THE TRIVMPH OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN DESCRIBED: OR, AN EXPLICATION OF THE EIGHT
CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE of Saint Paul to the Romans, wherein the sanctified
sinners heaven upon earth is laid open, with explication of the comfort of it
to as many as are so qualified.

Delivered in sundry Sermons by Edward Elton, Bachelour in Divinity, and
Preacher of Gods word at Saint Mary Magdalens Barmondsey near London.

And now by him published, intending the good and saving comfort of every true
believing soul that shall please to read it.

ISAI. 35.10. The redeemed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with
praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylburne and are to be sold at the
great South door of Paul's. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR Thomas Grymes Knight: grace, mercy, and comfort
in Christ Jesus be multiplied.
RIght Worshipful, I am not ignorant of it that many learned and worthy
servants of God, both ancient and modern, foreign and domestical, have
before me handled this sweet and comfortable 8. Chapter of the Epistle written
by the blessed Apostle Paul to the ancient famous Church of Rome, and have
unfolded the sweetness of it most excellently and most divinely, and from
thence have discovered the true Christians heaven upon earth: and there was
small reason for me after such bright shining lights to set up my dim candle,
yet considering with my self that God may be glorified in all men's gifts, and
the glory of his goodness and wisdom may shine forth in the variety of
them, and that a different manner of handling the same portion of holy
Scripture, it being sound and orthodoxall, may be useful for the Church of
God, the same truth being sometimes more readily conveyed to the minds of some
men, and better relished of them by some men's handling then by others: and
withal esteeming an unprofitable life to be an uncomfortable life, because the
Lord Jesus will assuredly call all his servants who have received any talent
from him to an account, Mat. 25.19.20. etc.
and none must hide his talent in a napkin, I have been moved upon the earnest
entreaty of some in mine own charge, and others not a few, once again to
adventure my self upon the open stage, and to offer my poor and slender
pains taken in my particular charge to the view of the world. It is well
known to as many as do well know me, that I have been for a long time withheld
by the good hand of God under more then ordinary weakness and sickness of
body, and that near to death, from the public exercise of the work of my
ministry; and now since it has pleased God of his rich mercy and unspeakable
goodness to bring me to it again, by restoring me in some measure to my
former health and strength, (for which mercy I cannot be sufficiently thankful
to his holy and blessed Majesty) I desire as the same good God shall be
pleased to give ability, to redeem the time, and not to let slip any
opportunity offered of doing what good I can within the compass of my
calling. My other weak and slender labors formerly published, have found
kind acceptance and entertainment at the hands of many: and of this present
work I have the more reason to conceive a comfortable hope that it will not be
disregarded or neglected, because of the excellency and sweetness of the
matter therein handled. Austustine de Sanctis Ser. 26.
What Epistle of Paul (says an ancient Divine) is not sweeter then honey? And
by common consent of all, this eight Chapter of this Epistle to the Romans, is
as the honey comb, most full of heavenly sweetness and soul comfort: it
setting forth that one thing necessary to the comfortable state of a Christian,
Luke ^0.42.
yea absolutely needful, in respect of which all other things are but
accidents and retainers. For the truth is, our conceits and apprehensions of
comfort are but dreams, till we attain some true feeling of Gods love to us
in Christ Jesus powered and shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost given
unto us: Romans 5.5.
that once gained, it fills our hearts with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1.
Pet. 1.8. Romans 8.37.
and it makes us more then conquerours, triumphing both over the corruption
that rests within us, and also over the sorrows, evils, and most bitter
afflictions that are brought upon us, and which we meet withal in this vale
of misery, and over all those enemies that oppose our comfort here and our
happiness hereafter. And where find we this ground of comfort more plainly and
pithily deciphered then in this Chapter? I confess that the form of this my
work on this Chapter is rude and unworthy the view of the learned: and if
Readers find not that loftiness of style that is suitable to the excellency of
the matter, I entreat them to consider that the things here put down were
delivered in a popular auditorie, where care was had to utter high and heavenly
things, in plain, easy, and familiar terms, I holding it better to speak
five words to edification, 1. Cor. 14.19.
the^ a thousand to vain ostentation. And now right Worshipful and worthy
Sir, I finding my self deeply interessed in your undeserved love and favor
many ways, and by many real evidences expressed both to me and mine; yea your
tried good affection toward me altogether unworthy of it, having been
extended and reached out in the sweet fruits of it to those that belong to my
charge, for which we are never able to make requital; but our good God
remember it in goodness; Nehem. 5.19.
my desire has been to take any opportunity offered to show my thankful
acknowledgement of your more then ordinary favor and labor of love showed
toward me, Hebr. 6.10.
and to give some real testification of my thankfulness. I therefore out of
my poor measure and penury, here offer and present unto you what I am able,
much better then it is I wish it were, some fruit of a thankful mind, praying
your favorable acceptance of the same, and humbly craving that what I now
tender unto you, may through your hands pass into the world: and if these my
poor travels may find good acceptance with you, and patronage from you, I
shall hold it and that justly, no small addition to your former kindness
toward me: and the God of heaven, whose glory I chiefly aim at in them, be
pleased to bless them for the spiritual good and saving comfort of your
self, and of all that shall vouchsafe to peruse them with care to profit by
them. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and I pray also that your whole spirit, soul, and body, may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom every where, but
especially in the Church, be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Barmondsey near London: May the 10. 1623. Your Worships to be commanded in
the Lord Jesus, Edward Elton.

THE TRIVMPH OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN.
ROMANS 8.1. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.


IN this eight Chapter the Apostle falls again on the doctrine of justification
and sanctification. The general matter of this Chapter.
He concludes his doctrine touching the justification of true believers through
Christ. And concerning their sanctification, setting it forth to their comfort,
laboring to strengthen and to arm them with comfort against temptations and
trials, that is the sum and substance of this whole Chapter: The parts of it
are threee.

The first is, The parts of this Chapter.
a sweet and excellent comfort to all true believers, delivered partly by way
of instruction, partly by way

The second is a comfortable exhortation, directed to the

The third is, a declaration of the immutable state and condition The matter of
the first part, with the manner of handling it.


Now the first part of the Chapter contains matter of comfort to true
believers, against the relickes of sin still abiding in them. Therein the
Apostle first deals by way of instruction, from the first verse to the
twelfth: then by way of exhortation, in the verses following to the seventeenth
verse, the middle of it.

Touching instruction, first he propounds and lays down this ground of
comfort, that there is no condemnation to the godly: though sin still dwell
and abide in them in part, yet there is no condemnation to them. And then he
limits that comfort by describing the persons to whom it belongs, that they be
such as be in Christ, and such as walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.

In the first verse then he further amplifies those two particulars. I will
refer the laying forth of his amplification till we come to the handling of
the verses following.

Verse 1.
The first verse (Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit,) has this respect
to foregoing matter.

The respect that the first verse has to foregoing matter. Romans 7.24.
The Apostle having handled the doctrine of justification, and thereunto
subioyned the doctrine of sanctification, and on occasion of that falling on
the spiritual combat, giving instance of it in himself, and having in the
Chapter before cried out: O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? and again raised up his heart with comfort in and
through Christ Jesus, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: thereupon in
this verse he inferres this general.

That as many as are in Christ Jesus, they are free from condemnation.

The particulars of the first verse.
In this verse considered by it self, we have these things offered.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

qualification, that they are such as walk after the Spirit, amplifying that
by denial of the contrary, that they walk not after the flesh: Which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. These are the general things laid
before us in this verse. (Now then) these words are to be understood,
Interpretation.
as having respect to that which the Apostle had formerly delivered; Gods elect
are justified freely by Gods grace, and by faith in Jesus Christ: and that
himself, howsoever he felt sin still abiding in him, yet he was able to
bless God for deliverance from it through Jesus Christ. Hereupon he thus
concludes: Now then there is no condemnation; the word (condemnation) here
signifies not as Bellarmine Bellarmine.
expounds it, the contagion of sin that comes by concupiscence of the flesh:
that were to make the Apostle to speak absurdly, but it imports two things:
the guiltiness of sin, and the punishment due to sin; a binding over or
standing subject to the punishment and execution of Gods sentence of death on
sinners; namely, the damnatorie sentence or curse of the Law, all plagues and
judgments in this world, and everlasting perdition in the world to come. Thus
we find the word used, Romans 5.16.18. Romans 5.16.18.
And in that the Apostle says (no condemnation) he means that there is a
freedom both from the guilt of sin, and from the punishment of sin, To
them that are in Christ Jesus, and that by the satisfactorie death of Christ,
he being made sin for them, 2. Cor. 5.21. 2. Cor. 5.21.
and having borne their sins in his body, 1. Pet. 2.24. 1. Pet. 2.24.
(To them that are in Christ Jesus,) that is, to them that are one with Christ,
being built and joined to him as members to the head, or as branches to the
vine, by the bond of his spirit, and by faith: for these similitudes the holy
Ghost uses to set forth the near union and conjunction of Christ and true
believers, Ephesians. 4.15.16. Ephesians. 4.15.16.
Christ is the head by whom all the body being coupled, etc. Ioh. 15.5. Ioh.
15.5.
I am the vine, ye are the branches, (Which walk not) the word (walk) in the
Scripture usually signifies to hold on a course of life, or to live as Genesis
5.22, Henoch walked with God, that is, lived as in the sight of God, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me, and be thou upright. (After the flesh.) By flesh we are to
understand the corruption of nature, and by Spirit, the grace of regeneration
and sanctification: and to walk after the flesh is to live according to the
motion and guidance of the corruption of nature, and to walk after the Spirit,
is to live according to the motion and guidance of the Spirit of grace and
sanctification. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words
of this verse, as if he had said; Now then since it is so as I have showed
before, that Gods elect are justified freely by Gods grace and faith in Jesus
Christ, though I feel sin still abiding in me, yet I being able to bless
God for deliverance through Jesus Christ, it follows that all such as are one
with Christ, and are knit and joined to Christ as members to the head, and as
branches to the vine, by the bond of the Spirit and by faith, though they have
sin still abiding in them, yet they are freed by the satisfactorie death of
Christ from the guiltiness of sin, and from the punishment due to them for
sin, even from the curse of the Law, from all plagues and judgments in this
world, and from everlasting perdition in the world to come: they shall not come
into condemnation, and they are such as live not according to the motion and
guidance of the corruption of nature, but according to the motion and guidance
of the Spirit of grace and sanctification.

The privilege of Gods grace and favor, and of saving comfort in Christ, is
common to all and every true believer.
but he sets down a general conclusion, that there is no condemnation, not
only to him, but not to any that are in Christ Jesus. Thus he orders his
speech in great wisdom: and hence note we thus much.

That the privilege of Gods grace and favor, of Gods mercy, and of comfort in
Christ Jesus, freedom from hell; death and damnation, is not to be restrained
to some particular persons, as happily such as have a great measure of grace,
such as the Apostle was, but it is common to all and every true believer, all
that truly believe in Christ, and are one with him by his spirit and by faith:
though their faith be weak, yet they truly believing in Christ, and their
faith being a true faith, they have right and title to all the saving comforts
in Christ; and they are free from hell, death and damnation, as well as those
that have the greatest measure of grace and holiness. And hence it is that the
Apostle Peter, 2. Pet. 1.1. 2. Pet. 1.1.
calls the faith of ordinary Christians and believers, a faith like precious to
his faith: Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to you which
have obtained like faith with us by the righteousness of our God and Savior
Jesus Christ. He says not, faith equal to our faith, or the same measure of
faith that we have, but faith like precious, faith of like worth and
excellency in regard of the fruits of it, faith that is able to save you as
truly and as certainly as our faith, 1. Ioh. 1.2, 3. 1. Ioh. 1.2.3.
Says Saint John: The life appeared, and we have seen it, and bear witness,
and show unto you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and appeared
unto us. That I say which we have seen and heard (that is Jesus Christ)
declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us, and our
fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. By
faith in Christ ordinary true believers have fellowship with the Apostles, yea
with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And therefore the
privilege of Gods grace and favor, of comfort in Christ, and of freedom from
hell, death and damnation, belongs to all and every true believer, as well as
to the holy Apostle. 2. Tim. 4.8. The Apostle having said, Henceforth is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day: he subioynes, and not to me only, but unto all them
also that love his appearing. Plainly teaching, that the greatest mercy of God,
even eternal life and salvation, is not to be appropriated to the Apostles, or
to such as they were, men of the greatest measure of grace and holiness, but
it belongs to all and every true believer, and it shall be given to them. And
so this is a clear truth, that the privilege of Gods grace and favor, of
comfort in Christ, of freedom from hell, death and damnation, is not to be
restrained to some singular persons, such as have a great measure of grace and
holiness, but it is common to all and every true believer; the reasons of it
are these.



Ioh. 3.14.15.
And therefore this is a certain truth, that the privilege of Gods grace and
favor, of comfort in Christ, of freedom from hell, death and damnation, is
not to be restrained to some particular persons, but it is common to all and
every true believer.

Comforts to poor weak Christians t^uly believing in Christ.
I mean such as are weak in faith, and are troubled with many doubtings in
believing. Such poor tender consciences, they commonly exempt themselves from
the comforts of other strong Christians, as if they did not belong to them,
because they are weak, and because they have not such a measure of grace as
others have. The doctrine delivered serves to take away this exception, it tells
them, that it is not the weakness of their faith that can hinder them from
right and interest in the comforts of Gods children. If then thou have evidence
in thine own soul, that thou have true faith in Christ be it never so weak,
if thou find thine heart in any measure purified by faith, that faith of thine
gives thee right and title to all the comforts of Gods children, and the
privileges of Gods grace and favor, of freedom from hell, death and
damnation; and all the saving comforts in Christ belong to thee. Indeed the
greater measure of faith thou have, Note.
the stronger thy faith is, the greater will be thy comfort, and therefore
labor thou to increase in faith, and to add one measure of faith to another.
But if thou have evidence of true faith in thine own heart, it may yield thee
this comfort, that thou have as much right and title to all the comforts of
Gods children, as the best of them, yea as Paul or Peter had, both in this life
and in the life to come. Yea then the word of promise and reconciliation, the
covenant of grace, the broad seals of Gods kingdom, the Sacraments belong to
thee, and thou may come to the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ
with comfort; (for herein some stagger and make question) because they doubt
whether they have faith or no. Do thou fear thou have not faith? and do
thou desire to believe? surely that is an evidence that thou have faith, and
the weakness of it is not to hinder thee from coming to the Sacrament. An
excellent comfort, and think on it to thy comfort.

In the next place observe we, Observation.
that the Apostle says not as Bellarmine infers on these words: There is no
matter of condemnation, nothing deserving condemnation: but he says, there is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; they are free from
condemnation. And the point hence is this.

That howsoever true believers, such as are in Christ, Though true believers
have in them matter deserving condemnation, yet there is no condemnation to
them.
yet there is no condemnation to them, they are free from the guiltiness of
sin, and from all punishments due to them for their sin. Such as truly
believe in Christ, though they have sin still abiding in them, and be guilty
of many actual sins, yet they being in Christ, by him they are freed from
all their sins both original and actual, the Lord will never charge them on
them, either in respect of guiltiness, or any punishment deserved by them:
Christ by his death, he being made a curse for them, when he suffered on the
cross, Gal. 3.13 Galat. 3.13.
has freed them from the curse of the Law, and so from all the punishments due
to them for sin, both temporal and eternal. And hence it was that Hezechiah
said, Isay 38.17. Isay 38.17.
The Lord has cast all my sins behind his back, Psalm. 103.3. Psalm. 103 3.
David stirs up his soul to praise the Lord, which forgiueth him all his
iniquities, and heals all his infirmities, and he says verse 12. As far as
the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us. Micah
7.18. Micah 7.18.
says the Prophet, Who is a Godlike unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him. And verse 19. He will subdue
our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea. And many
like phrases we find in Scripture confirming this truth: That such as are in
Christ are by him freed from all their sins, and the Lord will not charge on
them the guiltiness of sin, or any punishment due to sin: and the reason
and ground of it is plain, namely this.

Colos. 2.14.
And therefore such as be in Christ are certainly freed by Christ both from the
guiltiness of sin, and from all punishment due to the^ for their sins



David, speaking of Solomon his son, 2. Sam. 7.14, 15. If he sin, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, and with the plagues of the children of men;
But my mercy shall not depart away from him. Or means to prevent evil and
sin in them, and the venom and bitterness of them is taken away by Christ,
yea the poison and sting of death is removed by Christ. And therefore it still
remains a truth, that such as be in Christ, they are freed from all punishment
due to them for their sins both temporal and eternal.

And this truth must serve as a ground of sweet comfort to all true believers,
both in respect of sin, Comfort to true believers in respect of sin, and
the miseries that befall them.
and in regard of the miseries that befall them in this world, as first in
regard of sin: on the ground of doctrine now delivered, true believers, gods
children, may conclude to their comfort, that none of their sins shall ever
hurt them, no not their heinous sins, not those wherein they have lived and
continued long, and have doubled and often committed, not those they have done
with much boldness and presumption, they having truly humbled themselves and
repented for them, and now believing in Christ; and now being in him, by Christ
they are freed from the guiltiness and punishment of all their sins, yea
though they still find sin cleaving to them, and they are troubled with many
sinful infirmities, yea have many failings, yet now they being in Christ, the
Lord will never charge them on them, either the guiltiness of them, or the
punishment due to them, and that is an excellent comfort.

Again, for the miseries that befall gods children in this world, what though
they be under poverty, sickness, imprisonment, banishment, or any other
misery whatsoever? yet let them remember this, that those things are not
plagues, judgments, punishments and curses to them: but either trials, or
fatherly chastisements, or means to prevent sin in them, and the venom, and
poison, and bitterness of them is removed from them, they being in Christ. And
this being duly considered, it will arm them with comfort, and strengthen them
against the fear of them before they come, and against discouragement and
vtter^d e^ection when they are come. For why should a child of God fear any
misery before it come, or be utterly dejected when it is come, seeing the
venim and bitterness of it is removed, and all miseries are sweetened to him by
the death of Christ. Indeed if men be out of Christ, they have cause to fear
miseries and troubles, they are liable to all miseries in this world, and to
eternal death and misery in the world to come, and their case is fearful.

Note.
As there is no condemnation to them that be in Christ, so there is nothing but
condemnation to those that be out of Christ, even the good things and blessings
of God are curses to them, and there is a secret curse cleaving to them, when
apparently they seem happy and blessed. Yea the word of God, the word of
comfort, is a word of terror and bitterness to them: the seals of the
covenant are seals of judgment and damnation to them, and there is but a step
between them and hell, there is no difference between them and those that now
lie frying in the fire of hell, but this, they who are in hell are past
recovery, and these in Gods great patience are suffered for a time, how long or
how short they know not, to see if they will accept grace offered to them. A
thing that if it be duly considered, may shake the heart of the most deboshed
and profane wretch in the world: and if hell have not taken full possession of
his soul, may move him to bethink himself of speedy reformation. But if thou
have evidence to thine own soul, that thou art in Christ, comfort thy self,
nothing shall hurt thee, neither sin nor any misery that befalls thee can
hurt thee, no not death it self; the sting of death is removed, and taken from
thee by the death of Christ: yea when thou art dead, thou shall not come into
the judgment of condemnation: think on that to thy comfort.

An anabaptisticall cavil answered.
Now here before we leave this point, a cavil of the Anabaptists is to be met
withal: Say they, is it so, that such as are in Christ, are by Christ freed
from the guiltiness of sin, then (say they) it must needs follow, that they
are freed from subjection, true believers are not to be subject to any on the
earth, to kings, to magistrates, and to other governors: subjection of man to
man came in by sin as a punishment, Genesis 3.16. Genesis 3.16.
After the fall Eve was put in subjection to Adam, and therefore sin and all
punishment due to sin being removed from them that are in Christ Jesus, they
are not to be subject to any that live on the face of the earth.

Now for answer to this, we must know, that there is a twofold subjection of
man to man, one civil, and the other servile or slavish. Civil subjection, is
whereby one man is subject to another for the common good, even for the good of
them both, as the Apostle says, Romans 13.4. Romans 13.4.
The magistrate is the minister of God for the wealth of the inferior. Servile
or slavish subjection, is that whereby a slave or vassal is in subjection
only for the good of his Lord and master. The first of these, namely civil
subjection, was before the fall in the state of innocence, as appears in the
Apostles manner of reasoning, 1. Tim. 2.12, 13. 1. Tim. 2.12.13.
But the second servile or slavish subjection came in by sin: and for the
place alleged, Genesis 3.16. it is not so to be understood, as if civil
subjection simply considered in it self, had not been before the fall, but
that by the fall constrained subjection joined with pain, sorrow and grief
came in, which before in time of innocence was with pleasure: as before the
fall, man was to labor in dressing the garden, Genesis 2.15. Genesis 2.15.
yet his labor was with pleasure, but after the fall it was joined with pain,
sorrow, and grief. So doubtless subjection with pleasure was before the fall,
but after the fall it was joined with pain, sorrow, and grief, and therefore
it is not true which the Anabaptists say, that civil subjection of man to man
simply considered in it self, came in by sin as a punishment. No, I dare
affirm, that civil subjection of man to man, now since the fall simply
considered in it self, it is not a curse, it is not a punishment, but a
necessary ordinance of God, for the good of the Church and Commonwealth: and
so it is but an idle cavil of the Anabaptists to say, that such as are in
Christ are freed from all punishment of sin, and therefore freed from civil
subjection.

Observe we farther, that the Apostle makes the ground of freedom from the
guiltiness of sin, and from the punishment due to sin, to be in Christ,
even Gods mercy in him, and the merit of his death: and the conclusion hence is
briefly this:

Freedom from the curse of the Law and from Gods wrath due to sin, is grounded
only on Gods mercy and on the merit of Christ his death, without respect to
any thing in true believers or done by them as the cause of it.
and from all punishment due to them for their sins; and the ground of their
freedom is altogether out of themselves, it is only in Jesus Christ. Freedom
from the curse of the Law, and from Gods wrath due to sin, is grounded only on
Gods mercy, and on the merit of Christ his death; and it has no respect to any
thing in true believers themselves, or done by them as a cause procuring or
producing the same. A true believer is not freed from the least of his sins by
any thing in himself, or done by him as the cause or ground of it, but only
in and through Christ Jesus. Hence it is that remission of sins, which is
freedom from the guiltiness of sin, and from punishment due to sin, is
usually expressed in Scripture in those terms of covering of sin; and not
imputing sin is merely from the Lord, Psalm. 32.1.2. that is, from the mere
mercy of the Lord, without respect had to any thing in sinful man, or done by
him as the cause of it. Yea we shall find, that where remission of sin is
expressed under these terms of speech of putting away sins, not remembering
them, blotting them out, there is either an express mention or a necessary
implication of Gods mere mercy, as the ground of that benefit, Romans 3.24. the
Apostle says, We are justified freely by grace. Remission of sins is a part
of justification, and therefore freely given without respect of any thing in
us, or done by us as the cause of it.

Human satisfactions confuted.
works of penance and the like, which the popish sort hold able to satisfy
for sin, and to procure freedom from the temporal punishment of sin? They
cannot stand with this truth: that freedom from the curse of the Law and from
Gods wrath due to sin, is grounded only on Gods mercy and the merit of
Christ's death, and not on any thing in true believers themselves, or done by
them as the cause of it. And surely those human satisfactions do much
derogate from Gods free grace, from the infinite merit of Christ his death.
Admit this (which the Papists can never prove,) that some good works done by
true believers are most perfect according to the exact rule of Gods Law, yet
cannot those good works so done, cause or procure freedom from the least of
their sins. It is no part of Gods promise annexed to the covenant of works,
that any good work, done according to the exact rule of his Law, shall
satisfy for any sin: the Lord says not, do this and thou shall live, and if
thou fail and break my Law, thou shall by some good works done according to
the exact rule of my Law, make amends and satisfy for that breach. No, there
is no such matter: the condition of perfect obedience propounded in the moral
Law of God once broken, there can be no compensation made for that breach but
by punishment, either in the person offending, or some other in his stead: and
therefore no good thing in us, or done by us, (admit it be most perfect) can
cause or procure freedom from the least of our sins. No, we must renounce
all things in our selves, and done by us, be they never so excellent, as
insufficient to cause or procure freedom from the least of our sins: and for
freedom from our sins we must cleave only to the free grace of God, and to
the infinite merit of Christ his death, as the sufficient and meritorious cause
of the same. And if we would have comfort touching freedom from the wrath of
God due to our sins, we must go out of our selves, and seek for that only
in Jesus Christ, and build our faith on him as a sure foundation and rock,
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail.

Observe we further, as the Apostle makes Jesus Christ the ground of freedom
from condemnation, so he limits and restraines, and appropriates that benefit
to those only that are in Christ Jesus. That freedom from condemnation, from
the guiltiness of sin, and all punishment due to sin, it belongs only to
those that are in Christ Jesus, to those that are one with Christ Jesus, being
knit and joined to him by the bond of his Spirit, and by true faith. Whence
note we thus much.

Only those that are in Christ have right and title to the benefit of freedom
from condemnation.
being joined to him by the bond of his Spirit and true faith, have right and
title to this benefit of freedom from condemnation, of freedom from the
guiltiness of sin, and from the punishment due to sin: indeed only they
may challenge right and title to all the benefits of Christ, and to all the
saving comforts offered and found in him. And it is a certain truth, that we
cannot come to be partakers of any benefit or comfort in and by Christ, unless
we be in Christ, even one with him, and knit to him, as the members of the body
are to the head. And to this purpose the Apostle speaks plainly, Ephesians. 5.23.
Ephesians. 5.23.
He there calls Christ the Savior of his body: thereby giving us to understand,
that Christ is a Savior to none but to those that are his members, and that
none but they that are of the body whereof Christ is head, can look for life
and salvation, or any saving comfort in and through him. Ioh. 6.53, 54. Ioh.
6.53.54.
Says Christ, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you; Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has eternal life: As if he had said, unless ye become one with me, as
your meat and drink are made one with your own bodies, which are turned into
the substance of your bodies, ye cannot be partakers of the life and comfort
that is found in me. And only by being one with me, as your meat and drink
are one with your own bodies, being turned into the substance of them, shall
ye come to find comfort, life and salvation in and by me. And hence doubtless
it was, that the Apostle, Philip. 3.9. Philip. 3.9.
Counted all things loss and doung that he might be found in Christ; he knew
well that unless he were in Christ, he could not be partaker of any benefit or
comfort in and by Christ. And this truth is grounded on reason.

him before we can derive and draw down any life or comfort from him. And
therefore only those that are in Christ, even one with him by the bond of his
spirit and by faith, have right and title to the benefit of freedom from
condemnation, and to all other benefits and saving comforts in Christ.

Deceive not thy self then whosoever thou art, A caveat for such as falsely
imagine that Christ died for them.
and all punishments due to sin, and other benefits and saving comforts in
Christ, belong to thee, unless thou have evidence to thine own soul that
thou art one with Christ, even one with him by the bond of his Spirit, and by
true faith. Herein many deceive themselves, such as are so far from being one
with Christ, as they are rather limbs of Satan; even common drunkards, common
swearers, filthy adulterers, covetous persons, usurers, and the like, they
think that the comforts of Christ his birth, life and death belong to them;
and stick not to say it, that Christ is their Savior, and Christ died for
them, and they hope to be saved by Christ. Poor souls, they do but dream,
and feed upon a fancy, and on their own foolish conceit, and they are deluded
and blinded by the devil: only those that are in Christ have right and title
to the benefits and saving comforts in Christ, and they alone may truly and
with comfort say; that Christ died for them.

Object. Does not the Apostle tell us, 1. Tim. 2.5.6. There is one God, and one
mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself
a ransom for all men.

Answ. The meaning is, for all sorts of men, and title to the merit of Christ
his death, and be able to challenge the privilege of freedom from
condemnation, of freedom from the guiltiness of sin and all punishment due
to sin, and other benefits of Christ to belong to thee, thou must have good
evidence to thine own soul, that thou art in Christ, even one with Christ by
the bond of his Spirit and by true faith; and thou must find thy self knit to
Christ as a member to the head, and that thou receive from him influence of
grace and spiritual life, and that now thou have in thee the mind of Christ
Jesus, Philip. 2.5. And know this for a certain truth, if thou have not Christ
thine head in this world, thou shall have him thy Judge and condemner in the
life to come. If thou live as a limb of Satan, and carry thy self as a
member of that body whereof the devil is the head (as all profane persons do)
think not that Christ died for thee, and that thou have right and title to
this excellent privilege of freedom from condemnation; if thou so think, it
is an idle fancy, and thou do but deceive thine own soul.

Observation.
Now further observe we the phrase and form of speech here used by the Apostle:
he says not, there is no condemnation to them that are near to Christ Jesus,
or about him, or the like; but says, there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. Whence we are given to understand:

Christ and true believers are most nearely conjoined.
Such as truly believe in Christ, they are most nearely knit and conjoined with
him, they are in him, and he in them; yea the union and conjunction between
Christ and true believers is so near, that we are not able to conceive it in
our shallow brains, it it a secret and a divine mystery. Christ prays, Ioh.
17.21. Ioh. 17.21.
That they that truly believe in him may be one in him and in his Father, as
his Father is in him and he in his Father; which is a union most near, and
indeed inconceivable, we are not able to conceive the nearenesse of that
union. And hence it is, that we find the union between Christ and true
believers set out in Scripture by such similitudes as do imply a most near
union, as by the similitude of the head and the body, Ephesians. 1.22.23. Ephesians.
1.22.23.
Christ is appointed head to the Church, which is his body; by the similitude
of the vine and the branches, John 15.5. Ioh. 15.5.
I am the vine and ye are the branches; by the similitude of man and wife, that
as the husband and the wife are most nearely joined into one flesh, so near or
rather nearer is the union and conjunction between Christ and true believers:
insomuch as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.30. Ephesians. 5.30.
that true believers are members of Christ his body, yea flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone. Many other similitudes we find in Scripture setting forth
the near union that is between Christ and true believers. Yea we find that by
reason of the near union of Christ and true believers, that the word (Christ)
is sometimes put for the Church of Christ, 1. Cor. 12.12. 1. Cor. 12.12.
As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body
which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is Christ,
that is, the Church of Christ, as the next verse makes it manifest. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body.

This truly serves in the first place to strengthen and confirm The doctrine
of justification by Christ his righteousness imputed, confirmed.
that true believers are justified in Gods sight, by the merit of Christ his
death, and by his righteousness imputed unto them; for there being that near
union between Chtist and true believers, as there is between the head and the
members of the body, they being in Christ and Christ in them, it must needs be
that the grace and benefits of Christ, do truly and really belong to them; and
that as he was made sin for them, so they are made the righteousness of God
in him, 2. Cor. 5.21. 2. Cor. 5.21.
And what Christ did as mediator, that by the covenant of grace is truly
imputed to them that truly believe in Christ, and is made theirs by true faith.
For what is done by the head in a natural body, may be truly ascribed to the
whole body.

The Papists scoff at righteousness imputed, and call it a putatiue and
fantastical justice and righteousness; but indeed it is a true and real
righteousness, grounded on that near union that is between Christ and true
believers. And whereas they say, such as is our justification, such shall be
our happiness in heaven: and as we have no righteousness nor merit of our
own inherent in our selves, but by imputation, so we must look for no heaven
but by imputation, no happiness real and indeed; they are easily answered.
True believers have a real imputation of Christ his righteousness, not a
supposed imputation. And again, it follows not because our justification is
by Christ his righteousness imputed, therefore our blessedness shall be so
also, because happiness and glory is the promised reward, and righteousness
the condition. Now as a man that is bound for the payment of a sum of money,
may have the condition of his bond performed by another, and yet himself may
have liberty and freedom by it: So may we have the condition of
righteousness performed for us by Christ, and yet we our selves made partakers
of happiness and glory; and have the promised reward bestowed on our own
bodies and souls.

Terror to such as wrong the poorest member of Christ.
as that they are in him and he in them? then let all such as do abuse or wrong
any true believer, be it man or woman, never so poor or base in the eyes of
the world, let them know that the abuse and wrong rests not only on the
person abused or wronged, but it reaches up to Christ Jesus in heaven; and
through the sides of a poor believer, they abafe and wrong the Lord Jesus.
When Saul persecuted the poor members of Christ on earth, the Lord Jesus cried
to him from heaven, Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And this may
strike a terror and amazement into all wicked persons, that load the members of
Christ with injuries and wrongs, and do cast disgrace and contempt on them.
Do thou abuse or wrong a poor silly man or woman believing in Christ? thou
do it to Christ his head in heaven, and thou might as well spit in the
face of the Lord Jesus himself. And assure thy self, the Lord Jesus to whom
all power is given in heaven and earth, will not suffer any of his members,
bought with no less price then his own blood, to be wronged, but he will
revenge it. Yea the wrongs done to his poor members here on earth, ring in his
ears in heaven, and will cause him one day to come down in flaming fire, to
render vengeance to those that abuse them. Yea know it, whosoever thou art, if
thou have but an intent and purpose of evil against any true believer, that
intent and purpose of thine is known to him: for he is not only man but God
also, and thy malice and intent of mischief against any member of Christ, that
lies lurking in the depth of thine heart, does not rest in thine own bosom,
but it mounts up above the clouds, even to Christ Jesus in heaven: he sees it,
and he takes it as intended against himself, and without repentance he will
one day plague thee for it. And this may strike amazement into those that
offer, or intend, or do the least wrong to the poorest member of Christ. And
this also may cheer up the hearts of poor distressed Christians, and may
assure them, that the Lord Jesus is troubled in all their troubles, and that he
takes part with them; and therefore he will either moderate the weight of their
afflictions, or give them strength to bear them, or put an end to them, and in
the end he will wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Now before we leave this point, a Popish error is to be discovered, A Popish
error discovered.
an error which the Papists would ground on the near union that is between
Christ and true believers. For thus they hold and teach, that in regard of the
near union between Christ and true believers, the good works done by true
believers are meritorious, they are easily answered. For why, Note.
the union between Christ and true believers, is not personal but mystical,
true believers are not received into unity of person with Christ, but they are
one with him by spiritual and mystical union: now personal union is the
ground of merit, even in Christ himself. The manhood of Christ apart and by it
self merits nothing, but as it is received into union of person with his
Godhead: And therefore they must prove that true believers are received into
unity of person with Christ, before they can truly conclude that their good
works do merit, and deserve the favor of God: but that they are never able to
do by all their skill; they can never prove that a true believer is one person
with Christ: and therefore they build on the sand, and we are to renounce it as
an untruth and Popish error, that by reason of the near union between Christ
and true believers, their good works are meritorious.

Come we now to the second general thing in this verse, the infallible mark
by which the Apostle points out those that are freed from condemnation by the
death of Christ, they being in Christ, namely this: That they are such as walk
after the Spirit and not after the flesh, that is, such as live according to
the motion and guidance of the Spirit of grace and sanctification, as they are
moved and guided by the Spirit, and not according to the motion and guidance of
the corruption of nature. Now this we are to take, as the Apostle here gives
it, as an infallible mark of such as are freed from condemnation by Christ,
that such persons are thus qualified, that they walk after the Spirit. The
Papists take this as if the Apostle had put it down as the cause of freedom
from condemnation, to them that are in Christ Jesus: That therefore there is no
condemnation to them, because they walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit; and so they would hence ground an argument against justification in
Gods sight by faith alone, and go about to prove from hence, that true
believers are justified in the sight of God, not only by faith, but also by
their walking after the Spirit, and by their good works, but they are much
deceived. A Popish cavil answered.
The Apostle here makes not walking after the Spirit the cause of freedom from
condemnation, but the condition of such as are freed, and a speeciall note by
which they may be known. He says not: there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, because they walk after the Spirit; but they do walk
after the Spirit, they are thus qualified, they are such as walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. And inded it cannot be, that walking after the
Spirit should be a cause of freedom from condemnation, because walking after
the Spirit in order of nature, is after freedom from condemnation. Men are
first in Christ, and by him freed from condemnation, and have his Spirit in
them, and then they walk after the Spirit. And therefore the Papists deprave
and abuse this text, in that they make walking after the Spirit, the cause of
freedom from condemnation. Come we to matter of instruction hence offered:
first, in that the Apostle here makes walking after the Spirit an infallible
mark of such as are in Christ, and by him are freed from condemnation, we may
conclude.

That whosoever they be that are in Christ, and by him are Such as are in
Christ they live an holy and sanctified life.
that they walk after the Spirit, they are thus qualified, and they have this
certainly found in them, that they live according to the motion and guidance of
the Spirit of grace and sanctification. Or briefly thus.

Such as are in Christ, even one with him by the bond of his Spirit, and by him
are freed from condemnation, they live an holy and a sanctified life: their
life is a life of grace and holiness, and they do evidence and testify their
being in Christ, by their holy thoughts, words and works. And hence it is that
the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a new
creature, or as it is in the new translation, he is a new creature: for it may
be put down positiuely; he that is in Christ, he is a new creature, he lives
not as he was wont, but he lives a new life, even an holy and sanctified life,
1. Ioh. 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not truly: as if he had said; he deceiues himself
that says he has fellowship with Christ, and yet walks in darkness. He that
has fellowship with him is certainly enlightened, and has true saving
knowledge, and he walks answerable to it. 1. John 3.6. Whosoever abides in
him, sins not, that is, makes not a common trade and practice of sin, but
his life is holy and sanctified. And to these we might add other testimonies
of Scripture clearing and confirming this truth, that such as be in Christ,
even one with him, by him are freed from condemnation they live an holy and
sanctified life, their life is a life of grace and holiness, and the reasons
and grounds of it are these.

He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit: one and the same Spirit is
both in Christ and in him, even the same Spirit of grace and sanctification is
in Christ and in every true believer; and doubtless that Spirit works in true
believers according to the measure of his being in them.



How we may try whether we be members of Christ or no, and may be sure that we
are so.
Do thou hold thy self to be a member of Christ, and that thou art one with
him, and that by him thou art freed from condemnation? (without question every
one is ready out of self-love to assume this to himself, every one has this
conceit of himself) but would thou prove it, and would thou have good
evidence for it, and make it good to the comfort of thy soul, that it is so
indeed? then never rest till thou find that thou art truly sanctified both in
heart and life, and that thou live the life of grace and holiness, that thou
live not as thou art led by the light of nature, happily a civil honest life,
but as thou art guided by the Spirit of grace and sanctification, that thine
heart and life are holy, and seasoned with grace. And if it be thus with thee,
then may thou thereupon certainly conclude, thou have good evidence of it,
that thou art in Christ, and that by him thou art feed from condemnation; yea
on this ground thou shall be able to cheer up thine own heart in the greatest
trial, even when the devil lays siege to thy soul, and puts thee to the
trial, whether thou be in Christ or no. If then thou be able to show the
evidence of a heart and life truly sanctified, thou shall be able to silence
the devil, and put him to a nonplus, he shall not have a word against thee.
But if so be thou think thou art in Christ, and have part in his death, and
art by him freed from condemnation, and yet want the evidence of an holy
sanctified life, alas poor soul, whosoever thou art, thou do but deceive
thy self. And herein thousands in the world deceive themselves. Thousands
there be that fancy to themselves that Christ died for them, that they shall be
saved by Christ, and yet are so far from an holy and sanctified life, as that
their lives are soyled with many soul sins, with drunkenness,
Sabbath-breaking, and the like; and they will not be drawn to an holy course
of life, no, they hate to be reformed, and hate those that are holy and
religious, and truly fear God. And some content themselves with a civil
honest life, and think that a sufficient ground of comfort; poor souls, they
do exceedingly deceive themselves. And know it whosoever thou art, the devil
will suffer thee to think, yea to say it, that thou have part in Christ, and
that Christ died for thee, so long as he finds by thy fruits, that thou art
not in Christ: he will sooth thee up, and help thee forward in that conceit,
and so carry thee on in a fools paradise (as we use to speak) to thine own
endless perdition And know it further, that thou confessing thy self to be a
Christian (as every one will be held to be) and yet living a lewd and wicked
life, or contenting thy self with a formal profession, thou do more
dishonor Christ then Turks and Pagans that utterly deny him; and without
repentance thy judgment and damnation shall be deeper in hell then theirs: for
thou do thereby as it were witness against Christ, that he is but a weak
Christ, and that there is no power in his death, nor virtue in his
resurrection. Oh then if thou would have good evidence to thine own soul,
that thou art in Christ, and by him freed from condemnation, never rest till
thou find thy heart and life truly sanctified, and that thou live the life of
grace and holiness.

Gods mark on such as are in Christ.
they live an holy and sanctified life? then know to thy comfort, whosoever
thou art that have thy heart and life sanctified, and live the life of grace
and holiness, the Lord has marked thee out for his own, and thou have good
evidence, such as cannot deceive thee, that thou art in Christ. For these are
conuertible terms, and may be truly and reciprocally affirmed one of the
other: He that is in Christ, lives an holy, and sanctified life: And he that
lives an holy and sanctified life is certainly in Christ. If then thou find
the power of sin broken in thee, and that now thou do hate and strive
against all sin, yea even against the sin that heretofore was well pleasing
to thee, and now thou studiest and endeuourest to please God in every good
duty, and do account it thy chiefest honor to deny thy self, to mortify
the lusts of thine own heart, and to live to God; comfort thy self, thou have
good evidence of thy being in Christ, and that by him thou art freed from
condemnation, yea by him set in the state of grace and salvation. Let the
Papists say what they will to the contrary, A cavil of the Papists answered.
that holiness may be lost, and the fruit of Gods grace may wither and come
to nothing; they directly contradict the words of Christ, John 4, 14. Whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more a thirst, but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. Be of good comfort then, thou having evidence of an holy
and sanctified life, thou have such assurance of thy being in Christ, and of
being in the state of grace and salvation, as will never fail thee: and think
on it to thy comfort.

In the next place, the phrase and form of speech used by the Apostle is to be
observed; he says, such as are in Christ Jesus, they walk after the Spirit,
that is, they live and lead their lives according to the motion and guidance
of the Spirit of grace and sanctification. The point hence is this.

That the walking of the godly, true believers, such as are Such as are in
Christ are constantly holy in the course of their lives.
the course of their lives is according to the motion and guidance of the
Spirit of grace and sanctification; they have not only some good thoughts, or
good desires, and happily utter some good words, and it may be sometimes make a
step into a good way, and do some good duties, but the course of their life and
their actions, for the tenor of them, are constantly ordered and guided by the
motion of Gods Spirit, and they go on in an orderly course of holiness, and
the course of their life is holy, and good, and spiritual. Indeed (to prevent
an objection) this is not so to be understood, as if Gods children did never
trip or slip awrie, nor at any time slide out of the way of holiness, and did
never fall into any sin, we are not so to conceive the point: for then none
living on the face of the earth, should be said to walk after the Spirit,
because there is none that lives and sins not, but thus understand the point.
That howsoever Gods children, true believers, and such as are in Christ, do
sometimes slip and slide, and against their purpose fall into some sin; yet
the course of their life, and their thoughts, and words, and actions, for the
tenor of them, and for the most and greatest part, are holy, and good, and
spiritual; and they are ordered and guided by the motion of Gods Spirit: yea
even when they do slip, and fall, and are overtaken with some sin, therein
also grace has a working in them, not to the acting of sin, but to curb and
restrain the flesh, that the evil they do, is not done with full consent of
will, and so for the tenor, frame and course of their lives, it is holy, good,
heavenly and spiritual. Thus it is with the godly, true believers, and such as
are in Christ. And to this purpose the Apostle speaks plainly, Philip. 3.20.
Says he, Our conversation is in heaven, speaking of himself and other true
believers, or as the word (...) signifies, our civil life, all our thoughts
and actions are heavenly, or as Beza renders it, we carry our selves as free
Denisons of heaven, our whole carriage is heavenly and spiritual. Psalm. 119.1.
Says David, Blessed are those that are upright in their way, and walk in the
Law of the Lord. And then verse 3. Surely (says he) they work none iniquity,
but walk in his ways: they hold on a course in holiness, and in the ways of
God. Galat. 5.16. we find that the Apostle exhorts and stirs up true
believers thus to walk: Walk ye in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. And Psalm. 50.23. the Lord himself speaks of framing or
disposing the conversation aright, requires it as of his children, with promise
to show them his salvation: He that offers praise shall glorify me, and to
him that disposes his way aright, or conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God. It is said of Henoch, Genesis 5.22. that he walked with God, his
walking was with God. Without question Henoch sometimes faulted and failed, but
the course of his life was as in the presence of God, that was holy and
religious, and truly spiritual. And so doubtless is it with Gods children,
and true believers, and such as are in Christ, though sometimes they slip and
fail, yet their walking and course of life is holy, and good, and spiritual.
And the reasons of it are these.



Again, Gods children, true believers, have the true fear evil way, and
course of evil, Prou. 8.13. And their hearts are possessed with a true love to
God, which makes them to avoid and to abhor all and every sin, because it
is sin, and displeasing to God, and makes them careful to please God in all
holy duties. And on these grounds we may certainly conclude, that howsoever
Gods children do sometimes slip and fall into sin, yet their walking is after
the Spirit, and the course of their lives for the tenor of them, are holy,
good, and spiritual, and they live as they are ordered by the motion and
guidance of the Spirit of grace and sanctification.

Let no man then judge of a child of God by some one or A child of God is to be
judged by the course of his life.
It is the manner of the world, and of wicked men, to watch for the halting of
a child of God, as Iere. 20.10. and if they can take him tripping and failing
in the least thing, presently their mouths are open against him, and they cry
out against him, and charge him with hypocrisy, and stick not to say, that
all his profession is but mere hypocrisy: and on the occasion of his failing
they fly on all Gods children, and stick not to charge them all to be
hypocrites; so rash, and so heady, and so uncharitable are ungodly men in their
censure: we must take heed of this rashness, if we thus judge of a child of
God we trespass, Psalm 73.15. Look to the bent and course of a man's life and
his carriage, if that be holy and religious, and thou see in a man an honest
and careful endeavor to walk according to the will and word of God, though
he fail in some particular, thou art to judge of him as a child of God, and as
one that truly believes in Jesus Christ. The course of a man's life and his
walking, ought to be the rule of thy judgment in respect of others.

Again, is it thus with Gods children, and such as are in Some good thoughts,
or words, or actions, not sufficient prove a man or woman to be a child of God.
that the course of their life and their actions for the tenor of them, are
holy, they are good, and they are spiritual? Then take heed thou deceive not
thy self, think not that thou art a child of God, and that thou art in
Christ, because happily thou have in thee sometimes some good thoughts, and some
good motions and desires, and sometimes some good words drop from thee, and
sometimes thou do a good action, and thou do sometimes step into a good
way; for this is that which deceiues many in the world, they think they are
the children of God, and they are truly religious, and who shall say to the
contrary? only because they have sometimes some good motions in their minds,
and sometimes some good words fall from them, and sometimes they hit on a good
action; they hear the word, they pray, they give alms, or the like, when
notwithstanding the course of their life is far from being holy, and it is
far from the power of religion. Such persons deceive themselves: and take
heed of this deceit whosoever thou art, fancy not to thy self that thou art a
child of God, only because of some good motions in thine heart, some good
words, and some good actions coming from thee; if thou build on that ground it
will deceive thee, the vilest wretch may sometimes have good motions, good
words, or do good things. If thou would have good evidence and ground indeed
that thou art a child of God, thou must find thy walking to be after the
Spirit, and that thou art a spiritual man or woman: and think not as the
blind world thinks, that only the Ministers of the Gospel must be spiritual
men: No, no, if thou whosoever thou art, be not spiritual, thou have no part
in Christ. Note.
And therefore look to it, and let not thy thinking, speaking, and doing of
good things, be as it were accidental and happening sometimes; let thy failing
and falling into sin, be as it were accidental and against thy purpose, but
let thy thinking, speaking, and doing of good things, be ordinary and usual:
let thy walking be after the Spirit, and let the course of thy life be holy and
religious, and led in the fear of God, according to the measure of light
vouchsafed to thee: for that indeed thou art, that thou art in the course of
thy life, as well in private as in public. And if thou be holy in the Church
and in public, and not in thine house and in thy closet, and in thy trade and
calling, and course of life thou art not holy, thou art not truly religious,
and therefore look to the course of thy life; if that be holy and religious,
as well in private as in public, and that thou be holy in thy particular
trade and calling; then indeed thou art holy and truly religious, and that will
give thee good evidence to the comfort of thy soul, that thou art the child of
God.

Happily here some will demand, and say:

The marks by which thou may know it,

First, Marks by which men may know that they walk after the Spirit.
if thou have in thee a mind and desire to know the good way, that thou may
walk in it, and thou take counsel of God in his word, and make that the
rule of all thy actions, as David says, Psalm. 119.24. For certainly as one
says well, the Spirit of God leads the children of God in the way of Gods
commandments, he guides them not

Secondly, if thou be careful to lift up thine heart to God Nehemiah, Nehe.
2.4. When he was to speak to the King in a matter of weight, the text says he
prayed unto the God of heaven.

Thirdly, if when thou do slip and fall into any sin, thou

Fourthly and last of all, if thou carry in thee an holy resolution

By these notes thou may know that thy walking is after the Spirit, and that
the course of thy life is holy and religious: and hereby try thy self, and
never rest till thou find these things in thy self: and if thou find these
things in thee, thou may assure thy self thy walking is after the Spirit,
and that thy course of life is holy and religious; and that is a sure evidence
that thou art a child of God.

Observe we yet further; the Apostle having set this mark on such as are in
Christ, and by him are freed from condemnation, that they walk after the
Spirit; he there stays not, but he adds a denial of the contrary, that they
walk not after the flesh: he says, they walk after the Spirit, not after the
flesh. And hence we are given to understand thus much.

Men cannot walk after the flesh and after the Spirit both at one time.
it cannot be: it is not possible men should live according to the motion and
guidance of the Spirit of grace and sanctification, and according to the motion
and guidance of the corruption of nature, both at one time; men cannot think,
speak, and do as they are acted and moved by the Spirit of grace and
holiness, and withal think, speak, and do as they are moved and led by
their own carnal reason, and their own sinful lusts and corrupt affections.
A man's walking and course of life cannot be good, holy, heavenly, and
spiritual, and at the same time, earthly, carnal, and merely natural and
sensual: these two courses of life cannot stand together. And to this purpose
mark what Christ says, Math. 6.24. No man (says he) can serve two masters:
Now the flesh and the Spirit are two Lords and masters, yea they are masters
of contrary minds and dispositions, of contrary commands, as the Apostle
says, Galat. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other. Galat. 6.8. the
Apostle speaks of sowing to the flesh, and sowing to the Spirit: so he makes
an opposition between them, both in themselves, and in the fruit of them, as
that the fruit of sowing to the flesh shall be corruption, and the fruit of
sowing to the Spirit shall be life everlasting. Philip. 3.18.19.20. the Apostle
makes a flat opposition between those that walk after the lusts of their own
hearts, and make their bellies their God, and mind earthly things, and himself
and others who had their conversation in heaven: Many (says he) walk, of whom
I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of
the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and
whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly things. But (says he) our
conversation is in heaven. And Romans 12.1. the Apostle having exhorted the
believing Romans to give up their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable, and perfect, he presently subioynes, verse 2. Fashion not your
selves like unto the world, frame not the course of your life according to the
guise, and manner, and custom of the world and worldly men: as if he had said,
an holy course of life, and spiritual serving of God, and a carnal course of
life led after the manner and fashion of the world, cannot stand together.
These testimonies of Scripture do plainly euince and prove the point in hand,
that a man cannot possibly walk both after the flesh and after the Spirit: the
course of a man's life, and his walking cannot be good, holy, heavenly, and
spiritual, and at the same time earthly, carnal, and merely natural and
sensual.

Because of that opposition and contrariety that is between The works of the
flesh are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: But the
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie. The flesh and the Spirit are as
contrary, as fire and water, light and darkness: they are like the Ark of God
and Dagon, they cannot stand together, there can be no agreement between them.
2. Cor. 6.14. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, and
what communion has light with darkness, says the Apostle: and therefore it
is not possible for a man to walk both after the flesh and after the Spirit.

If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: if any man be
carried away with the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of
life, his heart is not right in the love of God; The amity of the world is the
enmity of God, whosoever therefore is a friend of the world, makes himself
the enemy of God, Iam. 4.4. And therefore it must needs be, that such as walk
after the flesh and not after the Spirit, they are carried contrary ways,
according to their contrary affections and likings. And so it cannot be that a
man should walk both after the flesh and after the Spirit, and the course of a
man's life cannot be holy, good, heavenly, and spiritual, and at the same time
earthly, carnal, and sensual.

The blindness and folly of many discovered.
Many there be who think they may bring contrary ends together: they are of
this mind, that they may walk both after the flesh and after the Spirit, that
they may live as they are led by their own corrupt reason, their sensual and
corrupt affections, even conforming themselves to the course of the world, in
following after the profits, pleasures, and vanities of the world, and may do
as the most do, and as the time ferues: and in their speeches, their actions,
their gestures, their attire, be like such as are carnal; and yet be
religious, and the children of God, and servants of God too. Poor souls
whosoever they are that thus think, they deceive themselves exceedingly, they
are besotted with the deceit of sin, and they discern not the things that
differ. Yea it is a sower fruit budding out from the bitter root of Atheism
and infidelity, for men to think they may follow the course of the world, and
yet be holy and religious, and the children of God. To instance in some
particulars: Do thou think that thou may be an earth-worme, always
poring and digging in the earth, minding and affecting earthly things, and
hunting after the things of this life, and yet be a child of God, and a servant
of God, and walk after the Spirit? it is because thou beleeuest not the word
of the Lord Jesus, who has told thee the contrary, Luke 16.13. Ye cannot serve
God and riches. Do thou think (as many do) that thou may serve God on the
Sabbath as well at home as in the Church and public assembly, (being able to
come to it) or as well on horseback as at a Sermon: or if thou come to the
public exercise and attend on it, when that is ended thou art at liberty,
and may then do a work of thy calling? it is because thou give not credit
to the word of God, he revealing the contrary to thee in his holy commandment.
Do thou think that thou may fashion thy self like to the world, in thy
speech, in thy gesture, in thy attire, even attiring thy self like to a
wanton, and yet be religious and a child of God? the word of God has told thee
the contrary, and it is because thou beleeuest not the word of God, that thou
art of that mind. And so I might instance in many other particulars. Note.
And know it whosoever thou art, that so far as thou do follow the guidance
of thine own corrupt reason in any thing, so far do thou swerve from the
guidance of Gods Spirit and grace: and it is as possible for thee to bring
heaven and earth together, and to gripe them within thy fist, as it is for thee
to walk both after the flesh and after the Spirit; and to live an holy,
religious and spiritual life, and at the same time to live an earthly, carnal
and sensual life. These two can never sort together, there is no medley, no
mixture to be made of them. No, no, if the course of thy life be earthly and
carnal; without all question it is not holy, and good, and heavenly, and
spiritual. And take this with thee: If thou live not an heavenly life here in
this world, thou shall never live it in the world to come; thou shall never
enjoy the life of glory in heaven. It is not thine own strong conceit that
will carry thee up to heaven, because thy conceit serves thee, that thou shall
be saved as well as the best, though thou be as bad as the worst. No, no, if
thou walk according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. after the Prince
that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience: with him, unless thou repent, thou shall one day have thy
portion: and therefore take heed of that course of life.

Comfort to such as hold on a constant course of holiness.
and the course of a man's life cannot be holy, good, and heavenly: and at the
same time, earthly, carnal and sensual? then comfort thy self whosoever thou
art, that find thy walking and course of life, to be holy, good, heavenly,
and spiritual. For what though it be so, that thou do sometimes slip and
fail, and art sometimes ouercarried, to the doing of some evil against thy
purpose, and the best of thine actions are not done so chearefully, and so
exactly and perfectly as they ought, but they are mingled with many
imperfections, and thou have cause to be humbled for them? yet if thou be able
to witness to thy self in truth, that the bent and purpose of thine heart is
to please God in all things, and thy care and thy endeavor is to walk with
God, and thou do in some poor measure hold on a course in holiness: comfort
thy self, thou have good cause to be comforted, for then thou art one, even in
Gods account, that walk after the Spirit; and the Lord esteems not of thee
as one that walks after the flesh. Though the flesh that still abides in
thee, do intermeddle, and thrust in it self, and do cause thee sometimes to
slip and fail, and to do good things imperfectly, yet the Lord passes by thy
failings and imperfections, he looks to thy walking and course of life, and
that being holy and good, he esteems of thee as one that walks after the
Spirit, and not as one that walks after the flesh, and consequently, as one
that art in Christ, and by him freed from condemnation. And that is an
excellent comfort, think on it to thy comfort.

Note we further, the Apostle here says, that such as are in Christ, and by
him are freed from condemnation, they walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit. Hence it is clear:

That the best of Gods children living on the face of the The best of Gods
children have in them both flesh and Spirit.
and by him are freed from condemnation, they have in them both flesh and
Spirit, both grace and corruption, and they walk after the one, and not after
the other. Satan commonly troubles and disquiets poor weak Christians, and
would bear them in hand that they are none of Christ's, because they have
corruption and flesh in them, and they feel in themselves many sinful
infirmities. Herein he plays the subtle sophister and cunning deceiuer, he
would have Christians to measure themselves by a false rule, by the rule of
perfect sanctification, and he tells them, unless they be perfectly sanctified
they are not in Christ.

Now perfect sanctification is the rule that is to be laid to the Saints in
heaven, Note.
and not to those that live on the face of the earth. No, no, sin and
corruption that is found in men or women, is not sufficient to prove them not
to be in Christ, but their walking after it. If men walk after the flesh, they
are not in Christ; but if thou having flesh and corruption in thee, thou art
weary of it, and thou do not willingly follow the motion and command of it,
but do even sigh and groan under it, as the people of Israel did under their
servitude and bondage in Egypt, and grace has wrought in thee a new
disposition, such as nature never could bring forth: comfort thy self,
undoubtedly thou art in Christ Jesus. Come we now to the second verse.

VERSE 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has
freed me from the Law of sin, and of death.


Our Apostle having in the verse foregoing laid down his general proposition,
full of sweet and heavenly comfort to all that are in Christ Jesus; that to
them there is no condemnation: in this verse he proves and confirms that
proposition. Some would have this verse to be a proof and confirmation of the
latter part of the former verse, namely, of that which the Apostle affirms of
such as are in Christ, that they walk not after the flesh, but they walk
after the Spirit. Say they, the Apostle confirms that part of the verse by an
argument from the efficient cause of an holy and sanctified life, namely, the
Spirit of Christ given to such as are in Christ, and have fellowship and
communion with him. But indeed this verse is rather to be taken as a proof and
confirmation of the former part of the verse foregoing. The Apostles
proposition, there is no condemnation to such as are in Christ, that is most
agreeable to the context, and to the drift and purpose of the Apostle. For
having said there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; some
might happily think or say, Is there no condemnation to such as are in Christ?
why, they that are in Christ Jesus have in them a remainder of corruption,
there is impurenesse and defilement in part in all the powers of their souls,
and in all the parts of their bodies: the impurenesse of nature is found in the
best and in the most holy that live in the world, and that is enough to
condemn them; how then are they freed from condemnation? This objection the
Apostle here meets withal, and preuents, and makes answer to it on this
manner: Howsoever the best and the most holy that live in the world have in
them impurenesse of nature, which in it self and of it self, is enough to
condemn them; and even for that, if there were no further matter of
condemnation in them, the Lord might justly throw them to hell, yet there is
that in Christ Jesus that is able to free them from it: yea there is that in
Christ Jesus, even the law of the Spirit of life, that does free all that are
in him from the law of sin and of death: therefore there can be no
condemnation to them. So the Apostle here reasons, and that is the dependence
of this verse on the former.

Now in this verse, for the general matter of it, The general matter of the
second verse.
we have these things laid before us.

First, what it is that sets them that are in Christ Jesus free from their
guiltiness in respect of their impure nature, and Law; and the subject of it,
in whom that Spirit of life is found, and that is in Christ Jesus: For the law
of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus.

Then the Apostle makes known the effect and powerful has freed me. And to
that he adds in the third place, from what himself from the law of sin and
of death: and so we see the sum and substance of this verse. Come we to
unfold the sense of the words of it.

This verse does much trouble Interpreters, Interpretation.
and is diversely taken according to the diverse applications of it, some
applying it (as I said) as a proof of the latter part of the verse foregoing,
and some as a confirmation of the former part of it, which (as I have showed) I
take to be the right application of it. And I doubt not but that this verse and
the two verses following, are to be taken as intended by the Apostle, touching
the matter of Justification, and freedom from condemnation, and not concerning
the sanctification of such as are in Christ: the context and words (as I
conceive) will bear no other sound exposition.

For the Law of the Spirit of life. These words (of the Spirit of life) are
diversely expounded. I will not trouble you with the variety of expositions,
but give that which I conceive to be the true meaning of them, and most
agreeable to the purpose of the Apostle. And the Spirit of life (as I take it)
is here put for life, according to the phrase of Scripture, as Reuela. 11.11.
After three days and an half the Spirit of life coming from God shall enter
into them: that is, life it self. Now life is that whereby a thing acts and
moves it self, and it is the cause and beginning of action and motion: and
being here applied to Christ, we are to understand it of that in Christ which
is the cause and beginning of all his holy actions. Now what is that? Why,
surely his original holiness and purity, the holiness and purity of his
humane nature, which is here called the Spirit of life for two reasons.

Proouing Christ his original holiness and purity to be here meant.
when he was conceived in the womb of the virgin, he being conceived by the
holy Ghost. Luke 1.35. the Angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouershadow thee:
therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called
the Son of God.

Spirit unto it; as the spirit of pride, of truth, of error, and the like. So
then the meaning of this phrase (the Spirit of life) is this, the most absolute
and most perfect purity and holiness of the nature of man. And the word law
here used, signifies the power of that holiness and purity to countermand the
power of sin, to acquit and discharge from sin: and that may be casily
gathered from the opposition of it to the law of sin. (In Christ Jesus) So is
the text original, (...), the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus. The meaning is, which is inherent in Christ Jesus himself, as the
proper subject of it. Has freed me, that is, me being in Christ Jesus, and one
with him by the bond of his Spirit, and by faith: has perfectly freed me being
imputed to me. For here no doubt the Apostle had an eye to that in the verse
before, (There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.) (From the
law of sin, and of death.) The word sin, here signifies the corruption,
the blot and stain of nature: and in respect of the Apostle and true
believers, the relics and remainders of that blot and stain still abiding in
them: and by the law of sin, is meant that force and power it has in it
self, to make guilty in Gods sight, and to bind over to punishment. And last
of all, by the law of death, we are to understand the power of death, both of
body and soul, both temporal and eternal, due to that blot and stain. Thus
then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this verse,
as if he had said.

For the power of the most absolute and most perfect holiness and purity of
the nature of man, which is found in Christ Jesus, is inherent in him as the
proper subject of it, even the power and force it has to acquit and discharge
from sin, that being imputed to me, has perfectly freed and delivered me, I
being in Christ Jesus, and one with him by the bond of his Spirit and by faith,
from the power which the remainder of sin, the blot and stain of my sinful
nature, has to make me guilty in Gods sight, and to bind me over to
punishment, and from the power of death both of body and soul, even of death
temporal, and of death eternal, due to me in respect of that blot and stain
of my corrupt and sinful nature.

Observe we that this verse has respect to the first part of the former verse,
as a prevention of an objection: for some might object and say, There is
impurenesse of nature in the best and most holy that live in the world, how
then are they freed from condemnation? This the Apostle meets with, and
answers, That the perfect holiness and purity of Christ his manhood imputed to
them, perfectly frees them from the power the defilement of their nature has
to condemn them, and it shall never condemn them; and so it is a truth that
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Hence then we may
gather thus much.

That such as are in Christ Jesus, they are partakers of the benefit of Christ
his most holy conception and birth, Such as are in Christ Jesus are partakers
of his most holy conception and birth, and of the perfect purity of his most
holy nature.
and of the perfect holiness and purity of his most holy and sanctified
nature: not only the merit of Christ his active obedience in his life, and the
merit of his suffering and death belongs to true believers, but the benefit
also of his habitual righteousness, of his most holy nature belongs to them:
and that is also imputed to them, to their justification in Gods sight: and by
the perfect holiness and purity of Christ his humane nature imputed to them,
they are accounted as holy and pure, and that in the sight of God, as if they
themselves had been conceived and borne without spot of sin. And to this
purpose is that of the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 1.30 Christ is made to us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Christ is made to
such as truly believe in him, not only righteousness in respect of his
perfect fulfilling of the Law of God for them, but sanctification also, in
respect of his holiness, innocence, and most perfect purity of his holy and
sanctified nature. Ezech. 16.6. Ezech. 16.6.
the Lord says, He saw Jerusalem polluted in her own blood in her nativity
and birth, and verse 8: And hence it is that the Lord is said not to see
iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23.21. He sees no sin in his people and children,
not that there is no sin in them that are justified by Christ, or that God
cannot see it: for the best have corruption still abiding in them, which God
sees and chasteneth them for it, but that in the justification of a sinner, he
looks on them in and through Christ, and beholds them in his perfect holiness
and purity: and so he sees them as holy and pure, and free from all spot of
sin. They are partakers of the perfect holiness and purity of Christ his
most holy and sanctified nature, and that being imputed to them, they are
accounted as holy and pure in Gods sight, as if themselves had been conceived
and borne without sin: and the reason and ground of this truth is this.

for Gods chosen: Isai. 9.6. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is
given. He was borne that he might bestow himself wholly on true believers, as
a mediator, and all his works of mediation, his holy incarnation, his
fulfilling of the Law, his suffering for sin. And this we may resolve on as a
certain truth, that such as are in Christ Jesus, they are partakers of the
benefits of Christ his most holy conception and birth, and by the perfect
holiness and purititie of Christ his humane nature imputed to them, they are
accounted in Gods sight as holy and pure, as if themselves had been conceived
and borne without spot of sin.

Now then, this may serve first to inform our judgments Information of
judgment touching the justification of true believers in Gods sight.
by this we may easily conceive how a true believer stands perfectly just and
holy in Gods sight, namely, by the birth and suffering of Christ, and by the
obedience of his life, and also by the holiness and innocence of his
conception and birth. By the merit of Christ his death, a true believer is
discharged from the guilt and punishment due to him for sin, both original
and actual: by the obedience of his life, he is accounted actually just and
righteous; and by the holiness and purity of his conception and birth, he is
accounted personally holy and pure, as if he had been conceived and borne
without spot of sin.

Again, is it so that such as be in Christ Jesus are partakers Sweet comfort
to such as are sure they are in Christ.
and by the perfect holiness of his nature imputed to them, they are accounted
as holy and pure in Gods sight, as if themselves had been conceived and borne
without sin? then here is matter of sweet comfort for thee whosoever thou art,
that have evidence in thine own soul that thou art in Christ: thou may
hereupon conclude to thy comfort, that thou art perfectly just and holy in Gods
sight, in and through Christ: and it is neither the want of holiness in thy
life, nor the want of purity in thy nature, that can condemn thee; there is a
supply of perfect holiness both actual and original made to thee in Christ.
Satan commonly seeks to brangle and trouble the conscience of a poor weak
Christian on this or the like manner: he sets on him and tells him, thou art
filthy, thou art unclean, and do thou look to be saved, and to enter into
Gods kingdom? thou do but deceive thy self. Admit this that Christ has
died for the sins that thou have done, and has also fulfilled the Law for
thee, yet thou know thou art filthy, and thou art privy to the uncleanness
of thine own heart and soul, sin cleaues to thee, and thou feel it, and
do acknowledge it to God, and do thou think to be admitted into Gods
kingdom of glory? No, no, I tell thee no unclean thing shall enter into that
kingdom, the Lord himself has spoken it, Revel. 21.27. There shall enter
into it no vncle^^e thing, neither whatsoever works abomination or lies. See
the cunning of the old serpent. The poor Christian may easily answer, and on
the ground of truth now delivered may tell him, Though I be unclean in my
self, yet in Christ there is perfect holiness and purity of nature, and I
being in him, and through him, I am accounted even in Gods sight, as holy and
pure as if I had been conceived and borne without spot of sin, and as if I
had no uncleanness in me. It seems then (will the devil say, and indeed it
is the objection of the Papists) that God accounts thee, that art a sinner, to
be just and holy, but that cannot be, that the Lord who is most just and holy
should so do. The poor soul may answer him again, I being justified in the
sight of God, in and through Christ, I am acquitted by Christ from all my sins:
and though I have sin still sticking in me, and I am a sinner in respect of
the inherencie of sin, yet I cease to be a sinner in regard of guiltiness,
I am not held guilty of sin: and having the perfect holiness and
righteousness of Christ imputed to me, I am truly just and holy by imputation;
there is a supply of perfect holiness, both actual and original made to me
in Christ. Thus the poor soul may answer Satan, and cheer up it self. And
herein comfort thy self whosoever thou art, that find thy self in Christ;
it is neither the want of holiness in thy life, nor the want of purity in thy
nature, that can condemn thee, thou art partaker of the benefit of Christ his
most holy conception and birth, and by the perfect holiness and purity of his
humane nature imputed to thee, thou art accounted as holy and pure in Gods
sight, as if thou had been conceived and borne without any spot of sin, and
that is an excellent comfort.

In the next place observe we, how the Apostle here sets out the holiness and
purity of Christ his humane nature: he calls it not the life of the Spirit, or
the life of grace, but which is more emphaticall and weighty, and more sets out
the excellency and perfection of it, (The Spirit of life) which is in Christ
Jesus. Hence we are given to understand thus much.

That in Christ is not only the life of the Spirit, or the life In Christ is
found absolute perfection of holiness and purity.
but the Spirit of life is in him, in him is found the absolute perfection of
holiness and purity; the holiness of Christ infused into him and in his
manhood, is not only free from all spot of sin, but it is also enriched and
filled with holiness, in greater measure then all men and Angels: the
excellency and perfection of all divine grace is found in the manhood of Christ
Jesus. And to this purpose that is a clear text, John 3.34. Ioh. 3.34.
God gave him not the Spirit by measure: the graces and gifts of the holy Ghost
were bestowed on him in fullness, and without measure. Isai. 11.2. Isai. 11.2.
the Prophet speaking of Christ says, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, even the fullness of the Spirit: and then he reckons the particular gifts
and graces of the Spirit, and gives to them the title of Spirit: The Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and strength, the Spirit of
knowledge and fear of the Lord: thereby signifying the absolute perfection of
those graces. Acts 10.38. Acts 10.38.
the Apostle Peter says. God has anointed him with the holy Ghost. And Heb.
1.9. Heb. 1.9.
it is said that God anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. And Luke 4.1. Luke 4.1.
it is said, that he was full of the holy Ghost. Ioh. 1.14. John 1.14.
says the Evangelist, The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw
the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father,
full of grace and truth. The Scripture is plentiful in the proof of this:
That in Christ is found the absolute perfection of holiness and purity; the
holiness and purity of Christ infused into him, and inherent in his humane
nature, is most absolute, Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and men. And this increase was not only in respect of
experience, and the manifestation of grace before God and men, as the
Schoolmen hold, but in respect of the habit or gift of grace. Yet so are we to
understand it, as that it was an increase without all imperfection, there was
not the least imperfection, the least defect in that grace that was in Christ
in his infancy. In his infancy he received a full measure of grace, and even
fullness of grace agreeable to that age, and fit for that age, and the works
to be done of him in that age. And when he was twelve years old he received a
further measure fit for that age: and so when he was thirty years old, and was
baptized, and began to preach, then was accomplished the Prophecy of Isaiah,
Isai. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me that I should heal the broken
hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of
sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are bruised. Luke
4.18. Luke 4.18.
And then he had the full growth of grace; and this increase of grace, and a
perfection of grace may well stand together. As it pleased Christ to take to
himself the body of an infant, and to grow up in stature of body; so also it
pleased him to take a fullness of grace agreeable to that age, and to grow and
increase in grace: and so the holiness and purity infused into Christ, and
inherent in his manhood, was even from his conception a perfect measure of
grace, and being come to the full growth it is most absolute, and most exact
and perfect, and it was needful so to be. There is reason why it should so be,
that the holiness and purity infused into Christ, and inherent in his humane
nature, should be most absolute and perfect, and that he should be free from
all spot of sin, and have absolute fullness of grace and holiness in him,
even holiness in the highest degree of perfection.

That he might be fit for the accomplishment of his office of Mediator, and
that he might in both natures, Iehoua our righteousness, Ierem. 23.6. And it
was needful also that in his manhood he should be perfectly holy and pure,
that he might be an absolute and perfect Savior.

Now then this trurh, that in Christ is found absolute perfection Information
that Christ merited not eternal happiness and glory for himself.
even the holiness and purity inherent in Christ his humane nature is most
exact and perfect: this may inform us in this particular, that Christ did not
fulfill the Law to merit eternal happiness and glory for himself, by the
actions of his life, by his active obedience: he needed not so to do, for he
was most worthy of all honor, and all glory, in respect of his original
holiness and purity, that was in him at the very first moment of his
conception.

Again, this truth now delivered, may further inform us Further information
where perfect holiness and purity is to be found.
to the comfort of true believers, namely, in the manhood of Christ. In his
Godhead indeed is infinite holiness, but that is inaccessable, we cannot
attain to it, 1. Tim. 6.16. but his humane nature being perfectly holy, and
perfectly sanctified, that is as a pipe or conduit to convey it to all that
truly believe in him.

Now further, is it so that in Christ is found absolute perfection The members
of Christ are holy as Christ is holy in their measure and proportion.
and the purity of Christ infused into him and inherent in his humane nature,
is most absolute? surely then it must needs be, that there is a proportion of
holiness, a measure of holiness in the members of Christ. Is there fullness
of holiness in Christ the head, and not a proportionable measure of holiness
in his members? it is not possible, that were to make the mystical body of
Christ a monstrous body. Out of all question, there being fullness of grace and
holiness in Christ, there is a proportionable measure of holiness and purity
in all that are in Christ. For as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit: and Ioh. 1.16. Of his fullness have we all
received, and grace for grace. All that are in Christ receive of his fullness,
and are partakers of that grace and holiness that is in him, in some measure:
and therefore deceive not thy self whosoever thou art. Herein many deceive
themselves, they think they belong to Christ, and that he is their head and
Savior, and yet they have no dram of holiness in them: no, their hearts are
full of many foul and filthy lusts, of pride, envy, covetousness, and the
like, and their lives are soyled with many foul and gross sins: yea they
cannot endure a measure of holiness and purity in others. Such persons
deceive themselves exceedingly: and take heed of this deceit whosoever thou
art, remember the truth now delivered, that in Christ is sound absolute and
perfect holiness, in Christ is the Spirit of life; and if thou be joined with
him, thou have the same Spirit, thou art partaker of that holiness in some
proportion. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Every one that has this hope in him, purges himself
even as he is pure: he labors for holiness, and he never rests till he find
his heart and life in some measure sanctified and purified. For assuredly, as
Christ has in him the Spirit of life, so such as are in Christ have the life
of the Spirit in them in some proportion.

Comfort to such as find in themselves the beginnings of grace.
then comfort thy self whosoever thou art that have in thee the beginnings of
true grace, and true holiness, and find in thee the life of the Spirit:
that gives thee evidence that thou art in Christ, and being in Christ, in him
thou have perfection of grace and holiness. In thy self thou find great
want, and a scant measure of grace and holiness, and thou many times
complainest of it: comfort thy self, in Christ thou have perfection of
holiness and purity: Note.
As thy life and happiness is hid and laid up in Christ, so is thy perfection
of holiness, Colos. 3.3.
thou may not look to find it in thy self, so long as thou live on the
face of the earth. No, no, the Lord will not trust thee with it, he knows if
thou were trusted with it, it is a thousand to nothing thou would lose it;
he has laid it up in a surer hand, even in the hand of the Lord Jesus: and out
of his hand all the devils in hell are not able to wring it. In him is laid up
absolute perfection of holiness, and he is able to keep it safe for thee, and
thou being in Christ, in him thou shall be sure to find it, and not miss of
it: and that is an excellent comfort, and think on it to thy comfort, thou
that have the first fruits of the Spirit, even the beginnings of true grace
and true holiness in thee.

Note we further, the Apostle here ascribes a power to the Spirit of life, to
the absolute holiness in Christ Jesus, under the word Law, and he makes that
power able to free from the power of sin, and from the power of death. Whence
note we thus much.

That there is a greater power and force in the perfect holiness Christ his
perfect holiness is of greater force to justify true believers, then the
impurenesse of their nature is to condemn them. Reason.
then there is in their impurenesse and defilement of nature to condemn them.
The perfect holiness of Christ Jesus is of greater force to make them holy and
pure in the fight of God, then the impurenesse of their nature is to make them
guilty in Gods sight, and to bind them over to punishment.

For why, though it be holiness inherent in the manhood of Christ, yet it is
the holiness of the mediator, even the holiness of that person who is both
God and man. As the blood of Christ is of infinite worth and value, though it
be the blood of Christ as he is man, and shed only as man; yet being the blood
of that person who is both God and man, and hence called the blood of God. Act.
20.28. and in that respect of infinite price and value: so the holiness
inherent in the manhood of Christ, being the holiness of him who is both God
and man, it is of infinite force to free from sin and death; and so of
greater force to justify such as be in Christ, then the defilement of their
nature is to condemn them.

A ground of sweet comfort to all that are in Christ.
hereupon they may cheer up their hearts against discouragement, in regard of
that mass, and lump, and body of sin they find in themselves, which they
find to be strong and powerful in them, and many times prevailing against the
power of grace in them. What though it do so prevail sometimes, yet know it
whosoever thou art that art in Christ, it shall never prevail to thy
condemnation. No, no, there is greater force in the holiness and purity of
Christ Jesus, to make thee holy and pure, and that in the sight of God, then in
that, to make thee guilty in Gods sight, and to bind thee over to punishment.
The holiness and purity of Christ Jesus imputed to thee, makes a louder cry
in the ears of God for thy justification, then that does or can do for thy
condemnation, and to call for the wrath and vengeance of God on thee.

Mark we further, the Apostle here making known the effect and powerful
work of the Spirit of life in Christ, to be freedom and deliverance from the
power of sin and death, he gives instance of that effect in himself, in his
own particular. He s^ith, The Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin and of death. Now this the Apostle
did not only for his own comfort, but also for the comfort and confirmation
of others, whosoever they be that are in Christ Jesus. As in the Chapter before
he sets himself as an example of weakness, and of the spiritual combat; so
here he sets himself before us as an example of confidence, touching his
freedom from the power of sin and death, in and through Christ Jesus, to the
comfort of all such as be in Christ: and his example is of excellent use, for
the comfort of all true believers. But that point I pass by, having not long
since showed, what use we are to make of the examples of holy men laid before
us in the Scriptures. And in that the Apostle here speaking of the freedom
from the power of sin and death, through the power of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, he speaks of it as belonging to himself, that himself in
particular was partaker of that benefit to his comfort, and says, the law of
the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin
and of death. He gives us to understand thus much.

That it is not sufficient for us to know the benefit of To our knowledge of
the benefits and saving comforts in Christ we must ioyn particular application
of them to our selves.
and to know that in Christ is freedom from the power of sin and death, and
other benefits and saving comforts that are found in Christ Jesus: but we must
apply them to our selves in particular. If we would have true comfort touching
freedom from condemnation through Christ, and other benefits of Christ, we
must never rest till we be able to say with the Apostle, that we in particular
are freed, that the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has
freed us in particular. To our knowledge of the benefits of Christ and saving
comforts found in him, we must join particular application of them to our
selves, if we would find true comfort in them, as Eliphaz said to Job, Job
5.27. Job. 5.27.
We must hear and know them for our selves: we must be able to say with the
Apostle, Galat. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
I live by faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for
me in particular. For why.

It is only true saving and justifying faith in Christ, that Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to
them that believe in his name.

Again, what comfort is there in this, to know the power particular? Surely
such knowledge is far from yielding true and sound comfort, Not the Law only
but the Gospel is a killing letter, if we rest in the letter of it, and know
it only in the general, and find not out the sweetness of it, applying it
to our own souls in particular. And therefore it is not enough for us to know
the benefits and saving comforts that are found in Christ, but we must apply
them to our selves in particular: to our knowledge of them we must join
particular application of them to our selves, if we would find true sweetness
and sound comfort in them.

Popish justifying faith discovered to be comfortless.
is a faith without any true comfort in it: for they disclaim particular
application of Christ and of his benefits: yea, they hold it to be an impudent
fiction, and an idle fancy, to apply Christ and his benefits particularly: and
they cry shame on particular application of Christ and his benefits, and they
will have faith to be nothing else but a general knowledge, or at the most but
a general assent to the truth of the Scriptures, and to the truth of the
articles of faith, which indeed may be in reprobates, yea in the devils
themselves: and therefore there is no true nor sound comfort in Popish
justifying faith. I leave them.

Exhortation to a particular application of Christ and his benefits.
particular application of them to our selves, and rest not in this knowledge
of the sweet and excellent comforts that are found in Christ Jesus, that thou
art able to speak of them: but if thou would find true comfort in them,
apply them to thine own soul in particular; the particular application of
them will yield thee true comfort both in life and death. Happily thou will say,
this is the hardest matter in the world, oh that I could believe and apply them
to my self, I would feign apply Christ and his benefits to my self, but alas
I cannot, I cannot say that Christ has freed me from condemnation, and that
Christ has fulfilled the Law, and died for me in particular, I would willingly
be able to say so, and be persuaded of it, but alas I find that I cannot. I
answer: Comfort to such as unfeignedly desire to believe in Christ, and endeavor
so to do, though as yet they cannot say they do believe.
Thou that find this hardness in thee to believe, and to apply Christ to
thy self, is thy mind set on Christ? do thou will and desire unfeignedly to
believe in him, and to apply to thy self in particular the benefits of Christ?
do thou endeavor and use means to that purpose? art thou grieved that thou
can not believe as thou ought, and as thou desire? Comfort thy self,
assure thy self the Lord accepts of thy will to believe for faith, and he
accepts of thee for a true believer. Thou will say again, Indeed sometimes I
seem to have some comfort, and I think I do apply the benefits of Christ to
my comfort, but how shall I be sure that I do it in deed and truth, and that I
do not deceive my self as many do? Many persons have a strong faith in Christ,
and out of their blindness and presumption say they doubt not, but that if
they should die at this present, they are sure they should go to heaven: but
alas, it is but out of their blindness and ignorance; they consider not how
hard a thing it is to believe in Christ. How shall I be sure that I believe? I
answer.

First, How we may know and be sure that we believe in Christ. Notes of it.
as namely, an inward love of God in his word of promise, a standing in awe of
God in his word of threatening, a willing subjection of thy heart and life to
the will of God revealed, in all things, a continual lifting up of thy soul
to God in prayer, and thanksgiving on all occasions.

Secondly, if thou find in thee the power of faith, and

If thou find these things in thy self, thou may conclude to the comfort
of thine own soul, that thou have true justifying faith, even a faith
applying the benefits of Christ to thine own soul particularly: and hereby
try thy self, and never rest till thou find in thee these things. If thou
find these things in thy self, certainly thou do join to thy knowledge of
the benefits of Christ particular application of them, and that will yield thee
sound comfort both at the hour of death, and at the great day of the Lord. The
Papists go about to prove from this verse, that the grace of regeneration,
inherent holiness, does free from sin, and justify in the sight of God, A
Popish error.
and is the cause of justification in Gods sight. And thus they reason. Say
they, the law of the Spirit of life does free from sin and from death, and
that law of the Spirit of life is the grace of regeneration, inherent holiness
wrought in us by the spirit of grace and sanctification. For this they allege
the authority and interpretation of some of their writers: And therefore, say
they, the grace of regeneration, inherent holiness, does justify in the sight
of God, and is the cause of justification: and it is not righteousness imputed
that does justify in the sight of God: that is their doctrine.

Quoad materiale, non quoad formale: in that it does purge out and bridle the
evil motions and sinful lusts of the heart in such as are justified, but it
does not free any that is not justified from the guilt of his sin, and acquit
and discharge from it in the sight of God: no, there is no such matter. Again,
the Apostle says not, the law of the Spirit of life in me, or the law in us,
but the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. He makes the subject of that
law of the Spirit of life he speaks of, to be Christ Jesus, and not our
selves; and therefore it cannot be understood of holiness inherent in us. And
further, he says not, the law of the Spirit of life has freed me from sin,
but from the law of sin. So that still admit that interpretation to be good,
that by the Law of the Spirit of life, is meant the grace of regeneration; yet
that will not follow which the Papists do infer on it, that the grace of
regeneration does justify in the sight of God: but only this will follow on
it, that the grace of regeneration does free from the power and dominion of
sin. And therefore this text makes nothing for that the Papists would fasten
on it, and which they would conclude from it.

Observe we further, the Apostle here ascribes a power to sin: and
understanding by sin, (as I showed) the impurenesse and defilement of nature,
even a power to make guilty in Gods sight, and to bind over to death, to death
of body and death of soul, death temporal, and death eternal, he puts them
together, and conioynes them: and the point hence is this.

That the impurenesse and defilement of nature, if no other The impurenesse of
nature is enough to make men liable to death of body and death of soul
is enough to make men liable to death of body, and death of soul, even the
filthiness and pollution in which men are conceived and borne, is enough of it
self to condemn them without any other sin added to it. And it was needful
that the Son of God should come down and take our nature upon him, and be
conceived and borne pure and holy, that he might free Gods elect from the
impurity and filthiness of nature. And this doubtless David knew well, when
making confession of his sins, Psalm. 51. he broke out and said, verse 5. that
he was conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: as if he had said, Lord I
acknowledge my filthiness and pollution of nature, and that in regard of the
impurenesse of my nature, if I had no other sin, I deserve thy wrath and
everlasting perdition. Ephesians. 2.3. the Apostle acknowledges, that himself and
other true believers were by nature the children of wrath as well as others;
plainly teaching us, that all by nature, in regard of the filthiness and
pollution in which they were conceived and borne, if they had no other sin
added to it, yet in regard of that, they are liable to the wrath of God and
everlasting perdition: For why, the reasons of it are plain. As,

For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. Again,



A papish error confuted.
and dream of pure naturals; and howsoever they do not altogether her deny
original sin, yet they much extenuate and lessen it, and they hold and teach
that the inclinations and pronenesse to sin or natural concupiscence in such
as are baptized, is not an evil repugnant and contrary to the Law of God, or
(as they speak) an evil that has the form of sin in it: but (say they) it
is a matter left in them, wherein the godly may exercise their power and
strength in striving against it; and if they fight and strive against it
manfully, they shall thereby obtain eternal life. Thus they hold and teach,
which is indeed a foul and gross error, it cannot stand with the truth now
delivered. If so be the impurenesse and defilement of nature, without any other
sin added to it, be enough to make men liable to death of body and death of
soul, as we have cleared and proved, certainly then it must needs be, that it
is an evil repugnant and contrary to the Law of God, and an evil that has
the form of sin: for nothing but sin deserves death of body and death of
soul; therefore the Papists err grossly, that deny it.

I leave them, and for the use of the point to our selves, the Why infants dye
in their infancy.
that infants do dye and are taken away by death in their infancy. Though they
may be truly said to be innocents in regard of actual sin, yet they are not
innocents in respect of original corruption, they have that impurenesse in
them, even from their conception and birth: that is enough without any other
sin added, to make them liable to death of body, yea without Gods mercy to
death of soul. Indeed infants within the covenant are freed from the sting and
curse of death, but they are subject to it as the true believing members of
Christ are, and death to them is sanctified and sweetened, and made a passage
to heaven.

Again, is it so that the impurenesse and defilement of We are to be humbled
for the impurenesse of our nature, and in that respect to magnify Gods mercy
and long patience toward us.
is enough to make men liable to death of body and death of soul? Take we then
notice of this, and let us seriously think on it, to stir us up to the
magnifying of the great mercy of God toward us. If we duly consider it, and
think on it as we ought, we shall find, that on this ground we have just cause
to admire, and to magnify the wonderful mercy, patience, and goodness of God
toward every one of us. For why, even the filthiness and pollution in which
every one of us was conceived and borne, did afford matter enough for the
Lords wrath to seize on to our everlasting confusion, and even for that without
any other sin added to it, might the Lord have justly thrown us to hell. Now
the Lord has spared us, some twenty, some thirty, some forty years and more:
and herein appears the wonderful and unspeakable mercy, and patience, and
goodness of God toward us; and we are to magnify his mercy, patience, and
goodness, and to make use of it. We are to be humbled for the impurenesse of
our nature, and to make our peace with the Lord: for to that end he spares us,
that besides the acknowledgement of his goodness and mercy, we should be
humbled before him, and make our peace with him, not only in respect of our
actual sins, but even for the impurenesse of our nature: we have cause to be
humbled for that, as well as for our actual sins, for even for that if we
had no other sin, might the Lord justly power out his full wrath upon us in
this life, and for ever in the life to come. Alas, many consider not what an
evil their corrupt nature is, and they are never troubled in respect of those
evil motions and lusts that arise from their own corruption: and many full
little consider that the Son of God must come down from heaven, and humble
himself, and become a man, that he might free Gods chosen from the impurenesse
and defilement of their nature. They think not on this, alas, their eyes are
shut up, they see it not: no, they bless themselves in respect of their
civil, honest, orderly carriage, and think all is well with them, if they
live in civil fashion in the world, and be free from foul and gross sins,
such as the world takes notice of. Poor souls, they see not the impurenesse
of their hearts, and that in respect of that they are liable to death of body
and death of soul. Let us then learn to take notice of it, that our own
clothes will make us filthy, and plonge us in the pit. Job 9.31. that the
impurenesse of our nature is enough to condemn us, if no other sin were
added to it: and let us bewail that, and be humbled for that, as well as for
our actual sins, and acknowledge Gods mercy in sparing us, and that he did
not throw us to hell so soon as we were conceived in the womb; he might
justly have done it, but he has hitherto spared us. Oh then let us acknowledge
and magnify his goodness, patience, and mercy: and in respect of the
impurenesse of our nature, even the best of us have still a remainder of it
still abiding in us; and in respect of that, we have cause to hang down our
heads: let us I say, even the best of us, in respect of the impurenesse of our
nature, learn to walk humbly before the Lord all the days of our lives. Come
we now to the third verse.

VERSE 3. For (that that was impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the flesh) God sending his own Son, in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.


THis verse has respect to the verse foregoing, as yielding a proof and
confirmation of that, that the most absolute and perfect holiness and purity
of Christ his humane nature, called the Spirit of life, imputed to such as are
in Christ, does free them from the impurenesse and defilement of their nature
still abiding in them, both from the guiltiness of it, and from the punishment
due to it, and does make them holy in the sight of God. The Apostle here
confirms that, from the effect of God his sending his Son into the world.
And of the Son of God his taking flesh and the nature of man on him, that the
effect was the condemnation of sin in that flesh: and in that humane nature
of the Son of God, being sent of his Father into the world, and taking the
nature of man on him, he in that nature condemned sin, and so freed all true
believers from the impurenesse and defilement of nature: that is the maine
drift of the Apostle in this verse, and the respect it has to the foregoing
matter. In this verse we have these things offered.

First, that the Law could not do that which Christ did, The general matter of
the third verse.
there was an impossibility in the Law to do it. Why? because it was weak,
and wanted power to that purpose. That which was impossible to the Law, in as
much as it was weak, says the Apostle. And lest he should seem to wrong the
Law, he explaines himself and says, the weakness of it was in regard of the
flesh, it was weak because of the flesh. And then:

Secondly, we have here laid before us what Christ did, namely this, that he
condemned sin, and wherein it was that he condemned sin, that it was in the
flesh. And this effect and working of Christ, the condemning of sin in the
flesh, the Apostle does not barely deliver, but he sets it down together with
another special work of God going before it, and that was the sending of
Christ into the world; that God sent his own Son into the world, to be
incarnate, and to take the nature of man on him, which is further amplified by
a particular end of his sending in the flesh, that it was for sin. God
sending his own Son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin: and
then follows the effect: That he being so sent, he condemned sin in the
flesh.

The drift of it
Touching this verse in general, as I said, it is to be taken as intended by
the Apostle, touching the matter of justification, and not concerning
sanctification. The whole matter of it, if we duly observe it, tends to set
forth justification: for here the Apostle shows that the Law cannot justify,
that the Law cannot bring to Gods chosen perfect holiness and purity. Though
the Law command and require perfect righteousness, both of nature and actions,
yet it brings not perfect holiness and purity to Gods chosen: it is only
Christ Jesus being sent of his Father, and taking flesh on him, that condemns
sin in his flesh, and brings such a perfection of holiness and purity to
Gods chosen, as being imputed to them, makes them perfectly holy and pure in
Gods sight: that is the very purpose of the Apostle in this verse. And this
verse being a proof or an explication of that which is delivered in the second
verse, it proves strongly against all that gainesay it, that we have rightly
expounded that verse; and that by the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, is meant the perfect holiness and purity of Christ his humane nature.
And they that cauil and except against that exposition, do it without ground.
Interpretation.
That that was impossible to the Law, or as it is in the new translation, what
the Law could not do: By the Law, we are to understand the moral Law of God:
and what is the thing the moral Law could not do, we may gather from the last
clause of the verse, (condemned sin in the flesh.) God sending his own Son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, and that was
the thing the Law could not do, it could not condemn sin in the flesh, it
could not free from sin in the sight of God, and bestow on men perfect
holiness and righteousness, in as much as it was weak, that is, of no force,
of no power nor strength to that purpose, because of the flesh, or by reason of
the flesh. By flesh, is here meant the corruption of nature, that which is in
men by natural generation, as Ioh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is
flesh. (God sending his own Son) the word God here standing in relation to
Christ, is to be taken personally, for God the Father the first person in
Trinity. Sending, that is, in his eternal counsel having designed to the
office of a Mediator, as Ioh. 10.36. Say ye of him whom the Father has
sanctified, and sent into the world, did in the fullness of time exhibit him.
Galat. 4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, that
is, his eternal Son, begotten of him from all eternity, and of the same
eternal essence with the Father, and so his only begotten Son, as he is
called, Ioh. 3.16. In the similitude of sinful flesh. The word similitude,
must not be here simply referred to the flesh, but to sinful flesh. And the
meaning is, endued with humane flesh, and a having a true body and a true
soul, like to our sinful bodies and souls, but yet free from all spot of
sin in his body and soul, as Heb. 4.15. He was in all things tempted in like
sort, yet without sin. (And for sin.) Some expound these words to be a
sacrifice for sin, but they are mistaken, the Apostle here speaks not of
Christ his sacrifice or death, but of his incarnation and coming in the flesh,
that he was sent, and became man for sin, namely, to take away and to drive
sin out of our nature, which he took on him. For (as Beza well observes) the
Apostle says not for sins, but for sin, meaning the blot and stain of
nature, which did stick in our flesh, before Christ did assume and take our
flesh on him, and did fully sanctify that assumed flesh. (Condemned sin in
the flesh.) The word condemned, is here put by a metaphorical metonymie, for
that which follows condemnation, namely, for the abolishing and taking away
of sin. As condemned persons use to be cut off, and to be taken out of the
world, that they may be no more: so the Apostle saying that Christ condemned
sin, he means, he abolished and took sin at once quite out of the way: so
the word is used, 1. Pet. 4.6. In the flesh, that is, in the nature of man,
even in that flesh and humane nature that he assumed, he abolished sin
altogether: and that flesh of his being perfectly holy and pure, and the
holiness of it being imputed to such as are in Christ, it takes away the
guiltiness from them in respect of the impurenesse of their nature, and they
thereby are made perfectly holy and pure in Gods sight. So (as I take it) we
are to understand these words, condemned sin in the flesh. Thus then conceive
we the meaning of this verse, as if the Apostle had said.

For that which the moral Law of God could not do, which was not possible for
the Law to do, namely, to free men from sin in the sight of God, and to
bestow on them perfect holiness and righteousness, in as much as it had no
force, nor power to that purpose, The meaning of the words.
by reason of their natural corruption: God the Father exhibiting and sending
into the world his eternal and only begoten Son, whom in his eternal
counsel he had designed to the office of a Mediator, I say, sending him into
the world endued with humane flesh, even with a true body and a true soul,
like to our sinful bodies and souls, yet free from all spot of sin, and
that to take away and to drive sin, even the blot and stain of nature out of
our nature which he took on him, he did indeed in that flesh and humane nature
that he assumed, abolish sin altogether, and took it quite out of the way.
That flesh of his being perfectly holy and pure, and the holiness of it being
imputed to such as are in Christ, it frees them from guiltiness in respect of
the impurenesse of their nature, and they are thereby made perfectly holy and
pure in Gods sight.

The Apostle here says: that which was impossible for the Law to do, God sent
his Son to do for his chosen, and the thing as I said, the Law could not do,
was this, it could not free men from sin in the sight of God, it could not
bring them perfect holiness and righteousness. Hence then it is clear.

righteousness, both of nature and actions: Though the moral Law teach
perfect righteousness both of nature and actions, yet can it not justify any in
the sight of God.
but it cannot justify any in the sight of God, it cannot possibly bring to
men perfect holiness and righteousness, by which they may stand perfectly
holy and just in Gods sight, that is a thing impossible for the moral Law to
do.

For why, the moral Law of God offers no pardon, nor forgiveness of any the
least sin, that is proper to the Gospel: the Law has in it no promise of
remission of any sin: no, it threatens the curse for the least breach and
transgression of it. Galat. 3.10. Galat. 3.10.
Cursed is every man that continues not Deuteronomy. 27.26.
And as the Apostle says, James 2.10: Iam. 2.10.
If a man fail but in one point, he is guilty of all, he is a transgressor of
the Law, and he is liable to the curse of the Law. And hence is the Law called,
A killing letter, the ministration of death, the ministry of condemnation. 2.
Cor. 3.6, 7.9. 2. Cor. 3.6.7.9


Again, the Law is not able to work faith in men, by Gal. 3.2.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith
preached? So that on these grounds, we may resolve on this as a certain truth,
that the moral Law of God cannot justify any in the sight of God: it is not
possible that the Law of God should bring men to perfect holiness and
righteousness, by which they may stand perfectly just in the sight of God.

Now then, first this meets with that erroneous conceit of Justification in
Gods sight by the works of the Law confuted.
who hold and teach justification in Gods sight by the works of the Law,
directly contrary to this truth, that the Law cannot possibly justify any in
the sight of God: yea directly contrary to the plain evidence of the
Scripture. Romans 3.20. says the Apostle, By the works of the Law, shall no
flesh be justified in his sight. It is but a shift to expound that place,
either of the works of the ceremonial Law, or of the works done by the
strength of nature: for the Apostle there subioynes, By the Law comes the
knowledge of sin: Now the knowledge of sin comes not by the ceremonial
Law, that brings not men to a sight of sin, but the moral Law is that by
which men come to the knowledge of sin.

Again, all men have sinned, and good works done by them, being in the state
of grace, and by the strength of grace, (admit them to be most exact and
perfect, and done according to the strict rule of the moral Law,) yet can they
not procure pardon of the least sin: and therefore they cannot possibly
justify any in the sight of God. Again,

An error ingrafted in nature confuted
that it cannot possibly bring to men perfect holiness and righteousness, by
which they may stand just and righteous in Gods sight? then take we heed that
we seek not justification in Gods sight in and by the Law, and that we seek
not life and salvation in our own observance and fulfilling of the Law of God.
It is an error ingrafted in nature, it is natural for men to seek for life
and salvation by some thing in themselves, and by their own deeds. The blind
ignorant multitude make this plain to be a natural error. The common plea of
the multitude met withal.
Ask them how they look to be saved, and they commonly answer; By their good
meaning, by their good dealing, and good serving of God; they do no body harm,
they serve God duly and truly, and they hope they shall go to heaven. Poor
souls, they deceive themselves, this is out of their blind ignorance, this is
to seek for life and salvation where it is not to be found. The Law only
shows us our sins, and the curse due to us for the same, without remedy,
and so it drives us from it self, and out of our selves, to seek remedy
elsewhere: it is a Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, Galat. 3.24. Indeed it
is an abuse of the Law, to seek for life and salvation by it: we are to make
another use of it, to make the Law a Schoolemaister to drive us to Christ, by
showing us our sins, and what we have deserved by them; and so whipping and
scourging our naked consciences, with the smart of it, yielding us no remedy
by which we may be freed from the curse of it, and so driving us to Christ, in
whom we shall find full remission of all our sins, and full and perfect
holiness, both of nature and life, and an acceptance of our imperfect
obedience; which benefits the Law cannot afford us. Learn therefore for thy
justification and salvation, to go out of thy self, and seek for those things
only in Christ. Cast thy self wholly on him, rest on him, and build thy faith
on him; and thou then buildest on a sure rock, against which all the gates of
hell shall never be able to prevail. In the next place observe we: The Apostle
says, the moral Law of God could not bring to men perfect holiness and
righteousness, that was a thing impossible to the Law: and why? Because it was
weak, it was unable and insufficient to that purpose; and yet not in it self,
but because of the flesh, because of the corruption of nature. Hence we may
easily conclude and gather thus much.

That no man living in this world, having flesh and the corruption No man
living in this world can possibly keep and fulfill the the moral Law of God.
so long as they live on the face of the earth: no man living in the world, can
possibly keep and fulfill the moral Law of God: it is not possible for any
mere man, in his own person, in the the time of this life, to keep and
fulfill the Law of God in perfection: he cannot perfectly and fully keep the
Law of God, and not fail in any thing the Law requires, that is not possible.
A man that is in his natural state and condition, is absolutely and altogether
unable to yield obedience to any part of Gods Law: yea, such as are regenerate
in the highest degree of regeneration, living on the face of the earth, they
are unable to yield obedience to the Law of God, in that manner and measure as
it ought to be obeyed; even they fail in many things, and diverse and sundry
ways. James 3.2. Iam. 3.2.
says the Apostle: In many things we offend all. Even the best of Gods
children sin in many things. Eccles. 7.22. Eccles. 7.22.
Surely (says the Preacher) there is no just man in the earth, that does good
and sins not: there is not such a man to be found on the earth. Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 130.3.
says the Psalmist, If thou O Lord straightly markest iniquity, O Lord who
shall stand? Job 9.3. Job 9.3.
Job says, He could not answer the Lord one thing of a thousand. Mat. 6.12.
Mat. 6.12.
Christ has taught such as are able to call God Father, to pray, Forgive us
our debts. And many like evidences of Scripture might be brought to clear and
confirm this truth: that it is not possible for any mere man, though he be
regenerate and have attained a great measure of holiness, in his own person,
in the time of this life, to keep and fulfill the Law of God. The most holy,
and the most regenerate that lives on the face of the earth, cannot perfectly
and fully without failing, observe and keep the Law of God.

Romans 7.14.
if they be compared to the perfect holiness and purity of the Law of God:
and therefore they cannot possibly answer the exact holiness and purity of
Gods Law, they cannot reach to it. And on this ground we may set this down as
a certain truth, that it is not possible for any mere man, though he be
regenerate, and have a great measure of grace and holiness in his own person,
in time of this life, perfectly without any failing at all, to keep and
fulfill the Law of God.

A gross error of the Papists discovered and ouerturned.
who blasphemously teach, that such as are regenerate may perfectly fulfill the
Law of God in the time of this life, and may do whatsoever the Law requires of
them without any failing at all: yea they hold that men in the state of grace,
may do works of supererrogation, even more then the Law requires: which is a
foul and gross error, and cannot stand with the truth now delivered. Yet this
error they stiffly hold, and for the upholding of it they have devised this
shift: say they, There is a double degree of fulfilling the Law of God, one, an
higher, and most absolute, and belonging to the life to come; and another
lower, belonging to this life, which the Lord requires according to our
frailty, even a perfect fulfilling of the Law of God according to our estate
and condition in this life.

This is a most wicked and foolish distinction, A Popish distinction met
withal.
yea manifestly false: for there is only one rule of righteousness and not
two, and there is only one general and unchangeable sentence of the Law,
namely this, he that continues not in all things written in the book of the
Law to do them, and that in this life, is cursed. And it is absurd to say that
the Lord requires not an absolute fulfilling of his Law in time of this life,
but only in the life to come: for what man could do in the state of innocence,
that the Law requires of him in the state of corruption. Oh, Adam in his
innocence had power to keep it, and that power and strength we lost through
our own default; we disabled our selves by the fall of our first parents. We
know that amongst men he is not to be blamed who requires his due debt of
another, who sometimes was able to pay him, and now has disabled himself
through his own unthriftiness and prodigality; and much less is the Lord to
be blamed, who requires of us the debt of perfect obedience to his Law, seeing
we were once able to yield him that debt, and through our own default have
disabled our selves: and therefore it still remains a foul and gross error
to say as the Papists do, that the regenerate may perfectly fulfill the Law of
God in the time of this life. And for further use of this point.

Is it so, that it is not possible for any man, though he be regenerate, in his
own person in time of this life, Swelling conceits of our own holiness and
goodness di covered to be abominable.
perfectly to keep and fulfill the Law of God. Oh then let no man swell and be
lift up with a conceit of his own holiness and goodness, and good things
done by him. It is monstrous and abominable pride in the Familists, in their
idle brains to dream of absolute perfection of holiness and sanctification
in the time of this life. Some foolish spirits there be, who think they can
aspire to the perfection of the moral Law of God: this is monstrous and
fearful pride, and we are to take heed of it; we are to be humbled in this
respect: and though we be regenerate, yet we cannot in our own persons in the
time of this life, perfectly keep and fulfill the Law of God. And we are to
acknowledge this our weakness and disability, and to seek to the Lord for
strength, that we maybe able in some measure to yield obedience to his Law, yea
to entreat the Lord to accept of that measure of obedience we are enabled by
his grace to yield to him. And for perfect holiness and righteousness, we are
to go out of our selves, and to seek for that where it is to be found, namely,
in Christ Jesus, who is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Romans 10.4. Romans 10.4.


Observe we further. The Apostle here says, the Law was weak and insufficient
to bring Gods chosen perfect holiness. And why? not through any imperfection
in the Law it self, but because of the flesh. The weakness and insufficiency
of the Law, was by reason of their own inbred corruption: the Apostle lays
the fault on the flesh, on the corruption of nature, and not on the Law it
self, that it brings not perfect holiness to Gods chosen. Whence note we:

Our own corruption makes the holy things of God unfruitful and unprofitable
to us, and unable to do us good.
and not the Law of God, that it brings not to us perfect holiness and
righteousness: our own corruption makes that weak and unable to do us good,
which in it self is strong to that purpose. Yea it is true in the general of
the whole word of God, of the Sacraments, and of all the holy things of God; it
is our own flesh and corruption that makes the holy things of God unfruitful
and unprofitable to us, and unable to do us good, they being in themselves, and
in their own nature powerful means of good. The word preached becomes a dead
letter to many, they find no benefit nor comfort by it. Yea as the Apostle
says, 2. Corinthians. 2.16. 2. Cor. 2.16.
it becomes to them the savor of death: And why? Surely through their own
corruption: because their own vile and sinful hearts are not fit to receive
benefit and comfort by it. So the Sacraments which are seals of Gods covenant,
and are full of sweet and heavenly comfort in themselves, they seal up
nothing to some but judgment, 1. Corinthians. 11.29. 1. Cor. 11.29.
And why? Surely because of their vnpreparednesse: they come to the receiving
of them in their blindness of mind, and only of form and fashion, and they
will not be turned back: and so the Sacraments become dangerous and hurtful
to them. Well take notice of it whosoever thou art, A caveat to fruitless
hearers of the word of God.
that art a fruitless and unprofitable hearer of the word of God, it may be
thou have lived under the means a long time, and thou have been a hearer of
the word of God many years together, and yet thou art ignorant and blind, and
thou art still unreformed in thine heart and life. Where is then the fault? in
the word? No, that is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Tim. 3.16.
but the fault is in the crookedness and corruption of thine own heart; the
word of God, the holy things of God are not empty shows and shadows, void of
all benefit and comfort: no, no, it is thine own corruption that sets a bar
between thee and the comfort and good that is to be found in them: it is that
that makes them weak and unable to yield comfort and good to thee; and
therefore if thou would find good, and comfort, and benefit by the holy
things of God, thou must purge out the corruption of thine own heart, and come
to the hearing of the word with an honest and good heart, an heart hungring and
thirsting after the holy instructions and comforts of it. Mix thine hearing
with faith, and bring with thee an heart willing to yield to the word of God,
even with fear and trembling, hearing it and submitting thy self to it, when
thine own sins are met withal, and thou art justly reproved. And then
doubtless thou shall find the word to be to thee, as it is in it self, a
word of power, of life, and saving comfort to thy soul. Come we now to the
general thing laid before us in this verse, and that is, what Christ did which
the Law could not do, as namely this, that he condemned sin in the flesh;
which is set forth together with another special work of God going before it,
the sending of Christ into the world to take flesh, the nature of man on him;
and that is further amplified by one patticular end of his sending, that it was
for sin. God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh. And here observe we in general, that yt which
was impossible to the Law, that which the Law could not do, God found out a
way, and he found out a means to effect and bring to pass. The Law could not
bring to Gods chosen perfect holiness and purity, that was impossible to the
Law: yet the Lord did effect and work it by sending his Son into the world,
to be incarnate, and to take flesh on him. Whence note we thus much.

Impossiblity in man's judgment cannot hinder Gods working.
The Lord is able to overcome impossibilities, he can work, and many times
does work and effect, and bring things to pass that in the judgment of man
are impossible: yea commonly the Lord does work, and bring things to pass
when they seem to be desperate and past hope, and altogether impossible in the
eyes and judgment of men. Witness that wonderful and miraculous deliverance
of the people of Israel, Exodus 14.21.22. when they had the sea before them,
high mountains on each side of them, the Egyptians behind them with a purpose
to destroy them, and it was impossible for them in the judgment of man to
escape, then the Lord removed that impossibility, and opened a way for them
through the midst of the sea. Witness also that deliverance of David out of
the hands of Saul: the text says 1. Sam. 23.26. That Saul and his men
compassed David and his men round about to take them: and in man's judgment it
was impossible for David to escape; then the Lord caused a messenger to come to
Saul, and to tell him, That the Philistines had invaded the land: 1. Sam.
23.26.27.28.
and so Saul left pursuing David and went against the Philistines, and he
escaped: verse 27.28. And what possibility was there for Daniel to escape the
teeth of the hungry Lions when he was cast into the den? Surely none in man's
judgment; yet then did the Lord work his safety, and stopped the mouths of
the Lions, Dan. 6.22. Dan. 6.22.
And indeed as Christ says, Matthew. 19.26. With God all things are possible.
And Mark. 14.36. says he, Abba Father, all things are possible to thee. Zach.
8.6. says the Lord touching the return of the people from captivity, Though
it be impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days,
should it therefore be impossible in my sight, says the Lord of hoasts? no, no,
it is possible to me. All things are possible to the Lord, and no impossibility
can hinder his working: and why?

His power is unlimited, it is infinite like to his glorious

And again, when things are impossible in man's sight,

Let it serve as a prop and stay to us, A prop to up hold Gods children in
their deepest distresses.
to hold up our fainting hearts in the time of our greatest troubles and
distresses. For what though it be so, that thou art in extreme trouble, and in
deep distress of body or mind, inward or outward, and all means fail thee,
and thou see no way nor means in the world how thou can possibly come out
of that trouble and distress, and in man's judgment it is impossible for thee
ever to come out of it? yet remember and think on this to thy comfort, and to
the upholding of thy fainting heart; that no impossibility can hinder the Lords
working, he is able to overcome and to remove all impossibilities: and if he
have a purpose to do thee good, as doubtless he has if thou be a child of
God, his purpose shall stand, it is unchangeable, he will do thee good, he will
deliver thee out of thy deepest distress. If thy case be hopeless in man's
judgment, and thou art even as dead as the dry bones spoken of Ezech. 37.3.
Ezech. 37.3.
yet the Lord can and will put life into thee, nothing is impossible to him, if
it be a work of power, or not against his nature, or not implying
contradiction. And therefore learn thou on this ground, in the time of thy
greatest distress to possess thy soul in patience, and to wait on the Lord
with comfort: and learn thou with Abraham to believe above hope, knowing that
the Lord is able to perform what he has promised, as Romans 4.21. Romans 4.21.
Yea on the ground of doctrine delivered, that the Lord is able to remove all
impossibilities, learn thou to wait on the Lord, and to rest on his truth,
goodness and power for the time to come. Some poor weak Christians many
times cast doubts and fears touching impossibilities as yet to come: Needless
doubts and fears to be avoided.
and they think thus with themselves: Oh, I find such weakness of faith, and
such weakness of grace in my self, as I doubt it will be impossible for me to
stand and to hold out in the time of trial, if the Lord should bring me into
any hard trial, or to the hour of death: alas, I find such weakness in my
self, as I fear it would be impossible for me to bear the trial.

Take heed of these needless doubts and fears, whosoever thou art, remember
the doctrine now delivered, that the Lord is able to overcome and remove all
impossibilities: and though thy faith and the grace that is in thee be weak
and changeable in it self, and indeed if thou stoodest by thine own strength,
it were impossible for thee to stand in the time of trial, yet the Lord can,
and he will remove that impossibility, He is able to do exceeding abundantly
above that thou think, Ephesians 3, 20. and he will do above that thou think.
Though thy thoughts fail thee, and thou think if thou should be brought
into a trial, it were impossible for thee to stand, yet comfort thy self, the
Lord can make thee stand, and thou shall find that the Lord will give thee
strength above and beyond thy thoughts, above and beyond thy expectation.
Therefore take heed of needless doubts and fears, rest on the goodness,
truth, and power of God, both in thy present distress, and for strength to
stand and to hold out in time of trial that hereafter thou shall come into.
Assure thy self the Lord will not fail thee, but will supply strength to thee
beyond thy thoughts: and having begun this work of grace in thee, he will
preserve thee to his heavenly kingdom, and keep thee by his power through
faith to salvation: as 1. Pet. 1.5. 1. Pet. 1.5.
think on that to thy comfort. Come we now to stand on these words more
particularly, (God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh.)
And first from these words (God sending his own Son) we may note the
distinction of persons in the Trinity.

That God the Father is the person sending. The distinction of the persons in
the Trinity proved.
And God the Son the person sent: and being sent from the Father, he must
needs be a person distinct from the Father.

Indeed the three persons in the Trinity, as they are one in nature, and so one
in will, have a hand in this sending: yet for order the Father is said to send,
because he is the first in order: and so the Father as the first person in the
Trinity, he sent the Son: and as the Son is the second person in the
Trinity, he was sent of the Father. And this confutes the error of Sabellius
and Patripassians, who held the persons of the Godhead not to be really
distinct one from another, but to be only several names or titles given to
God. I pass from that.

Observe we further, that the Apostle says, God sending his Son. God sent
his Son, his Son was not sought after or required, but the Lord of his own
accord sent him; and having from all eternity designed his Son to the office
of Mediator, did in time exhibit and send him into the world. And what moved
him so to do? Surely nothing out of himself, and it was only his free grace,
goodness, and mercy; nothing in us moved God to send his Son, but the cause
of his sending was only in God himself, Gods unspeakable and undeserved love
manife^ted in sending his Son into the world
even his own goodness, and his own free and undeserved love to his chosen,
as we have it Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life, 1.
Ioh. 4.9. In this (says Saint John) appeared the love of God toward us,
because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live
through him. Herein appeared the wonderful and unspeakable, and indeed
infinite love of God to his chosen, the breadth, length, depth and height of
Gods love, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 3.18. If the Lord had sent millions
of Angels to do that which Christ did if it had been possible, yet had it not
been so much as to send his own eternal and only begotten Son, the Son
of his love, his Son equal to himself in majesty and glory: herein he
manifested the riches of his love and bountifulness exceedingly. And therefore
abominable and monstrous is that error of foreseen faith and works held by
the Papists; Foreseen faith and works do obscure the glory of Gods infinite
love to his chosen.
it does much obscure and darken the glory of Gods infinite love to his chosen:
and we for our parts are to acknowledge the infinite love of God toward us, in
sending his Son into the world. He sent his Son to redeem us if we belong
to him, when we sought not after him; and it was only his own free grace, and
goodness, and mercy, and not any thing in us that moved him so to do.

Thankfulness required for Gods infinite love, appearing in the sending of his
Son into the world.
How then are we bound to magnify the goodness and mercy of God, and how are
we bound to be thankful for his infinite love toward us, manifested in
sending his Son into the world? We are to be thankful to God for common
benefits, for meat, drink, and the like: much more for so great and so
inestimable a benefit, as the sending of his Son into the world. That the
Lord of heaven and earth, of his own free grace, goodness and mercy, should
send his own dear Son, out of his own bosom, to be incarnate and to take
flesh on him unsought for of us, we cannot sufficiently prize this benefit, and
we cannot be sufficiently thankful. Certainly such as have a right and feeling
apprehension of this benefit, they endeavor to be thankful, How it ought to be
expressed.
and in way of thankfulness, they give up themselves to the Lord, to be
guided, and governed, and disposed of at his own will and pleasure. And they
endeavor to answer the Lords love, by loving him again; and they testify
their love unto him, by loving his word, his ordinances, his children. And if
thou say, thou do acknowledge Gods love in sending his Son into the world,
and yet thou love thy sins, and thou have no love to his word, to his
ordinances, to his children, thou deceiuest thy self. Note.
Assuredly Gods election begets another election in us, it makes us choose God
to be our God, and to resign our selves wholly to be guided and governed by
him, even by his word and Spirit. Gods love to us, breeds in us a love to God
again, 1. Ioh. 4.19. Gods love felt warm in our hearts, kindles in us a love
to God again, and a love to all that bear his image, for his sake. And if we
find this in our selves, we then indeed acknowledge Gods love to us in sending
his Son into the world.

Here further note we, that the Son of God was sent of his Father, he was
called and sent forth of his Father: God in his eternal counsel having
designed his Son to the office of a Mediator, did in time exhibit and send
him into the world. He took not on him the office of a Mediator without a
calling from God his Father, he was called and sent forth of his Father, and he
had his office and calling from God his Father; and this himself often
witnesses, as Ioh. 10.36. Ioh. 10.36.
Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world, Thou
blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? John 16.5. Ioh. 16.5.
Now I go my way to him that sent me. Ioh. 17.3. Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ: and so in many other places. Now that we learn
hence, is this.

That we are by the example of Christ, to look that the The office and calling
we hold and enjoy, and use, and exercise, must be from God.
we have it from the Lord; that we be designed and sent of God to be employed
in that office and calling that we hold, use, and exercise: especially the
office being of an high nature, and an office of great weight, and of special
use and consequence, as the office of the Ministry or Magistracy. The Lord
often complains, that some Prophets were not of his sending, they run and he
sent them not. Iere. 14.14. Ier. 14.14.
The Phophets prophecy lies in my name, I have not sent them. Ierem. 23.21.
Ier. 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets says the Lord, yet they run. Romans 10.15.
Romans 10.15.
says the Apostle, How shall they preach except they be sent? Such as exercise
the office of the ministry, must look to their sending, that they be sent of
the Lord. And there is reason for it.



How a man may know that he is called of God to the office and function of the
ministry Three things by which it may be known. 1. Sam. 10.9.
First, if the Lord have bestowed on him a competent measure of gifts, fit for
the discharge of that office: for the Lord never sends any to execute an
office, but he qualifies him with gifts fit for it. Saul was was anointed King
by Samuel. 1. Sam. 10. The text says, verse 9. God gave him another heart, God
gave him an heart fit for his office. Ephesians. 4.8. Ephesians. 4.8.
the Apostle says, Christ ascending gave gifts unto men: and then he
subioynes, verse 11. He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers.

Secondly, if he have been rightly designed to that office, by such as be in
place of authority and government: for God calls ordinarily by the voice of
his Church. Ephesians. 4.11.


And thirdly, if the Lord have given him an heart to be faithful, and in truth
of heart to use the talent given to him to the best advantage of gaining glory
to God, and of bringing good to others, and he finds that the Lord gives a
blessing to his labors: for thereby the Lord, as it were, sets his hand and
seal to his calling, that he is called and sent of him; as the Apostle says
the Corinthians were the seal of his Apostleship, in that the Lord had blessed
his labors amongst them. 1. Cor. 9.2. 1 Cor. 9.2.


First, this for the use of it, besides that it discouers many An
Anabaptisticall fancy met withal.
it meets with that fancy of the Anabaptists, and of such fantastic spirits,
who think that any man on a private motion, may step forth and take on him the
office of a Minister of the word, and may expound and preach the word. That is
an idle fancy, and howsoever they pretend such motions are from Gods Spirit,
indeed they are from a spirit of vanity and pride, and from the spirit of
error and lies, even from the devil. If a man would have sound comfort
touching his office and function, he must look that he be called and sent of
God, that God has fitted him with gifts for that office, and that he has been
designed to his office in a right manner, and that the Lord has given him an
heart to be faithful, and to use his gifts for the best good. If he finds
himself so called and sent, he may assure himself of the Lords assistance in
the execution of his office: yea of the Lords special protection over him,
that the Lord will shield and protect him against injuries and wrongs, so far
as shall be for his own glory and his good, and that such as do wrong him,
shall be sure to feel the revenging hand of God on them or theirs: and
howsoever he be little regarded amongst men, yet his work is with the Lord,
Isai. 40.4. Isa. 40.4.
and the Lord will one day of his mercy reward him. This may be a comfort to
him that finds himself called and sent of God, and this may cheer up his
heart in the time of his greatest troubles and opposition.

Observe we further, the Apostle here calls Christ, Gods own Son: God
sending his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh: thereby he puts a
difference between Christ and all other sons of God, How Christ is Gods own
Son.
as that Christ is the Son of God his Father in a peculiar manner, not by
creation, as the Angels and Adam were, nor by adoption, as all true believers
are, but by nature, even by eternal generation, being begotten of the
substance of his Father from all eternity, his Father fully communicating to
him his whole essence after an unspeakable manner, as the Prophet says, Isai.
53.8. Who can declare his generation? And thus is Christ Gods own Son, even
his eternal, and his only begotten Son, of the same essence and substance,
and coequall with the Father. And this is an high and heavenly Mystery, far
beyond the reach of natural understanding.

The Arians searching into it by the strength of natural reason, stumbled and
fell into a foul and gross error: they deny the eternal Godhead of the
Son, and they make him an inferior God, and so indeed no God at all. Now the
point hence in that the Apostle calls Christ, Gods own Son, is this.

Christ is true and very God begotten of his Father from everlasting.
he was with the Father before all times, as Ioh. 1.1. Ioh. 1.1.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was
God. He is of the same eternal essence and substance with the Father, and he
is true and very God. And for this we have further plain and plentiful
evidence of Scripture. Phil. 2.6. Philip. 2.6.
He being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
Act. 20.28. Acts 20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. And who has purchased the Church of God with
his own blood, but Jesus Christ? Romans 9.5. Romans 9.5.
The Apostle affirms in plain terms, that Christ is God over all, 1. Tim.
3.13.
blessed for ever, Amen. 1. Tim. 3.16. Without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness, which is God manifested in the flesh. And to these we
might add many other testimonies of Scripture confirming this, that Christ is
true and very God. Yea to this purpose serve the Prophetical predictions of
the Prophets, spoken only of the Lord of hoasts, and applied by the Apostles
to Christ. And works proper to God are truly ascribed to Christ, as to make
the world, to forgive sins, to know the hearts of men, and such like, and the
miracles of Christ. All these do plainly euince and prove the eternal Godhead
of Christ, that he is true and very God.

Object. so is inferior to the Father, and being inferior to God, how then is
he God?

Answ. How Christ is inferior to his Father.
Now Christ is not inferior to his Father by nature, for by nature he is one
and the fame with the Father; but by condition, as he is the Mediator, as he
did voluntarily of his own accord abase himself, and take on him the shape of
man, Philip. 2.7. He made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in the shape as a man.

Object.

Answ. How Christ is the Son of the Father.
for the Godhead of the Son is the same with the Godhead of the Father; the
Godhead of the Father does not beget, neither is the Godhead of the Son
begotten. And so it still remains a truth, that Christ is true and very God,
yea he is true God of himself, equal to his Father in respect of his Godhead.
And it was needful that Christ the Mediator should be true and very God,
because the infinite majesty of God was offended by our sins, and God is
both infinitely just,

Now for the use of this, it serves to discover to us the infinite Whence it is
that Christ his blood is of infinite worth and value.
that his blood is a most precious blood, even of infinite worth and value: for
why, it is the blood of that person, who is not only man, but true and very
God also, and therefore of infinite price and value, and able to answer the
justice of God to the full, and to appease his infinite wrath against sin.
Let then Satan lay before thee the grieuousnesse of thy sins, and lay out to
the uttermost the greatness of Gods wrath against thee for the same, that the
least of thy sins deserve the infinite wrath of God, as indeed it does: yet
if thou be able to hold out against him the blood of Jesus Christ, apprehended
by a true faith, thou shall put him to flight, that is the blood of Gods own
Son, of his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, Math. 3.17. and that
is of infinite worth, able to answer the justice of God to the full, and able
to appease his infinite wrath against sin.

Comfort to true believers.
here is a ground of sweet comfort for thee: for why, thou art one with him by
faith, who is able to save and deliver thee from death and damnation, from the
devil and all the enemies of thy salvation, which is a marvelous comfort: yea
thou art one with him, who is both willing to save thee, and will be sure to
bestow on thee righteousness and life everlasting. For why, thou art one with
him who is true and very God, in whom is all fullness and perfection, not only
of power, but of mercy, and goodness, favor, and loving kindness, who is not
only most powerful, but most gracious also, and most ready to do thee good,
and will never suffer thee to perish. It is Christ his own argument of
comfort, and of assurance, that none that are given to him shall perish. Ioh.
10.30. he says in the two verses foregoing, I give to my sheep eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My
Father which gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to take them
out of my Fathers hand: and then he subioynes, I and my Father are one. As if
he had said, I and my Father are one in substance, in will, and power: and
therefore none that are given to me, shall ever perish, none can pluck them
out of my hand, all the power of hell shall never be able to prevail against
any soul given to me.

In the similitude of sinful flesh: that is, (as we showed) endued with humane
flesh, even with a true body and a true soul, like to our sinful bodies and
souls, yet free from all spot of sin: for the word similitude is not simply
to be referred to the word Flesh, but to sinful flesh; the Son of God was
sent into the world, and took flesh on him like to our sinful flesh: yet
altogether free from sin. Now from these words, In the similitude of sinful
flesh, we may in the first place easily gather and conclude the truth of Christ
his humanity, and the abasement of the Son of God, to put them both together.

That Christ was true and very man, consisting of a body Christ was true and
very man, in all things like to us, sin only excepted.
sin only excepted. For it is not here said, that God sent his Son in
sinful flesh, but in the similitude of sinful flesh, like to sinful flesh.
The Son of God taking flesh on him, did so far abase himself, as he
appeared like a sinful man. And though our nature as Christ took it, was free
from all spot and contagion of sin, yet was it not free from the effects and
fruits of sin, it was subject to those common infirmities which sin
brought on us, even to those infirmities that appertain to the whole nature of
man, as to hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, weariness, to mortality, and
death it self: insomuch as those that looked on Christ with a mortal eye,
they could see nothing in him but that which appertains to man, and they
thought him to be nothing else but a mere man. Ioh. 6.52. The Jews say, how
can this man give us his flesh to eat? Yea those that looked on him with the
eye of the body, they saw neither form nor beauty in him to be desired, Isai.
53.2. Yea as the Prophet further adds, He was despised and rejected of men, he
was full of sorrows, and had experience of infirmities. Phil. 2.7. the Apostle
says, He took on him the form of a servant, and was made like to men, and
was found in the shape as a man. The meaning is, that Christ had the like
natural properties of a true body and soul, the like affections and
infirmities, without sin, that other men have, and was in sense and behavior
as other men are; yea he abased himself, and was content to be made inferior,
not only to the Angels, but to men of the meanest sort and condition: he was
sold for thirty pieces of silver, he was thought not so worthy to live as
Barrabas the murderer, he was ranked among thieves, when he hanged on the
cross he was accounted of and handled as a most vile sinner and wicked
malefactor. All which prove, both the truth of his manhood, and also his
exceeding great abasement. And the truth of his manhood may be further proved
by many evidences of Scripture. Romans 1.3. the Apostle says, He was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh. Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman: which proves that he was truly
man. And many like testimonies of Scripture might be brought to this purpose,
if it were needful.

Now the reasons why the Son of God was incarnate, and became truly man like
to us in all things, sin only excepted, are these.

without shedding of blood is no remission. Hebrews 9.22.



Now this truth first meets with all those opinions that Opinions that are
against the truth of Christ his manhood confuted.
whether ancient or of latter times, and whether directly against the truth of
it, or by consequent: as that of the Papists, that the body of Christ may be in
many places at once, and may be and is, under the form of bread in the
Sacrament, and yet not seen nor felt: these be mere fancies, ouerturning the
truth of Christ his humanity: I will not stand on the particular confutation of
them. We for our parts are to acknowledge and believe the truth of Christ his
manhood: that Christ became truly man, like to us in all things sin only
excepted: and know we, Christ his manhood the ground of all our comfort.
that Christ his manhood is the ground of all our comfort. Indeed the Godhead
of Christ is the fountain of all good things, but to us it is as a fountain
scaled up, and the flesh and manhood of Christ is the pipe or conduite to
convey all good things to us. By the flesh and manhood of Christ we come to be
joined to God, and to have fellowship with God, and to be partakers of life,
and of grace, and of all good things, 1. Ioh. 4.3. He that confesses not Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, to be truly incarnate, is not of God, but is
the spirit of error and of Antichrist. And indeed whosoever they be that deny
the truth of Christ his manhood, either directly or by consequent, they can
look for no true comfort in and by Christ, or from him: their faith is but
vain, and they are yet in their sins. Therefore learn we to know and to
acknowledge the truth of Christ his manhood. Many poor souls in the world,
scarce know what Christ is.

Now for further use of this; Is it so, that the Son of God The infiniteness
of Christ his love to his chosen, manifested in the incarnation of Christ.
yea the common infirmities of our nature, and in that nature of ours became
subject to those infirmities that sin brought on us, to hunger, thirst, cold,
nakedness, and such like? oh then the greatness and infiniteness of his love
to Gods chosen! In this he manifested his wonderful, unspeakable, and infinite
love to them; we are not able to comprehend the gratnesse of it. And surely
whosoever they be that have a true feeling of that love of his, in some measure
shed abroad in their hearts, may assure themselves, that that love of his is an
endless love, and shall never fail them, but will undoubtedly bring them to
eternal happiness and bliss. And they are bound to love him again, who has
so dearly loved them: Has the Son of God out of his mere love, left his
throne of majesty and glory, and as it were suspended and laid aside his
glory, and appeared in the form of a sinful, weak and mortal man for thy
sake, and art not thou bound to endeavor to answer his love, How our love to
Christ ought to be testified.
by loving him again? Yes doubtless, thou art, and in testimony of thy love
to him again, thou art to lay aside thy honor, thy credit, thy wealth, thy
profit, thy pleasure, and the dearest things thou have, yea thy life it self
(if thou be called) for his sake. And thou art daily called of him by the
Ministry of his word, to lay aside thy pride, thy covetousness, thy usury,
thy drunkenness, thy garishnesse, thy carnal pleasures, and vain delights:
and do thou persuade thy self thou love the Lord Jesus, and yet will not
lay aside any unlawful gain, or any needless pleasure, at his call and
commandment? Do thou think that thou could be content to have thy flesh
fry in the fire, to lay down thy life for his sake if hereafter thou be
called to it, and yet now when he calls thee to it by his word, thou will not
lay aside thy pedling gain, gotten by that damnable trade of usury, nor a
needless and vain pleasure, no not so much as a cup of wine or bear, which
thou know will distemper thee, nor an idle and vain toy in thy apparel,
and the like? Poor soul, thou do but deceive thy self, thou have no
dram of true love to the Lord Jesus: and having no true love to him, thou
can have no assurance of his love to thee. No, no, if thou love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, thou art in a miserable state; and if thou persist and go on in
that state, thou art to be had in execration: these are the words of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 16.22.

Exhortation to humillatio^ from the example of Christ.
yea the similitude of sinful flesh? was he content though he were free from
all spot of sin, yet to be thought and reputed as a vile sinner, and to be
dealt withal as a malefactor? How then ought we to humble and to abase our
selves, and to become as nothing in our selu^s, as indeed we are? If we have
any goodness in us, it is of grace, it has been given us, and we have
received it, 1. Cor. 4.7. How I say ought we to abase our selves, and to be
brought to nothing in our selves, that so we may be like to the Lord Jesus? His
example is for our imitation, and it is an example without all exception: yea
by his example we must learn the best of us all, willingly and with
contentment to undergo contempt and disgrace in the world, And to be patient
under injuries and wrongs.
and with patience to endure injuries and wrongs, and many indignities which
the Lord suffers wicked men to throw upon us. Such is our self love, and such
is the pride of our hearts, that we commonly swell, and our hearts rise up in
us when we are disgraced, and when we are accounted base and vile, and have
reproaches and indignities cast upon us: but let us consider with our selves,
are we better then the Lord Jesus? was not he content to be thought a vile
sinner? did not he endure the speaking against of wicked sinners? Hebr. 12.3.
was not he dealt withal as a wicked malefactor? and yet was dumb, and as a
sheep before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Isay 53.7. and do thou
think much when such things befall thee, when thou have disgrace and contempt
and indignities cast on thee? But thou will say, I have not deserved this or
that disgrace at the hands of men. What did the Lord Jesus deserve? In him was
nothing at all deserving the least disgrace or indignity, but in thee there is.
Though it may be thou art wronged in that particular disgrace and indignity
that is thrown upon thee, yet the Lord sees just cause and matter enough in
thee why he should suffer men to wrong thee, to disgrace thee, and cast
contempt and indignities on thee. Oh then whosoever thou art, think on the
example of the Son of God, that he abased himself, and took flesh on him,
and was content to appear in the similitude of sinful flesh, even to be
thought and accounted a vile sinner, and to be dealt withal as a wicked
malefactor. And if thou duly consider this, it will be a notable means to
frame thee to quietness, patience, and contentment, when thou art most
disgraced, and have many wrongs and indignities cast on thee.

God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh. As from these
words we may gather the truth of Christ his Godhead, and the truth of his
manhood, that he was true and very God, and true and very man, which points we
have already stood on: so from hence we may easily gather the personal union
of Christ his two natures: And the point hence further offered is this.

Christ is both God and man in one person.
and make but one person and one subsistence. Gods own Son the second person
in Trinity, was sent into the world, and took flesh on him, and did assume
the humane nature into unity of person with his Godhead. So as we are to
conceive the manhood of Christ, not to be a person in it self, but only a
nature, and that it is received into unity of person with the Son of God the
second person in Trinity, and does wholly and only subsist in the same person;
so that Christ is that Immanuell God with us, (...)
spoken of Isay 4.17. And to this purpose that is a plain text, Ioh. 1.14. And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as
the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.
And that also 1. Tim. 3.16. God manifested in the flesh. Which places are thus
to be understood. That the second person in the Trinity the Son of God,
took to himself the nature of man into unity of person, and became incarnate,
and so in Christ God and man were united into one person. It was needful that
Christ the Mediator should be God and man in one person.

God that he might satisfy.

And this serves to discover the advancement of our nature, The advancement of
our nature in Christ discovered.
even above the Angels, and does excel all creatures, in wisdom, in
goodness, and in holiness, in power, in majesty, and in glory. God is in
all creatures both good and bad by his essence, and by his presence and power,
and he sustaines them in their being, life, actions, and motions; and he is in
his Saints on the earth, by his grace and work of his Spirit: in his Angels
and Spirits in heaven, by fullness of glory: but in Christ alone is the
fullness of the Godhead by personal union. So that our nature in Christ is
exalted far above all creatures: Yea, the manhood of Christ, Note.
because it is personally united to his Godhead, is to be adored and worshipped
with religious and divine worship: and when we pray to Christ, we are to pray
to him as God and man. Indeed the manhood of Christ for it self and of it
self is not to be worshipped with religious worship, because it is a creature,
but as it is received into unity of person with the Son of God, it is to be
worshipped with the same worship that the Godhead is.

Again, is it so that Christ is both God and man in one Comfort for all true
believers.
then here is a ground of sweet comfort for all that truly believe in Christ.
Hereupon they may assure themselves, that Christ has made perfect
reconciliation between God and them, that he has perfectly reconciled them to
God his Father: for as the Prophet says, Amos 3.3. Can two walk together
except they be agreed? So, can God and man come so near together as to be made
one person, unless there be a perfect reconciliation and agreement between
them? No, no, it cannot be: Christ being God and man in one person, he is a
perfect Mediator; for he is a Mediator, both as he is God and as he is man. In
his humane nature he performed the chief duties of a Mediator; and therefore
the Apostle calls him, The Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
1. Tim. 2.5. And his works of mediation are of infinite worth, and value, and
sufficiency, because his manhood is personally united to his Godhead, and so he
is a perfect Mediator, a perfect reconciler of God and his chosen, and he has
made a perfect reconciliation between them: so that such as truly believe in
Christ, may assure themselves, that he has fully and perfectly reconciled them
to God his Father, and they have perfect peace toward God through Jesus
Christ, as Romans 5.1. And that is an excellent comfort.

Now the Apostle here adds a particular end of Christ his taking flesh on him,
that it was for sin: and says, God sending his own Son in the similitude
of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. That is, (as we
showed in opening the text) to take away, and to drive sin out of our nature,
even to expel the blot and stain of nature, which did stick in our flesh
before Christ did assume and take our flesh on him, to expel that blot and
stain utterly out of that nature of ours which he took on him.

Now here observe we, that for the abolishing of sin out of our nature, the
Son of God must descend from heaven, and take flesh on him, and become man,
so hard a thing was it to expel and to drive sin out of our nature. The
point hence offered is this.

It is a most hard thing to expel and drive sin out of our nature but in
part.
The taking of sin and corruption quite out of our nature, was no less then
the work of the Son of God taking flesh on him, and that not after the
ordinary course of nature, by natural generation; but after an extraordinary
manner, even by an extraordinary work of the holy Ghost above nature: for so
he was conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and so the taking of sin
out of our nature is a marvelous hard thing: yea the expelling and driving of
sin out of our nature but in part, as it is in them that are truly
regenerate, is a most hard work, and it is wrought only by the mighty and
powerful hand of God. The abolishing of sin but in part, is so hard a work,
as it requires no less then the powerful hand of God to effect it. And hence
it is that regeneration is said To be a new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. Tit. 3.5. And such as are regenerate, are said to be borne of the
Spirit, Ioh. 3.5.6. Ioh. 1.13. they are said not to be borne of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And the weakening of
the power and strength of natural corruption, and the abolishing of it in
part, is said to be only by the virtue of Christ his death; it requires no
less a power, then the power of his death. Romans 6.6. the Apostle says, Our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, or
might be weakened, and the strength of it broken, and made idle, fruitless,
and ineffectual; (...).
for so the word (...) signifies. Hence it is that the purging of the heart
from corruption in some measure, and the sanctifying of it, is said to be even
a new creation. Psalm. 51.10. David prays, Lord create in me a clean heart:
and creating (we know) is a work of Gods own hand, and a work of his hand
alone. And so it must needs be granted, that the expelling and driving of sin
out of our nature but in part, is a most hard work, and such a work, as it
requires no less then the mighty and powerful hand of God to effect it: And
why? the reasons of it are these.

First, it is the altering and changing of nature: for sin is

Again, the rebellion of nature does oppose and withstand driving of sin out
of our nature but in part is a most hard work, and is wrought only by the
mighty and powerful hand of God.

A deceiving conceit to be avoided.
and a thing that he may do at pleasure, even to shake off the vile lusts of
his own heart, and to break off the corruption of it. It is a thing wherein
many please themselves, they fancy to themselves, that they are yet young,
lusty, and strong, and they have yet many years to live, and they may yet
follow the lusts of their own hearts, and the vanities of the world, and may
yet enjoy the pleasures and delights of sin, even their carnal and sensual
pleasures; and hereafter when old age shall come upon them, Eccles. 12.1.
and the days wherein they shall have no pleasure, then they will lay aside
the vile lusts of their hearts, and break them off, and they will then follow
them no longer. Poor souls, they do deceive themselves exceedingly. Consider
with thy self whosoever thou art that do thus fancy to thy self; do thou
know whether thou shall come to old age or no? the Lord may stop thy breath
this day before to morrow, and dare thou be so bold and so presumptuous, as
thus to indent with the Lord, and to appoint him a time when thou will break
off the lusts of thy heart, and turn from evil to good, which he has
appointed to be an act of all the days of thy life? And if thou live to old
age, do thou think that then it will be an easy thing to offer violence to
thine own nature, to shake off the lusts of thine own heart, and to break
off thine old sweet familiar sins, sins thou have a long time accustomed
thy self to? Why custom in sin hardens the heart, and adds strength to
sin, and by continuance in sin, the corruption of nature gathers strength
and grows stronger. The Prophet makes it as hard a matter to break off a
custom of doing evil, as to make the black Moore white, or the Leopard to
change his spots, Iere. 13.23. Ierem. 13.23.
Yea woeful experience shows it, that custom in sin brings men to a habit
in sin, and makes them senseless of sin. Tell a common swearer of his
swearing, and will he not sometimes deny it, and say he did not swear?
Custom of swearing has taken away the sense of that sin, and he knows not
when he swears, and therefore take heed of thus deceiving thy self: remember
the truth now delivered, that the expelling of sin out of our nature but in
part, is a most hard work, Gods children find it so in themselves, they find
they have much ado to get the masterie of some one sinful infirmity. And
therefore let not the devil so blind thee, and thine own deceiving heart so
misleade thee, as to make thee think, that thou may at thine own time and
leisure lay aside thy corruption, and break off thy course of sin, and so
neglect the timely and careful use of the means. No, no, learn thou betimes
to use the means, even the means the Lord has sanctified to that purpose; be
diligent in hearing, reading, and meditation in the word of God. And seeing the
driving of sin out of our nature, is a work of Gods own powerful hand,
seek and sue to him, that he would vouchsafe to put his hand into thy bosom,
and pluck off the foreskin of thine heart, and purge out the corruption of it,
and expel and drive out the vileness and rebellion of it.

Again, is it so that the expelling of sin out of our nature The whole
praise and glory of expelling sin out of our nature is to be given to God.
and wrought only by the mighty and powerful hand of God? then if thou find
that work wrought in thee, and sin and corruption in any measure expelled
out of thine heart, and the power of sin broken, and the lusts of thine heart
weakened, give the whole praise and glory of that work to the Lord, gaze not
too much on the outward instrument, or on the excellency of gifts of any that
has been a means to do thee good, lest so thou give part of the glory to the
instrument; but have an eye to the Lord, whose only work it has been, and
remember that the best Ministers of God are but instruments, by whom the Lord
has wrought good on thee; bless God for them, but give him alone all the
praise, and all the glory, for the good that has been wrought in thee. There
is yet further matter of instruction offered from this second part of the
verse. The Apostle says, God sending his own Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. In these last words
(as I showed) the Apostle makes known what it was that Christ did which the
Law could not do, namely this, that he condemned sin, and wherein it was that
he condemned sin, that it was in the flesh, and his meaning in these words is
this. That the Son of God being sent into the world, and taking flesh on him,
did indeed in that flesh and humane nature that he assumed, abolish sin
altogether, and took it quite out of the way, that flesh of his being
perfectly holy and pure, and free from all spot of sin.

Now here in the first place we might easily take up this truth: That the Son
of God taking flesh on him, and being incarnate, did utterly abolish sin and
corruption out of that In Christ our nature and the corruption of nature were
severed one from the other.
was conceived and borne without all spot of sin: the Son of God took man's
nature on him, without any spot or stain of sin at all: in Christ our
nature, and the corruption of nature, were severed one from the other. And to
this purpose is that of the Angel to the Virgin Marie, Luke 1.35. That holy
thing (says he) which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of
God. He calls Christ holy, or an holy thing, both because as God he was most
holy, and because also as man, he was conceived and borne free from all spot of
sin, and was sanctified in the womb of his mother. 1. Pet. 1.19. the Apostle
describing Christ, thus speaks of him, that He was a lamb undefiled, and
without spot: and this was prefigured in the Paschall lamb, which was to be
without blemish, as the Lord commanded, Exodus 12.5. and in the lambs of the
daily sacrifice, Number. 28.3. The Lord commanded that those lambs should be
without spot. Heb. 9.14. it is said, Christ offered himself without spot to
God: he offered himself as man, (for so indeed did Christ offer himself)
without any spot or stain of sin at all, so that in him our nature and the
corruption of nature were severed one from the other.

And the reasons of it are these: first, in Christ our nature was

Again, secondly, Christ was a Savior, as he is both God How Christ took
man's nature on him without sin
that he was conceived in the womb of his mother after an extraordinary
manner, even by the power of the holy Ghost ouershadowing her, as Luke 1.35.
and not by natural generation: thence it was that Christ was conceived and
borne without, all spot of sin. And that was a privilege proper to Christ
alone, to be so conceived and borne, because of his extraordinary conception;
for all that come of Adam by natural generation, are stained with original
sin and corruption of nature: only Christ was free from that stain, and
that blot of natural corruption, because, though he came of Adam, and took
the seed of man, yet not after the ordinary course of nature, but after an
extraordinary manner.

And therefore by the way, A Popish conceit met withal.
that is an idle and an erroneous conceit of the Papists, in that they hold
that the Virgin Marie was conceived without spot of sin, that is proper to
Christ alone, in regard of his extraordinary conception by the holy Ghost. But
happily some will say, We read Iere. 1.5. He sanctified Jeremiah before he came
out of the womb, he was sanctified before he was borne; and therefore it is
not proper to Christ alone to be sanctified in the womb. I ordained thee to be
a Prophet unto the nations: and so it makes not against that privilege of
Christ, it does not infringe it, that he alone was conceived and borne without
spot of sin. This therefore we are to hold as a certain truth, that the
Son of God taking flesh, our nature on him, he did utterly abolish sin and
corruption out of that flesh and humane nature that he took: and his flesh,
his humane nature, was conceived and borne without all spot of sin, he being
conceived in the womb of his mother after an extraordinary manner by the power
of the holy Ghost.

Christ is powerful to abolish sin out of all his members.
Did the Son of God taking flesh, our nature on him, utterly abolish sin
out of that flesh he took? surely then it must needs be, it holds by
proportion, that Christ does in some measure abolish sin out of all those
that are one with him. Did the Son of God utterly and altogether abolish
sin out of that nature of ours that he received into unity of person, and
joined to himself by personal union? and does not Christ Jesus abolish sin
and corruption in some proportion out of all those whom he takes near to
himself, and makes one with himself by mystical union, and ioynes to
himself by the bond of his Spirit? without question he does. And therefore
deceive not thy self whosoever thou art, think not that thou art one with
Christ, and that thou have right and title to the saving comforts in Christ,
unless thou find it thus with thee: that sin and corruption is in some
measure abolished and taken out of thy heart. Surely the Son of God took
sin quite out of that nature of ours that he took on himself, and the same
Son of God now incarnate, is as strong and as powefull as ever he was; he is
able, and doubtless he does abolish sin out of the hearts and souls of them
that he makes one with himself by mystical union. And therefore deceive not
thy self, do not imagine as many foolishly do, that thou art one with Christ,
and that thou have part in the sweet comforts in Christ, and yet the corruption
of thy heart is as strong and as powerful in thee as ever it was, and it
breaks out on every occasion: and if thou be but a little moved, thou powrest
out the bitterness of thy soul, in cursing, in swearing, in railing, and the
like: if thou so think, then do thou but deceive thy self. Do thou think
that thou art one with the Son of God incarnate, and yet thou carriest thy
self as a devil incarnate, and as a limb of the devil, thou art a drunkard,
a swearer, a rayler, and such like? No, no, if thou would have sound
assurance that thou art one with the Son of God incarnate, even one with
Christ Jesus, never rest till thou find that he has in some measure abolished
sin and corruption out of thy heart, and out of thy soul, and that thou do
not rest in an external form of piety, or in repressing only the outward
act of sin, (for that may be and is many times in reprobates) but that the
very root of sin is weakened and wounded in thee: thereupon thou may
conclude to thy comfort, that thou art one with the Son of God incarnate,
even with Christ Jesus, and that thou have right and title to the sweet
comforts that are found in him.

Again, is it so that the Son of God taking our nature Comfort to all true
believers.
did utterly abolish sin and corruption out of that flesh that he took? here
is then a ground of sweet comfort to all that truly believe in Christ. For
certainly this Christ did, that he might be a fit Savior of Gods chosen: and
hereuppon all that truly believe in Christ, may assure themselves that he is a
most absolute, and a most perfect Savior to them; he saues them, and he frees
them, not only from their actual sins, but also from their defilement of
nature, and from that remainder of sin and corruption that abides in them,
and sticks so fast to them, which so much troubles them, and which they many
times complain of. For why, he is a Savior, holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sin and sinners, Heb. 7.26. not only in his life, but in his
conception and birth also, he abolished sin and corruption out of that flesh
of ours that he took, and he was conceived and borne without all spot of
sin: and that most perfect holiness and innocence of his humane nature, is
imputed to them that truly believe in him: and no less reckoned to them for
healing and curing of their defiled nature, then his suffering for the
remission of their actual sins: and that is a ground of excellent comfort to
them, it might be further pressed, but I pass from it. One thing further I
will note. The Apostle says, the Son of God being sent in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. He took flesh on
him, and he did utterly abolish sin and corruption out of that flesh. Hence
then it is clear.

Sin may be removed from the soul, and yet the soul remain entire in all
the powers and faculties of it.
and yet the flesh and nature of man still abide. Sin may be removed from the
soul, and yet the soul still remain entire in all the powers and faculties
of it. For indeed natural corruption is not a corruption of the substance of
the soul: for then could not the soul be immortal, neither could the Son
of God have taken man's nature on him without sin; but it is a corruption that
cleaues to the soul, and to the faculties of it, and it may be severed from
the soul, and yet the soul still remain without any diminution in the
substance of it. And hence it is that corruption of nature, is said to be an
evil that does easily compass about. Heb. 12.1. -- (...). Heb. 12.1.
Cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast
on. And to this purpose it is, that we are exhorted to cast off the old man,
the corruption of nature, Ephesians. 4.22. And to put on the new man, verse 24. And
to put off the old man, Coloss. 3.8.9. Which places and many other do evidence
this truth, that sin may be removed from the soul, and yet the soul still
remain entire in all the faculties of it.

Comfort to such as groan under the burden of their natural corruption.
And this serves for the comfort of those that groan under the weight of their
natural corruption, and are weary of their sinful infirmities, and would
willingly shake them off. Know to thy comfort whosoever thou art, sin is such
a thing as may be severed from the soul; the Lord is able to sever it, and he
will one day utterly abolish it, and take it quite out of thy soul. He that
severed sin and our nature in Adam in his creation, and likewise severed
sin and our nature in Christ Jesus in his incarnation, he is able, and he
will at length sever sin and thy nature at thy glorification. And as Moses
said to the Israelites concerning the Egyptians, Exodus 14.13. Says he, The
Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see them again: so it
may be said to thee that art a child of God, and do sigh and groan under the
burden of thy corruptions and sinful infirmities; the sins which now thou
see with grief, and do much vex and trouble thee, and are enemies to thy
peace and comfort, the time shall come wherein the Lord will remove them, and
utterly abolish them, and take them quite out of thy soul, and thou shall
never see them more, and they shall never trouble thee any more. Think on that
to thy comfort. Come we now to the fourth verse.

VERSE 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


IN this verse our Apostle first makes known to us, to what end it was that
God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that is, to what end it was that the Son of God
taking flesh on him, did utterly abolish sin and corruption out of that
flesh, and out of that humane nature that he took on him: as namely, that it
was to this end and purpose, That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us: And so he concludes and shuts up that ground of comfort, laid
down verse the first, That there is a freedom from condemnation to them that
are in Christ. Then secondly, he here falls again on the qualification of the
persons to whom that freedom belongs, repeating it again word for word, as he
delivered it verse 1. That they are such as walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit.

Interpretation.
I will now as briefly as I can, clear the words of this verse touching the
sense of them. That the righteousness of the Law, or even that righteousness
of the Law, or that which the Law of right requires (for so the word signifies)
The meaning is, that righteousness which the moral Law of God requires of
men, that they may be found perfectly just, holy, and pure in Gods sight, being
thoroughly conformed to the will of God revealed in his Law, in their souls, in
their bodies, inwardly and outwardly, in their minds, wills, and affections:
that is the righteousness of the Law here meant and intended by the Apostle.
For as reverend Beza says well, when to remission of sins, and perfect
actual obedience to the Law of God, there is added and adjoined perfect
purity and holiness of our nature, then are men perfectly just and holy in
Gods sight, according to the most absolute and exact rule of the Law of God.
Might be fulfilled: That is, might be fully accomplished, or might be performed
to the full, without leaving any thing unperformed that it requires. In us.
These words have some difficulty in them, they much trouble Interpreters: for
indeed it is somewhat hard to conceive, how the righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in us, who are, not only sinful by nature and before our
regeneration, but have sin still abiding in us in part, though we be
regenerate, even after regeneration and new birth, and when we are truly
sanctified. Therefore it may seem strange that the Apostle should thus speak,
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: but for the right
understanding of these words, we are to mark the context, and to consider them
together with that which goes before them, and that which follows after them.
The Apostle says, God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: that is, utterly abolished sin
out of that flesh and nature of ours that he took, that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, we being one with him by faith, and by the
bond of his Spirit, euidenced and testified by this (as the Apostle subioynes)
that we walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit: so that these words, in
us, are thus to be conceived; in us that are one with Christ by faith, and
members of Christ. Yea but there remains a doubt: wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. So the
meaning of the Apostle, in saying, That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, is this, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in the Son of God incarnate, in Christ, as inherent in him, and in his person,
and in us that are one with him by faith, by imputation and by application. It
is to be observed (as reverend Beza well observes,) that the Apostle says not,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled by us, or of us, or by
any righteousness inherent in our own persons, but in us, because it is to be
found in Christ whose members we are, we truly believing in Christ: Which walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. These words we had in the first
verse, where I showed the meaning to be this; which live not according to the
motion and guidance of the corruption of our own hearts, as we are acted and
moved by the lusts of our corrupt hearts, but according to the motion and
guidance of the Spirit of grace and sanctification. Thus then conceive we the
meaning of the Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said:

That the righteousness which the moral Law of God requires of men, that they
may be found perfectly just, holy, and pure in Gods sight, being every way
conformable to the will of God revealed in his Law, might be fully
accomplished, and so the full performed in the Son of God incarnate, in
Christ, as inherent in him, and in his own person: and so in us by imputation
and by application, we being his members and truly believing in him, that being
euidenced and testified by this, that we live not according to the motion and
guidance of the corruption of nature, but according to the motion and guidance
of the Spirit grace and sanctification.

Here first observe we, that the Apostle expressing the end of Christ his
taking flesh, says: the end of it was, That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. The Son of God taking flesh, our nature on him, did
utterly abolish sin and corruption out of that nature, to this end, that
thereby the perfect righteousness which the moral Law of God requires, might
be fulfilled. Hence then it is clear, the context plainly yields it,

The moral Law of God requires purity of heart and soul, and co^formitie to
it, as well in man's nature as in his thoughts, words, and actions.
is not only outward conformity and outward obedience, but it is also inward
holiness and purity: and the conformity to the Law of God, which the moral
Law of God requires, is a perfect conformity to it, not only in the outward
man, but in the very heart, and soul, and spirit, and as well in man's nature,
as in his actions: it requires that the very nature of man be conformed to it
in holiness and purity, as well as his thoughts, words and actions. And to
this purpose is that Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 6.5.6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy might. And these words which I command thee this day,
shall be in thine heart. Which words are remembered by the expounder of the Law,
Luke 10.27. Luke 10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy thought. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 1.
These. 5.23.
the Apostle prays that the Thessalonians may be holy, not only in body and
soul, but also in spirit; there ought to be holiness and purity in their
very spirits. 1. Tim. 1.5. the Apostle says, The end of the commandment is
love out of a pure heart. The Law of God requires the purity of heart and
soul, and that the very nature of man be conformed to it in holiness and
purity, as well as his thoughts, words, and actions: and this is grounded on
reason. The reasons of it are these.

First the Law of God, as breathed out from the Spirit of

Again, the moral Law of God, for the nature of it, is all one with that
original purity and holiness that was placed in man in his first creation,
even with the image of God standing in perfect holiness and righteousness,
and therefore doubtless it requires purity of heart and soul, and that the
very nature of man be conformed to it in holiness and purity, as well as his
thoughts, intentions, words and actions.

Now then, this truth serves to discover to us the absolute A discovery of the
absolute perfection of Gods Law.
and we may on this ground justly say with David, Psalm. 119.96. There is an end
of all perfection, but the Law of God is exceeding large: it meets with all
sins, both actual and original, both the sins of men's hearts and the
sins of their lives, yea with the very corruption of nature, and want of
original holiness and purity. Even the want of that holiness and purity
that ought to be in the nature of man, is against the Law of God, that requires
holiness and purity of heart, and soul, and in the very nature of man. An
Anabaptisticall conceit met withal.
And it is a gross and erroneous conceit which some Anabaptisticall spirits
hold, that the corruption of nature is neither against Gods Law, nor in it
self sin; and that God gives us not any Law in our conception and birth.
That is the assertion of some idle brains, and that is utterly false, it
cannot stand with the truth now delivered. The want of conformity to the Law
of God in a man's conception and birth, and the want of original holiness and
purity, is against Gods Law: the Law of God requires conformity to it, not
only in men's actions, but in their nature, and the want of such conformity is
deadly and damnable in it self, and makes a man subject and liable to the
curse of the Law.

The Popish opinion that men may fulfill the Law of God in this life, confuted.
and that the very nature of man be conformed to it in holiness and purity,
as well as his thoughts, words, and actions? who then is able in the time of
this life, in his own person, perfectly to fulfill the Law of God? who is able
to reach to that perfect purity the Law of God requires? Surely none living,
being but a mere man; for alas there is impurity and defilement of nature
cleaving to the best and most holy, so long as they live on the face of the
earth. And it is a dotage of the Papists to say as they do, that men may
fulfill the Law of God in this life: and they are ignorant of the
righteousness of the Law, they know it not, or they are wilfully blind and
will not see it and take notice of it. And it is gross ignorance in blind
people to say, they can keep the Commandments of God as well as God will give
them leave, therein they show themselves grossly ignorant.

An unjust imputation commonly cast on Gods children removed.
and that the very nature of man be conformed to it in holiness and purity,
take we notice of a wrong and unjust imputation that is commonly cast on Gods
children, and such as truly fear God; the world commonly thinks, that they
are too strict, and too precise, and too curious, and that they make more ado
then they need. Yea worldly minded men stick not sometimes to charge it on
them as a foul fault, that they are too strict, and too precise, and that they
are singular. Why say they, cannot they content themselves to be
neighbour-like, and to live a civil, honest, and orderly life, what need they
make such ado in keeping the Sabbath, and in doing holy duties, and what need
they be so precise in their speeches, gestures, and apparel? they are more
nice then wise, they make more ado then they need. Poor souls, they that thus
think or speak, they consider not the righteousness of Gods Law, what that
requires at the hands of men. Can men be too strict in yielding obedience to
the Commandments of God? can men go too far in following after holiness and
purity? is it possible? No, no, it is not possible, the Law of God requires
purity and holiness of heart and soul, and that the very nature of man be
conformed to it in holiness and purity, as well as his thoughts, words, and
actions; and that is the thing we are to labor for and to breath after, if we
would have true and sound comfort in our obedience to the will of God revealed
in his word. It is not thy outward conformity to the Law of God, thy civil,
honest, and orderly life, that will yield thee true comfort in time of trial,
in the hour of death, or day of judgment: no, no, if thou trust to that, it
will deceive thee when thou stand in most need of comfort. If we would have
true and sound comfort in our obedience to the will of God revealed in his
word, we must labor in truth, (though not in perfection) yet in truth to yield
obedience to the Law of God, not only in our bodies, but but also in our
hearts, souls and spirits, and that our very nature may be conformed to the
Law of God in holiness and purity, and that we may be transformed and changed
in our nature into the blessed image of God in true holiness and
righteousness: and that will yield us true and sound comfort both in life and
death.

The Papists conclude from these words, The Popish opinion that Gods
Commandments may be kept, further confuted.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: that Gods
Commandments may be kept, and that men may fulfill the Law of God by the grace
of Christ. Yea Bellarmine says, that if the Law of God cannot be fulfilled,
then Christ has not compassed or attained that which he intended; for
therefore says he, Christ died, that the justice or righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled: and he would ground it on this context, because it is here
said, that God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us. But they are easily answered: they mistake and misconstrue the
text; the Apostle says not, that the justice or righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled by us, or of us, as by any righteousness inherent in our
persons; but in us, namely by Christ as inherent in him, and so in us by
imputation, he being made righteousness to us who are one with him by faith,
and by the bond of his Spirit. And whereas they say, that by the grace of
Christ men may fulfill the Law of God, A proposition not found in Gods book.
we find not that proposition in all the book of God, neither can it be
gathered from thence: indeed by the grace of Christ men are enabled to yield
obedience to the Law of God in some measure, but not perfectly to fulfill it in
the time of this life. The best and most holy that live on the face of the
earth, have a corruption still abiding in them, and they are not able in the
time of this life in their own persons perfectly to keep and fulfill the Law
of God. And though true believers cannot perfectly fulfill the Law of God in
their own persons, in the time of this life, yet that will not follow that
Bellarmine infers on it, that Christ obtained not that which he intended: for
he can never prove that Christ intended any such thing. When Christ satisfied
the Law for the faithful, his intent and purpose in fulfilling the
righteousness of the Law was, that true believers might have that
righteousness of his imputed to them to their justification. So that the
Papists cannot fasten it on this text rightly understood, that men may fulfill
the Law of God in their own persons in the time of this life.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle here says, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, meaning that the
righteousness of the Law might be fully accomplished in Christ as inherent in
him, and in his person, and so in us by imputation and application, we being
members of Christ, and one with him by faith, by the bond of his Spirit. Now
from hence we may easily take up this conclusion.

The perfect fulfilling of the Law of God performed in the person of Christ, is
truly and really theirs who believe in Christ, by imputation and by application.
is as truly and as really ours, we believing in Christ, as if it were in our
selves. The perfect fulfilling of the Law of God performed and done in the
person of Christ Jesus, is as truly and as really ours by imputation and by
application, we being members of Christ, as if we our selves had done it in our
own persons. And this truth is not only grounded on this text, but in other
places of Scripture. We have further evidence and testimony of Scripture for
the confirming of it. Romans 5.19. Romans 5.19.
the Apostle says, that by the obedience of one, meaning of Christ, many are
made righteous. Even by the obedience of Christ, the obedience of his life and
death, his perfect fulfilling of the Law of God, and by his suffering of death,
as many as truly believe in him, are made as just and righteous, as if they
themselves had done and suffered the things that he did and suffered. Romans
16.14. the Apostle says, Romans 10.4.
that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes: as if he had said, Christ has not only determined and put an end
to the ceremonial Law of God, both for signification and promise, but he is
also the end and perfection of the moral Law of God: he has perfectly in his
own person accomplished the moral Law, and that not for himself, but for
righteousness to every one that truly believes in him. His fulfilling of the
moral Law of God for righteousness of every one that truly believes in him:
1. Cor. 1.30. 1. Cor. 1.30.
the Apostle speaking of himself and other true believers, he says, Christ is
made to us of God righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. And
again, 2. Cor. 5.21. 2. Cor. 5.21.
he says, God made him (that is Christ) to be sin for us who knew no sin,
that we truly believing in him, might be made the righteousness of God in him.
And to these we might add other evidences of Scripture if it were needful,
clearing and confirming this truth, that the righteousness of the Law of God
fulfilled and fully accomplished in the person of Christ, is as truly ours, we
truly believing in Christ, as if it were in our selves, and as if we our selves
had done it and fulfilled it in our own persons.

And the reason and ground of this is, flesh of his flesh and bone of his
bones. Ephesians. 5.30. Ephesians. 5.30.
that by virtue of that near union true believers have fellowship and
communion with Christ in all his benefits, and in all things done by him as the
Mediator of the new covenant: and that which is his is theirs, they partake in
it; and that he has done as Mediator is accounted as done by them. And
therefore doubtless this is a certain truth, that the righteousness of the
Law of God fulfilled and fully accomplished in the person of Christ, is as
truly and as really ours, we believing in Christ, as if it were in us, in our
selves, and as if we had fulfilled it in our own persons.

A scornful term given by the Papists to the righteousness of Christ
imputed to true believers, met withal.
that the Papists are deceived, and that they are blinded in their own
conceit, in that they think, and stick not to utter it, that the
righteousness of Christ imputed to true believers, is but a putatiue justice,
an imaginary and a fantastical righteousness, for so they speak of it
scornefully and disgracefully: They say, it is but an idle thing, and a mere
fancy that we hold; that true believers are justified by Christ his
righteousness imputed to them. They are deceived, the doctrine now delivered
shows plainly, that the righteousness of Christ imputed to true believers, is
a true real righteousness, even the righteousness of the Law of God
fulfilled in the person of Christ, which is as truly and as really theirs that
truly believe in him, as if it were in themselves, and as if they themselves
had fulfilled it in their own persons.

Object.

Answ. for though the same righteousness that is in Christ be theirs that
truly believe in him, yet it is not theirs in the same measure, or in the same
manner. It is in Christ by inherency, it is inherent in him, and in him as a
root and fountain: but it is theirs only by imputation and by application.

And again, it is in the person of Christ in that measure, as it is sufficient
and able to justify many, even many thousands, but it is theirs being imputed
to them, only so far as it serves to justify their particular persons in
the sight of God; and therefore this makes nothing against the truth of the
doctrine now delivered.

Again, is it so that the righteousness of the Law of God How we may truly
say, that we fulfill the Law of God, and do merit life and salvation.
we truly believing in Christ, as if it were in us, in our selves, and as if we
our selves had fulfilled it? surely then we may be bold to say, that in Christ
(we believing in him) we fulfill the Law of God, and we merit life and
salvation, though in our selves, and as of our selves, there is nothing but
matter deserving the wrath of God, and our best actions, if the Lord should
examine them by the strict rule of the Law, deserve the curse of the Law, and
our justification and salvation is merely of grace; yet in Christ his
righteousness being imputed to us, we are accounted worthy of eternal life
and salvation. Note.
And the doctrine of free justification by the righteousness of Christ, and by
his perfect holiness and purity imputed, does not ouerturne the Law of God,
they may well stand together, true believers are justified by the
righteousness of the Law, not inherent in themselves, or done and performed by
them in their own persons, but by the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in
the person of Christ, and inherent in him, and made theirs, of the mere mercy,
and of the free grace and favor of God, by imputation and by application. And
so the truth now delivered may further serve as a ground of sweet and excellent
comfort to all and every one that truly believes in Christ: for why.

Is it so, that the righteousness of the Law of God fulfilled Comfort to true
believers.
(we truly believing in Christ) as if it were in us, even in our own persons,
and as if we our selves had fulfilled it. Then take notice of this to thy
comfort whosoever thou art; thou truly believing in Christ, thou art as just
and as righteous in the sight of God, as the Law of God can make thee, or as
the holy Law of God can require at thine hand: thou have absolute and perfect
holiness and righteousness to thy justification in Gods sight; thou have such
holiness and righteousness as will abide the trial, and will bear thee out
before the judgment seat of the Lord, and against which the Lord himself
cannot take exception. For why, the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in the
person of Christ, is most absolute and perfect, and free from all exception.
Now that is as truly and as really thine, thou truly believing in Christ, as if
it were in thy self in thine own person, and as if thou thy self had
fulfilled it: and that may be a ground of sweet comfort to thee. If the
righteousness serving to thy justification in Gods sight, were that which is
inherent in thy self, or the good works done by thy self, as the Papists
teach, thou might justly doubt of the sufficiency of it, and fear whether
thou had done enough to that purpose or no, but being the righteousness of
the Law fulfilled in the person of Christ, and inherent in him, thou have no
cause of any such doubtings or fear. No, no, thou have most absolute
holiness, and purity, and righteousness, thou want no righteousness to
thy justification in the sight of God, nor any merit to thy eternal salvation:
yea know it to thy comfort, that the righteousness of the Law of God fulfilled
in the person of Christ, being as truly thine as if thou had fulfilled it,
thy righteousness to thy justification in Gods sight can never be lost, it is
laid up in Christ Jesus, it is in a safe and sure hand, where thou shall be
sure to find it, and to have it when thou have most need of it. The holiness
and righteousness that is inherent in thine own person may decay, and may be
weakened, and may be lost in part, but the righteousness of the Law fulfilled
in the person of Christ, imputed to thee for thy justification in Gods sight,
that can never decay nor be lost in any measure, but that remains whole and
entire to thee for ever: and that is a ground of unspeakable comfort to every
child of God, even to every one that that truly believes in Christ.

Now the words the Apostle here subioynes, Which walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, we had verse 1. I will not therefore stand on the particular
doctrines they afford to us, only note we thus much. The Apostle here says,
God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, that is, in the Son of God incarnate, as inherent in him,
and in us by imputation and application, we being one with Christ: and for
evidence of that he subioynes. Which walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. Whence we may gather.

That only they that walk after the Spirit, Who they be for whom the
righteousness of the Law was fulfilled in the person of Christ.
only they that live according to the motion and guidance of the Spirit of
grace and sanctification, have the righteousness of the Law fulfilled for them
in the person of Christ: and on the contrary, they that walk after the flesh,
they that live as they are acted and moved by the lusts of their own hearts,
they have no righteousness performed for them, Christ was not conceived holy
and pure for them, nor fulfilled the Law of God for them, nor died fot them,
they have no assurance of it. Come we now to the fifth verse.

VERSE 5. For they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh:
but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.


Our Apostle having in the verse foregoing fallen again on the qualification
of the persons to whom freedom from condemnation belongs, as that they are
thus qualified: They walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, and made
an opposition between those two, to walk after the flesh and to walk after
the Spirit, that true believers walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit;
in these two verses, 5.6. he further lays forth that contrariety. And first he
shows that there is a contrariety between those that walk after the flesh
and those that walk after the Spirit, in respect of their natures and
dispositions, that they are of contrary dispositions and affections; and that
is in the 5. verse, as namely, they that walk after the flesh, or they that
are after the flesh, for so speaks the Apostle, they are thus disposed, they
savor the things of the flesh: but on the other side, they that are after the
Spirit, they are minded and disposed to the contrary, they savor the things of
the Spirit: and by this contrariety of dispositions he proves, that true
believing justified persons walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. For
(says he) they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but
they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. Then secondly, the
Apostle shows that there is a contrariety between those that walk after the
flesh and those that walk after the Spirit, in respect of their ends, that
their ends are contrary, verse 6. I will lay forth that contrariety when we
come to the handling of that verse. Now to keep within the compass of the 5.
verse, setting forth the contrariety that is between them that are after the
flesh, and after the Spirit, in respect of their natures and dispositions, the
words of this verse are first to be opened.

Interpretation.
They that are after the flesh: That phrase, after the flesh, the Apostle makes
all one with that to be in the flesh, verse 8. and to be in the flesh or after
the flesh, is to be carnal, unregenerate, and to be nothing but flesh and
corruption, as Christ says, Ioh. 3.6. Ioh. 3 6.
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh: it is nothing but a lump of sin
and corruption, and so the Apostle, meaning is this: they that are carnal,
unregenerate, as yet in their natural state and condition, they that have the
flesh ruling in them and over them, and are acted and guided by the evil
motions and lusts of it, they savor the things of the flesh. The word here
rendered savor, comprehends the actions and operations both of the
understanding and will: we find it in Scripture applied to both, but most
commonly to the actions of the will, and to the affections which are particular
motions of the will, as Col. 3.2. Colos. 3.2.
Set your affections on things that are above: the same original word is there
used, (...).
that here we have. And so the Apostles meaning in these words is this, they
mind and affect the things of the flesh, they muse and meditate, and think of
those things, they affect them, and love and like them, they care for them, and
desire them, and seek after them, and those things are sweet, and sauourie,
and pleasing to them, and they well relish them. So much is comprised under
that word, they savor. The things of the flesh. By things of the flesh, we are
to understand not only such things as are simply evil in themselves, even
such evil works of the flesh as sinful corruption moves men to, as namely,
such as are reckened up, Galat. 5.19.20.21. Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation,
wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness,
gluttony, and such like; but such things also as pertain to this life, and are
things of this world, and not evil in themselves and of their own nature, but
become evil to the wicked, they affecting and seeking after them with wicked
minds and after a wrong manner, and abusing them; even these also are things
of the flesh, as knowledge of arts and sciences, meat, drink, apparel,
riches, honor, and the like. But they that are after the Spirit: that is, on
the contrary, they that are truly regenerate, and have true sanctifying grace
in their hearts, and are ordered and guided by the Spirit of grace, and have
that ruling in their hearts, keeping under the corruption that in part abides
in them, and stirring them up to good things pleasing to God. They savor: that
is, they mind and affect the things of the Spirit, they muse and meditate on
those things, they love and like them, and seek after them, and they are
sauorie, and sweet, and pleasing to them. Even the things of the Spirit. By
things of the Spirit, we are to understand the contrary to the things of the
flesh, namely, such things as are the works of the Spirit, holy works, as
those spoken of, Galat. 5.22.23. Love, joy, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, and all such things as are heavenly
and spiritual, and pertain to Gods kingdom, and to life and godliness, 2.
Pet. 1.3.4. Thus then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the
words of this verse, as if he had said:

For they that are carnal, unregenerate, and as yet in their natural state
and condition, and have the flesh ruling and reigning in them, and are acted
and guided by the flesh, they mind and affect, they love and like, and they
desire and seek after such things as are simply evil in themselves, or things
that pertain only to this life, and things of this world, which being not
evil in themselves, yet become evil to the wicked, they affecting and seeking
after them with wicked minds and after a wrong manner, and abusing them; those
things are sweet, and sauorie, and pleasing to them, they will relish them:
But they that are truly regenerate, and have true sanctifying grace in their
hearts, they mind, and they affect, they muse and meditate on the works of the
Spirit, holy things, things that are heavenly and spiritual, and pertain to
life and goodness, those are the things they love and like, and those things
are sauorie and sweet, and pleasing to them.

First observe we, that the Apostle here ranging and dividing men into two
sorts, that they are either after the flesh or after the Spirit, they are
either carnal or spiritual, either regenerate or unregenerate: he says, the
one sort, they savor, they mind, and they affect the things of the flesh; and
the other, they savor, they mind, and they affect the things of the Spirit.
Hence then note we thus much:

The regenerate and unregenerate are of contrary minds and affections.
between the godly and the wicked, in their minds and in their affections;
they are of contrary minds, and of contrary wills and affections. The godly
they mind and affect, they love and like good things, things heavenly and
spiritual: But the wicked and unregenerate, they mind and affect, they love
and like things earthly and carnal, those are the things that are sweet and
pleasing to them: and so they are carried contrary ways in their minds and
dispositions. Philip. 3.19. Philip. 3 19.
the Apostle describing Epicures and carnal persons, he says of them in
plain terms, They mind earthly things: their minds and their affections are
set on those things. But says he, (speaking of himself and others truly
regenerate, verse 20.) Our conversation is in heaven; our minds are lift up
above the things of the earth, we mind things heavenly and spiritual, our
whole disposition and carriage is in heaven. Psalm. 4.6.7. Psalm. 4.6.7.
says David, Many say, who will show us any good? That is the speech of many
in the world, they mind and they affect the things of the world, those are the
things they seek after, and the things they enquire after, and they say, who
will show us any good in respect of worldly things? But Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, thou have given me more joy of heart, then
they have had when their wheat and their wine did abound. That was David's
mind, and that was his affection: and to this purpose it were easy to bring
further evidence clearing this truth, that there is a contrariety between the
regenerate and the unregenerate, between the godly and the wicked, in their
minds and in their affections, and that they are of contrary minds, and of
contrary dispositions. And no marvel though it be so: for why,

They are of contrary natures,

Now then in the first place this must teach us, not to stand It is no strange
thing that there is so little agreement between the godly and the wicked.
and to wonder that there is so little agreement between the godly and the
wicked, and that they are many times at jar, and discord, and difference one
with another: we are not to think it strange, as Prou. 29.27. that a wicked
man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in his way, is
abomination to the wicked. That a godly man cannot away with a wicked man, and
that a wicked man cannot abide a godly man, here is one special cause of it,
they are of contrary minds, and of contrary dispositions. We know it is
similitude and likeness of minds, and affections, and dispositions, that
draws men together, and combines them, and makes them love and like one
another, and to agree together; and where there is discrepancy and difference
of minds and affections, there can be no good agreement of any long
continuance, and therefore it is that the godly and the wicked are commonly at
such ods and difference, because they are of contrary minds and dispositions;
the godly cannot away with the wicked, because they are not of their minds and
dispositions; the wicked cannot endure the godly, they hate them, because they
well perceive they are not of their minds, and they are not disposed as they
are; yea the wicked speak evil of the godly, because the godly like not those
things that they like, and because they run not with them to the same excess
of riot. 1. Pet. 4.4. 1. Pet. 4.4.
The works of the godly are good, the works of the wicked are evil, and
therefore they hate them, and cannot away with them, as Cain hated Abel. 1.
Ioh. 3.12. 1. Ioh. 3.12.
Wicked men though they pretend other causes why they cannot abide the godly,
as that (forsooth) they are hypocrites, yet in deed and truth here is the very
cause, they are not of the same mind and disposition with them, and therefore
it is. Thus it was between Cain and Abel, Isaac and Ismael, David and Saul,
Christ and the Jews, and thus it will be to the end of the world. There is
enmity between the seed of the woman and between the seed of the serpent,
and there is dislike and disagreement between the godly and the wicked,
because they are of contrary minds, and of contrary dispositions: and
therefore we are not to marvel at it, when we see that the one cannot abide
the other.

The reason why the godly and religious cannot join in fellowship and society
with the wiked.
and of contrary dispositions, and they savor contrary thing? surely then it
cannot be, that the godly and such as are truly religious, should join
society and fellowship with the wicked, and consort with them unnecessarily,
and take delight and comfort in their company: they that have sound and true
grace in their hearts, they cannot endure to be familiar with the wicked and
ungodly unnecessarily: it is a grief to Gods children to be in the company of
the wicked accidentally. David cried out, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I remain
in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar: the good man was grieved that he
was forced to live among the wicked but for a time. And doubtless thus it is
with such as are truly religious, it is even irksome and tedious to them to
remain among the wicked but for a time. And know it whosoever thou art, that
it is a shrewd sign thou have no soundness of grace in thine heart, if so be
thou can familiarly consort and converse with the wicked, and that
unnecessarily, as it is the manner of some. Can thou be familiar, and that
unnecessarily, with wicked and graceless persons, such as are enemies to God
and all goodness, and blaspheme the truth of God, and speak evil of the
ways of God, and open their mouths wide against the professors of the truth?
Can thou sit with them, walk and talk with them familiarly? It is more then
probable that thou have no true nor sound grace in thee. For either thou do
humor them, and sooth them up in their vileness, which is a soul fault and
sin in thee; or else if thou have soundness of grace in thine heart, thou
hear and see that which is a grief to thy soul, and makes thine heart
bleed within thee. The godly and the wicked cannot consort and company together
with comfort and delight to them both: they are of contrary minds, and of
contrary dispositions, and that which is sauorie to the one is unsavory to the
other; good things are sweet and pleasing to the godly, and they delight to be
speaking of them, but to the wicked they are harsh and unpleasant, and they sit
as on thorns when they hear them spoken of; and so carnal things are sweet,
sauorie, and pleasing to the wicked, and they commonly foam out filthiness,
ribaldrie, and rotten speeches with delight, which if the godly hear, they
hear with grief and vexation to their souls: and with what comfort then can
they consort together? Can two persons feed on the same dish of meat with
delight to them both, if that meat be sauorie, and pleasant, and tastfull to
the one, and unsavory, and unpleasant, and bitter to the other? surely no,
they cannot. No more can the godly and the wicked delight in the same things,
and as it were feed on the same things with delight, they savor contrary
things; that which is sauorie to the one, is unpleasant and unsavory to the
other, therefore they cannot consort together with comfort. And think not that
thou can so handle the matter, as that thou may be soundly religious, and
yet be a familiar companion with wicked and profane persons, and that
unnecessarily; no no, thou being familiar with the wicked, besides this that
thou do thereby provoke God to anger against thee, as Iehoshaphat did by
joining with Ahaziah, 2. Chron. 20.35. and do harden the wicked in their
evil courses, thou do thereby show that thou have no soundness of grace in
thine heart.

They that are after the flesh, It is the property of carnal persons to savor
carnal things.
savor the things of the flesh, he points out to us the nature and property of
carnal persons: and the point hence is this. That it is the property of
carnal persons to savor carnal things: unregenerate persons and such as are
in their natural state, they love, and they affect the things of the flesh,
the pleasures of sin, the profits and preferments of the world, ease,
idleness, softness, daintiness, and the like: those are the things that are
most sweet, and sauorie, and pleasing to them, and the things which they most
desire and seek after. Happily a carnal person has sometimes some little joy
and delight in spiritual things, and does sometimes taste the good word of
God, Heb. 6.5. Heb. 6.5.
but indeed it is but a taste, he does but taste it as it were with the tip of
his tongue, and his delight in spiritual things is but a vanishing delight,
the things of the Spirit are for the most part harsh and unsavory to him; but
the things of the flesh, carnal pleasures, riches, honors, ease, idleness,
and the like, these are the things that he finds most sweetness and most
savor in; and these are the things that best please his taste, and are best
liking to his mind: And to this purpose Zophar speaks plainly, Job 20.12.13.
Job 20.12.13.
Says he, Wickedness was sweet in the mouth of the wicked, he hides it under
his tongue as a sweet morsel, he savors it and keeps it close in his mouth:
he delights as it were to be chawing on it continually. Prou. 4.17. Prou. 4.17.
says Solomon, The wicked eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence: it is even as meat and drink to them to do evil. Isay 32.7.
Isay. 32.7.
the Prophet says, The churl deuiseth wicked counsels, to undo the poor with
lying words, and to speak against the poor in judgment. And Micha 2.1.
Micha. 2.1.
the Prophet denounces a woe against the wicked, in that they imagined iniquity
and wrought wickedness upon their beds: it was so sweet and so sauorie to
them, as they were willing to lose their sleep to muse and think on it, and
to devise it. And to these we might add many other testimonies of Scripture,
showing this to be a truth, that the things of the flesh, the pleasures of
sin, riches, honors, and such like, are most sweet, and sauourie, and
pleasing to carnal persons, and that these are the things they most mind and
affect, and that they desire and seek after, and take most delight and
pleasure in: and the reasons of it are plain.

First this, Carnal things, the pleasures of sin, and the like,

Again secondly, carnal persons out of the blindness of and draw them from
following after the things of the flesh. The Sodomites were exceedingly enraged
against Lot, when he labored to dissuade them from their filthiness, Genesis
19.9. they said, Away hence: he is come alone as a stranger, and shall he judge
and rule? they were mad against him. Carnal persons out of their corrupt
judgment, think and esteem carnal things most excellent, and place their
happiness in the fruition of them: and therefore no marvel though they mind
and affect them, and desire them above all other things, and even prefer them
before things heavenly, and as the Gadarens did their swine before Christ
Jesus, Mat. 8.34. This then we may resolve on as a certain truth, that the
things of the flesh, the pleasures of sin, riches, and the like, being most
agreeable to the nature of carnal persons, and they out of their blindness of
mind, placing their happiness in the fruition of them, that those things are
most sweet and sauourie, and pleasing to them, and that those are the things
they most mind and affect, they care for, and desire, and seek after, and take
most delight and pleasure in.

The cause why most me^ in the world do so eagerly follow after the pleasures
of sin and the profits of the world, discovered.
to the pleasures of sin, or to the profits of the world, even to follow the
pleasures and vanities of the world, or profits of it with eagerness, and with
greediness, and that they are insatiable in their pursuit and following after
these things; they even swallow up iniquity, as Prou, 19.28. they make no
bones of sin, they commit sin with as great delight and pleasure, as
drunkards power down strong drink, or as gluttons carry down delicious
meats. Whence is this? Surely from hence, they are carnal, and the things of
the flesh are most sweet, and sauorie, and pleasing to them; carnal persons
give themselves to ease and idleness, and to pampering of the flesh, to
softness and daintiness, to pride and vanity, and garishnesse in apparel.
And why? Because indeed they are carnal, and those things are most sweet, and
sauourie, and best pleasing to them: and so worldlings and earth-wormes, they
give themselves to carking and caring for earthly commodities, and to raking
and scraping together of wealth: and why? because they are worldlings, and they
are after the flesh, and the things that pertain to the flesh; the things of
this world are the things that they find most sweetness and savor in: as for
things heavenly and spiritual, alas, sensual persons and worldlings they find
no sweetness nor savor in them at all. Tell a carnal person, one either
given over to the vanities of the world and the pleasures of sin, or one given
over to the pelf and profits of this world, one that will be rich, as 1. Tim.
6.9. Note.
one that has resolved with himself so to be; tell such persons of the joys
of the life to come, of the comforts in Christ, of the comfort and peace of a
good conscience, of the sweetness of the word of God, and the holy ordinances
of God, and alas they find no more sweetness and savor in these things, then
in a dry chip, or the white of an egg, as Job 6.6. These things are too fresh
and too unsavory for their taste, they cannot relish them: no, when things
heavenly, and things pertaining to life and godliness are spoken of in the
public ministry of the word, carnal persons savor them not, unless it be
to death and damnation. They are no more moved with them then the seats they
sit on, they give themselves to gazing about, or to sleep: and this is the
very cause why men give themselves to sleeping at Sermons, and some vain women
give themselves to gazing about, to toying and playing with their fingers, or
to talking, and such like: and people are weary of holy exercises: and why?
they savor not things heavenly and spiritual, they find no sweetness in
them. If it were at a stage play, at a feast or banquet, or at a merry
meeting, they could sit many hours together without weariness, yea some can
spend whole days and nights in such exercises. Oh these things are most sweet
and sauourie, and pleasing unto them: yea when sensual persons are exercised
in the works of carnal pleasure, and worldlings exercised in and about the
things of the world, they are as fishes in the sea, in their proper element,
and these things are most suitable and agreeable to their nature, and best
please their humor, and therefore no marvel though they follow them with
eargernesse and with greediness.

Who may be justly accounted carnal persons, and justly taxed so to be.
are the things of the flesh most sweet, and sauourie, and pleasing to carnal
persons? and are those the things they mind and affect, and take most delight
and pleasure in? Surely then, if we discern a man or a woman to be earthly
minded, if we well perceive that they savor the things of the flesh, and that
those things are most sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing to them, and do
best fit their humor, we may be bold to say, that that man or woman is a
carnal person; we may so judge of them, and so esteem, and so account of
them. Carnal persons cannot endure to be thought and to be accounted that
which they are, and they cannot endure to have their proper name and title
given to them, and to be called carnal: but do we see that a man gives
himself to ease, to idleness, and to drunkenness; is a man a gadder to
tauernes, to stage plays, a gamester, or the like? does he give himself over
to sensual pleasures? certainly that is a carnal person, and we may so
esteem and so account of him.

Again, do we see a man drowned in the cares of this life, and that he gives
himself over to the seeking of the things of the world, he is a greedy and a
grinding usurer? Surely, let his name be never so great in the world, his
proper name is this, a Carnal person: he is so, and we may so call him, and so
account of him. And hereby learn to discern of thy self whether thou be a
carnal man or a carnal woman or no. Does thy mind run on the world? Is
thine heart set on the things of the world? Is thy mind on thy halfepeny, as we
use to speak, especially when thou art performing of holy duties? Does thy
mind then run after thy covetousness, as Ezech. 33.31? No doubt the best and
most holy have distractions in performing of holy duties, but they like them
not: but is it so with thee, that in performing holy duties thou have commonly
thoughts of the world running in thy mind, and then give way to such
thoughts, they are pleasing to thee, and thou delightest in them; yea thou
give way to them so far, as they carry thy mind altogether from the word
taught, and when thou come home, thou can remember nothing that was
delivered, and thou art nothing grieved for it? If it be thus with thee, surely
thou sauourest the things of the flesh, thou art carnal.

Quest. Some may say,

Answer.

Quest.

Answer.

Come we now to the other part of the opposition here made by the Apostle,
wherein he makes known the nature and property of such as are after the
Spirit; as namely, that they that are after the Spirit, they savor the things
of the Spirit; they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh:
but (says he) they that are after the Spirit, savor the things of the Spirit.
Now hence we are given to understand thus much, the point hence is this.

It is the property of regenerate persons to mind and affect heavenly things.
regenerate persons such as have true sanctifying grace in their hearts, they
mind and they affect things heavenly, and spiritual things, pertaining to
Gods kingdom, to life and godliness, as the works and gifts of the Spirit,
love, joy, peace, long suffering, the means of grace and salvation, the word
and the Sacraments, and other holy ordinances, and the peace and comfort of a
good conscience, the joys of the world to come, and the like: those are things
that are most sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing to them, and the things
they most desire, care for, and seek after, the things they take most delight
and pleasure in; and these are the things they best relish, and find most
sweetness and savor in. And that thus it is with such as are truly
regenerate, such as have true sanctifying grace in their hearts, they are thus
minded and thus affected, we find it confirmed by many evidences of Scripture.
1. Ioh. 5.3. 1. Ioh. 5.3.
says Saint John, The commandments of God are not grievous: his meaning is to
them that are borne of God, as he subioynes in the next verse, For all that is
borne of God ouercometh the world. To them that are truly regenerate, to them
the commandments of God are not grievous, but they are easy, sweet, and
pleasant. Job 23.12. Job 23.12.
Job says, He esteemed the word of the Lords mouth, more then his appointed
food. The words of the mouth of God were more sweet and sauourie, and better
pleasing to him, then his ordinary food. And David in many of the Psalms
makes known a marvelous great affection that he had to the word of God, and
to heavenly and spiritual things, that he took more delight in those things,
then in all the things in the world besides. Psalm. 19.10. Psalm. 19.10.
he puts it down positiuely, that the judgments of the Lord are more to be
desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, that they are sweeter then the honey
and the honey comb. Psalm. 119.97. Psalm. 119.97.
he breaks out and says, Oh how love I thy Law! As if he had said, I am not
able to express the greatness of my love and affection to it. And in that
Psalm we find, that he preferres the word and commandments of God, before the
most excellent and precious things in the world, and before the greatest store
and abundance of them. Verse 14. Psalm. 119.14.72.127.
I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches.
Verse 72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and
silver. Verse 127. I love thy commandments above gold, yea above most fine
gold. And hence it was that he broke out so pathetically, Psalm. 84.1.2. Psalm.
84.1.2.4.10.
O Lord of hoasts how amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul longs, yea and
faints for the courts of the Lord: for mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the
living God. And verse 4. he pronounces them blessed that may dwell in the
house of the Lord. And in his estimation one day in the courts of the Lord, was
better then a thousand elsewhere, yea though it were in the kings Palace, verse
10. Psalm. 42.1.2. Psalm. 42.1.2.
he says, That as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water; so his soul
panted after God. And that his soul thirsted for the Lord, and cried, Oh when
shall I come and appear before the presence of God. Such was the affection and
longing of this holy man after the house of God, and after heavenly and
spiritual things: and this doubtless is the affection of Gods children in
their measure; such as are truly regenerate, and have true sanctifying grace in
their hearts, they mind and they affect things heavenly and spiritual, things
pertaining to Gods kingdom, to life and godliness, these are the things that
are most sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing to them, and the things they
best relish and find most sweetness and savor in.

And the reasons of it are these. First, things heavenly and

Again, they that are regenerate, and have true sanctifying the beauty,
excellency, and worth of them, they are able to see and discern, and do
indeed see and discern the sweetness and comfort of heavenly things, that
they are as milk and honey, as marrow and fatness, as the Lord speaks, Isay
55.1.2. and that there is such true and sound comfort to be found in heavenly
and spiritual things, as all the wealth in the world cannot yield, yea that
they are more precious, and all things that men can desire are not to be
compared to them. Prou. 3.15. This Gods children see and discern, and take
notice of, in things heavenly and spiritual; and that beauty, excellency,
and worth, and sweetness, that is found in heavenly and spiritual things, is
most amiable and lovely. And therefore it must needs be, we may set it down as
a certain truth, that things heavenly and spiritual, things pertaining to
Gods kingdom, to life and godliness, the works and gifts of the Spirit, the
means of grace, and the like, are most sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing
to regenerate persons, and to such as have true sanctifying grace in their
hearts; and those are the things they most desire and seek after, and take
most delight and pleasure in, and things they best relish and find most
sweetness and savor in.

Whence it is that the godly do so earnestly follow after holy exercises.
do so earnestly follow after holy exercises, and that they do so willingly and
chearefully come to the exercise of the word, to the Sacraments, and to the
holy ordinances of God, as Psalm. 110.3. and think it their chief joy and
delight to be exercised in holy duties, and are content many times even to
break their sleep, and to abridge themselves of the pleasures and profits of
the world, that they may be exereised in holy duties: and that they then hold
it their greatest misery, when either they want the public means of
salvation, or they ate hindered and kept from them, and cannot come to them. It
was David's case, Psalm. 27.4. One thing (says he) have I desired of the Lord,
and that I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy
Temple. David was then in banishment, and deprived of all outward comforts, yet
he makes as though h^ wanted nothing but this: that he might come into the
house of God, and behold the beauty of the Lord in his holy ordinances: and
thus it is wirh Gods children. And whence is this? Surely from hence; they are
after the Spirit, and the things of the Spirit, things heavenly and spiritual,
are most sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing to them, and they find an
excellent relish and sweetness in them. The world thinks Gods people foolish
and mad, and stick not sometimes so to say, that they are foolish and mad
people, in that they so run after Sermons, and are so eager in following
after holy exercises; they judge of Gods children by themselves, and think
that others find as little sweetness in holy things as they do: but alas they
are deceived, Gods children find an excellent taste and sweetness in holy
things, yea Gods children relishing and sauouring the word of God and holy
things to their comfort, they find such sweetness and comfort in them, as they
would not part withal for all the world. And holy things being sauoured of
Gods children, in their sweetness they give to them a taste and a beginning of
that joy that eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor the heart of man
conceived: and therefore no marvel though they follow after them with such
earnestness and eagerness as they do. Things heavenly and spiritual are most
agreeable to the renewed nature of Gods children, they see and discern the
beauty and excellency of them, and they savor the sweetness of them to
their comfort; and therefore they cannot but follow after them with all
willingness and cheerfulness.

Again, is it so that things heavenly and spiritual, things How a man or
woman may easily discern whether they be in the state of regeneration or no.
are most sweet, and sauorie, and best pleasing to regenerate persons, and to
such as have true sanctifying grace in their hearts? are those the things they
most desire and seek after, and take most delight and pleasure in, and the
things they best relish, and find most sweetness and savor in? Surely then it
is no hard matter for a man or woman to discern whether they be in the state
of regeneration or no: whether they be truly regenerate or no; a man or a woman
may easily descerne it, by the affection and savor they have in respect of
good things, as a man may easily discern the state of his body whether it be
in health or distempered by his taste. If his mouth be in good taste, and do
well relish good and wholesome meat and drink, he knows that his body is in
good temper: but if a man's mouth be out of taste, and good and wholesome meat
and drink is bitter and distasteful to him, and he cannot well relish them, he
knows by that, that some peccant and hurtful humor troubles his stomach, and
that his body is distempered: So in this case, if a man find good things sweet
and sauourie to him, and he does well relish them, he may thereby know, that
there is some grace in his heart; but if good things be distasteful to him, and
he finds not that sweetness that is to be found in them, he may thereby know
that his heart is not seasoned with sanctifying grace, but has a corrupt
humor, even the corruption of natute still abounding in it. And hereby try
thy self whosoever thou art: Do thou find things heavenly and spiritual
sweet, and sauourie, and best pleasing to thee? Is the Sabbath a delight to
thee? Do thou long for it before it come? Rejoice in it when it is come? Do
thou consecrate it as glorious to the Lord? Isai. 58.13. Do thou come to the
house of God, and to the public exercises of religion, with joy and with much
delight, and with cheerfulness as to a feast, as it is said, Psalm. 42.4? Is
it the joy of thine heart to be exercised in hearing the word, in prayer, in
singing of Psalms? And do thou think thy self never so well as when thou
art exercised in holy duties? Certainly then thou art regenetate, thou may
thereby discern that there is sanctifying grace in thine heart. But if so be
things heavenly and spiritual be harsh and unpleasant to thee, the Sabbath is
a burden to thee, holy exercises are irksome and tedious to thee, thou come
(indeed) to public holy exercises, but it is slackly, for form and fashion,
and in some sinister and by respect, and in attending on the word thou art
heavy and drousie, thou have no heart to good things, thou find no
sweetness in them, thou fauourest earthly things above things heavenly and
spiritual. Deceive not thy self, thou have no good evidence to thine own
soul that thou have any dram of sanctifying grace in thine own heart, thou
can take no comfort in thy state. I deny not but that Gods children and such
as are regenerate may savor the lawful delights of this life, and may taste
the sweetness that the Lord has put into his good creatures, as Isaac said to
his Son Esau, Genesis 27.4. Make me sauourie meat, such as I love. The Lord
gives to his children liberty to savor the sweetness of the good things of
this life, so as it be with moderation, and with thanksgiving: but if thou
would have good evidence to thy soul, that thou have true sanctifying grace
in thine heart, thou must look to this, that thou savor things heavenly and
spiritual, above earthly things, and above the good things of this life,
though they be never so sweet and comfortable: and especially look to thy
affection when thou have plenty and abundance of outward good things, for then
thou art in danger to have thine heart ensnared with a love and liking, and a
delight in those things above things heavenly and spiritual, and to have thine
heart to settle on the sweetness and comfort of those things, and to say with
the rich fool, Luke 12.19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime.

Thou will say:

I answer: continual meditation, as David said, Psalm. 119.97. and though thou
can not be always hearing, reading, or talking of the Gospel, and the sweet
promises of it, yet thou do continually meditate and think of them, and thy
thoughts run upon them; then thou do savor things heavenly and spiritual
above earthly things, though thou have abundance of them; and hereby try thy
self, and by this thou may discern thy self to be in the state of
regeneration: thou sauouring things heavenly and spiritual, and those things
being most sweet and best pleasing to thee, surely then thou art after the
Spirit, thou art regenerate, and have true sanctifying grace in thine heart,
and then thou may take comfort in thy state and condition, thou art in the
state of grace, and in the way of life and salvation. Come we now to the sixth
verse.

VERSE 6. For the wisdom of the flesh is death: but the wisdom of the
Spirit is life and peace.


IN this Verse our Apostle further shows, that there is a contrariety
between those that walk after the flesh and those that walk after the
Spirit, in respect of their ends; that their ends are contrary one to the
other, that the fruit and end of those that are after the flesh, and savor
the things of the flesh, and walk after the flesh, is death: yea that the
fruit and end of their wisdom is death; for so the Apostle delivers it, For
the wisdom of the flesh is death: but on the other side, that the fruit or
end of those that are after the Spirit, and savor the things of the Spirit,
and walk after the Spirit, is twofold, and both comfortable, namely, life and
peace. The wisdom of the flesh is death, but (says he) the wisdom of the
Spirit is life and peace. And so we have the general matter of this verse. I
will stand a while to clear the sense and meaning of the words of it. For the
wisdom of the flesh is death. The particle (for) is not here to be taken as a
note of a reason proving that which goes before, Interpretation.
but as implying an exhortation, as if the Apostle had subioyned, Let us not
savor the things of the flesh, for the wisdom of it is death; and so it is a
note of an argument dissuading from sauouring the things of the flesh. Wisdom
of the flesh. By flesh we are to understand the corruption of nature, or
corrupt nature, even the same which the Apostle means, Galat. 5.24. where he
says, They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh: that is, the corruption
of nature, or their corrupt nature. And the word here rendered wisdom, comes
from that word that is used verse before translated savor: which word (as I
showed) signifies to mind, or to affect, comprehending under it the actions and
operations of the mind, and of the will and affections: and so the original
word here used, signifies the act of the understanding and will, minding,
willing or affecting, and may be indifferently translated, wisdom, sense,
affection, desire: the new translators render it, to be minded. And verse 27.
the Apostle says, He that searches the hearts, knows the mind or meaning of
the spirit, or what the spirit wills: and the original word is there the
very same that here is used, (...). So that thus much is comprehended under the
word here used, as if the Apostle had said, The minding, meaning, the thoughts,
discourses, purposes, and counsels, the love and liking, the care, the desire
and delight, the study and best exercise of corrupt nature, the wisdom of it
is death, that is, is deadly, or causes death, or brings unto death, the
fruit or end of it is death. Now death being here put metonymically, by death
we are to understand death of body and death of soul, death temporal and
death eternal, even the wrath of God and everlasting destruction. But the
wisdom of the Spirit. These words stand in opposition to the wisdom of the
flesh, and the meaning of them is briefly this, The minding, meaning, the
thoughts, purposes, discourses, and counsels, the wisdom, the love and
liking, the care and desire of renewed nature, of nature renewed and sanctified
by the Spirit of grace, is life and peace: that is, it brings to life and
peace, the fruits or ends of it are life and peace. And by life, we are to
understand eternal life and salvation: and by peace, true peace and comfort of
conscience in this life, and eternal peace and comfort in the life to come.
But the wisdom of the Spirit. The minding and affecting of renewed and
sanctified nature, brings to eternal life and happiness: not as a
meritorious, but as causa sine qua non; as a means or a way which God has
ordained for his chosen to walk in to life and salvation, as Ephesians. 2.10. God
has ordained good works, that we should walk in them, as in a way leading to
eternal life and happiness. Thus then briefly conceive we the meaning of the
Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said.

The minding, the meaning, the thoughts, discourses, purposes, counsels, and in
a word, the study, and the best act and exercise of corrupt nature, the
wisdom of it is deadly and brings to death; the fruit and end of it is death
of body and death of soul, death temporal and death eternal, even the wrath
of God and everlasting perdition. And on the other side, the minding, willing,
and affecting, the study and exercise of renewed nature that as a way, brings
to eternal life and happiness, to true peace and comfort of conscience in
this life, and to eternal peace and everlasting comfort in the life to come.

Now thus understanding the words, observe we, that as the Apostle in the verse
before made an opposition and contrariety between such as be after the flesh
and such as be after the Spirit, in respect of their nature and dispositions;
here in this verse he makes an opposition between them in regard of their
ends, that their ends are contrary one to the other: that the end of those
that are after the flesh, and savor the things of the flesh, and follow the
guidance of the flesh, in the wisdom of the flesh, is death: and the fruit
and end of those that are after the Spirit, and follow the guidance of the
Spirit, in the wisdom of the Spirit, is life and peace.

The regenerate and unregenerate can not possibly meet together in their ends.
That the regenerate and unregenerate cannot possibly meet together in their
ends; such as are after the flesh, and savor the things of the flesh, and live
as they are led by the guidance and wisdom of the flesh, cannot look to come
to the same end with those that are after the Spirit, and savor the things of
the Spirit, and follow the guidance and wisdom of the Spirit, it is not
possible; the wisdom of the flesh brings to death, and the wisdom of the
Spirit that brings to life and peace. Romans 8.13.
And as the Apostle says verse 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye,
but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live. And
Galat. 6.8. Galat. 6.8.
he says, He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
The Apostle here uses an excellent comparison, he compares a carnal life to
seed sown, that as he that sowes nothing but cockle, or darnell, or tares,
cannot look for a croppe of wheat; so he that sowes nothing but the seeds of
a carnal and wicked life, cannot look to reap the harvest of eternal life:
as a man sows so shall he reap, and as he breweth, so shall he drink, and
every one shall eat the fruit of his own way, and be filled with his own
devices. Prou. 1.31. Prou. 1.31.


Now this I note in a word, A deceiving conceit of carnal persons discovered.
we shall hereafter speak of it more at large, to show that they deceive
themselves whosoever they be, that think though they be after the flesh, and
savor the things of the flesh, and live as they are led by the guidance of
their own carnal nature, yet they shall iumpe and meet and concur with the
godly, and with the children of God in their end, and shall come to the same
end with them. Many there be in the world who sooth themselves in this conceit,
that though they follow the flesh, and live according to the lusts of their
own hearts, and be as vile and as bad as the worst, yet they shall be saved as
well as the best: and though they be most opposite and contrary to Gods
children in the course of their lives, yet they shall meet with them in
heaven, and shall come to heaven as well as the best of them all. Poor souls,
they deceive themselves, it is all one as if a man that is going on the way
that leads to York, and keeps on that way, should think that he shall meet
with him that goes the road and ready way toward London, in the end of his
journey. What a madness were it for any so to think? Such is the folly and
madness of those that go on in the ways of the flesh, and follow after the
lusts of the flesh, and yet think that they shall in the end come to that life
and peace, and to that happiness and comfort that belongs to Gods children.
Poor souls, the devil blinds them; and this is one of the subtilties of
Satan, in good things he seuers the means from the end, he persuades a man
that he may come to the end though he never use the means, that a man may come
to life and salvation, though he never set foot in the way that leads
thither. Oh take heed of this subtlety, and this deceit of Satan, and take
notice of it whosoever thou art, that the regenerate and unregenerate cannot
possibly meet together in their ends: and know that if thou be after the
flesh, a carnal person, and savoring the things of the flesh, and followest
after the lusts of the flesh in respect of the profits and pleasures of the
world, thou art going on in the way that leads to destruction; and holding on
thy course in that way, thou can not possibly meet with the peace, and
comfort, and happiness that belongs to a child of God, either in this life or
in that life that is to come.

Now more particularly in the next place, in that the Apostle here says, That
the wisdom of the flesh is death, he points out what the best act of the
soul of a carnal man or woman, yea what the best act of corrupt nature brings
forth, and what it makes a man or a woman liable and subject to. And the point
hence is this.

The best act of the soul of a carnal person, is deadly and damnable.
the love, liking, yea the best act of the soul of a carnal man or woman,
even that which the world accounts his wisdom, is deadly, and it is damnable,
and it makes him liable to death and damnation, even for the best act of
corrupt nature. For the best act of the mind or will of a carnal man the Lord
might justly condemn him, and throw him to hell: his wisdom is deadly and
damnable, and makes him liable to death and damnation: for why, as the Lord
himself says, Genes. 6.5. Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are only evil continually.
And Genesis 8.21. Genesis 8.21.
he says, The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. And the
imaginations and thoughts of the heart of man being evil and sinful, out of
all question they are deadly and damnable. 2. Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 3.5.
the Apostle says, That of our selves we are not able to think a good
thought: and therefore all the thoughts men think by the strength of nature,
that is, of themselves, they are evil, and consequently deadly and damnable.
And it must needs be so, that the thoughts of corrupt nature, and the fruits of
the mind or will of carnal men are evil, and so deadly and damnable.

Because they come from a corrupt fountain; that is one

Again, every act of corrupt nature, even the best act of It is enmity against
God, Romans 8.7.
and therefore doubtless it is deadly and damnable.

Now then for the use of this, is it so that the thought, purpose, The
miserable state of carnal persons discovered.
and even the best act of the soul of a carnal man, his wisdom is deadly
and damnable, and makes him liable to death and damnation? surely then we must
needs conceive the state of a carnal man or woman to be a miserable state and
condition: a carnal person cannot bend his mind to think of any thing, but
that very thought of his makes him liable to the wrath of God: and what a
miserable state and condition is that? Ignorant persons commonly bless
themselves in their good minds, and good meanings, and think themselves in
good case, in that (as they conceive) they have in them good minds and good
meanings, Poor souls they deceive themselves, their minds and meanings which
they conceive to be good (they being in their natural blindness and
ignorance) are but minds and meanings of the flesh, and they are deadly and
damnable: yea the best thought of civil honest persons, of such as be only
ciuilly honest, what are they? surely thoughts of corrupt nature: for they have
no dram of sanctifying grace in them, they have only restraining grace, and
so their thoughts are but thoughts of the flesh, and they are deadly and
damnable. Oh then content not thy self, whosoever thou art, with civil
honesty, and think that that will bring thee to life and salvation: no, no, so
long as thou art in that state, thy best thoughts are but thoughts of corrupt
nature, and thy wisdom is but wisdom of the flesh, it is deadly and
damnable, and makes thee liable to the wrath of God, and to everlasting
perdition: and if thou have no better ground of comfort, thou art in a
miserable state and condition.

The evil thoughts of carnal persons are most deadly and damnable.
even their wisdom is deadly and damnable: what then are their thoughts that
are evil and sinful for the matter of them? their thoughts of pride, of
filthiness, their idle, vain, and foolish thoughts, yea their thoughts
plotting and devising of evil against Gods people and children? Surely those
must needs be most deadly and damnable, and those make them liable to the most
fierce wrath of God. wicked and carnal persons think they are wise, and that
they deal wisely, as Pharaoh and his Counsel thought, Exodus 1.10. Exodus 1.10.
When they are plotting and deui^ing evil and mischief against the people and
the children of God; but alas their cunning deceiues them, their wisdom is
but the wisdom of the flesh, it is most deadly and damnable. Achitophel was
cunning to plot and devise mischief against David, 2. Sam. 17.1.2. 2. Sam.
17.1.2.
but his plot was the occasion of his own ruin, 2. Sam. 17.23.
it brought his own neck to the halter, and that by his own hands, verse 23.
The devil is more cunning then all the world, to devise and work mischief
against Gods people, and yet as one says well, he is the most foolish creature
that ever God made, he works the increase of his own woe. And so those
instruments of the devil are no better: for they that are cunning to plot and
contriue mischief against the people of God, they are the veriest fools in
the world, they do but work their own woe and sorrow, they twist a whip for
their own backs, though they think not so; and they are but as rods in the
hand of the Lord to whip and scourge his children for a time, for their good;
and when they have accomplished the Lords will, he will throw them into the
fire of his vengeance. Isay 10.12.

Now further, is it so that the best act and exercise of the Carnal persons
have no cause to pride themselves in the pregnancie of their wit and deep
reaching heads.
and the best thought, purpose, device, and counsel of corrupt nature, is
deadly and damnable? surely then carnal persons have no cause to swell, and to
be lift up (as commonly they are) in a conceit of their wit, and of their
understanding, and to pride themselves in the pregnancy of their wit, and in
their reaching heads, or the like. Alas, their pregnancy of wit, and their
deep reaching heads, are but instruments and means of their greater woe and
sorrow, so long as they continue in their carnal state and in their natural
condition. Indeed I confess that dexterity, and pregnancy of wit, and
excellency of understanding, and wisdom, are good gifts of God, and they are
excellent things in themselves; but if they be left to be as they are in
themselves, and be merely natural, and not sanctified, they are most
dangerous, they carry men to a fearful height of wickedness, and of
impiety and sin, and so to their own fearful ruin and destruction. If
then God have given thee an excellent wit, and other excellent parts and gifts
of mind, be not proud or highly conceited of them, but labor thou to have them
sanctified; for certainly if they be not sanctified, they are most dangerous
and hurtful to thine own soul: yea the more pregnant thy wit is, the more
excellent the gifts of thy mind are, the fitter instruments are they for Satan
to work by, even thine own woe and thine own everlasting destruction. Thy
wit, and thy wisdom not sanctified, are but as a sword or a knife in a mad
man's hand, fit to hurt thy self withal, and fit to give a deadly blow to
thine own soul. Wit and wisdom not sanctified, are but wit and wisdom of
the flesh, they are deadly and damnable. If God have given thee a ripe and a
ready wit, and other excellent parts and gifts of nature, be not proud of
them, thou have no cause so to be, but rather look thou more carefully to thy
self, thou art in danger to be carried with greater violence to thine own
destruction; and thou art to examine thy wittiest thoughts and thy best
devises, if they came from the flesh they are deadly and damnable, and thou
have cause to be humbled for them.

Wisdom is twofold, carnal, spiritual.

we may note in a word, (it is not properly intended in this place,) but hence
we may note in a word; that there is a twofold wisdom, there is carnal
wisdom, though indeed it deserves not the name of wisdom, it is rather to
have the name of craft and subtilty, and carnal and unregenerate persons are
usually termed fools in the book of God: yet it is so accounted, and being so
esteemed, we may say there is a twofold wisdom, there is a carnal wisdom,
and there is a spiritual wisdom. Some men have in them the wisdom of the
flesh, and they are wise after the flesh, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 1.26.
1. Cor. 1.26.
and some have in them the wisdom of the Spirit; and they are wise to
salvation, as 2. Tim. 3.15. 2. Tim. 3.15.
Carnal persons are carnally wise, and such as be regenerate are spiritually
wise, and indeed they only are truly wise: and there is a direct opposition
between the wisdom of the one and the wisdom of the other, and they judge
each other to be fools. Such as are carnally wise, they hold them that are
spiritually wise to be fools: and such as are spiritually wise, they hold, and
that according to truth, that the wisdom of carnal persons is but mere
folly. No marvel then though carnal persons do so disdain the holy course of
Gods children, and think so basely of it as commonly they do; and that they
esteem of Gods children as fools, and stick not to term and to call them
fools, and to say they are precise fools: as Michal said of David. 2. Sam.
6.20. when he danced before the Lord, that he was but a fool or vain fellow.
For why, carnal persons, such as are wise after the flesh, they judge of Gods
children by their fleshly wisdom, and that tells them they are but silly
fools, and that they have no wit nor wisdom in them: but on the other side,
Gods children being guided by the light of true wisdom, by the wisdom of
the Spirit, are able to wind and turn them, and to look into their very
inwards: and they see and discern that there is no dram of true wisdom in
carnal persons: howsoever they be renowned and magnified for their wisdom in
the world, and held to be jolly wise men, yet Gods children discern them to be
but stark fools. And though carnal persons bless themselves in their
course, in that they are wise for the world, and for worldly matters, and they
take a course to thrive in the world, and hold the course of Gods children to
be folly and midnesse, and no thriuing course, yet Gods children in the
wisdom of the Spirit, see and discern them to be in a miserable state and
condition, and they would not change states with them for all the world. And so
stands the case between such as are carnally wise, and such as have in them
the wisdom of the Spirit. Now touching the wisdom of the Spirit, the
Apostle here opposes that to the wisdom of the flesh, and he says: that the
fruits of that are life, and peace. Where first we are given to understand
thus much.

That the wisdom of the Spirit, or spiritual wisdom, The wisdom of
renewed nature is saving wisdom, and as a way it brings in the end to
eternal life and salvation.
it is a wisdom to salvation, it leads, and in the end it brings to eternal
life and salvation: and the act and exercise of the mind and will renewed and
truly sanctified, it is saving and comfortable. Or thus conceive we the point.

The thought, affection, desire, study, and endeavor, of and after holiness,
of and after things heavenly and spiritual, things that pertain to life and
godliness, it leads them that are truly regenerate, and truly sanctified, to
life and salvation in the end: it shall certainly (not as a meritorious cause,
but as a way) bring them to eternal life and happiness in heaven: their
minding and affecting good things, their study and their endeavor after
holiness, shall undoubtedly at length bring them to the eternal salvation of
their souls and bodies in the kingdom of heaven. And to this purpose is that
of the Apostle, Galat. 6.8. Galat. 6.8.
He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. He
that has the Spirit, and is truly sanctified, and sowes to the Spirit, that
is, studies and endeavors to mortify the lusts of the flesh, and studies and
endeavors after heaven, even to sow the seeds of holiness, both in heart and
life, shall in the end reap the fruit and harvest of everlasting life. 2.
Tim. 4.7. 2. Tim. 4.7.
the Apostle says of himself, I have fought the good fight, I have finished
my course: I have kept the faith. As if he had said, I have minded and affected
things heavenly and spiritual, I have studied and endeavored after holiness,
and I have kept a constant course in holiness, and in doing the duties of my
calling, and now I have finished my course: and then he subioynes, verse 8.
Verse 8.
Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day: I know my course shall end in
happiness and glory in heaven. And he makes it general: And not only for me,
but unto all them also that love his appearing: even for all that study and
endeavor to keep faith and a good conscience, and therein hold on in a
constant course, waiting for the appearing of Christ to judgment, for them
also is laid up the crown of righteousness. Romans 2.6, 7. Romans 2.6.7.
the Apostle says, that At the day of the just judgment of God, the Lord will
render to every one according to his works: And to them that continue in well
doing: to them that mind, and affect, and study, and endeavor after holiness,
He will give glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life. Ier. 6.16.
Ierem. 6.16. says the Lord by the Prophet, Seek for the old and good way,
and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls: and it shall lead
and bring you to everlasting rest. And to these we might add other testimonies
of Scripture confirming this truth: that the minding and affecting, loving and
liking of things heavenly and spiritual, and the study and endeavor after
holiness, it leads Gods children, and them that are truly sanctified, to life
and salvation, and shall undoubtedly, as a way, bring them to eternal life and
happiness in heaven. The fruit and end of their spiritual wisdom, shall be
at length the salvation of their souls and bodies in the kingdom of heaven:
and the reasons and grounds of it are these.

First, the minding, and affecting, loving, and liking of Receiving the end of
your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Again, it stands with the justice of God to give to his

Now then, first this may serve to stop the mouths of wicked The calumny of
wicked persons against the study, care, and endeavor of Gods children after
holiness, answered.
that are commonly opened against Gods children, to cavil against them in
respect of their minding and affecting of things heavenly, and their care and
endeavor after holiness. Wicked persons seeing Gods children to be afflicted,
and crossed, and not to thrive in the world, they open their mouths against
their holy course, in this or the like manner: Oh (say they) what get you by
your study and endeavor after holiness? What are you better for it? Do not
you see you are hated and contemned in the world, and that you forgo many
pleasures and profits that others enjoy, and that you might enjoy if you would
but do as others do. Alas (say they) these holy brethren, and these holy
sisters (for so they speak in scorn of Gods children) they thrive not in the
world, they are but fillie simple fools, and the like. Thus commonly the
mouths of wicked persons are opened against Gods children, in that they mind,
and affect, and study, and endeavor after holiness. Now the doctrine
delivered puts an answer into the mouths of Gods children to this cavil of
wicked persons; they may tell them, and that truly, their minding, and
affecting, their study and endeavoring after holiness, their spiritual
wisdom does much advantage them, and they gain much by it. For why, it
brings them much peace and comfort in this life, and gain by it assurance of
Gods special love: and it shall certainly end in the eternal salvation of
their souls in the kingdom of heaven. And is that no gain? Can they then be
said to get no good by their minding and affecting of heavenly things? Oh the
gain of it is unspeakable: Godliness is great gain. 1. Tim. 6.6. 1. Tim. 6.6.
It is profitable, and it has the promise of the life present, and of that
that is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8. 1. Tim. 4.8.


A ground of comfort to all Gods children.
it may cheer up their fainting hearts in time of their greatest afflictions.
For what though they be much troubled, and molested, and tossed up and down in
the world, they are hated, contemned, slandered, and reproched, and many ways
hardly dealt withal at the hands of the wicked: yet let them consider, that
the end will be comfortable, and that at length all tears shall be wiped away
from their eyes, and their minding and affecting of good things, their study
and endeavor after holiness, shall certainly end in the everlasting salvation
of their souls and bodies in the kingdom of heaven: and howsoever this life
of theirs, be full of troubles and afflictions, yet the end will be peace and
much comfort, and that will hold up their fainting hearts. When therefore thou
that art a child of God art in any trouble or distress, look up to the
eternal weight of glory that is laid up for thee in heaven, that will cheer
up thine heart, and make thee as Christ Jesus did, Heb. 12.2. Heb. 12.2.
Endure the cross and despise the shame, and to run the race that is set
before thee with patience and comfort. Come we now to that which the Apostle
here adds as another end and fruit of spiritual wisdom, namely, when he
says, The wisdom of the Spirit is life and peace. Hence then in the next
place we are given to understand.

That the wisdom of the Spirit or spiritual wisdom is Spiritual wisdom
brings true peace and true comfort in this life and in the life to come.
the minding and affecting of things heavenly and spiritual, the study and
endeavor after holiness, it yields and brings to Gods children true peace and
comfort of conscience in this life, and as a way it leads them to eternal
peace and comfort in the life to come. Gods children being spiritually wise,
they minding and affecting things heavenly and spiritual, they studying and
endeavoring after holiness; that wisdom, and that study, care, and
endeavor of theirs, yields them matter of true joy, and of true rejoicing, and
it yields them true peace and heavenly comfort, even such peace and such
comfort as the world is not acquainted withal. And hence it is that S^lomon
says, Prou. 3.17. That the ways of spiritual wisdom are ways of pleasure,
and all her paths prosperity: her ways are pleasant and comfortable, peace
and prosperity. And Pro. 8.11. he says, That wisdom is better then precious
stones, and all pleasures are not to be compared unto her; she yields such joy
and such comfort as all the pleasures in the world cannot yield. 2. Cor. 1.12.
says the Apolste, Our rejoicing is in the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world and most of all to you-wards.
As if he had said, this is it that fills our hearts full of joy, and full of
rejoicing, that our own hearts testify and witness with us, that we have not
been wise after the flesh, not carried our selves by the rule of carnal
wisdom; but that we have been guided by the wisdom of the Spirit, and
following that guide we have studied and endeavored after holiness, and we
have had our conversation in simplicity and godly pureness, and that now
yields to us matter of true joy, and of true rejoicing, and that yields to us
true peace and heavenly comfort. Galat. 6.14. Galat. 6.14
the Apostle having commended his rejoicing in the cross of Christ, whereby
the world was crucified unto him, and he unto the world, and the study and
endeavor after piety and holiness, in becoming a new creature, he subioynes,
verse 16. As many as walk according to that rule, peace should be upon them
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God: they shall be sure to find true peace
and heavenly comfort. And he makes it general: Peace shall be upon them and
mercy, and on the Israel of God: even on all true hearted Israelites, on all
that truly fear God, and are spiritually wise, and in truth and soundness
study and endeavor after holiness. These and many other testimonies make this
a clear point, and confirm it, That Gods children being spiritually wise,
they minding and affecting things heavenly and spiritual, and they studying
and endeavoring after holiness; that wisdom, that study, and care, and
endeavor of theirs, it yields them true peace and quietness of mind and
conscience, and true joy, and heavenly comfort. And the reasons of this truth
are these:



them, and that they being justified by faith, have peace toward God, Romans
5.1. Yea it gives them assurance that they have right and title to that peace
Christ left to his, and gives to his, as Ioh. 14.27 Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give you: let not your heart be troubled nor fear. And therefore this
we may set down as a certain truth; that Gods children being spiritually
wise, they minding and affecting things spiritual, they studying and
endeavoring after holiness; that wisdom, and that study, and care, and
endeavor of theirs, it yields them true peace, and quietness of mind and
conscience, and true joy, and heavenly comfort.

This first discouers to us, that the world is deceived in The conceit of the
world touching the life of Gods children, taxed.
and such as truly fear the Lord. For what is the common conceit of the world
touching the life of Gods children? how do wicked persons judge of it? Surely
thus, they judge and they deem the life of Gods children, to be a life without
joy, and a life without comfort, an heavy lumpish life, and that there is no
joy nor mirth in them that truly fear God, and in them that are truly
religious: yea they think the life of Gods children is a life full of
bitterness, and full of discomfort. Poor souls, they are deceived, the life
of Gods children is full of sweetness, and full of heavenly comfort. Alas, the
world is blind, and cannot see the joy, and peace, and comfort, that a child of
God finds in his study, care, and sound endeavor after holiness; the world is
not acquainted with it, and therefore it deemeth the life of the children of
God to be an heavy, lumpish, and uncomfortable life: but indeed Gods children
minding and affecting things heavenly and spiritual, and studying, and
endeavoring after holiness, that mind, and that study, and that care and
endeavor of theirs, yields them such sweetness, and such peace, and comfort,
as they would not part withal for ten thousand worlds; it seals up to them
assurance of Gods special love and favor, it yields them quietness, and
peace of mind and conscience: which as Solomon says, Prou. 15.15. Is as a
con^inuall feast. Gods children and such as fear God, pass their time as
cheerfully, and as comfortably, as if they were ever feeding upon dainties and
delicates without satietie, and therefore the world is deceived, that think
the life of Gods children a life without joy and without comfort.

What we must do if we tender our own true peace, and our own true comfort.
their minding and affecting of things heavenly and spiritual, their study,
care, and endeavor after holiness, yields them true peace, and quietness of
mind and conscience, and true joy, and heavenly comfort? then we must learn
this lesson, as we tender our own true peace, and our own true comfort, we
must mind and affect things heavenly and spiritual, we must study and
endeavor, and labor after holiness. And as we desire the continuance of our
peace, and would not have our peace broken off, so we must be constant in
minding and affecting things heavenly and spiritual. Do thou, whosoever thou
art, desire to have thy life full of peace, and full of joy, and of sweet and
heavenly comfort? then do thou mind and affect things heavenly and spiritual,
and do thou study and endeavor, and labor after holiness. The more thou do
mind and affect such things, the more thou do study and endeavor after
holiness, the more true peace, and the more true joy and comfort thou shall
find; and as thou do daily add to the measure of thy holiness, so
certainly thou do add to the measure of thy peace and comfort, both in this
life and in the life to come, and the greater shall be thy joy, and comfort,
and glory in heaven. Thy minding and affecting of things heavenly and
spiritual, thy study and endeavor after holiness, shall yield thee such joy,
and such comfort, as all the world cannot take from thee, no not all the devils
in hell, as Ioh. 16.22. Ioh. 16.22.
Your joy shall no man take from you. But here happily the poor Christian soul,
the soul that is troubled and disquieted with many doubts and fears, will be
ready to say,

A doubt.
Alas, I study, and I endeavor, and I labor and strive after holiness, but as
yet I find not that peace and quietness of mind and conscience, and that
sweet comfort you speak of, but I am still full of doubts, and fears, and
terrors; and who more exercised with inward terrors then I? If it be so that
the spiritual wisdom of Gods children, their study and endeavor after
holiness, yields them true peace and quietness of conscience, and true joy,
and heavenly comfort, what may I think of my self? I doubt whether I be a
child of God or no, for I find as yet no such matter.

I answer thee whosoever thou art: The Lord is most wise, Note.
and he knows that the hearts of his chosen are better settled in peace and
comfort, after they have been exercised with doubts, and fears, and terrors,
and by his wonderful working he makes their inward troubles as preparatiues to
their greater comforts: as a man that is about to build, the higher he intends
to raise his building, the deeper he lays his foundation: so the Lord humbles
them lowest, with doubts, fears, and terrors, and digs the deepest into their
souls, to whom he purposes to communicate the greatest measure of comfort.
And therefore cheer up thy self, and still go on in laboring and striving
after holiness, and assuredly at length abundance of peace, and joy, and
comfort, will come. Ioh. 16.22. Thou may be in heaviness for a time, but joy
will come. And as 2. Cor. 3.5. As thy sufferings abound, so shall thy
consolations abound through Christ. Think on that to thy comfort.

One thing note we further: the Apostle here does appropriate peace to the
wisdom of the Spirit; he makes true peace and sound comfort the proper fruit
of spiritual wisdom, yea a fruit that comes only from that root. And the
point hence is this.

That only the godly and spiritually wife, Only the godly and truly religious
are partakers of true peace and of sound comforts.
only the truly religious, and such as truly fear the Lord, are partakers of
true peace and sound comfort: the wicked, the carnal and worldly wise, have no
part nor portion in true peace, and in sound comfort: it is the speech of God
himself, put down Isai. 57.21. There is no peace says my God to the wicked.
Indeed the wicked, carnal, and worldly wise, have their own carnal
security, and they bless themselves in their own hearts, when the word of
God does curse them: and they many times frame to themselves false conclusions
of peace and comfort, but true peace and sound comfort they have none: that is
found only in them that are truly religious, and in them that truly fear the
Lord, they only are partakers of it. For why, joy and peace, as the Apostle
witnesses, Galat. 5.21. and they only are within the covenant of peace the
Lord speaks of Isai. 14.10. And therefore this we are to hold as a certain
truth, that only the godly wise, only the truly religious, and such as truly
fear the Lord, are partakers of true peace and of sound comfort.

They are deceived who think to find true peace and sound comfort being not
truly religious.
And therefore deceive not thy self whosoever thou art, do not thou imagine,
that thou shall find true peace and sound comfort in any thing but only in
this, that thou art a man or woman truly religious, and that thou art one truly
fearing God. Art thou an ignorant person, an impenitent person, yea art thou a
civil honest person, and do thou bless thy self in thine own heart, and
promise to thy self true peace and sound comfort? Poor soul, it is but the
deceit of thine own heart, thine own heart deceiues thee, and thou concludest
thy peace on a false ground: and think not that I judge too hardly, (as some
stick not to say: Oh I judge too hardly of them, and I give them cold
comfort:) Alas, I judge no man, it is the word of God that does judge thee, and
by that thou shall be judged at the day of the appearance of the Lord Jesus:
and I dare not promise thee peace and comfort on a false ground, I should then
be a false Prophet unto thee: but on the evidence of the word of God I dare be
bold to tell thee, that it is as possible for thorns to bear grapes, or figs
to grow on thistles, as for ignorance, impenitencie, or civil honesty, to
bring forth true peace and sound comfort, and therefore deceive not thy self.
Indeed thou that art ignorant, or impenitent, or ciuilly honest, may think
thou have true peace and sound comfort, thy conscience being benumbed and
asleep, but thy peace is but a carnal security; and if thou go on in that
course, thy security will end in a fearful wakening, and thou shall one day
find thy self in a fearful condition. Oh then take heed whosoever thou art,
that thou conclude not peace to thine own soul on any other ground but only
on this, that thou art truly religious, and one truly fearing God; and that
thou have not only the form of religion, but the power and life of it in
thine own heart and soul. If thou find that in thee, thou shall then have
peace in thy greatest trouble and affliction, and in thy greatest distress,
yea when the pangs of death are on thee. Ioh. 16.33. Ioh. 16.33.
says Christ: In the world ye shall find affliction, but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world. Come we now to the seventh verse.

VERSE 7. Because the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God: for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.


IN the first words of this Verse our Apostle confirms and strengthens that he
puts down in the verse before touching the wisdom of the flesh. He affirms
verse 6. that the wisdom of the flesh is death, or deadly and damnable; and
here he confirms it by this, that it is in flat opposition to God, yea that it
is enimitie against God. The wisdom of the flesh is death, because (says he)
it is enimitie against God. And that he might not seem to charge this on the
wisdom of the flesh unjustly, and to lay this foul blot on it without cause
or ground, he further proves it so to be. He proves the wisdom of the flesh
to be enimitie against God, from the nature and proper quality of an enemy:
as namely, that it is thus qualified, that it is stiff, and stubburne, and
rebellious against God; which is delivered in the proof of it, that it does
not bow and bend to the will of God, it is not subject to his Law: for says
the Apostle, Romans 8.8.
It is not subject to the Law of God. And he further amplifies that rebellion
of the wisdom of the flesh, by denying all power to it to be subject to Gods
Law: he says, it cannot be subject, it has no power in it self of being
subject to it: affirming that as a certain truth, he says, It is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. And then on these grounds he inferres
this corrolarie or conclusion, verse 8. that therefore they that are in the
flesh cannot please God. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

But to keep within compass of the seventh verse, we see the general matter
of it, containing in it a confirmation of that which the Apostle affirms of
the wisdom of the flesh, that it is deadly, because it is enimitie against
God; together with the ground and proof of that: because it is not subject to
the Law of God, amplified by a certain and undoubted impossibility in it
self to be subject.

Interpretation.
Let us now examine the words of this verse, touching the sense and meaning of
them. Because the wisdom of the flesh. What is meant by wisdom of the
flesh, or carnal mind, as it is in the new translation, we showed in the verse
before: namely, the minding and affecting of corrupt nature: for the original
word (...) comprehends under it the act and exercise both of the mind and of
the will. And by the word Flesh, is not only meant the inferior parts of the
soul, as the Papists expound it, but als^ reason, and understanding, and will:
for there is fleshlinesse in the mind, as Coloss. 2.18. Rashly puffed up with his
fleshly mind. And Gal. 5.20. the Apostle reckons up heresy, which is an error
in the mind held with obstinacy, among the works of the flesh. So that by the
wisdom of the flesh (as before we did expound it) we are to understand the
meaning, thought, discourse, set purpose, counsel, love, liking, care, desire,
delight, study, the best act and exercise of corrupt nature, the wisdom of
it is enimitie against God. The Apostle here speaks very emphatically, he
uses a word of great force and vehemency, he speaks in the abstract: he
says not, (...).
The wisdom of the flesh is an enemy, but it is enimitie against God,
thereby signifying that it is extremely hostile, opposite, and contrary to God
and to all goodness, and it is carried against the very nature of God, so as
if it could, it would take away the very being of God: yea that it is carried
against God and all goodness, with an unreconcilable hatred and opposition:
for an enemy may be reconciled, as Esau was to Jacob, but enimitie can never
be reconciled; enimitie and amity can never be at one. And therefore the
Apostle affirming this of the wisdom of the flesh, that it is enimitie
against God, he would have us to know, that there can be no friendship between
it and God, nor any agreement between it and goodness, but that there is an
unreconcilable hatred and opposition between them. For it is not subject to
the Law of God. By the Law of God, we are to understand the moral Law of God,
for the will of God revealed in his word touching all moral duties, touching
all duties of piety toward God, and touching duties of love, mercy, equity,
and justice toward men. And the word here rendered subject, signifies an
orderly subjection, subject according unto order. It is the same that is used,
Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: or it signifies
submitting of the neck to the yoke. And the Apostle saying, the wisdom of
the flesh is not subject, his meaning is, it yields not to it orderly
subjection, it may happily hit on a good duty commanded in the Law of God, but
it does it not orderly: yea the less is spoken, and the more signified, it
pulls as it were the neck from under that yoke, and it does rebel and rise up
against that Law; it understands, loves, and likes, and it does things that the
Law of God forbids, and it hates and auoyds the things that the Law of God
commands. Neither indeed can be: or thus, for indeed it cannot be. That is, the
wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the Law of God: it has no power nor
ability in it self to yield obedience to Gods Law. Nay so long as it is the
wisdom of the flesh, it cannot but rebel against the Law of God, according
to that, Genes. 6.5. All the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are
only evil continually: and that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural
man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he know them. He neither does know them, neither has he
known them. Thus then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the
words of this verse, as if the Apostle had said:

Because the mind, meaning, thought, discourse, counsel, love, liking, care,
desire, delight, study, best act and exercise of corrupt nature, the wisdom
of it is directly and extremely opposite and contrary to God and to all
goodness, and is carried against God and all goodness, with an
unreconcilable hatred and opposition. For why, it yields not to the Law of
God, or will of God revealed in his word any orderly subjection. No it puts as
it were the very neck from the yoke: yea it does rebel and rise up against
the Law of God; it understands, it loves, likes, and it does things that the
Law of God forbids: and it hates and auoyds the things the Law of God commands;
for indeed it has no power, no ability in it self to yield obedience to the
Law of God: nay so long as it remains to be the wisdom of the flesh, it
cannot but rebel against the Law of God.

Now here first mark we the Apostles reason, by which he proves the wisdom
of the flesh to be deadly and damnable: he proves it to be deadly and damnable
by this, that it is enimitie against God. He reasons thus. The wisdom of the
flesh is enimitie against God, therefore deadly and damnable. Now the ground of
this reasoning yields to us thus much,

Enimitie to God or against God is deadly and damnable.
That enimitie to God, or against God, is deadly and damnable. That which is
enimitie against God, or in opposition to God, it leads to destruction, and
the Lord will assuredly bring destruction on every thing that stands up against
him, and does oppose him: whatsoever it is, whether person or thing that stands
in opposition to God, the Lord will certainly bring it to naught, and he will
bring confusion on it: for why,

The Lord is a God of infinite power, nothing is able to Isai. 43.13.
and nothing is hard to him, Ierem. 32.17. Ier. 32.17.
He is able to do whatsoever he will. Psalm. 115.3. Psalm. 115.3.
Nothing in heaven, or earth, or hell, not all the powers of men or Angels,
good or bad, can withstand his power.

Again, the Lord is a God of infinite holiness and purity, Hab. 1.13.
says the Prophet, Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil, thou can
not behold wickedness: thou can not look on sin with approbation: no, it
stands with his justice to punish it. The Lord is stirred up to anger and wrath
against sin, and against every thing that is opposite and contrary to his
most holy and pure nature, and as the Prophet says, Nahum 1.6. Nahum. 1.6.
Who can stand before his wrath, or who can abide in the fierceness of his
wrath? none is able to stand against it. Yea further it stands with the glory
of God, to bring destruction on every thing that stands up against him. Iam.
4.6. Iam. 4.6.
the Apostle says, God resists the proud: the word signifies, (...).
sets himself in battle array, and takes up arms against the proud, and so
against every thing that does oppose him. And it were dishonorable to the
Lord, to lay down his weapons before he have conquered and subdued his
enemies, and those things or persons that oppose him. And therefore on these
grounds we may set down this as a certain truth: that whatsoever is enimitie
against God, or in opposition to God, it is deadly, and it leads to
destruction: and the Lord will certainly bring destruction and confusion on
that thing, or person, that stands up in opposition against him.

Now then this may serve as a ground to prove, that every Every sin be it
never so small is deadly and damnable.
every sin, be it never so small, is a transgression of Gods Law, it is
against the very majesty of God, and therefore deadly and damnable. And it is
an idle and foolish distinction of the Papists, that some sins are venial,
and some mortal, that is, as they hold, that some sins are in their own
nature venial, such as are only beside the Law of God, not against it, and
such as may be taken away by a temporary punishment. There is no sin, but it
is against the Law of God, and against the infinite majesty of God, and it
deserves proportionable punishment, even the wrath of God and everlasting
perdition. I leave them.

The miserable state of unrepentant sinners discovered.
and the Lord will certainly bring confusion on that thing, or person, that
stands up against him? Oh then he^eby take we notice of the miserable and
fearful state and condition of unrepentant sinners. Every unrepentant sinner
lives in a state of life that is enimitie with God, he is an enemy to God, and
he has God an enemy to him, he is at defiance with God, and at open war
with God: he can look for nothing, but that the Lord should deal with him as
with his professed enemy, even come down in judgment on him, hew him in
pieces, and give him his portion with the devils in hell. Oh that wicked and
graceless persons, such as live in their sins, had but hearts to consider
this. Consider it whosoever thou art, thou that art a drunkard, a swearer, a
filthy person, and thou that hold on a course in evil and sin, thou
live in that state of life that is enimitie with God, and thou being at
enimitie with God, all the creatures of God are armed against thee, all the
judgments of God do attend thee, and thou lie open to all the plagues and
judgments in the world, and to eternal woe and confusion in the world to
come. Thou can not speak to God, but as to an angry Judge, clothed with
justice and judgment against thee, thou can not hear him speaking to thee,
but in his voice of threatening and denouncing judgment against thee: and
think not as many do, that it will serve thy turn, to say God is merciful: I
dare be bold to tell thee, God has no mercy for thee so long as thou live in
thy sins. Mark what is said, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Deuteronomy 29.19.20.
If any bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I
walk according to the stubburnnesse of mine own heart, thus adding
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every
curse that is written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall
put out his name from under heaven. Oh consider this thou that forgettest the
power of God, the justice of God, the truth of God: even this truth of his,
that thou living in thy sins, thou art at enimitie with God, and being at
enimitie with him, thou art in a damnable state, thou art as dry stubble
before the fire of his vengeance, and there is but a step between thee and
hell. Think on this, and if hell have not taken full possession of thy soul,
let it stir thee up to bethink thy self of speedy reformation: humble thy
soul, and make thy peace with the Lord, there is no standing out with him.

Last of all, is it so that whatsoever is enimity against God, A terror to all
unrepentant sinners, and especially to those that do oppose the word and truth
of God, and the sound profession of his truth.
and that the Lord will certainly bring destruction on that thing or person
that stands up in opposition to him? then as this may strike a terror into all
unrepentant sinners, so in particular into such as are guilty of that sin of
opposing the word and truth of God, and the sincere profession of his truth,
and the true professors of it. For what do they that oppose the word and truth
of God, and the sincere professors of it? Surely they fight against God, as
Gamaliel said, Act. 5.39. Act. 5 39.
If the profession of truth be of God, as certainly it is, it is divine, it is
heavenly, and of God: then they that oppose it cannot destroy it, they fight
against God. And consider it whosoever thou art, that do set thy self
against Gods children and such as sincerely profess the Gospel, thou do but
therein fight against God, and so doing thou do but strike and spurn against
thorns, thou medlest with one that is more then thy match, with one stronger
then thou, yea with one that is able with the breath of his mouth to blow thee
down to hell, and to bring confusion on thee. Isay. 45.9. Woe to him that
strives with his maker. It is worth the marking which Zeresh Hamans wife and
his friends say to him. Hest. 6.13. Hest. 6.13.
say they, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun
to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.
Alas, what was Mordecai, and what Haman? Mordecai a poor captive, and Haman a
mighty man and of great place, and yet Zeresh and his friends tell him, If
Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou
shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him. So certainly
if those thou do set thy self against be the children of God, begotten of
the immortal seed of his word, thou shall never prevail against them, thou
do but fight against the Lord, and he will bring thy plots and devices to
naught; yea if thou go on in that course, opposing his truth, and setting thy
self against his children, he will bring confusion on thee. Consider this
whosoever thou art that do oppose and set thy self against Gods children,
thou do therein fight against God, thou ioynest hands with the devil; and
going on in that course, thou do but work thine own woe, and bring confusion
on thy self; the Lord will stand up for the defense of his children, and
stir up himself as a man of war against thee, Isay 42.13. and he will have
the victory: though thou take away the lives of his children, thou shall not
prevail to their hurt, but thou shall bring woe and confusion to thy self. And
this may be a great comfort to Gods children, to consider that the Lord is an
enemy to their enemies, and to those that oppose them: they may be sure their
enemies shall never prevail against them to their hurt, but in opposing them,
they fight against God, and the Lord will bring confusion on them. Let this be
thought on, to the terror of all the enemies of Gods Church and children, and
to the comfort of all such as are the children of God.

In the next place, in that the Apostle says, The wisdom of the flesh, or
carnal mind, the mind of the flesh is enimitie against God: note we thus much.

in his natural state and condition, The very mind, reason, understanding and
will of man in his natural condition, in the best act and exercise of them,
are contrary to God and to all goodness.
in the best act and exercise of them, are opposite and contrary to God and to
all goodness, not only in the appetite and the senses, the inferior parts of
the soul, but the most noble parts of the soul being yet in the natural
state and condition, even reason, mind, and will, are carried in a course
contrary to God and to all goodness. And the best inclination and motion of
the mind or will of a natural man or woman, it is in flat opposition to God
and to all goodness. And to this purpose is that, Genesis 6.5. Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are only evil continually.
Where by heart is meant the understanding power of the soul, whereby man uses
reason, as Matthew. 15.19. Mat. 15.19.
Out of the heart come evil thoughts: so the whole frame and disposition, or
the whole act and exercise of the natural understanding is only evil
continually. And hence it is that the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, Ephesians.
4.23. Ephesians. 4.23.
To be renewed in the spirit of their mind: that is, in the purest part of
their souls; and he grounds his exhortation on a description of their
conversation before their conversion and renouation, verse 17. 18. That then
they walked as other Gentiles did, Ephesians. 4.17. (...). and verse. 18. (...).
in the vanity of mind, and darkness of cogitation: where we have both (...),
and (...), both mind, and discourse of mind, the one vain, and the other dark
and blind; so that indeed not only the appetite and senses, but the best parts
and powers of the soul, being yet in the natural state and condition, the
reason, mind, and will, are carried in a course contrary to God and all
goodness. And why? the reason of it is plain.

The corruption of nature has not only taken hold of the appetite and senses,
but it has also ouer-spread the mind, reason, understanding, and will; even
the most excellent parts and powers of the soul are poisoned with the
contagion of sin, and they are corrupted: yea it may be truly said, that they
are more deeply tainted with corruption, then the inferior parts of the
soul. For as before sin came, Note.
the mind of man had in it the chief part of Gods image, so now being
corrupted it is most corrupt: for every thing degenerating into a contrary
nature, it becomes most contrary to that it was before; as water once hot and
then cold again, it becomes most cold. And therefore the reason, mind, and
will of man being not only tainted, but so deeply poisoned with the contagion
of sin, it must needs be a truth, that not only the appetite and senses, but
even the reason, mind, and will of a natural man or woman in the best act and
exercise of them, are carried on in a course contrary to God, and to all
goodness.

It is no matter of wonder that men of excellent wits are overtaken with gross
sins.
not to wonder at it, when we see men of singular wits, and of sound judgments
for matters of the world, yea men of great learning, to be carried on in a
course of evil and sin, yea to run into foul and gross sins; this is
that that blinds and bleares the eyes of many, in that they see men of
excellent wits overtaken with gross sins: but we are to consider, that the
wit and wisdom of man not sanctified, but in the natural state of it, is
carried on in a course contrary to God, and to all goodness: and the more
excellent wit, and the greater the wisdom is, not sanctified, the more
strongly and the more violently it carries men to impiety and sin: yea we
shall find if we observe it, that it has been so in all ages, and is so at
this day. Woeful experience shows it, that the vilest monsters in all outrage
of sin, have been and are, not idiots, or simple witted, or unlearned men,
but men of most excellent wits, and men of the greatest learning; and therefore
let not that trouble us, and make us stand amazed, when either we see or hear
that men of excellent wits, sound judgments, or men of great learning, are
carried on in a way of evil and sin, and that they run into foul and
gross sins: their wit, and wisdom, and learning not sanctified, it is but
the wit, wisdom, and learning of the flesh, and it is enimity against God and
all goodness, it carries them on in a course contrary to God, and to all
goodness.

In matters of piety and religion our own reason and understanding, and the
best act and exercise of them must be laid aside.
being yet in a natural state and condition, even reason, mind, and will, are
carried in a course contrary to God and to all goodness? Learn we then, that
in matters of piety and religion, and in things that pertain to life and
godliness, to lay aside not only our own appetite and senses, but to
disclaim also our own reason and understanding, and the best act and exercise
of our own reason, even our own wisdom: for indeed to consult with flesh
and blood, and with the wisdom of the flesh, in matters of piety and
religion, it is but to advise with sin. The wisdom of the flesh is enimity
against God, and will carry us on in a course contrary to God, and to all
goodness: it is a dangerous thing to examine the ways of God by the wisdom
of the flesh: yea I dare affirm it; Note.
It is impossible for us to yield true and sound obedience to any one
Commandment of God, if we follow the rule of our own corrupt reason, our own
reason will carry us on to a contrary course. To show it in one or two
particulars: the Lord requires of us in his word, we have it, 1. Tim. 6.8. That
if we have food and raiment we should therewith be content, and that we should
not greedily hunt after the things of this life. Now carnal reason, the
wisdom of the flesh, that is ready to suggest, and it does suggest to many in
the world, that they may by fraud, by usury, by oppression, and by unlawful
means, seek to enrich themselves: yea it tells them, that so they shall be
able to do good, not only to themselves and those that belong to them, but to
others also, to distribute to the poor, to build alme-houses, and to do great
good, and that with such sacrifices God is pleased. See how the wisdom of the
flesh will furnish men with strength of arguments out of the word of God
abused, to make men sin against God. And so for the matter of apparel, the
Lord requires in his word it should be modest and sober. Oh but says carnal
reason, the wisdom of the flesh, that tells men and women, if we do not follow
the fashions of the world, we shall be of no account, and we shall carry no
credit in the world. And so I might instance in many other particulars, wherein
the wisdom of the flesh carries men on in a course contrary to God and to
all goodness: yea the wisdom of the flesh is ready to furnish men with new
ways of committing sin, and with many excuses, pretenses, and defenses for
sin when it is committed. And therefore if we desire to do the good duties
the Lord requires at our hands in truth of heart, we are not only to lay aside
our own appetite and sense, but we are also to renounce our own reason and
understanding, and our own wisdom, and all that nature has endued us
withal, and to suffer our selves wholly to be guided and governed by the
wisdom and will of God revealed in his word. Now further mark we here the
weight of the Apostles speech, he says not, the wisdom of the flesh is an
enemy, but it is enimitie; thereby signifying, as we showed, that it is
extremely opposite and contrary to God, and to all goodness; yea that it is
carried against God and all goodness with an irreconcilable hatred and
opposition. So that hereby we are to take notice how far the wisdom of the
flesh is carried in opposition to God and to all goodness: and the point hence
is this.

The wisdom of the flesh is extremely opposite and contrary to God and to all
goodness.
is extremely opposite and contrary to God and to all goodness. The mind and
will of a natural man is not only not able to think or will good things,
things that pertain to Gods kingdom, to life and salvation, but they are
auerse, and they are repugnant to good things, and carried against God and good
things, with an irreconcilable hatred and opposition, they are at enimitie
with God and all goodness. Thus it is with the mind and will of a natural man
in the act and exercise of his mind and will: and hence it was that the Apostle
said, Ephesians. 5.8. They were once darkness: he says not, that they were dark,
or blind, or not able to see good things, but they were darkness, they were in
extreme opposition to light, even as contrary to God himself, who is light.
1. Ioh. 1.5. and to the light of his truth, as darkness is to light. And not
to amplify the point, the reason and ground of this:

standing in true and perfect holiness and righteousness: that image is
defaced in man by the fall of Adam, and in place of it is come the image of
Satan: and such as the cause is, such is the effect: and therefore it must
needs be that the act and exercise of the mind and will of a natural man, is
directly and extremely opposite and contrary to God and to all goodness. Here
happily some may make this question

Whether man do naturally hate God?

Answer. haters of God. Romans 1.30.

Now for use of the point; The popish conceit of pure naturals confuted.
this being so that the act and exercise of the mind of a natural man, is
directly and extremely contrary to God and to all goodness, it meets with
that conceit of the Papists touching pure naturals, and the goodness in
nature. They magnify nature, and teach that a man in his natural state may
prepare himself to receive grace, and that he preparing himself, he merits
grace ex congruo, as they say. It is an idle conceit, it cannot stand with the
truth now delivered, that the act and exercise of the mind and will of a
natural man is extremely opposite and contrary to God and to all goodness:
and it is as possible that a violent stream of water should suddenly turn it
self backwards, as it is for the mind and will of men being carried against
God and all goodness, to turn and prepare it self to receive grace. The Lord
Jesus says, Ioh. 6.44. None can come to me, except the Father which has sent
me, draw him. Now if there were in man the least power and aptness to receive
grace, drawing were needless, for that argues an obstinate rebellion, and
reluctance and striving against grace. Though indeed none is forced to come to
Christ, or to receive grace, but he receives it willingly, yet of himself he
has no such will, but of unwilling he is made willing. Now for the use of the
point to our selves.

They whose minds and wills are wrought on by grace, and turned from evil to
good, ought to magnify Gods goodness and mercy And they who are in their
natural state, must be far from imagining that they can at their pleasure
change their minds and wills.
surely such as have their minds and wills wrought on by grace, and turned from
evil to good, so that now they are able to think of good things, to mind
them, to will them, to love and to like them, and to delight in them in some
measure, they are to magnify the goodness and mercy of God, and the power of
his grace; they cannot be sufficiently thankful for so great a mercy, in that
their minds and wills were before at enimitie against God. And such as are yet
in their natural state and condition, are to take heed they please not
themselves in a conceit that they can at their own time and pleasure change
their minds and wills, and so neglect the timely and careful use of the means
by which God works grace in those that belong to him. As Popery is natural in
many things, so in this particular: men think that howsoever their minds are
now set on evil, and their wills and affections are wholly carried after evil,
yet they may when they please change their minds, and turn their hearts from
evil to good, and take a new course: but indeed they deceive themselves. Ier.
13.23. says the Prophet, Can the Blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. Where he
shows how hard a thing it is to break off a custom of doing ill, even as
hard as to make the Blackmore white, or to change the skin of a Leopard. And if
custom which is but a second nature be so hard to root out, how hard then is
nature it self and the corruption of it, to be rooted out, which is as dear
and near to us as any part or member of our bodies, or any part of our souls?
Surely there must be an holy violence before that can be done, and it is done
only by the mighty hand and power of God And therefore our part is to use the
means carefully, by which the Lord works grace in the minds and hearts of
his, even diligent hearing, reading, and meditating in the word of God,
conference, good company, and the like, to wait on the Lord till he strike an
holy stroke on our hearts and minds; he will do it in time on all those that
belong to him.

Having stood on the Apostles argument, by which he proves the wisdom of the
flesh to be death, or deadly, or damnable, because it is enimitie against God:
come we now to the ground and proof of it in the next words, For it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The Apostle proves the
wisdom of the flesh to be enimitie against God by this, that it is not
subject to the Law of God, it yields not to the Law of God any orderly
subjection; nay it does resist, and rise up, and rebel against the Law of God:
even against the will of God revealed in his word, touching duties of piety
toward God, and duties of love, mercy, equity, and justice toward men. And
here first we are to observe the Apostles argument, by which he proves the
wisdom of the flesh to be enimitie against God; he reasons thus: The wisdom
of the flesh is not subject to the Law of God, it does rather resist, and
rebel, and rise up against Gods Law, and therefore it is enimitie against God.
This manner of reasoning yields to us thus much.

That they that will not subject themselves to the Law of Whosoever they be
that will not yield obedience to Gods will revealed to the in his word, are in
Gods account as enemies to God.
that yield not obedience to the will of God made known to them in his word,
they that will not subject their minds, their wills, and their affections to the
will of God, and square and frame their actions according to his will, to do
the good it requires, and to avoid the evil it forbids, his will being made
known to them, they are in Gods account as enemies to God, and as rebels
against God, the Lord so accounts of them. And for further clearing of this,
mark what the Lord says, Exodus 20.5. Exodus 20.5.
In the second commandment he says, He is a God visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of
them that hate him. And who are those that hate him? We may easily gather who
they be, by that he subioynes verse 6. where he says, He shows mercy to them
that love him and keep his commandments: as if he had said, those that love
me, are those that keep my commandments; and so on the contrary, those that
keep not the commandments of God, and yield not obedience to his will, the
Lord accounts of them as those that hate him, and as enemies to him, and as
rebels against him. Deuteronomy. 31.27. Deuteronomy. 31.27.
says Moses, I know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck: behold, I being yet
alive with you this day, ye are rebellious against the Lord: how much more then
after my death? He says the people were rebellious against the Lord, in that
they did not subject themselves to his will made known to them. Ioh. 14.15.
Ioh. 14.15.
says Christ, If ye love me keep my commandments. Whence it follows by
proportion, that those that keep not the commandments of Christ, they love
not Christ; no they hate him, and they are enemies to him, as himself says,
Mat. 12.30.
Math. 12.30. He that is not with me is against me, I account them as mine
enemies. And to this purpose is that, Luke 19.27. Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither, and slay them before me. Those that would not subject their necks to
my yoke, nor yield obedience to my laws, bring them hither, and slay them
before me. And to these we might add many other testimonies confirming this
truth, that they whosoever they be, that will not subject themselves to the Law
of God, to mind, to will, and to affect and love the good things the Lord
requires of them, and to avoid the evil he forbids, his will being made known
to them, they are in Gods account as enemies to God, and as rebels against him,
the Lord so accounts of them: for why, the reasons of this truth are these.

God and his Law, the Law of God is the mind of God and will of God, even his
eternal and unchangeable will revealed, to which he would have men to be
subject and conformable; and men cannot deny subjection to that, but they
deny it to God himself, and so they rebel against him.

Again secondly, all men are bound to yield subjection

First, this truth serves to discover the wretched and fearful A discovery
of the fearful state of those who refuse to hearken to the voice and call of
God in the ministry of his word, and to yeeldto it.
and yet will not subject themselves to it, either to do the one, or to avoid
the other, They pull away the shoulder, they stop their ears that they should
not hear, Zach. 7.11. Zach. 7.11.
and they hate to be reformed. Fearful is the case of such persons, whosoever
they be; they oppose against God; they resist, as Stephen said Act. 7.51. Act.
7.51.
and the Lord accounts them as enemies, and as rebels against him; and will
deal with them as with rebels. Men commonly make it a matter of nothing to
refuse to subject themselves to the word of God, either when it calls them to
good things, or when it calls them from their evil ways and sins: yea many
times they make but a mock at it, and make but a tush or puff at the voice of
God, in the ministry of his word calling them from their sins. But consider
it whosoever thou art: art thou a drunkard, a common swearer, or the like? and
has the word of God often sounded in thine ears? has it discovered to thee
thy particular sins, and showed thee the greatness of them, and danger of
them? has it smitten thine heart, and hit on thy conscience, and do thou
refuse to hearken to it, and to yield to the voice and call of God, and do
thou make light of it? Thou art in a fearful case, the Lord accounts thee as
his enemy, and will deal with thee as with his enemy. Yea know it, that thou
hardening thy heart against the voice of God in the ministry of his word, and
refusing to be reformed by it, the Lord will also harden it, and in his just
judgment give thee over to sin, and to the will of the devil, to be led of
him at his will and pleasure. Yea thou being a child of disobedience and
wilful rebellion, thou art not only a child of wrath, as all men are by natu
e, but it is more then probable that thou shall never be received to mercy,
that thou art a child of perdition, and art now going on a pace toward hell,
and shall one day be fit fuel for the fire of hell. Consider this all you that
refuse to subject your selves to the will of God made known to you in the
ministry of his word.

Not only open contemners of God and of al goodness are enemies to God, but
such also as are lukewarm professors and carnal gospellers.
to will, affect, and do the good things the Lord requires of them, and to
avoid the evil he forbids (his will being made known to them) they in Gods
account are as enemies to God, and as rebels against him, the Lord so accounts
them. Then take we heed we deceive not our selves, think not that only they
are enemies to God that are at open defiance and hostility with him, as those
that are open contemners of God and of all goodness, open blasphemers, such as
bend their tongues like their bows for lies: Ier. 9.3. and shoot out bitter
and blasphemous words against God and against goodness: No, no, not only
they, but even thou that do not subject thy self to the will of God made
known to thee, to mind, to will, and to affect, to love and to like good
things, even thou in Gods account art an enemy to God. It may be thou art able
to say, I am no enemy to goodness, I speak not ill of the ways of God, I
blaspheme not God and his truth, I am neither Papist nor Atheist, etc. Yea but
what love have thou to goodness and to the truth of God? what zeal have thou
for God and for his truth? is thy heart and soul, thy mind and thy inward
affections, thy wisdom subject to it or no? for these are things the Lord
requires of thee in his word, thou bearing the name of a Christian, and taking
on thee the profession of the Gospel. Alas, if many in the world examine
themselves touching these particulars, they shall find that these things are
wanting in them: they are lukewarm professors, they are carnal Gospellers;
they go on in a drousie course and a formal profession, they have no burning
love to the truth, no zeal to Gods glory. Well, let such persons know,
howsoever they please themselves in a conceit that they are at peace with God,
and they are his friends, yet indeed in Gods account they are enemies to God,
and though they be not at open enimitie with God as open contemners are, yet in
their degree they are enemies to God: and the Lord so esteems of them. And
howsoever lukewarm Gospellers may seem neither to be enemies to God, nor yet
sound and good friends to him, but to hold on a middle course, and to be in a
middle condition, yet indeed so far as they are lukewarm, Note.
they have fellowship with the devil, and they are enemies to God, and
therefore deceive not thy self.

One thing note we further, (...).
and that is from the word here used: the word (as I showed) here rendered
subject, signifies orderly subjection: so that hence note we.

That the wisdom of the flesh may hit on a good duty, The wisdom of the
flesh may do that which is good for the matter of it, but not for the manner of
doing it.
he does it not orderly, it is accounted of as the deed of an enemy to God, he
does it not so as may please God and bring comfort to his own soul. The
Apostle says of the Gentiles, Romans 2.14. Romans 2.14.
that they did by nature the things contained in the Law, but yet they failed
in the ground, manner, and right end of doing good things; they did them not of
faith, for they had none; they did them not of conscience toward God, they
knew not God; nor in obedience to his Commandment, they were ignorant of it;
and they did them not to the glory of God, but to their own praise and glory
amongst men. And thus it is with all men in their natural state and condition.

A good intent is not sufficient in the service of God.
And therefore it is not a blind intent and good meaning that poor ignorant
souls stand on, that will serve the turn in serving God: no, no, though men
do that which is commanded in the word of God, and do it with a good intent and
good meaning (as they say,) and yet do it not orderly as it ought to be done,
in faith, in conscience toward God, and in obedience to his will, and with
respect to his glory, it is not pleasing to him; the Lord accounts it not any
subjection to his will, but rather rebellion against him. And they that thrust
on God any thing not commanded in his word, or things commanded and yet not
done as they ought to be, they hate the Lord, and the Lord does so account of
them, Exodus 20.5. Exodus 20.5.


Now the Apostle says, The wisdom of the flesh, the wisdom of corrupt
nature, is not subject to the Law of God, but indeed rebels against it. I might
stand to show the error of the Pelagians. An error of the Pelagians and Popish
schoolmen met withal.
It meets with their error who hold that a natural man might fulfill the Law
of God; and that error also of the Popish schoolmen: it meets with their error
likewise who affirm that a man without grace may keep the Law in respect of
the substance of the work, though not ad intentionem Legis, not after the
intention of the Law. But these we have in part stood on before verse 3.
therefore I pass by them. Only from hence in that the Apostle says, The
wisdom of the flesh, the wisdom of corrupt nature, is not The best act and
exercise of the soul of a carnal person is evil and sinful.


That the best act and exercise of ye soul of a carnal person, of a man that
is yet in his natural state and condition, is evil and sinful, it is not
subject to the Law of God, it is not conformable to the will of God revealed in
his word, which is the rule of all holiness and righteousness: and so it must
needs be evil and sinful. For indeed whatsoever act of the soul of man is
not consonant and agreeable to the Law of God, that is evil, and that is
sinful. Sin is so defined. 1. Ioh. 3.4. Sin is transgression of the Law:
any act of man transgressing Gods Law, yea any act not agreeable to the Law of
God, it is evil and sinful. And this bears strongly against an erroneous
opinion of the Papists, namely this:

That the first intents of the mind disordered, A popish opinion confuted.
even lust and concupiscence of the heart without consent of will, if it gain
not consent of will to accomplish evil, is no sin: that they hold and teach.
Now the truth delivered makes strongly against that. For why: Is the best act
and exercise of the soul of a corrupt person evil and sinful, even his
wisdom, is that evil, because it is not subject to the Law of God? surely
then the motions of the mind disordered, the motions and stirrings that are in
the mind and heart of man to evil, though consent of will be not gained,
though they never get consent of will for the accomplishment of evil, yet
those very motions must needs be evil and sinful. For certainly they are not
subject to the Law of God, they are repugnant and contrary to the Law of God,
they are fruits of corruption; they are such as men should not have had, if our
first parents had stood and continued in the state of innocence: and therefore
they are naught, and they are sins, and it is a gross error to hold the
contrary.

Now further in that the Apostle says, the wisdom of the flesh is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: affirming that as a certain
truth, neither indeed can be, we are given to understand thus much:

That the wisdom of the flesh, the minding and affecting The wisdom of the
flesh has no power in it self to be subject to the Law of God.
but it has no power in it self to be subject to it: the mind and will of a
natural man, one that is yet in his natural state, has no power nor ability
in it self and of it self, to mind, to will, and to affect good things. Or
thus briefly conceive the point.

A man that is in his natural state and condition, as yet unregenerate, has
no power nor ability in himself nor of himself, to mind, to will, and to
affect good things, things concerning piety toward God, or things concerning
equity, justice, love, and mercy toward men, commanded in the Law of God; at
least to mind, to will, and to affect them, as they ought to be minded, willed,
and affected. To this purpose that is a plain text, 1. Corinthians. 2.14. 1. Cor.
2.14.
The natural man (says the Apostle) perceiues not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him. And he adds further, Neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. He does not only not know
nor perceive spiritual things, for that might be through neglect or contempt
of them; but he cannot know them, he has no power in himself of himself to
know them, though he labor to know them. And 2. Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 3.5.
says the Apostle, We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing (he
means any thing that is truly good) as of our selves. Ioh. 15.5. Ioh. 15.5.
says Christ, Without me ye can do nothing. A man that is out of Christ, as
yet in his natural state and condition, can do nothing that is truly good, he
cannot mind, will, or affect good things; either things that concern piety
toward God, or love and mercy toward men, as they ought to be minded, willed,
and affected. And not to add any further evidence and testimony of Scripture,
the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.



dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Ephesians. 2.1.
He has neither spiritual life, nor the actions, nor the faculties of that
life. And therefore on these grounds we may resolve on this as a certain
truth, that a man that is in his natural state and condition as yet
unregenerate, has no power nor ability in himself and of himself, to mind,
will, and to affect good things, things that concern piety toward God, or
love and mercy toward men, commanded in the Law of God, as they ought to be
minded, willed and affected.

This being a truth, The error of the Pelagians and Papists touching freedom
of will, confuted.
it meets with the vain conceit of all those that magnify nature, and dream
of some goodness in our nature without grace: and especially it meets with the
error of the Pelagians and of the Papists, touching freedom of will. They hold
and teach, that the will of man is able to love God, and to be subject to his
Law without grace, or at least (say they) being a little helped by Gods Spirit,
can either receive grace or refuse it, if it list. This is utterly false, it is
as possible for a dead man to will his own quickening, and his own raising up
from the grave, as it is for a man in his natural state and condition, being
dead in sins, to mind and to will spiritual good things.

Oh but say the Papists,

First, they speak not to the purpose,

Again, in that they say, the natural will being by grace fortified and
lifted up to an higher degree of perfection, can then concur and work with
grace to faith, and to all good works necessary to salvation, they contradict
themselves: for this proves not that the will of man concurres by it own
natural power, which is the thing in question, but the clean contrary, that
the will only by grace is enabled to will that which is truly good: and that
is the thing we teach; that the will of man in the first act of conversion is
merely passive, able to do nothing, but being wrought on and renewed by grace,
and of unwilling made willing, then it is able to choose, to will, and to affect
that which is truly good.



I answer.

The wisdom of the flesh being unable to yield subjection to the Law of God,
much less can it yield to the doctrine of the Gospel.
as yet unregenerate, has no power in himself and of himself, to mind, to
will, and to affect good things concerning piety toward God, love and mercy
toward men, the good things of Gods Law? surely then much less has any man
power in himself and of himself, to mind, to will, and to affect the good
things of the Gospel. The wisdom of the flesh cannot yield subjection to the
Law of God, much less can it yield to the doctrine of the Gospel, as to
believe the sweet promises of it, and to believe in Christ: there is some seed
of the one in nature, but none of the other. And this is a thing that deceiues
many in the world; they fancy to themselves that faith is in their own power,
and that they can at their own time and pleasure believe in Christ. And herein
the devil deludes thousands: yea some are so besotted and blinded by the
subtlety of Satan, as they think they have believed in Christ ever since they
could remember, and they never doubted of Gods mercy. Or if this slight be too
palpable and be discerned, yet Satan persuades with them, they may believe when
they will, and that it is an easy matter to believe in Christ, and in their
own power to believe when they list; yea that they may take hold of the mercy
of God and merit of Christ at the very last hour of their life: and with this
pleasing conceit he carries thousands to the pit of everlasting perdition. We
are to take heed of this, and know that true faith in Christ is a wonderful
and supernatural gift and grace of God, wrought by the exceeding greatness of
Gods power, even by the working of his almighty power, Ehpes. 1.19. and
therefore not in any man's power to believe when he lift. No, no, Note.
if true faith in Christ were in a man's own power, then would never any man
feeling the weight and burden of his sins, and apprehending Gods anger and
wrath against him for them, despair of Gods mercy, but he would take hold of
it to his comfort. Now woeful experience shows the contrary; that at such a
time as some are brought to the sight of their sins, and have an apprehension
and feeling of Gods anger against them for the same, they cannot take hold of
Gods mercy: no, they cannot be persuaded by any means to take hold of it to
their comfort; they rather blaspheme God, and fall to utter desperation: and
therefore it is not in man's power to believe when he list, and at his own time
and pleasure. And if thou whosoever thou art, please thy self in that conceit,
that it is an easy matter to believe in Christ, and that thou may so do when
thou will, thou may happily when the Lord lets thee see the greatness of thy
sins, what thou have deserved by them, seek for faith and never find it:
yea, it may be, if thou would give a thousand worlds (if they were thine to
give) thou shall not be able to find any comfort in Christ. And therefore take
heed thou deceive not thy self, learn to know, that true faith in Christ is
not in a man's own power, but is the only work of Gods mighty power: and
never rest till thou find that the Lord has wrought in thee the wonderful and
supernatural work of faith, even such a faith as is able to break through the
sense and feeling of thine own sins and Gods anger, and to take hold of Gods
mercy and merit of Christ, to thy comfort; and then thou may be sure that
thou have such a faith as is wrought in thee by the mighty and powerful work
of Gods Spirit.

VERSE 8. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.


COme we now to Verse 8. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
This verse is a corollarie or conclusion inferred and brought in by the Apostle
on the verse foregoing: having said verse before, that the wisdom of the
flesh is enimity against God, and showed the ground of that, Because it neither
is nor can be subject to the Law of God, thereupon he infers in this verse,
that therefore they that are in the flesh cannot please God. This verse for the
general matter of it, sets forth how it is with such as are in the flesh, in
regard of Gods favor and acceptance, the Apostle affirming this of them, that
their case and condition is such as they cannot please God: they are not only
out of Gods favor, and displeasing to God, but there is a further matter, They
cannot please God. The Apostle affirms it as a thing impossible for them to
please God; let them do what they will, or what they can, they cannot possibly
please God.

So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Interpretation
To be in the flesh, is sometimes taken in Scripture to be in a good sense: it
is all one with this, to be in the body, as Gal. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
In that I now live in the flesh. But the phrase is not so to be taken in this
place: it was the error of the Maniches, by flesh in this place to understand
the body. The phrase is here used in the evil part, it is opposed to that, to
be in the Spirit, as the Apostle says in the next verse, Romans 8.9.
Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit: and it is to be taken in a
contrary sense, as namely thus, to be in the dregs and filth of nature, to be
unregenerate, Romans 7.5.
as we may gather from verse 5. of Chapter 7. where the Apostle uses this
phrase, and says, When we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were
by the Law, had force in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. It was
the conceit of a Pope of Rome whom the Papists do magnify, and say that men
are to seek the sense and meaning of Scripture out of his breast. I say it was
the conceit of one, Pope Syricius by name, that to be in the flesh, in this
place is to be understood of married persons, of such as live in the married
estate, that they are in the flesh, and so cannot please God: directly
contrary to the plain text of the Apostle, who says, that the Romans to
whom he writ, among whom were Aquila and Priscilla, and no doubt many other
married persons, that they were not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. It is a
strange thing that the Papists should so forget themselves, as sometimes to
extol marriage and to make it an holy Sacrament, and at other times so to
debase it, as to make it a state and condition of life carnal, impure, and
unclean. This were strange, but that indeed we are to consider that they are
possessed with a spirit of blindness and giddiness: but that by the way. The
meaning of the phrase is (as before we showed) to be in the puddle and dregs of
nature, to be unregenerate. Cannot please God: that is, cannot think, speak,
or do any thing that God may like of, and to approve and account as pleasing to
him, and as it were take pleasure in, as the Lord says, Malac. 1.10. Malac.
1.10.
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. So
the meaning of the Apostle in this verse is briefly this, as if he had said:

So then, or so therefore, they that are in their natural state and condition,
in the dregs and filthy puddle of nature, and as yet unregenerate, they cannot
possibly think, speak, or do, any thing that God may like of, and approve of,
and that he may accept as pleasing to his holy Majesty.

First note we here, Note.
that this verse is a conclusion inferred by the Apostle on the verse
foregoing, that seeing it is so that the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie
against God, and neither is nor can be subject to the Law of God: therefore
says the Apostle, being guided by the Spirit of God, They that are in the
flesh, they cannot please God. We see that this verse is Gods truth, Gods own
conclusion, brought in on his own premises in express terms, that they that
are in the flesh, they that are unregenerate, they can do nothing pleasing God.
If this had been our conclusion deduced and drawn by consequent out of some
place of Scripture, the Papists might have had some better color, Gods own
conclusion against the merit of congruitie.
though no good ground to except against it; but this we see is Gods own
truth, his own conclusion grounded on his own premises: they that are in the
flesh, as yet unregenerate, they cannot please God. This bears strongly
against the merit of congruitie: in that the Papists say, a man in his natural
state and condition may prepare himself to receive grace; yea that he may so
fit himself for grace, as that he merits grace at the hands of God ex congruo,
by a kind of congruitie, they directly thwart, and cross, and contradict Gods
own truth, and his own conclusion inferred on his own premises: namely, that
they that are in the flesh are so far from meriting, as they can do nothing
pleasing to God. And no marvel though the Papists seek to pervert this text,
and to thrust on it a misconstruction, and false interpretation, because it
makes so directly against them, and in such express terms delivered by the
Apostle from the mouth of Gow himself, and by the special motion of the holy
Ghost: as 2. Pet. 1.21. This I thought good to note, to show by what spirit the
Papists are led, even by a lying spirit, a spirit in flat opposition and
contradiction to the Spirit of God.

Now in the next place observe, how the Apostle does express the state and
condition of such as are in the dregs of nature, as yet unregenerate. He says,
they are in the flesh; he says not there is flesh and corruption in them, for
that may be, and is in the best of Gods children so long as they live in the
world: but they are in the flesh; this phrase is very weighty and very
significant, it imports an universal thraldom under sin and corruption. The
point hence is this.

Unregenerate persons are altogether fleshly.
they are altogether fleshly, they are nothing but a lump of flesh, a lump of
sin and of corruption; they are drenched in sin, and as it were over head
and ears, they are in the very puddle of sin. And thus the Lord speaks of
Jerusalem, Ezech. 16.6. Ezech. 16.6.
When thou wast in thy blood, not when blood was in thee: and Act. 8.23. Act.
8.23.
Peter says to Simon Magus, Thou art in the gall of bitterness, thou art
overwhelmed in sin. Coloss. 1.21. Colos. 1.21.
the Apostle says of the Colossians, that before their conversion their minds
were set in evil works. And many other evidences might clear and confirm
this truth; that unregenerate persons, such as are yet in their natural state
and condition, they are altogether fleshly, they are nothing but a lump of
flesh, of sin, and of corruption. And it must needs be so: Ioh. 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, it is nothing but flesh and a
lump of corruption: and as Job speaks, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing
out of filthiness?

And this may serve to pull down the pride of many in the world that carry
their heads aloft, A just reproof of the pride of many.
and show forth the pride of their hearts, in their speech, in their gesture,
in their apparel, and the like. If they well consider it, they being
unregenerate persons, they have cause to hang down their heads, and to cover
their faces for shame: for what are they? truly nothing but a lump of sin,
and a dunghill of corruption. What cause has the poor Lazer, that is full of
botches and soars from top to toe, to set out himself in goodly apparel, and
in rich array? Such is thy case, thou that art unregenerate, and as yet in thy
natural state and condition, thou art full of blaines in all the powers of thy
soul, and in all the parts and members of thy body; and therefore thou have no
cause to set out thy self in vain and garish attire. Thou will say:

I hasten to that which I principally intend in this verse, the thing the
Apostle affirms of them that are in the flesh; namely this, that they cannot
please God: he says, they that are unregenerate, such as are yet in their
natural state and condition, they cannot please God. The point hence is the
very proposition of the Apostle, namely this.

Veregenerate persons can do nothing pleasing to God.
as yet unregenerate, they cannot think, speak, or do, any thing pleasing to
God, any thing that God may approve and accept of, as pleasing to his holy
Majesty. Unregenerate persons, such as are yet in the dregs of nature, offend
God and displease him, not only in and by their sins, and such things as are
directly evil; but also in and by their indifferent actions, in and by their
eating, drinking, walking, and the like: yea in and by their thinking,
speaking, and doing of good things, things that in themselves are good and
commanded of God: in their hearing or reading of the word of God, and their
prayers, and the like. An unregenerate person cannot please God, though he
think, speak, Pro. 15.8.9.
or do, the best thing that may be. Solomon says Prou. 15.8. The sacrifice of
the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: all the labor and all the cost that
a wicked person bestows on the worship of God, is not only vain, but it is
abominable in Gods sight. And in the 9. verse, he says again, The way of the
wicked, even his whole course is abominable: it is odious to God, it prouokes
him to anger against him. And to this purpose is that of the Apostle, Tit.
1.15. Tit. 1.15.
To the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving is nothing pure: nothing they think, speak, or do, is pure, and
so nothing they think, speak, or do, can be pleasing to God: and why.

God had respect to Abell and to his offering: first to Abell, and then to his
sacrifice. Now only in Christ is the person accepted of God, in Christ only
is the Father well pleased, Mat. 3.17. And therefore unregenerate persons being
out of Christ, their persons are not pleasing to God: it must needs be a truth,
that let them think, speak or do, what they will, even the best thing that
may be, they cannot please God.

Happily some will say: Nebuchadnezzar, a man without question unregenerate, for
his service against Egypt: and therefore it may seem, that good things done by
such as are yet in their natural state are sometimes pleasing to God.

Answer.

For use of the point, is it so that they that are in the flesh, in
Unregenerate persons are in a most miserable state and condition.
or do, any thing pleasing to God? Surely then we must needs conceive the state
and condition of unregenerate persons, such as are yet in their natural state,
to be most wretched and miserable. For why, let such persons do what they will,
or what they can, they cannot please God: no they offend God, and displease him
in the best things they think, speak, or do, and that must needs be a most
unhappy and fearful condition. The chief thing that a man should endeavor
and seek for, is how to please God, and to be approved of him on whom depends
his being, his life, and all his comfort, both in life and death, and for ever.
Now this cannot a man do that is yet in his natural state and condition: no,
know it whosoever thou art, that art yet in the dregs of nature, thou can do
nothing pleasing to God, the best thing thou do is offensive and displeasing
to his holy Majesty, even thy prayer is turned to sin, and that prouokes God
to anger against thee, Psalm 119.7. and that is a fearful condition. In the
Lords good liking and approbation is life and happiness, and in his disliking
and displeasure; is nothing to be expected but death and damnation. Yea
consider with thy self, thou that art yet in thy natural state and condition,
and so within compass of Gods displeasure, thy prosperity is but thy bane,
and to the increase of thy judgment and condemnation: and when thou art in
trouble and distress, thy trouble is doubled on thee, it is both grievous and
painful to thee, and it is also mingled with bitterness of the curse, it is
an accursed trouble to thee. And therefore think on it whosoever thou art that
art yet in the dregs of nature, thy case is fearful, wretched and miserable;
and be stirred up with all speed to hasten out of that state and condition,
never rest till thou find an alteration and change in thy self, and that thou
have some evidence to thy self that thou art set out of the state of nature
into the state of grace, and that thou have the life and power of grace in thy
soul: that will give thee comfort, and assure thee that thou art within
compass of Gods special love and favor.

Gods approbation of good things done, is not to be measured by the things
themselves.
in their natural state and condition, they cannot do any thing pleasing to
God, any thing that God may like of and approve, and accept, as pleasing to his
holy Majesty? Surely then we must learn not to measure Gods liking and his
approbation of good things done by our selves, or by others, by the things
themselves, and to think that the things that we or others do, are pleasing to
God; and that he likes them, and approoues of them, because they are good in
themselves, and they are such things as God has commanded: if we have no
better ground then that, that the things we or others do are pleasing to God
because they are good in themselves, and things commanded of God, it will
deceive us, we must look to the qualification of the person, that the person
be regenerate and sanctified, if we would rightly gather and conclude Gods good
liking, and his approbation of good things done by the person, whether it be
our selves or others. The Papists foolishly think they do things highly
pleasing to God, yea meriting at the hands of God, and deserving heaven, when
they do things merely idolatrous and superstitious. Yea, to pass by them, many
amongst our selves deceive themselves in this respect, they think they do
things highly well pleasing to God, and such as he does greatly like and
approve of, when in deed and in truth there is no such matter. For example, do
not many imagine and think that their true and just dealing with men, their
giving every man his own, their hearing the word of God, their praying, and
the like things done by them, are things exceeding well pleasing to the Lord,
and that he likes them, and approues of them marvelous well, though those
things as they are done by them come not from a sanctified heart, not from the
root of a sound justifying faith, they are yet in the dregs of nature, and as
yet in their natural state and condition: do not many thus think? without
question they do, and because they do such things, they think they are greatly
in Gods favor. Indeed it is true, it cannot be denied, but that such things
for the substance of them, and considered in themselves, and by themselves, are
good things, and such as God has commanded to be done: but yet know whosoever
thou art, if thou be an unregenerate person, and as yet in thy natural state
and condition, even the best things that can be, being done by thee, they are
displeasing to God, they come not from the root of true faith purging thy
heart from corruption, without which it is not possible to please God, Hebr
11.6. And therefore do not thou gather and conclude, that God is well pleased
with the good things thou do, only because the things done by thee are good
in themselves: if thou so do, thou deceiuest thy self, thou gatherest Gods
good liking and his approbation by a false ground only from thine own fancy:
and the devil and thine own corrupt heart deceive thee, thou must find thy
self regenerate, and got out of thy natural state and condition, and thy
person pleasing to God through Christ, before thou can think, speak, or do,
any thing that the Lord may like and approve of, A distinction needful to be
known and considered.
there be different degrees of it: for Gods elect are loved of God before their
calling, as the elect of God only known to God so to be, (for he only knows
them to belong to his election in time to be called) with that degree of love
that is proper to his elect uncalled; but when they are called and justified,
then they are loved of God with a further degree of his love, even to an
actual acceptance and liking of their persons, and good things done by them
as pleasing to him in Christ. So that still it remains a truth, that if thou
would be actually accepted of the Lord, think, speak, and do, the things
pleasing to his holy Majesty, thou must find thy self regenerate, and set out
of thy natural state and condition, and that thy person is actually accepted
of God in Christ.

Observe yet further, the Apostle says, They that are in the flesh cannot
please God. He speaks here of pleasing God, not of meriting or deserving any
good at the hands of God; we find not that affirmed in any place of the book
of God, of the best and most holy obedience of Gods children, that it merits or
deserves any good at the hands of God. This we often find affirmed in Scripture
of the obedience of Gods children, that it is acceptable to God, and that the
good things done by them are accepted and pleasing to God through Christ: but
never do we find it said of the obedience of Gods children, that it merits or
deserves any good at the hands of God. No, it cannot be gathered out of any
place of Scripture by any good consequent, that the holy obedience of Gods
children and the good things done by them, do merit or deserve any good at Gods
hands. So that on this ground, thus comparing this text with other places of
Scripture, we may gather and conclude thus much.

That the greatest and highest degree of excellency that Our obedience to Gods
will, at the best and highest degree, goes no further then to the pleasing of
God in and through Christ.
to please God, to be accepted of God as pleasing to his holy Majesty in and
through Christ. We can go no further then to the pleasing of God in and through
Christ, by our best obedience, in and by our best thoughts, words, and works;
our best and most holy works merit no good at the hands of God, they only are
pleasing to God through Christ. This is that we find urged by the Apostle on
the believing Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
says he, We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye
increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and
to please God. As if he had said, It is the thing we urge and press on you,
and this ye have received of us, that ye ought to walk in holiness and the
good ways of God, to the pleasing of God. Genes. 5.24. Genesis 5.24.
it is said of Henoch, that he walked with God; he carried himself justly and
vnbleameably as in the sight of God continually. And of this the holy Ghost
speaks thus, Hebr. 11.5. Heb. 11.5.
That before he was taken away, he was reported of, that he had pleased God.
His holy life and carriage was accepted of the Lord as pleasing to him: and in
carrying himself holily as in Gods sight continually, he went no further then
to the pleasing of God. Coloss. 1.9.10. Colos. 1.9.10.
the Apostle says, he prayed for the Colossians, that they might be fulfilled
with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
that they might come to this, that they might walk worthy of the Lord and
please him in all things. Hebr. 13.16. says the Author of that Epistle, To do
good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. It
is but an idle and a foolish cavil of the Papists on that place, that the word
there is promeretur, which (say they) signifies, Gods favor is thereby merited
and deserved; for so they make promeretur to have a passive signification, and
so indeed the Latin word is but a barbarous term. The word original is
(...), God is well pleased with such sacrifices: he is pleased to accept of
them in and through Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 2.5. Ye are made an
holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And to these we might join many other testimonies of Scripture proving
the point in hand, that the highest degree of excellency our most holy
obedience to Gods will can reach to, is this, to please God, and to be accepted
of God, as pleasing to him in and through Christ: and the reason of it is this.



An erroneous opinion of the Papists overthrown.
in that they hold and teach, that the obedience of true believers does answer
the justice of God, and makes them more just in the sight of God. That cannot
stand with the truth now delivered: we are to hold it for a certain truth,
that our most holy obedience is so far from meriting any good thing at the
hands of God, as that it pleases not God unless he behold it in mercy, and
in the face of Jesus Christ.

And so for the use of the point to our selves, we must learn We are to
renounce all merit of any good in our selves, or done by our selves. Natural
Popery abiding in the best of Gods children.
or in any good done by us, as meriting and deserving good at the hands of God.
There is a kind of natural Popery; we are naturally inclined to rest on some
goodness in our selves, or in some good done by us as deserving good at the
hands of God: yea the best of Gods children have some dregs of this natural
Popery still abiding in them, they are given to ascribe too much to their own
holiness, and to their own holy obedience: many times they think, if they
could attain to such a measure of holiness, and such a measure of holy
obedience, then they should be well. Indeed it is true, the more holiness we
have, and the greater that our holy obedience is, the more and the greater will
be our comfort: yet we must take heed we ascribe not too much to our holiness,
and that we advance not our holy obedience to an higher degree then this, to
please God, and to be accepted of him, as pleasing to him in and through
Christ. That is the highest degree of excellency our most holy obedience to
Gods will can reach to: and as Christ has taught us, Luke 17.10. Luke 17.10.
When we have done all those things which are commanded us, we are to say, we
are unprofitable servants. Yea says the Papist, say so for humilities sake,
and out of modesty, though we be not unprofitable. A poor shift, as if Christ
should teach us to say for humilities sake, that which is not true. When he bids
us say, we are unprofitable servants, does he bid us speak an untruth? No
without question, we are to say so, and in so saying we speak the truth; we
merit no good at the hands of God by our best and most holy obedience: we are
to renounce all merit of any good in our selves, or done by our selves, and to
lay claim and title to all good things both of this life, and of the life to
come, only by this, that we are the adopted sons of God in Christ, by whose
merit we are justified, and by whose Spirit we are sanctified. And yet we must
not hereupon cast off all care of doing of good things, because by doing of
them we merit no good at the hands of God: no, we are in way of thankfulness
to God for his mercy, to yield to him all holy obedience, and to be stirred up
to do good things, because they are pleasing to God through Christ, though
there were no heaven to reward us. Come we now to Verse 9.

VERSE 9. Now ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, because the Spirit of
God dwells in you: but if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.


Our Apostle having in the Verses before, from the first Verse hitherto, made
known in general, how it is with such as are after the flesh and such as are
after the Spirit: that the one sort savor the things of the flesh, and the
other the things of the Spirit: and that the wisdom of the flesh is death,
and the wisdom of the Spirit is life: and that the wisdom of the flesh is
enimitie against God, because it neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of
God; and thereupon brought in this conclusion, that they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. In this 9. verse, he makes application of his doctrine to
the believing Romans, and he labors to cheer them up and to comfort them: and
lest they should be discouraged, dejected, and cast down, and made sad by that
sentence of his, that they that are in the flesh cannot please God, he tells
them for their comfort, that they are not in the flesh: as if he had said,
Howsoever I thus speak, and affirm this as a certain truth, that they that
are in the flesh cannot please God, yet I am persuaded better things of you,
and I dare boldly affirm this of you, and tell you for your comfort, that you
are not in the flesh. Now ye are not in the flesh. And he amplifies that by the
contrary, affirming the contrary of them, that they were in the Spirit, Ye
are not in the flesh but in the Spirit. And again, he does not barely affirm
this of them, that they were in the Spirit; but he further subioynes proof and
confirmation of it, from the inhabitation and dwelling of Gods Spirit in them:
he says they were in the Spirit, because the Spirit of God dwelt in them. And
lest any amongst the Romans should presume on it, that they were not in the
flesh but in the Spirit and true Christians belonging to Christ, on a false
ground haling comfort to them that did not belong to them, the Apostle adds a
caveat or a wartch-word, that every one should look whether he have the Spirit
of Christ or no, affirming this in the last words of the verse, that he that
has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his: But (says he) if any man has
not the Spirit of Christ the same is not his. And so we see the general matter
of this verse, it containing a particular application of the Apostles former
doctrine made to the believing Romans; the Apostle affirming this of them,
that they were not in the flesh but in the Spirit, confirming that from the
dwelling of Gods Spirit in them, and thereunto subioyning a caveat to take heed
that none of them deceive themselves, but that they should look to it that
they had the Spirit of Christ; the Apostle affirming this, that if any man
amongst them have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.

Now ye are not in the flesh: that is, Interpretation.
ye believing Romans are not in the dregs and filth of nature, you are not
unregenerate and in your natural state and condition. But in the Spirit. The
Apostle opposes this to that, to be in the flesh: and so the meaning is easily
gathered, namely this, (...)
but ye are regenerate, sanctified, and set into the state of grace. Because or
for the Spirit of God dwells in you: the original word is the same we have
2 Thessalonians. 1.6. 2. Thesse. 1.6. (...).
For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you. By the Spirit of God, we are here to understand the third person
in Trinity, the holy Ghost: and the word God, is here to be taken personally
for the first person in Trinity, God the Father. Dwells in you. This phrase
is metaphorical, borrowed and taken from householders, from such as have their
certain abode and residence in a place or house, and do there busy
themselves, and exercise their power and authority: and it signifies the true
and powerful presence of Gods Spirit, that the Spirit of God is in the
faithful, not only in his infinite essence, as he is in all other things
filling heaven and earth, but by his special presence, by the efficacy and
working of his Spirit, enlightening them, quickening them, and ruling and
governing in them throughout, in all the powers of their souls, and in all the
parts and members of their bodies, as Satan and seven other spirits are said to
dwell, Matthew. 12.45. And so the Apostles meaning is this, because the Spirit of
God is in you, not only as he is in all other things in regard of his infinite
essence, but in more special manner, even by his true powerful working
presence, by the efficacy and working of his grace. But if any man has not
the Spirit of Christ. By the Spirit of Christ, we are to understand as before,
the holy Ghost, who proceeds both from the Father and from the Son. And for a
man to have him, is to be understood as before, to have him dwelling and
abiding in him, not only in regard of his essence, but also by his true and
powerful working presence, by the efficacy and working of his grace in
special manner in him. He is none of his: that is, none of Christ's, he belongs
not to him, he is not a lively member of Christ. Thus then the meaning of the
Apostle in the words of this verse, is thus to be conceived.

Now ye believing Romans are not in the dregs of nature, ye are not
unregenerate, in your natural state and condition: but you are regenerate and
sanctified, because the holy Spirit of God, even the holy Ghost, who proceeds
from God the Father, is in you; not only as he is in all other things, in
regard of his infinite essence, but in more special manner, even by his true
powerful and working presence, by the efficacy and working of his grace: but
take this with you, if any whosoever he be have not the holy Ghost, who
proceeds from the Son as from the Father, and is also the Spirit of Christ,
abiding in him, not only in regard of his essence, but also by his true
powerful working presence, by the efficacy and working of his grace in
special manner; he is none of Christ's, he belongs not to him, he is no lively
member of Christ.

Now first observe we, that the Apostle having before delivered general
doctrine, here in this verse he comes to apply it, and he does apply it in
particular to the believing Romans; both for the comfort of them that were to
be comforted, and for the warning of such as might happily apply and appropriate
comfort to themselves which did not belong to them, to look to the ground of
that comfort they took to themselves. Herein we may see the heavenly wisdom
of the Apostle, and by what Spirit he was guided; but to pass by that. From
this method of the Apostle, and from his manner of proceeding, we are given to
understand thus much:

That the right manner of dividing the word of God is In preaching the word,
general doctrines propounded and proved, must be particularly applied to the
use of the hearers.
general doctrines must not only be propounded and proved, but they must also
be particularly applied to the use of the hearers; even to profitable use for
their edification. It is not enough in preaching the word of God to deliver
general doctrines, and to clear and confirm them by strong evidence of
Scripture and reason, but application must also be made of them to the use of
the hearers, for their instruction, for their reproof, for their comfort, and
every way for their good, as need shall require, and as just occasion is
offered. Doctrine taught must be applied particularly, by instructing,
confuting, reproving, and comforting, as occasion is offered. 2. Timothy 4.2.
2. Tim. 4.2.
the Apostle lays this charge on Timothy, Preach the word, that is, publish
the doctrine of the word: and not only so, but says he, Be instant in
improuing, rebuking, and exhorting, with all long suffering and doctrine. Tit.
2.15. Tit. 2.15.
says he, These things speak, and not only so, but exhort, and rebuke with
all authority. And this we find to have been the practice of holy men in
preaching the word of God, John Baptist Matthew. 3. preaching the word, he
applies it home to the hearts of his hearers, even to the hearts of the
Pharisees and Sadduces that came to his Baptism. Verse 7.8.9.10. Mat 3.7.8.9.10.
O generation of vipers, (says he) who has forewarned you to fly from the
anger to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy amendment of life. And
think not to say with your selves, We have Abraham to our father: For I say
unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham:
and now also is the axe put to the root of the trees, therefore every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.
Act. 2.22. etc. to 37.
Thus also Peter preaching to the Jews, Acts 2. he makes application of his
doctrine to them in particular, from verse 22. to 37. he discouers to them
their particular sin in crucifying the Lord of life and glory, and lays
before them their sin, with all necessary circumstances of aggrauation. And
to these we might join the example of Nathan, 2. Sam. 12. and others clearing
and confirming this truth, that in preaching the word, doctrine must not only
be taught in general, but it must also be applied to the use of the hearers,
for their instruction, reproof, and comfort, and every way for their good, as
need shall require, and as occasion is offered. And why; there is reason for
it, as

bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Corinthians.
10.5. and that the heart may be stirred up to a love of God and good things,
and to a true hatred of evil.



Preaching only in general terms not such as it ought to be.
and never comes near the heart and conscience; as some preachers there be,
that only deliver general things, and never come to particular application:
if they do, it is but ouerly: they deal with sin as unskillful men use to
meddle with curious works made by the hand of cunning artificers, nicely for
fear of putting some thing out of due place and proportion: or as private
persons use to speak of state matters in general terms, warily and a far
off, lest they may be entangled in their speech. Such preaching cannot be
justified as good and profitable.

Again, is it so that in preaching the word of God, Hearers of the word
preached must suffer not only teaching and instruction, but also just reproof
and reprehension.
doctrine This iniquity says the Prophet, Isay 30.13.14. shall be to them as
a breach that falls, both suddenly and remediless, like the breaking of a
potters pot, which is broken without pity, and in the breaking thereof is not
found a sheard to take fire out of the harth, or water out of the pit. And
consider we that the word of God truly taught and applied to the heart and
conscience, to the discovering of sin particularly, it never returns empty;
if it work not godly sorrow and amendment, certainly it works hardness and
impenitencie, it is either the savor of life to life, or the savor of death
to death: and remember withal what Solomon says, Prou. 28.9. He that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abominable. He
that refuses to heat God speaking in his accusing, condemning, and threatening
Law, the Lord will deal with him proportionably, and will in justice turn
away his ear from his prayer. Oh then learn we to submit our selves, not
only to be taught the truth, but also to be reproved, and to be rebuked for
any thing that is amiss in us.

We have hitherto stood on the Apostles method and manner of proceeding: come we
now to the matter of this verse. And whereas the Apostle here affirms it of
the Romans, to whom he writ, that they were not in the flesh but in the Spirit,

The holy Prophets of God and the holy Apostles had an extraordinary spirit of
discerning. Use. They might therefore lawfully use imprecations against
particular persons.
even a spirit of revelation, by which they could discern who were regenerate,
and who were not: who were Gods children, and who were not. Paul was able by
the spirit of discerning to see and discern that the same faith dwelt in
Timothy that dwelt before in his grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice.
2. Tim. 1.5. Peter knew by the spirit of revelation, that Simon Magus was in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: I see says he, I
descerne it well, that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. Acts 8.23. And in this respect on this ground, the holy Prophets and
the holy Apostles might lawfully use imprecation against particular persons, as
Paul did against Alexander the copper Smith, 2. Tim. 4.14. Alexander the copper
Smith has showed me much evil, the Lord reward him according to his works.
Thus I say, the holy Prophets and the holy Apostles might do, because they had
an extraordinary spirit of discerning, and were able to see and discern who
were incurable enemies of God; and because they were carried with a pure zeal
of Gods glory, not mixed with hatred or desire of revenge; but this may not
ordinary men do. This may not ordinary men do.
Men that are but of ordinary gifts, whether Ministers or others, they may
pray against the bad cause the wicked enemies of God maintain simply and
absolutely; but against their persons they may not pray simply, but only with a
condition, if otherwise the good estate of the Church cannot continue, or
religion be preserved. And therefore it is a bold and a monstrous presumption in
any whatsoever they be, that take on them to discern of some particular
persons, that they are reprobates, and such as shall certainly be damned.
Indeed we may safely say of wicked and profane persons, and such as hold on a
course in sin, that they are in a damnable case and state, and that if they
go on in that state, they are sure to go to hell: but certainly to determine of
their final state, that is more then any man can do. Some phantasticke spirits
take on them by looking on men's faces to diue into their hearts, and then to
pronounce them hypocrites and unregenerate, and such as have not repented of
their sins. Though they have no just cause otherwise to judge of them, but
that they are religious, and such as fear God, yet they say they can tell by
looking on their faces, that they are hypocrites and unregenerate. An idle,
foolish, and wicked conceit; we are but men of ordinary gifts, we have not
that extraordinary spirit of discerning that the holy Prophets and Apostles
had. And if we see men outwardly reformed and resembling Gods children, that
they carry themselves as the children of God, (they may deceive us indeed) but
if they so carry themselves, we are to judge of them charitably, and in the
judgment of charity to hold them to be in the number of Christians: and they
that otherwise judge, they know not of what spirit they are, as Christ said to
James and John, Luke 9.55. they are carried with a lying and a deceiving spirit.

Now here further observe we, that the Apostle being guided by the Spirit of
God, affirming of the believing Romans that they were not in the flesh but in
the Spirit: that they were in the Spirit: without question the very best
amongst the believing Romans had flesh and corruption still in part abiding in
them, and yet the Apostle counts them holy and regenerate, and in the Spirit:
and his estimation and account of them was Gods account, the Lord did so
esteem and account of them; for the Apostle spoke as he was moved by the holy
Ghost. So the point hence offered is this.

God accounts true believers holy and sanctified persons though corruption
still abides in the^ in part.
holy and sanctified persons, and such as are in the Spirit. Though true
believers, Gods children, have flesh and corruption still in part abiding in
them, and shall have so long as they be in this world, and be but in part
sanctified and in part holy, in regard of inherent holiness, yet the Lord is
pleased to esteem and to account of them as holy and sanctified persons, and
such as are regenerate and in the Spirit. And hence it is that the Lord is
pleased to style true believers with the name and title of his children, of his
servants, of his Saints, and holy ones. Job 1.8. the Lord gives this testimony
of Job to the devil himself, that he was his servant: says he, Have thou not
considered my servant Job? And often we read of David, that he is called the
servant of the Lord, as Psalm 89.20. I have found David my servant. And the
Apostles usually style those to whom they writ, by the name and title of
Saints. Romans 1.7. To all you that be at Rome beloved of God, called to be
Saints. 2. Corinthians. 1.2. 1. Cor. 1.2. 2. Cor. 1.1.
To the Church of God which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, Saint by calling. Colos. 3.12. Now therefore (says the Apostle)
as the elect of God holy and beloved. He calls them Saints or holy, that were
but in part sanctified, and in part holy, in regard of inherent holiness. Yea
we find that such as are sound and sincere, and upright hearted, they are often
in Scripture said to be just, and holy, and righteous. Psalm. 32.11. Be glad ye
righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are upright in
heart. Prou. 20.7. He that walks in his integrity or uprightness is just:
he is a just and a righteous man. Job 1.8. Have thou not considered my servant
Job, how none is like him in the earth, an upright and just man, one that
fears God and eschueth evil? By these and many other places of Scripture, we
see that though Gods children have flesh and corruption still abiding in them,
and be but in part sanctified, and in part holy, in regard of inherent
holiness, yet the Lord is pleased to esteem and to account of them as holy
and sanctified persons, and such as are regenerate and in the Spirit. For why,
the reason and ground of this truth is this.

The Lord is so good and so gracious to his children, Job is accounted patient,
Ye have heard of the patience of Job: though indeed Job had sore fits of
impatiencie, Job 3.1. And so though David had many failings, as in his hasty
purposing and swearing the destruction of Nabal, and in his rash sentence
against Mephibosheth, yet the Lord passes by them, and gives this testimony
of him, 1. King. 15.5. that he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of his life,
save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. Now the Lord being thus good and
gracious, and thus indulgent to his children, he judging of them according to
the better part: on this ground we may resolve on this as a certain truth,
though Gods children have flesh and corruption still abiding in them, and be
but in part sanctified, and in part holy, in regard of inherent holiness, yet
the Lord is pleased to esteem and to account of them as holy and sanctified
persons, such as are regenerate and in the Spirit.

Comfort to Gods children who are much troubled with their sinful corruptions
and infirmities.
even to such poor believing Christians as find themselves much encountered and
much troubled with their sinful corruptions, and sinful infirmities. Art thou
one that endeuorest to please God? and do thou make conscience of every
sin, both in thought, word and deed? and yet thou find in thy self an
exceeding measure of rebellious corruption, much ignorance in thy mind, much
perverseness in thy will, and great disorder in thy affections: thou art
troubled and clogged with many sinful corruptions and infirmities? Be not
thereupon utterly dejected and cast down, and altogether out of heart and
discouraged; but comfort and cheer up thy self with this, that thou being
truly sanctified, though but in part, and in a very small measure; yet thou
having the least measure of true sanctifying grace in thy soul, the Lord of
his gracious goodness is pleased as it were to ouer-looke thy corruptions and
thy sinful infirmities, and to take no notice of them; and his eye is on that
holiness and on that grace that is in thee: and though it be but in part, and
poor, and weak for the measure of it, yet he looks on that, and in respect
of that he is pleased to esteem and to account of thee, as holy, and
sanctified, and regenerate, and as one that art in the Spirit. Indeed thou have
cause to be grieved and humbled for thy rebellious corruptions and sinful
infirmities; and thou art to groan under the burden of them, and to labor and
strive against them continually: yet take heed thou do not because of them
deny the work of grace, and be a false witness against that grace of God
that is in thee, and think there is nothing in thee that God likes or is
pleased withal, because thou have many sinful corruptions, and many sinful
infirmities still abiding in thee. No, no, take heed of that, that is the
devils argument, by which he troubles a poor weak Christian; he tells him,
thou have many sinful corruptions in thee, and thou can not be freed from
them: though thou labor and strive against them, yet they still cleave to thy
soul, and therefore thou have nothing in thee that is pleasing to God; thou
art but an hypocrite, there is no goodness in thee, and the like. Oh take heed
of yielding to Satan in this, and so denying the work of grace that i^ in
thee: though thou be but in part sanctified, and in part holy, and though thou
have as it were but a dram of true holiness, and true grace in thy soul, yet
the Lord is pleased in the riches of his mercy, to esteem and to account of
thee as an holy and sanctified person, as one that art regenerate and in the
Spirit. Yea but thou will say: I doubt whether I have any truth of Blessed are
such as hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled: Thou
have true grace and true holiness in thee, and though it be but weak and
poor for the measure of it; and though thy failings against thy purpose be
such as the world takes notice of, and for them accounts thee an hypocrite and
dissembler, yet comfort thy self on this ground, the Lords eye is on the truth
of grace and holiness that is in thee, he sees that, and takes notice of it;
and of his abundant goodness and mercy, in respect of that he esteems and he
accounts thee as an holy and sanctified person, as one regenerate and in the
Spirit; and that may be a great and singular comfort to thee: think on it to
thy comfort.

Come we now to the Apostles argument, by which he proves the believing Romans
not to be in the flesh but in the Spirit; in these words, Because the Spirit of
God dwells in you. The Apostle proves the believing Romans not to be in the
flesh but in the Spirit, from the inhabitation of the Spirit of God in them; he
reasons thus: The Spirit of God dwells in you, that is, the holy Spirit of
God is in you in special manner, by his true powerful working presence, by
the efficacy, and by the working of his grace: therefore you are not in the
flesh but in the Spirit. Now from this manner of reasoning only note we thus
much.

Such as find Gods Spirit working in them in special manner, are certainly
regenerate.
certainly proves that they are regenerate. Such as find Gods Spirit dwelling
in them, and working in them in special manner, they may certainly conclude
that they are regenerate, and that they are truly sanctified. And it is a good
argument: I find and I feel the efficacy and the power of grace, and the
working of Gods Spirit in my heart and soul in special manner, therefore I am
regenerate.

and true sanctification on a good ground, How a man may certainly conclude
that he is regenerate.
let them look that it be from the indwelling of Gods Spirit in them, and that
they find and feel the power of grace, and the working of Gods Spirit in their
hearts in special manner: thereupon a man may certainly resolve that he is
regenerate. It is not illumination, nor the common gifts of Gods Spirit, though
they be in thee in great measure, that will certainly prove that thou art
regenerate. No, no, thou may have the common gifts of Gods Spirit in great
measure, thou may have a great deal of knowledge, and that of heavenly
things, and be able to speak and discourse of them to others to good purpose,
and yet be a man unsanctified. Judas was a man that had great knowledge, no
question Christ taught him many good things, and he taught others, yet was he a
man unsanctified: therefore deceive not thy self, the devil will suffer any
man to say, I am regenerate, I am sanctified. But would thou prove it, and
have such proof of it as may comfort thine own soul, and silence the devil
though he do oppose thee: never rest till thou be able to say and that truly, I
find and feel the power of grace, and the working of Gods Spirit in my heart
and soul in special manner, and therefore I am regenerate: that is both an
holy and a sure kind of reasoning, and that will not deceive thee.

In the next place, we are to mark how the Apostle here expresses the being
of Gods Spirit in the believing Romans: he says, the Spirit of God dwelt in
them. This phrase and form of speech offers to us several particulars, as
first this, hence we are given to understand thus much.

That the Spirit of God is in Gods children in special Gods Spirit is in Gods
children in special manner.
The holy Spirit of God is not only in Gods children as he is in all other men
and in all other things, in regard of his infinite essence and being, but in
more special manner, he is in them by his true powerful working presence, he
as it were busies himself in them, he is resident in them, as an householder
in his own family, as a Lord, and as a commander; and in them he shows forth
the efficacy, power, and working of his grace. And hence it is that the
Apostle says, that true believers, Gods children, are the temples of the holy
Ghost, 1. Corinthians. 6.19. 1. Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in you,
whom ye have of God? as if he had said, the holy Ghost is in you that truly
believe, in your bodies, and in your souls, by his special presence, making
them fit temples for himself; and as in his holy temple he does more clearly
manifest his special presence then he does any where else in the world
besides: so is he in you, in your bodies and in your souls in special manner.
And to this purpose speaks the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 3.16. 1. Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? and verse 17. the latter end of it, For the temple of God is holy,
which ye are. And hence also it is that the Apostle Peter calls true believers a
spiritual house, a mansion, an house or an habitation of the Spirit, an house
wherein the Spirit of God is resident as an householder: 1. Pet. 2.5. 1. Pet.
2.5.
Ye as lively stones be made a spiritual house. And to these we might add
many other evidences of Scripture, showing this to be a truth, that the Spirit
of God is resident in Gods children in special manner, even by his true
powerful working presence, showing forth in them the efficacy, power, and
working of his grace. And the reason and ground of this truth is this.

1. Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. And therefore it must needs be,
that the Spirit of God is in Gods children in their measure in special manner,
even by his true powerful working presence, showing forth in them the
efficacy, power and working of his grace.





In three degrees appears the power of Gods grace in Gods children.
1. In curbing and restraining the flesh and corruption that still in part
abides in them, from breaking out in the full force and strength of it. Saint
John says, 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
The seed of grace keeps the regenerate that they cannot sin.

2. In putting into their minds a new light of knowledge, Thine ear shall
hear a word behind thee, even the voice of the Spirit in thee, saying, This is
the way, walk ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou
turnest to the left.

3. In making the means of salvation, the word, prayer,

Now this being a truth, it may serve as a ground of trial How we may try
whether we have the Spirit of God in us to our comfort, or no.
On this ground we may try whether we have the Spirit of God in us to our
comfort or no. Do thou find the holy Spirit of God resident in thee in
special manner? do thou find that he is in thee by his true powerful,
working presence? do thou feel the efficacy, power, and working of his
grace in thy soul? does he restrain thy corruption from breaking out, that it
cannot now break out as it was wont? does he inwardly rebuke thee for every
known sin? John 16.8. Has he set up a new light in thy mind? has he put
new motions and new inclinations into thy will and affections? does he direct
thee to do things agreeable to the will of God? do thou find that now thou
art enabled fruitfully to partake in the holy ordinances of God? to hear the
word of God in some measure to thy profit and comfort; to pray with feruencie
of spirit, that thy prayers pierce the heavens? Is it thus with thee? certainly
then the Spirit of God is in thee to thy comfort; he dwells in thee as a master
in his own family, and as a father with his children: yea he delights in thee
as in his own proper house and mansion. And he being the God of hope, and
peace, and true comfort, how can thou then want true peace or true comfort?
assuredly thou shall never want true peace or true comfort either in life or
death, and that is an excellent state. But on the other side; art thou one that
find not in thee the true powerful working presence of Gods Spirit? do
thou not feel the efficacy and power of his grace in thy soul? is thy
corruption, and are the vile lusts of thy heart as strong in thee as ever they
were? do thou make no bones of known sins? do thou without inward rebuke
break the Sabbath, sell thy commodities on that day whatsoever they be? art
thou as covetous? and do thou find that thou art as blind and as ignorant as
ever thou wast? art thou a formal and drowsy hearer of the word of God? have
thou no life nor feruencie in prayer, but thou prayest of form and custom,
and the like? Is it thus with thee? Deceive not thy self, thou can have no
comfort in this that the Spirit of God is in thee. Alas, the Spirit of God is
no otherwise in thee as yet, then he is in the reprobate, or then he is in the
ox or horse: He is in them in regard of his infinite essence, and he sustaines
them in their essence and being, and so he is in thee and sustaines thee. And
what comfort can thou find in it, that the Spirit of God is so in thee?
surely no more then the very ox, or horse, or reprobate can find that the
Spirit of God is in them. Indeed the Spirit of God is the true comforter, but
as yet to thee he is no comforter at all. No, know it for truth, whosoever thou
art, if thou find not the Spirit of God dwelling in thee in special manner, he
will one day be a God of dread and terror to thee; he will one day awaken thy
conscience, and set thy sins in order before thee: he will bring to thy
remembrance the sins that now thou take no notice of, and show thee what
thou have deserved by them, to thy utter amazement and everlasting confusion.

Again, is it so that the holy Spirit of God is in Gods children Terror to
those who wrong and abuse the poorest of Gods children.
is he as it were resident in them as in his proper house and mansion, and as
in his temple? Oh then take heed whosoever thou art, how thou do the least
wrong or the least indignity to the poorest or meanest of Gods children. Do
thou wrong and abuse a poor child of God, happily a silly man or woman? thou
know not what thou do; that wrong or that abuse is done to the house and
temple of the holy Ghost, and assure thy self he will not put it up at thy
hands. Will a Prince suffer his palace where he keeps his residence and has
his special abode, to be battered, to be dug through, or to have mire, and
dirt, and filth cast on it, if he be able to help it? certainly he will not.
And do thou think that the holy Spirit of God, who is of infinite power,
will suffer thee to bend thy tongue as a bow, and to shoot out vile and bitter
words as arrows, against the house where his holy Majesty dwells and delights
to dwell? Will he suffer thee as it were to batter his house, and to cast dung
and filth on it, as thou do when thou openest thy foul mouth against any
child of God, and when thou lodest the children of God with reproaches, and
do cast contempt and disgrace on them: and especially when thou do revile
them for their holiness; as when thou say to them as some wicked and
graceless wretches shame not to say tauntingly and scoffingly: Oh you are full
of the spirit, you are full of the holy Ghost, the devil is within you? Will
the holy Spirit of God, who is a God of infinite power, and has the command of
heaven and earth, and all the hoasts of them, will he suffer thee thus to do,
and to escape unpunished? No, no, assure thy self he will not, his hand shall
one day take hold of vengeance, and his revenging hand shall at one time or
other reach thee, and light on thee. Through the sides of Gods children thou
do cast contempt and disgrace on the Spirit of glory, that rests on them and
dwells in them. 1. Pet. 4.14. 1. Pet. 4.14.
and for that thou shall not escape his punishing hand. And it were good for
them to consider this, whosoever they be that seek to impose on poor weak
Christians, and seek to seduce them, and to draw them into any error be it
never so small: and under a color of edification in holiness and building on
the foundation Christ Jesus, they wrong such as are the temples of the holy
Ghost. It is the drift of the Apostles speech, 1. Cor.
3.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.
1. Corinthians. 3. from verse 11. to 18. to show, that such as build on the true
foundation stubble and straw, that their building shall be destroyed, though
they holding the head and the foundation shall be saved, yet as it were through
the fire. And let them consider what the Apostle there says, verse 17. If any
man destroy the temple of God him shall, God destroy. They that seduce poor
weak Christians, and impose on them, they as much as in them is destroy the
temples of the holy Ghost, and he will not suffer it unpunished.

In the next place, in that the Apostle uses this phrase, Because the Spirit
of God dwells in you: he says not barely, the Spirit of God is in you, but
the Spirit of God dwells in you: we are further given to understand thus much.

Gods Spirit has a settled abode and residence in Gods children.
or a stranger, or as a lodger, for a night, or for a short time; but as a
continual indweller, he has in them a settled abode and residence, he dwells in
them at all times, and shall dwell in them for ever. The holy Spirit of God
once having taken possession of the soul of a true believer, and taken up that
for his dwelling house and mansion, and being in it in special manner, even by
his true powerful working presence; by the efficacy and power of his grace,
he is in that soul for ever, and shall never wholly depart from it. The Spirit
of grace and holiness being once in the soul of a true believer, it abides
and it remains in that soul for ever, it dwells in it, Ioh. 14.16.17.
and it shall never utterly forsake it. Ioh. 14.16. says Christ, I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you
for ever: and then he subioynes verse 17. Even the Spirit of truth, whom the
world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye
know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Ioh.
3.9.
Saint John says, The seed of God, that is, the Spirit of grace and
sanctification, it remains in them that are borne anew. It is not only in
them, but it abides and it remains in them. Romans 11.29. Romans 11.29.
The gifts of God (says the Apostle) are without repentance. He means not
outward gifts of body or state, nor natural gifts of mind, as wit, memory, or
the like, nor common spiritual good things, as knowledge, the gift of
preaching, and such like: but the gifts of Gods special love bestowed on his
children, as remission of sins, justification, sanctification, and amongst
the rest, the Spirit of grace and holiness; even the Spirit of God in regard
of his true powerful working presence. And the efficacy and power of grace
bestowed on Gods children, even that gift is without repentance, the Lord never
repents him of that gift; he never calls it back, but being once had it abides
for ever, and can never be utterly lost. We see then that this is a truth
grounded on the word of God, that the holy Spirit of God is in Gods children,
not as a stranger, or soiourner, or lodger, but as a continual indweller, and
has in them a settled abode; and the Spirit of God taking up the soul for his
house and mansion, and being in the soul of a true believer, by his true
powerful working presence, and by the efficacy and power of grace, he is in
that soul for ever, and the Spirit of grace and holiness is never utterly out
of that soul. And the reasons of it are these.

First, none is able to dispossess the holy Spirit of God, and stronger then
he may come upon him, and overcome him, and take from him all his armor
wherein he trusts, and divide his spoils. Luke 11.22. but none is able to
overcome the power of the holy Ghost, and cast him our of his house and
dwelling.

Note.
that grace of his is the life of that soul, even the spiritual and heavenly
life of it, which being here begun, must continue for ever: for the life of
grace in Gods children must be the life of glory, it comes from the eternal
Spirit of God, and it is bred in them by an immortal seed: 1. Pet. 1.23. We
are borne a new, not of mortal, seed but of immortal, by the word of God, who
lives and endures for ever. It must needs be immortal and endure for ever:
and for the continuance of that life the Spirit of God is continually resident
in them. And therefore on these grounds we may set down this as a certain
truth, That the holy Spirit of God is in Gods children, not as a soiourner, or
stranger, or lodger, for a time, but as a continual indweller, and he has in
them a settled abode and residence. And the Spirit of God once taking up the
soul of a man or woman for his house and mansion, and being in it by his true
powerful working presence, and by the efficacy of his grace, he is in that
soul for ever: the Spirit of grace and holiness is never utterly out of that
soul. An householder being but a man, is sometimes out of his house, and from
home, but it is not so with the holy Spirit of God.

Now before we come to the use of this point, some things brought against this
truth are to be answered: as first it is objected.



That grace truly wrought, it is preserved of God by a second grace, and by a
continual supply of grace and strength from God, and so made durable and
lasting. And this is that the Lord promises to his people, Ierem. 32.40. That
he will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him:
they shall have no will to depart from him.

It is objected again, that some that are partakers of the

For answer to this, first mark the text it self, If they fall away. Again,
for further answer to this, Two degrees of partaking of Gods Spirit.
we must know that there be two degrees of partaking of the holy Ghost: one an
inferior or lower degree; when men are only enlightened and made partakers of
the common gifts of Gods Spirit, they have knowledge, and they have joy, and a
kind of tickling delight in the knowledge of new and strange things, which is
that Christ speaks of, Matthew. 13.20. And this is that partaking of the holy
Ghost that is meant in the place alleged; and this is but temporary and may be
lost. But there is another, an higher and more effectual partaking of the holy
Ghost, which is when men are enlightened to a certain and sufficient knowledge
of Gods will, and to a rejoicing in the sweet comforts of the word under the
hope of glory: and they are thoroughly wrought on, and thoroughly changed into
the image of God; and there is grace in them in power and practice. And this
pertaking of the holy Ghost is permanent, this is lasting and durable, and can
never utterly be extinct and lost. And so it still remains a truth, that the
holy Spirit is in Gods children, not as a stranger, or soiourner, or lodger for
a time, but as a continual dweller: and he being in them by the efficacy of
his grace, he has in them a settled abode and residence, and he is in them for
ever.

Now then to apply this, Comfort to all such as find and feel the power of
grace in themselves.
it may serve as a ground of sweet and excellent comfort to all such as find
and feel the power of grace in themselves, and find and feel the Spirit of
God dwelling in them in special manner. Do thou whosoever thou art, find and
feel the Spirit of God dwelling in thee by his true powerful working
presence? is the Spirit of God in thee by the efficacy and power of his grace?
Then assure thy self of this to thy comfort, that self same holy and blessed
Spirit of God will never forsake thee, he is in thee now, and he will he in
thee for ever: he has taken up thy soul as his own proper house and mansion,
and he will dwell in it for ever; he will never be (as men sometimes are) from
home and altogether absent from thy soul, he will be thy guide, thy sweet
companion and comforter, both in life and death, yea and after death most of
all. Sometimes poor tender hearted Christians cast out these or the like
complaints: I fear I shall not be able to hold out to the end, I feel such
weakness of grace in me, as I doubt when the time of trial comes I shall
faint, and give over, and even fall away. Oh what do thou thus troubling thy
poor soul? why do thou cast these needless doubts aforehand? have thou
true grace in thy soul? be it never so poor and weak for the measure, yet
have thou good evidence that there is truth of grace in thee? Comfort thy
self, the holy Spirit of God dwells in thee, and he will dwell in thee for
ever; he will never forsake thee: thou stand not by any power of thine own,
but by the power of the Spirit of God, and he is able to uphold thee, and he
will; thou have his faithful promise, 1. Corinthians. 10.13. 1. Cor. 10.13.
that he will not suffer thee to be tried or tempted,
above thy strength: and he will be as good as his word, he will quicken thee,
and comfort thee, and uphold thee in thy greatest trials: the holy Spirit of
God dwelling in thy soul, he will abide in it for ever. All the power of hell
is not able to thrust him out of his house and mansion, he is stronger then
all; and he having begun the life of grace in thee, assure thy self nothing
shall hinder him but he will bring it to the life of glory hereafter; and
therefore comfort thy self.



turbida interualla, their troubled fits, sometimes gracious feelings, and
sometimes faintings: sometimes forwardness in good things, and sometimes
heaviness and deadness of heart. And remember withal, that thou art not so
to conclude, I feel not the gracious working in me I was wont to feel, and
therefore the Spirit of God is gone from me, and has utterly forsaken me: that
is no good conclusion, There is a substance in the oak or in the elm when they
cast their leaves: Isay 6.13. Isai. 6.13.
and so there may be the sap of grace and the Spirit of grace in thee, though
for the present thou feel not the gracious working of it: and if once thou
feel the power of grace in thy soul, assure thy self that gracious working
will come again in time. The holy Spirit of God being in thee by the efficacy
and power of grace, he dwells in thee, and will never leave thee, but will dwell
in thee for ever. Yet take heed thou be not secure and careless, that thou
neglect not the good means that serve to cherish the Spirit of grace and
holiness in thee: it is the Apostles exhortation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 1 Thessalonians.
5.19.
Quench not the Spirit. Through thy carelessness and security thou may in
some sort and degree quench the Spirit: and howsoever the Spirit of God once
dwelling in thee, will dwell in thee for ever, yet if thou grow careless and
secure, and either neglect holy duties, or through thy security suffer thy
self to be overtaken with some foul sin, the Spirit of God may so far
forsake thee, as that he may seem in thine own judgment to be clean gone,
and quite quenched and put out; and thou may lose the tokens and gifts of
grace, as feeling of comfort and spiritual joy, clearness of understanding,
feeling and affection to goodness, feruencie of love, holy boldness, and the
like: and these things being gone, oh what tugging and what wrestling will
there be before thou can recover them again? And the peace of thy conscience
being wounded by some foul sin, and thy spiritual joy being gone, thou
shall never recover it in that measure thou had it in former times: though
thy wound be healed, yet there will remain a scarre and mark in thy soul so
long as thou live. Therefore take heed of security, be careful to use all
good means that serve to nourish and cherish the Spirit of grace in thee, as
diligent hearing, reading, meditating in the word of God, and prayer, holy
conference, and such like.

There is yet one thing further offered from this phrase and form of speech,
dwells: this metaphorical and borrowed word dwells, gives us further to
understand thus much.

Though the holy Spirit of God be truly and really in Gods children, yet he is
not so in them as that they partake of the divine essence of his Godhead.
yet he is not in them so as that they partake of the divine essence of his
Godhead, and so as that he does communicate his divine nature to them, and
deifie them, and make them one nature with himself: no, but he is in them as
an indweller, and as an householder; and their hearts and souls are as the
houses where he dwells; and there is a real distinction between him and them,
they are really distinguished one from another, as the dweller and the house
where one dwells. Indeed the holy Spirit of God is truly and really in Gods
children: the gifts and effects of the Spirit presuppose the true presence of
the Spirit, but yet he is not in them by communicating of his essence and
nature to them, but by his gifts, and by his effectual and special operation,
and working by the power of his grace. It is the conceit of some idle, foolish,
and phantasticke spirits, against whom I note this.

A foolish conceit of some phantasticke spirits confuted.
That the spirit of grace and holiness in Gods children, is a participation of
the very nature of Gods Spirit: and they say, that such as are regenerate are
partakers of the divine essence of his Godhead, and so are deified. Thus they
speak blasphemously. This is a blind and foolish conceit; and they that hold
this are possessed with a spirit of giddiness, and they are strongly deluded
of Satan: and this conceit of theirs cannot stand with this truth, that the
Spirit of God dwells in Gods children, and is in them as an indweller.

Gods Spirit, and therefore it is part of his divine essence and nature. I
answer. partakers of the godly nature. 2. Pet. 1.4. The word there used, is not
(...), (...).
but (...), and it signifies such a precious gift of holiness, as does
resemble the holiness of God. And so the holy Spirit of God is in Gods
children, not by communicating to them his divine essence and nature, but by
his gifts, by his effectual and special working, even by the power of his
grace. We have now heard of the comfort the Apostle yielded to the believing
Romans, he telling them to their comfort, that they were not in the flesh but
in the Spirit: and confirming that from the indwelling of Gods Spirit in them:
we are now to come to his caveat or watchword that he gives them in the words
following: But (says he) if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.

In these words the Apostle gives them a watchword, to look to it that none
of them did assume and take that comfort to them that did not belong to them,
but that they should see to it that they have the Spirit of God dwelling in
them indeed: affirming this, that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his. And herein appears the heavenly wisdom of the Apostle;
he so applies the word of comfort to the Romans, to whom he writ, as withal he
gives them a caveat and watchword, to take heed they did not hale comfort to
them which did not belong to them, but that they should look to the ground of
their comfort. And this ought to be the wisdom of all good Ministers,
especially when they speak to a mixed company: they are then so to order and
to temper their words of comfort, as that none may abuse them, or misapplie
them. In speaking and delivering the word of comfort to Gods children, which
properly belongs to them, they are to take heed they lift not up the hearts of
the wicked and profane, but withal they are to give them an item and a
watchword, that they presume not to lay foul and theeuish hands on that
comfort, and hale and pull that unto them which they have no right to. But to
pass by this, come we to the caveat or watchword it self: But if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his. And here first mark and
observe we the generality of the Apostles speech: he says, If any man
whatsoever he be, he speaks without exception, if any man, as if he had said,
Let a man be what he will, or be a man what he may be, rich or poor, high or
low, noble or base, learned or unlearned, and let him have never so excellent
gifts and endowments of body or mind, inward or outward, it skils not, it is
nothing to his comfort, he cannot thereupon conclude that his state is good if
he want grace and holiness. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same
is not his: he belongs not to him, he is not in the comfortable state of a true
Christian. Hence then we may gather and conclude thus much.

Nothing without true grace and holiness yields to any man or woman true
comfort touching their spiritual and Christian estate.
That nothing without true grace and holiness can yield to man or woman true
comfort in regard of their spiritual and Christian state: it is not any
excellency of body or mind, inward or outward, nor any privilege whatsoever,
be it never so great, can yield true comfort to a man that wants the Spirit of
grace and holiness: such a man cannot truly gather and conclude, that he is in
the comfortable state of a true Christian, though he be rich, or noble, or
learned, or the like. And to make this further manifest, was it not an
excellent privilege to be of the kindred of Christ in respect of blood?
doubtless it was, more then to be of the bloud-royall of the greatest Monarch
or Emperor in the world; yet mark what Christ himself accounts of that,
Matthew. 12.47. Mat. 12.47.48.
when one came to him and told him that his mother and his brethren stood
without desiring to speak with him, (says he) verse 48. Who is my mother? and
who are my brethren? as if he had said, what is it to be of my kindred? do you
think that such a thing as may yield a man or woman true comfort? No, no, I
tell you they are my brethren and my mother, that do the will of my Father
which is in heaven: so he speaks in the last verse of the Chapter. Though a
man or woman be allied to Christ and be of his kindred, yet if he want grace
and holiness, that is nothing, that will yield him no true comfort. Who ever
had greater honor then was vouchsafed to the Virgin Marie, even to bear in
her womb the Lord Jesus, and to be the mother of the Savior of all Gods
chosen; and yet that was nothing to yield her true comfort. Luke 11.27.28. Luke
11.27.28.
When a certain woman lift up her voice and said unto him, Blessed is the
womb that barc thee, and the pappes which thou have sucked: Nay rather (says
Christ) blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it: blessed are
they that have grace in their hearts to profit by the word of God. And as one
says well, if the Virgin Marie had not borne Christ in her heart as she bore
him in her womb, she had not been the better, it had been nothing to her
comfort. I might instance in many other particulars showing the truth of this,
yt it is not any excellency of body or mind, inward or outward, nor any
privilege whatsoever, that can yield true comfort to a man that wants the
Spirit of grace and holiness; and such a man cannot truly conclude, that he is
in the comfortable state of a Christian. For why, the reason and ground of it
is this.

The excellencies of body or mind, or account with the Lord; they being but
carnal and temporal, as they be where grace and holiness is wanting, the
Lord esteems them but as vanity and nothing worth. It is worth our marking to
this purpose, that we find Act. 25.23. it is there said, that Agrippa and
Bernice came with great pomp. The original words are (...), they signify
with great fantasy or vain show: so does the Lord account of the great
glory and pomp of the world, even as a fantasy or shadow. And therefore
this we may hold as a certain truth, that it is not any excellency of body or
mind, inward or outward, nor any privilege whatsoever it be, can yield true
comfort to a man that wants the Spirit of grace and holiness: such a m^n
cannot truly conclude, that he is in the comfortable state of a true Christian.

A common swelling and proud conceit of men and women met withal.
Oh then take heed, whosoever thou art, thou deceive not thy self, think not
that any excellency thou have, either of body or mind, inward or outward, or
any privilege thou enioyest above others, will yield thee true comfort, thou
being a man or woman that want the Spirit of grace and holiness, and the
Spirit of sanctification. It is a common thing for men to pride themselves in
their excellencies, and in their privileges above others, and in regard of
them to lift up themselves above their brethren; yea not only so, but
sometimes through the pride of their hearts, to lift up themselves in the
presence of the Lord, and to think that they are highly in Gods favor, and
that they have ground of comfort in his presence, even because of those
excellencies and privileges they do enjoy. Is it not a common thing, for men
that are grown rich and increased in wealth, or honored in the world, to
think that therefore they are highly in the favor of God, and that God loves
them, though they be men utterly void of grace and true holiness; nay happily
such as scorn and despise it in others? Poor souls, they deceive themselves
exceedingly, they measure the savor of God by a leaden rule: and know it
whosoever thou art, though thou had, the wisdom of Solomon, the beauty of
Absalom, the strength of Sampson, the riches of Croesus, the greatness and
power of Alexander, yet if thou want the Spirit of grace and holiness, all
those things can yield thee no true comfort: they are to thee but accursed
vanities and bitter vexations of Spirit; so the holy Ghost speaks of them. Yea
know yet further, thou may enjoy privileges of an higher nature, even the
good things of God, his word, Sacraments, and the like, (which is all that some
have to brag and boast of, that they live in the bosom of the Church, they
have been baptized, and they are made partakers of the word and Sacraments,
they live in a place where the word is truly and powerfully taught) thou may
enjoy these things in a plentiful measure which others want, and yet be never
the better, and be yet far from the comfortable state of a true Christian;
yea thou wanting grace to make a right and good use of these things, they are
to thee but seals of deeper condemnation: and therefore deceive not thy self;
pride not thy self in any excellency thou enioyest whatsoever it be, if thou
be a man or woman wanting the Spirit of grace and holiness. Labor thou to get
that evidence of true comfort that will never deceive thee, even true grace and
holiness, that indeed will assure thee that thou art in the comfortable state
of a true Christian. But if any man whatsoever he be, be he rich, or noble, or
learned, be he what he will or may be, it is the eternal truth of God: if he
have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, he is not in the comfortable
state of a true Christian.

Let us now go on in further handling of this caveat of the Apostle: But if any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his. To have the Spirit of
Christ, is (as before I showed) to have him dwell in us by his true powerful
working presence, by the efficacy and power of his grace. Now in Only the
being of the Spirit of Christ in a man by his true powerful working presence,
gives him true comfort.
If any man have not the Spirit thus dwelling in him, the same is none of his,
we are further given to understand thus much.

That it is only the Spirit of grace and holiness, even the being of the
Spirit of Christ in a man by his true powerful working presence, by the
efficacy and power of his grace, that gives him true comfort, and yields him
this comfort, that he belongs to Christ, that he is a member of Christ, and a
true Christian. Every man or woman whosoever the person be, that would have
this comfort that he belongs to Christ, and that Christ does acknowledge him
for one of his, must find that he has the Spirit of Christ, that the holy
Spirit of Christ is in him as he is in Gods children, by his true powerful
working presence, and by the efficacy of his grace. And this truth has
footing and ground not only in this text, but in other places of Scripture. To
cite one or two to this purpose, 1. Ioh. 4.13. 1. Ioh. 4.13.
Hereby (says Saint John) we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because
he has given us of his Spirit: that we dwell in God, and God in us, that we
belong to Christ, and through Christ have fellowship and communion with God:
for thorough Christ alone men come to have fellowship with God, and are his
children; because he has given us of his Spirit, because we have the gifts of
his Spirit, and do find and feel the efficacy and power of his grace in our
hearts. Galat. 4.6. Galat. 4.6.
says the Apostle, Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba, Father. Even the Spirit of
Christ given to you, and being in you by the power of his grace, does give you
evidence that you belong to Christ, and that you are the children of God. And
hence it is that the holy Spirit of Christ is called a seal and an earnest: 2. Corinthians. 1.22. 2. Cor. 1.22.
God (says the Apostle) has sealed us, and has given the earnest of his
Spirit in our hearts. And Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by
whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption: because the Spirit of Christ
does seal up to Gods children their being in Christ, and is as an earnest
penny to them to assure them of their comfort in him, both in this life and
for ever. And therefore this is a truth grounded on the word of God, that it is
only the Spirit of grace and holiness, even the being of the Spirit of Christ
in a man, by his true powerful working presence, by the efficacy of his
grace, that yields him this comfort, that he belongs to Christ, and that he is
a member of Christ, and a true Christian, and that Christ does acknowledge him
for one of his. Now the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.

First, Christ and his Spirit are never found asunder in respect

Again secondly, to whomsoever Christ is a Savior, to

First, this truth serves to discover to us an erroneous conceit An erroneous
Popish conceit discovered.
that only their Clergy are spiritual men: and it is the Popish conceit of
some ignorant persons amongst us, that only Ministers of the word are
spiritual men. Yea the Papists withhold the holy Scripture from their people,
and suffer not them to meddle with reading the Scriptures, on this pretense,
that (forsooth) they have not Gods Spirit. Oh say they, they have not Gods
Spirit, and therefore it is not for them to look into the Scriptures. Surely
they might as well say, that their people are no true Christians, and that they
have nothing in them that may yield them this comfort that they belong to
Christ. It is the being of the Spirit of Christ in a man or woman that yields
him or her this comfort, that they belong to Christ, and are members of Christ,
and true Christians: therefore it is an erroneous conceit of the Papists, that
Gods Spirit is only in their Clergy, and that the people are not to read
the Scriptures, because they want Gods Spirit. I leave them.

A common deceiving conceit of many in the world discovered.
by the efficacy of his grace, is that only that yields him this comfort,
that he belongs to Christ, and is a member of Christ, and a true Christian? Oh
then consider it I beseech you: this discouers that many in the world deceive
themselves: Every one accounts himself a Christian, and that he belongs to
Christ; and every one will be so held and so reputed: but alas where is almost
the man or woman that is able to conclude from the being of the Spirit of
Christ in them, even from the true powerful working presence of his Spirit in
their hearts and souls, that they belong to Christ, and are members of Christ,
and true Christians? Alas, many are so far from this, as that they have in them
a contrary spirit, even the spirit of the devil strongly working. To instance
in one particular: has that man or that woman whosoever they be, the Spirit of
Christ, that break out into blasphemous speeches against the workmanship of
God, and stick not to say, against the plain evidence of the word of God,
that women have no souls; and break out into other vile and blasphemous
speeches not fit to be named, touching the making of women; have such persons
the Spirit of Christ? surely no, but the Spirit of the devil. And how many be
there that show forth the strong working of Satan in their hearts, in setting
their tongues on fire to belch out blasphemous oaths, cursings, and raylings,
even to break out into most bitter, venomous, and galling terms against their
neighbors and brethren? have such persons the Spirit of Christ? No, no, they
have in them the Spirit of the devil, and their tongues are set on fire of
hell, Iam. 3.6. Iam. 3.6.
Oh, but they say, we are provoked, and we are so stirred up by the evil words
and evil deeds of others, as we cannot endure it, flesh and blood cannot
endure it. Yea, but thou art more then flesh and blood, thou have the Spirit of
Christ in thee, even by his true powerful working presence, or else thou have
no part in Christ, thou belongest not to him, thou are no true Christian. Yea
let such as are not thus exorbitant, and thus vile, but more civil and orderly
in their carriage, even civil honest persons, know that they deceive
themselves, if they think that they have ground of comfort that they belong to
Christ. Do thou that art only a civil honest person, and have no more but
civil honesty, persuade thy self that thou have that, that will yield thee
this comfort, that thou belongest to Christ, that thou art a member of Christ,
and a true Christian? Poor soul, thou deceiuest thy self, that will not
serve the turn: no, no, know it whosoever thou art, it is only the being of
the Spirit of Christ in thee, even his being in thee by his true powerful
working presence, by the efficacy and power of his grace, that will yield thee
this comfort, that thou belongest to Christ, and art a member of Christ, and a
true Christian: thy civil honesty and thy civil virtues, though never so
many and excellent, cannot possibly yield thee this comfort: for they may be in
a man or woman that is only endued with reason and the light of nature; and
therefore rest not on thy civil honesty, as sufficient to yield thee this
comfort, that thou belongest to Christ, and art a member of Christ, and a true
Christian; if thou do, it will deceive thee. Happily here some will say, heavenly
disposition, and enabling thee to profit by the means of salvation. And to
add a little further, if thou find that thou have in thee the mind of Christ
Jesus, as the Apostle exhorts, Philip. 2.5. that thou art minded in some
measure as Christ was, that thou have a mind to know the will of God, that thou
may do it; and it is meat and drink to thee to do it, as it was in Christ,
thou art meek, and lowly, and humble minded; thou suffer as Christ
suffered, in silence, contentation, obedience, subiecting thy self to the will
of God, and thou have the spirit of prayer in some measure, yea thou art able
to pray for thine enemies as Christ did. If it be thus with thee, certainly
then thou have the Spirit of Christ, and he is in thee by his true powerful
working presence, and by the efficacy of his grace; and that is the only
thing that will yield thee this comfort, that thou belongest to Christ, and art
a member of Christ, and a true Christian: and if thou want this, if the Spirit
of Christ be not thus in thee by his true powerful working presence, and by
the efficacy of his grace, assuredly thou art none of Christ's, thou belongest
not to him, and then thy case is fearful; thou art then a vassal of the
devil, thou belongest to him And if thou live and die in that state, Christ
will never own thee for one of his either in life or death, or at the day of
judgment: no, then he will utterly disclaim thee, and say to thee, depart
from me thou cursed one into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
Angels. Therefore rest not thou in anything but only in this, that thou have
the Spirit of Christ, and that the Spirit of Christ is in thee by his true
powerful working presence, and by the efficacy and power of his grace; that
indeed will yield thee this comfort, that thou belongest to Christ, and art a
member of Christ, and a true Christian.

There is yet one thing further to be noted from this verse. The Apostle here
(as we see) calls the holy Ghost the holy Spirit of God the Spirit of Christ
also: because (says he) the Spirit of God dwells in you: and then he
subioynes, But if any man has not the Spirit of Christ. Now in that he calls
the Spirit of God the Spirit of Christ, it proves clearly and strongly, that
Christ is God; it is a plain evidence and proof of The holy Ghost is the
Spirit of Christ, and proceeds no less from the Son of God then he does
from God the Father.
This also is a plain evidence and proof, that the holy Ghost proceeds no
less from the Son of God then he does from God the Father: the holy Ghost
has his personal being from the Father and from the Son, and he proceeds by
communication of substance or Godhead, not only from the Father, but also from
the Son from all eternity: and in this respect he is said to be the Spirit
of Christ and the Spirit of the Son. Galat. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba,
Father. In two respects is the holy Ghost the Spirit of Christ.
And not only in this respect is the holy Ghost said to be the Spirit of
Christ, or the Spirit of the Son, but also in two other respects.

As namely, because Christ in his manhood was filled with received not the
Spirit by measure, Ioh. 3.34. but in fullness. Ioh. 1.16. and likewise, Because
by his

Now this, Information in that high mystery of the unity of essence and
trinity of persons in the Godhead.
that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son as from the Father, and is the
Spirit of Christ as of God the Father, may serve not only to inform us in
this high mystery, that God is one in essence, even one simple undivided
essence, and distinguished into three persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
but we may further profit by it to this purpose, it may further teach us, that
whatsoever the Spirit of God The Spirit of God teaches men that which Christ
has taught and revealed, and nothing else.

A foolish conceit of Anabaptists and Familists met withal.


it is the same that Christ has taught and revealed, and nothing else but that
he has taught and revealed by his Spirit: For the Spirit of God is also the
Spirit of Christ. And what is it that Christ has taught us by his Spirit?
Surely nothing but that which is recorded in the written word of God, and made
known by the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles. And all doctrines
concerning salvation that are besides or contrary to the written word of God,
as most Popish doctrines be; they are not revealed by the Spirit of God, but
are mere fictions and devices of the devil. And it is an idle and foolish
thing of the Anabaptists and of the Familists to depend on revelations of the
Spirit besides the written word of God, they bragging much of the illumination
of the Spirit. Surely those revelations they brag of besides the written word
of God, are not suggested to them by the Spirit of Christ, but by the spirit of
error, even by the devil. That which Christ does suggest by his Spitit to Gods
children, it is that doctrine that is either expressed in the written word of
God, or that which is agreeable to it. Ioh. 14.26. Christ promises that his
Spirit should suggest and bring all things to the minds of his disciples: and
he adds, which he had told them, and taught them, and not any new doctrines
and revelations.

Again, he says Ioh. 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and shall show it to
you. And hence it is that the Apostle calls his preaching the ministration of
the Spirit, 2. Corinthians. 3.8. teaching us that the word and Spirit ever go
together, the Spirit shines in the word, and the word is powerful by the
Spirit: and therefore it is an idle and vain thing to depend on reuelatitions
of the Spirit besides the written word of God. The Spirit of God is also the
Spirit of Christ, and that Spirit reueales nothing but that which Christ has
revealed and made known by the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles. And
therefore they that say they are enlightened by the Spirit, and have
revelations from the Spirit of God besides the written word, are exceedingly
deceived, and they are deluded by Satan. Come we now to the 10. verse.

VERSE 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin: but the
Spirit is life for righteousness sake.


IF Christ be in you (says the Apostle) the body is dead because of sin.
Our Apostle having in the second Verse of this Chapter delivered this that the
Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus had freed him, and not only
him but all true believers from the Law of sin, and from the Law of death:
and having hitherto confirmed the first branch of that position, touching
freedom from the Law of sin, and confirmed the believing Romans against the
remnants of sin still abiding in them; in this 10. Verse he comes to make
known to them the other part of their freedom, that is, from death: and in
the 10. and 11. verses, he shows them to their comfort how far they were
freed from death. In this 10. verse, that they were freed from death so far
as that they were subject to it but in part, only in respect of the body, not
in respect of the soul. Then verse 11. that they were subject to death in
their bodies but for a time, that their bodies being mortal, yea being dead,
they should not ever remain under the power of death, but they should in time
be quickened and raised up again from death to life. That is the sum and
substance of these two verses: containing in them this ground of comfort, that
true believers are not subject to death, either wholly or perpetually.

Now in this 10. verse, the Apostle speaks to the comfort of the believing
Romans by way of prevention of a secret objection For, happily they might object
and say to him, You tell us that we are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in us, and that so we are in Christ, but yet you
see it, and we find it, that are subject to death as well as others, and death
is the fruit and effect of sin, and therefore what may we think of our
selves: have we such ground of comfort in our selves as you seem to yield to
us? To this the Apostle answers, granting to them in part that they were
subject to death as well as others in respect of the body by reason of sin;
but yet Christ being in them, he tells them, that they were not wholly subject
to death as others that are out of Christ, but that the Spirit was life for
righteousness sake, that their souls were nor subject to death as the souls
of others are.

So then in this verse we have these two things laid before us, first a
concession, a granting to the believing Romans by way of answer to a secret
objection, that they were subject to death in the body because of sin, in
these words, The body is dead because of sin. And secondly, a chearing them
up, and comforting of them in this respect, that their souls were free from
death, yea that Christ being in them, their souls were partakers of life
because of righteousness, laying the beginning and ending together: If Christ
be in you the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life for
righteousness sake. And so we see the general drift and purpose of the
Apostle in this verse.

If Christ be in you. This phrase is all one in sense with that verse 1.
Interpretation.
In Christ Jesus, and the meaning is this, if you be joined and knit to Christ,
and one with him by spiritual union and conjunction, by the bond of his
Spirit, and by true faith, as his members. The body is dead. By the body some
would have the unregenerate part of man to be meant, but indeed in that sense
the Apostle uses to oppose flesh and spirit, and not body and spirit. And
again the body is never put for sin without some addition, as the body of
sin, the body of death, and the like. The word body (as I conceive) is here
to be taken in the proper sense and signification, even for that part of man
which is called the body, the mortal part of man, and that is most agreeable
to the purpose of the Apostle, and to the context, even to that which the
Apostle subioynes in the next verse touching quickening and raising up of the
body from the dead, Is dead, that is, is frail, corruptible, and mortal, or
subject to death, as 1. Corinthians. 15.53. For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. Because of sin: that
is, because of the remainder of sin, or by reason of sin still abiding in
you in part though you be in Christ; even the remainder of sin that still
abides in you, makes you liable to death of body, though the venom and sting
of death be removed from you by the death of Christ. But the Spirit is life.
Some here again would have the word Spirit, to signify the holy Ghost, but
that is not answerable to the other member of the opposition (the body.) By
spirit we are to understand, as an opposite member of the body, the soul of
man; and yet not the soul simply, but the soul renewed, the soul sanctified,
the spiritual part of man, namely, the soul being renewed by the Spirit of
God, and therefore called Spirit. Hebr. 12.23. The holy Ghost calls the holy
souls of the Saints in heaven, spirits of just and perfect men. Is life, that
is, alive, or lively now by grace, (as the just is said to live by faith, Romans
1.17.) and shall hereafter live the life of glory in heaven. For righteousness
sake, or because of righteousness: that is, because of the righteousness of
Christ imputed, which gives right and title to life and salvation. Romans 5.18.
As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation, so by the
justice of one, the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of
life. And in regard also of righteousness inherent, not as a meritorious
cause, but because it is a certain infallible sign of imputed righteousness
to which eternal life and salvation belongs. Now then thus conceive we the
meaning of the Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said.

If you be joined and knit to Christ, and one with him by the bond of his
Spirit, and by faith; your bodies indeed are frail, corruptible, and mortal,
and subject to death by reason of sin still abiding in you in part, though
the venom and sting of sin be removed from you by Christ; but yet your
renewed and sanctified souls, your souls renewed by the Spirit of God, are
alive, and they live now the life of grace, and shall hereafter live the life
of glory in heaven, because of the righteousness of Christ imputed to you,
which gives you right and title to life and salvation: and in regard of
righteousness inherent in you, not as a meritorious cause, but because that is
a sure and infallible sign of imputed righteousness, to which eternal life
and salvation belongs.

The Apostle here says, If Christ be in you; and in the next verse, If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead dwell in you. He speaks
conditionally, being to deliver matter of comfort, he propounds it with a
condition, thereby teaching us thus much.

Promises of comfort and of good things are in Gods book propounded with a
condition.
they are propounded with a condition, they are not general and indifferently
belonging to all, but there is a condition annexed or implied in every promise
of God touching good things of this life or the life to come. In the covenant
of works the Lord says, Do this and thou shall live; in the covenant of grace
propounded in the Gospel, Believe and repent, and thou shall be saved. Matthew.
10.12. says Christ to his Apostles sending them abroad, When you come into an
house, salute the same: and then verse 13. And if the house be worthy let your
peace come upon it, if not, let it return to you again. Matthew. 5.4. to whom
does Christ promise comfort? only to such as mourn: and verse 6. whom does he
promise to satisfy? surely only those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness. Throughout the book of God we find that every promise of
mercy, or of any good thing, it is conditional: for why, To whom comfort from
God belongs, and who they be that have just title to it.
Oh then deceive not thy self whosoever thou art, think not that any comfort
from God belongs to thee, unless thou be qualified as one of those to whom God
has made promise of that comfort. If thou be not a child of God and one truly
fearing God, thou have no title to any comfort from God belonging to this life:
no, not to a bit of bread to put into thy mouth, nor a ragge to put on thy
back, much less to the comforts of a better life. Alas, many deceive
themselves, they think that Gods mercy and sweet comforts in Christ belong to
them, and that Christ is their Savior, and died for them, and that they shall
be saved by him howsoever they live, though they be drunkards, common swearers,
filthy adulterers, and make no conscience of any sin. Poor souls, they
deceive themselves exceedingly, we find not in all the Bible from the beginning
to the end, any one promise but with a condition: and therefore they that would
have title to any comfort from God either belonging to this life or the life to
come, must look that they perform the condition required of such as may
challenge right to that promise.

The Apostle says, If Christ be in you, which as I showed is all one as if he
had said, If thou be in Christ, if thou be joined and knit to Christ by the
bond of his Spirit, and by faith. I might here stand to show the nearenesse of
that union that is betwixt Christ and his members, that they are so nearely
knit together, as that Christ is in them and they in Christ; but that we stood
on verse 1. and therefore I pass by it: only here observe we, that the
Apostle having said verse before, that the Spirit of God which he also calls the
Spirit of Christ, dwelt in the believing Romans: here he says, If Christ be in
you, if you belong to Christ, and one with Christ. Now from this context we may
note the manner of Christ his dwelling in Gods children, that it is by his
Spirit. The point hence is this.

That Christ is one with true believers and with his members, The union of
Christ and his members is mystical and spiritual.
The union by which Christ and his members are conjoined, though it be a true
real union, and a most near union, so as they are of his flesh and of his
bone, Ephesians 5.30. Ephesians. 5.30.
yet it is not natural, as when two things are joined in one nature, nor
corporal, by touching, mixture, or the like, nor personal, 1. Cor. 6.17.
as the soul and body are united, nor political or civil, as the Prince and
his subjects are conjoined; but it is mystical and spiritual, by the bond of
the same Spirit, and by true faith. 1. Corinthians. 6.17. says the Apostle, He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. And this I Confutation of
Vbiquitarie^.
as the Vbiquitaries do affirm, that we may be joined to Christ and one with
him. And to show us also that it is as needless that Of Popish
transubstantiation and real presence of Christ his body in the Sacrament of
the Lords supper.
that so we may be partakers of his flesh and of his body, as the Papists do
imagine, and as they hold and teach. Indeed it is true that Christ says, Ioh.
6.53. that we must eat his flesh and drink his blood, or else we have no life
in us: we must be as nearely knit and joined to Christ, even to his body and
to his flesh, and by his flesh to his Godhead and divine nature, as our meat
and drink which nourish our bodies, are joined to our bodies, which are turned
into the very substance of our bodies; there must be so near a union betwixt
Christ and us: but yet our union with Christ is not a corporal union, but a
spiritual union, as Christ says, Ioh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickens,
the flesh profits nothing. And though the body of Christ be truly received
of us in the Sacrament, yet it is not received corporally, but spiritually and
sacramentally: the body of Christ is truly present in the Sacrament to the
soul and to the spirit, and truly apprehended and received by faith. Christ
says, Ioh. 6.35. He is the bread of life, and he that comes to him shall never
hunger: an then he subioynes, He that believes in me shall never thirst. Our
union with Christ is spiritual by the bond of his Spirit, and our partaking of
the body of Christ in the Sacrament is spiritual, and there needs no carnal
presence to make our union with him. And therefore it is a gross imagination
and conceit of the Papists, that in the Sacrament the bread must be turned into
the very body of Christ, that so we may be partakers of his body and of his
flesh.

I proceed to further matter. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin. We see here that the Apostle grants this, that Christ being
in the believing Romans, and they being one with Christ, yet their bodies were
frail, and cortuptible, and mortal. And so the point hence arising is this.

That all men, even the godly and dearest of the Saints and All men both good
and bad are subject to frailties, infirmities, and diseases, and to death of
body
and corruptible, and mortal, and subject to death. All men both good and bad,
are liable and subject to frailties, and infirmities, and to sicknesses, and
diseases of the body, yea to death it self: and the godly and true believers
must die as well as the wicked and unbelievers. And to this purpose we have
plain evidence of Scripture. Psalm. 49.19 Psalm. 49.19.
says the Psalmist, Men shall enter into the generation of their fathers, and
they shall not live for ever: they shall not for ever continue in this life,
but they shall certainly die at length. And again, Psalm. 89.48. Psalm. 89.48.
What man lives and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his soul from
the hand of the grave? As if he had said, Certainly there is no man living good
or bad, but he shall die, and he shall not deliver himself from the power of
the grave. Eccles. 2.16. Eccles. 2.16.
says the Preacher in the end of that verse, How dies the wise man as does
the fool? they are both subject to death. Eccles. 3.2. Eccles. 3.2.
There is a time for every one to be borne, and a time to dye. The Scripture is
plentiful in this point. Deuter. 31.14. the Lord tells his dear and holy
servant Moses, that he must dye. And to this purpose we might bring the
examples of all the Saints and servants of God in all ages, to show that they
as well as others have been subject to frailties, infirmities, and to grief of
body, and to mortality, and death it self: yea we see it so to be in common
and daily experience. And the reason because of sin,) besides this, is that
we find put down Genes. 3.19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.
The body of every man, whether good or bad, godly or wicked, is frail,
brittle, and corruptible: every man's body is a compound of corruptible matter,
and therefore as the Author to the Hebrews says, Hebr. 9.27. It is appointed
to men that they shall once dye: It is a law, or as it were a statute enacted
in the high Court of heaven; it is the common law of nature, that every man
shall once dye. And it is as natural for man's body to be weak, and sick,
and diseased, and to die, as it is for the grass, and flowers, and leaves, to
fade, and to wither, and to fall. It is the comparison of the holy Ghost, Isay
40.6.7. All flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the
field. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it: surely the people is grass. If any here object the example of
Henoch and Eliah, that they were taken away and saw not death, as Hebr. 11.5.
By faith Henoch was taken away, and he saw not death. And the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 15.^1. That we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. I
answer. The taking away of Henoch was miraculous and extraordinary, it was to
show that God has power over the order of nature, and that he is not tied to
the order of nature, but can and does sometimes cause things to come to pass
above nature, and contrary to the order of nature: as the fire not to burn,
Dan. 3.27. and the waters that are heavy and fall downward, to rise up on an
heap, Exodus 14.21.22. Again, that of the Apostle alleged 1. Corinthians. 15.51.
is to be understood of such as shall be found alive at the coming of Christ to
judgment, to them a change shall be in stead of death. So that this we are to
hold for a certain truth, that all men, even the godly and dearest of the
Saints, as well as others, in respect of their bodies, are frail, and
corruptible and mortal, and all men both good and bad, are liable and subject
to frailties and infirmities, to sicknesses and diseases of the body, yea to
death it self.

Men are not to be judged of by things that befall their bodies.
We are not to judge men to be none of Gods children, because they have many
weaknesses and infirmities in their bodies, or because happily their bodies are
under sore and grievous pains and diseases, or their bodies are vexed with
strange and violent diseases. No, no, the bodies of the dearest of Gods
children are frail and corruptible, and subject to like infirmities that the
bodies of other men are: and as Eccles. 9.1.2. No man knows either love or
hatred of all that is before them: all (outward) things come alike to all: and
the same condition is to the just and to the wicked, to the good and to the
pure, and to the polluted: and to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner; he that swears, as he that
fears an oath. And further, we are not to judge of men by the effects of
those strong and violent diseases that are in their bodies. Note.
A dear child of God in time of some strong and violent disease, may be
stirred up to impatience, and through the violence of the disease, not only
tormenting his body, but bereauing his mind of present use of reason, may show
forth strange behavior: yea he may dye showing forth strange behavior, and
yet are not we to judge him an hypocrite, or forsaken of God, and out of his
favor. No, a child of God may dye showing forth strange behavior, and a
wicked man may dye (as we use to say) like a lamb, and as a bird in a shell,
and as he has had no knot in his life, his life has been drawn out with an
even thread, so there may be no bands in his death: as Psalm 73.4. And it is
an ill sign when a wicked man dies a quiet death, and therefore judge not of
any man's state before God, by the things that befall his body, or by his
behavior at or about the hour of his death; but rather judge of him by the
course of his life: and know that though it may sometimes come to pass, that a
violent death may deprive a repentant sinner, a child of God, of the right use
of reason for a time, yet it cannot deprive him of Gods favor in Christ, nor
his soul of eternal life.

Again, is it so that all men, even the godly and dearest of We are not to be
proud of any excellency of our bodies.
are frail, corruptible, and mortal: and all men both good and bad, are
liable and subject to frailties and infirmities of body, and to death it
self? Surely then this must teach us to take heed that we be not proud of any
excellency of body, as beauty, strength, or any other good thing the body is
endowed withal. Alas we must consider that the foundation of that excellency
is but dust, the Lord can soon crush our bodies to powder, they are but houses
of clay, earthly tabernacles, frail and brittle, and soon ouerturned. Yea
this must teach us to take heed, that we suffer not our selves to be entangled
in the pleasures of the flesh, Nor to be entangled in the pleasures of the
flesh, or the profits of this world.
in the sensual pleasures or in the profits of this world; we may suddenly be
taken from them, our breath is in our nostrils. Moses might have enjoyed all
the pleasures Pharaohs Court could have affoorded him, with honor and wealth,
yet he refused them, knowing well he should enjoy them but for a season, Hebr.
11.25. The pleasures of the flesh are but for a season, short and momentanie:
and what folly is it for a man to give himself over to such pleasures as are
shut up in a vapor, a shadow, a bubble, a puff of wind, which when they
continue longest, are but as a spanne long, and cut off by death? Admit a man
should live Methushelahs days, Genesis 5.27.
and all those days enjoy all the pleasures that the flesh could yield,
without interruption, yet his pleasures must have an end, they are but for
term of life, death puts an end to them. And if the end of a wicked man's
pleasure were the end of his being, it were something, but alas it is but the
beginning of his endless torment: and what is the longest life to eternity,
and to everlasting torments? As the afflictions Gods children endure in this
life, are not worthy the glory which shall be showed unto them, Romans 8.18. Romans
8.18.
so the pleasures that wicked men enjoy in this world, are not comparable to
the torments they shall undergo in hell. Note.
One hours torment in hell is of greater weight then all their pleasures, and
will swallow up the pleasures of a thousand years. Oh therefore remember thou
that give thy self over to the pleasures of the flesh, that thy flesh is
corruptible, thy body is mortal, and subject to death and dissolution: and
suffer not the devil to besot thee with a conceit of long life, and that thou
have yet many days and years to spend: thou may happily reckon without thine
host, as the saying is: and though thou be lusty and strong, yet thou see
some as lusty and as strong as thy self suddenly brought to the grave: and
though thou be sick of no disease, yet thy life it self is a sickness, and
thou art sick of a consumption, thy life is wasting, consuming, and wearing
away continually. Think on this, and let this sway with thee, not to give thy
self over to thy pleasures, and sinful delights of the flesh, but labor thou
for the true treasure, and to have thy part in those pleasures that are at the
right hand of God in heaven.

The Apostle says, The body is dead: the body is frail, brittle, and
mortal, subject to death; and he gives this reason of it, because of sin. He
tells the believing Romans, that their bodies were frail, and mortal by reason
of sin still abiding in them in part. Whence we are further given to
understand thus much.

That all men, even the dearest of the Saints and servants of It is sin that
makes all me^ both good and bad subject to frailties, infirmities, diseases,
and death it self.
and that because of sin. It is sin that makes all men both good and bad,
both godly and wicked, liable and subject to frailties, and to infirmities, and
to sicknesses and diseases of the body, yea to mortality and death it self;
even the best of Gods children, so long as they live in this world, have sin
still in part cleaving to them, and the corruption of their hearts many times
breaks out into actual sins: and it is that sin of theirs that makes them
obnoxious and liable to frailties and infirmities, yea to death it self. And
it is by reason of sin, that all men whatsoever they be are subject to
frailties and infirmities, and to death of body: and to this purpose we have
further plain evidence of Scripture. Lamen. 3.39. it is said, Wherefore is the
living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin: and verse 42.43. We have
sinned, and have rebelled, therefore thou have not spared, thou have covered us
with wrath, and persecuted us, thou have slain and not spared. Rom.6.23. Romans
6.23.
says the Apostle, The wages of sin is death: death of body and death of
soul is the due debt to sin. 1. Corinthians. 11. 1. Cor. 11.30.
the Apostle reproving the Corinthians for some abuses that weree crept into
the Church, especially for their vnreuerent and unworthy partaking in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, he tells them verse 30. For this cause, even by
reason of your profaning of the Lords supper, because of your unworthy
receiving of that holy Sacrament, many are weak and sick among you, and many
sleep: many of you are taken away by death. Genes. 20.3. Genesis 20.3.
the Lord said to Abimelech when he had taken away Sarah from Abraham, Thou art
but dead, thou art but a dead man, because of the woman which thout have taken,
for she is a man's wife. Psalm. 32.4. Psalm. 32.4.
David says, that when he kept close his sin, and did not acknowledge it to
the Lord, the hand of God was heavy on him, and his moisture was turned into
the drought of Summer. So again, Psalm. 38.3. Psalm. 38.3.
(says he) There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thine anger, neither
is there rest in my bones because of my sin. And verse 5. Verse 5.
My wounds are putrified and corrupt because of my foolishness. And many other
proofs might be brought to this purpose, clearing and confirming this truth;
that it is sin that makes all men both good and bad, both godly and wicked,
liable and subject to frailties and infirmities, and to sicknesses and diseases
of body, yea to death it self.

Adam, In the day that thou eatest of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, thou shall dye the death: death of body and death of soul.
Adam eating of the forbidden fruit, made himself and all mankind subject to
death of body and death of soul, and so to all the messengers and forerunners
of death and dissolution of the body, to hunger, thirst, heat, cold,
sicknesses, diseases, and such like. And hence it is that the Apostle says,
Romans 5.12. that by sin death entered into the world, and went over all men:
and so by reason of sin it is that all men whatsoever they be, are subject to
frailties and infirmities, and to death of body.

Ioh. 9.3.
that the man that was borne blind, was not so borne either for his own sin,
or for the sin of his parents, but that the works of God should be showed on
him. And therefore it may seem not to be generally true, that all men
whatsoever they be, are subject to frailties, and to sicknesses, and diseases
of body, by reason of sin.

To this I answer. It is true indeed, I grant it, Adam was before his fall.

Why but will some say,

I answer: Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: and for their
conformity to Christ their head, and also for the utter abolishment of sin
in them: for the best of Gods children have sin abiding in them in part, so
long as they live in the world; and death does utterly destroy and abolish that
sin: and so the Lord does wonderfully manifest his power in the death of his
children, both in changing the nature of death, and making it a blessing in
stead of a curse, and also in destroying and abolishing sin by death, which
brought death into the world. So then this still remains a truth, that all
men, even the dearest of Gods children, in respect of their bodies, are frail,
and mortal, and that because of sin: and it is by reason of sin that all
men whatsoever they be, are subject to frailties and infirmities, and to death
of body.

And this truth may serve as a ground of confutation, first, The opinion of the
Papists touching the taking away of original sin by baptism, confuted.
that original sin is quite taken away by Baptism, not only in regard of
guilt and punishment, but of being. If it were so, then should not infants die
in their infancy, as we see many times they do: their dying in their infancy
before they come to years, is a plain evidence and proof that they have that
in them which is properly sin, for otherwise they should not dye. It is by
reason of sin still abiding in infants baptized, though the guilt of sin be
removed, that they are subject to death of body, and that they do dye indeed.

The opinion of the Anabaptists touching infants confuted.
And again, the truth now delivered makes against the opinion of the
Anabaptists, that infants are not conceived and borne in original sin: their
dying in their infancy is a plain proof to the contrary, for otherwise they
should not dye in their infancy.

Now for further use, is it so that all men, even the dearest of the Saints and
servants of God in respect of their bodies, are frail and mortal, and that
because of sin? Is it by reason of sin, that all men whatsoever they be are
subject to What ought to be done in time of sickness.
in time of sickness, when the hand of God is on us in any sickness or any
disease of body, to examine our selves, and to labor to find out the cause of
that sickness, and of that disease. And though we be such as have assurance of
Gods love, and of the pardon of our sins, yet we must consider that
sicknesses and diseases come because of sin originally, and the body is
sick because of sin: and we are thus to think with our selves, Surely this
sickness and this disease that is now on my body, it is sent to me for a good
purpose, there is some sin in me for which I have not been thoroughly humbled;
and therefore the Lord of his mercy would by this means drive me to a sound
and through humiliation for it: though I daily make confession of my sins to
God, yet there is some sin in me for which I ought to be more deeply humbled,
and to this end has he sent this sickness; for certainly if I had judged my
self, the Lord would not thus judge me. 1. Cor. 11.31.32.
1. Corinthians. 11.31. And the Lord does thus judge and chasten me, that I should
not be condemned with the world, verse 32. and therefore now it behoues me to
call my self to a more strict account, to be more thoroughly humbled for my
sins. Thus are we, though assured of Gods love, and the pardon of our sins,
yet thus are we to carry our selves in time of sickness. And howsoever we may
lawfully take physic, good diet, and the like, yea we are bound so to do; yet
we are especially to seek for the pardon of our sins: yea we are rather to
desire the pardon of our sins, then release of our pain, and deliverance out
of our sickness; and we are rather to desire that the hand of God on us may be
sanctified to us, then that it may be removed from us, that we may be truly
humbled, and that sin may be more loathsome to us: and if we be restored to
health again, that we may come out of that sickness purged and made more
careful to walk humbly before the Lord, and more careful to please him in
all things. And remember we that speech of Christ to the man healed of his
disease, Ioh. 5.14. Thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee. If men and women be not bettered by their sickness and diseases,
certainly they are made worse by them, and then their sickness is but a
praeludium, but a forerunner of greater evils.

One other use I will add: is it so that all men, even the We are to make
account of death every moment.
are frail and mortal, and that because of sin: and is it by reason of
sin that all men whatsoever they be, are subject to frailties and
infirmities, and to death of body? Who then is it that can promise to himself
continuance of his life one minute of an hour? Every one of us is to make
account of death every moment; even before we go out of this place, the Lord
may strike us suddenly dead: we carry about with us matter and means of death
continually; the arrow of death, namely, sin, it sticks as it were in our
bodies, yea it sticks in our very bowels: And how ought this to stir us up to
prepare for death every moment, yea so to carry our selves, as every moment
ready to yield up the ghost, even to our power to be doing of good while we
have time, that our master when he comes to us by death or judgment may find
us so doing; yea to do it as heartily and as sincerely, as if presently we were
to give an account for the doing of it, that is the right numbering of our
days, Psalm. 90.12. And think on this all you that are now to come to the
table of the Lord; consider with thy self if thou come irreverently,
vnpreparedly, and for form and fashion, the Lord may justly for that sin
strike thee with sickness or with death, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.30.
For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep: and many
are taken away by death. And if the Lord so do, and if the Lord strike thee
with sickness or with death, upon thy unworthy receiving of the Sacrament, thy
case is fearful, thou art guilty of profaning the holy ordinance of God,
and of taking his name in vain: and the Lord himself has said, He will not
hold thee guiltless if thou take his name in vain. And if he that should
acquit thee from thy sins, will not hold thee guiltless, who then shall
plead for thee?

Again, is it so, that all men, even the dearest of Gods children, in respect
of their bodies, are frail and mortal, because of sin? and is it by reason
of sin that all both good and bad are liable to frailties and infirmities, to
sicknesses, diseases, It is no wonder that the Lord does sometimes strike
wicked persons with sore diseases, and sometimes with sudden and strange kinds
of death
such as go on in their sins without repentance, with sore and grievous
diseases: and no marvel though the Lord do sometimes bring on wicked and vile
persons sudden and strange kinds of death. We see sometimes the Lord leaves not
himself without witness that he is a just God; we see it (I say) that
sometimes the Lord does suddenly strike wicked persons in the very act of
sinning, sometimes the drunkard together with his wine and vomit, does even
belch out his own soul, or he is suddenly overtaken by death, sometimes
drowned in a ditch, or the like: sometimes the Lord strikes the blasphemous
swearer, that together with his blasphemy he breaths out his last breath.
Instance might be given in diverse other particulars: Note.
yea the Lord does usually proportion out sicknesses and diseases answerable
and proportionable to the sins of men: he sends on filthy adulterers and
fornicators, filthy, rotten, and loathsome diseases, and causes rottenness to
enter into their bones, and to wast and consume their bodies; and on beastly
drunkards that have been inflamed with wine and strong drink, he sends hot
burning fevers, and inflammations, and redness of eyes, and such like, Prou.
23.29. And in this respect we are not to marvel that the Lord sends amongst us
many times new and strange diseases; we see there is every year amongst us new
agues, and new fevers, and they hold men and women in a strange fashion: yea
sometimes such diseases are sent amongst us as pussell the Physicians, they
know not what to think of them, or how to cure them: and what is the reason of
this? Surely our new and strange sins; and amongst the rest, our new and
strange fashions in apparel, our new tricks to cozen men, and the fearful
height of sin that men are grown to. It is no marvel though the Lords wrath
increase against men, seeing sin increases and abounds among men that
deserves Gods wrath. L^^it. 26.16. Leuit. 26.16.
the Lord threatens, that if men will not obey him, but sin against him, he
will appoint over them fearfulness, a consumption, and a burning ague to
consume the eyes out of the head. Deuteronomy. 28.27. Deuteronomy. 28.27.
he threatens that if his people would not obey his voice, he would smite them
with the botch of Egypt, and with the Emerods, and with the scab, and with the
itch, yea so as they should not be healed. It is by reason of sin that men's
bodies lie under sicknesses and diseases; and because of strange sins come
strange judgments, and new and strange diseases. The Lord sometimes brings
strange judgments, and strange diseases on the bodies of wicked and vile
persons, to verify the truth of his word that we find Psalm. 58.11. Psalm. 58.11.
that there is a God that judges the earth.

And again, the Lord sometimes in his wise providence and dispensation spares
others as vile and as wicked as they, to assure us that there is a judgment to
come, and that they are but reserved to the day of judgment to be punished, 2.
Pet. 2.9. 2. Pet. 2.9.
And know it whosoever thou art, that go on in sin without repentance in
thy drunkenness, in thy whoredom, and the like, and addest one sin to
another, thou lie open to strange judgments, and to new and strange
sicknesses and diseases: and if the Lord do not speedily execute his judgments
on thee, and thereupon thine heart is fully set in thee to do evil, Eccles.
8.11. Eccles. 8.11.
that is the most fearful plague and judgment of God that can befall thee.
Oh it was a most heavy judgment that the Lord threatened by his Prophet, Hozea
4.14. Hoze. 4.14.
I will not visit your daughters when they are harlots, nor your spouses when
they are whores: for they themselves are separated with harlots, and sacrifice
with whores. Assuredly God is most angry with wicked persons when he spares
them, and seems not to be angry with them at all; and then their case and
condition is most fearful, when they thrive and prosper in sin, and the
hand of the Lord is not on them, they are neither sick nor sore, nor any way
diseased.

Our Apostle granting this to the believing Romans, that Christ being in them
their bodies were frail, and brittle, and m^rtall, because of sin; he
subioynes yet to their comfort, that their souls being sanctified and renewed
by grace, they were alive, and did live by the life of grace here, and should
live the life of glory hereafter. The body (says he) is dead because of
sin: but the Spirit is life for righteousness sake. Whence in the first
place we are given to understand thus much.

The sanctified souls of Gods children now live the life of grace, and being
loosed from their bodies, they live the life of glory.
and subject to death and dissolution; yet their souls be immortal, and death
cannot touch them, nor prevail over them: the sanctified souls of Gods
children now live the life of grace, and so soon as they are loosed and
disioyned from their bodies, they live the life of glory, and death has no
power over them at all. And this truth has not only ground on this text, but
in many other places of Scripture. Eccles. 12.7. says the Preacher, Dust
returns to the earth, and the Spirit returns to God that gave it. Luke 16.22.
Lazarus was immediately in his death carried to Abraham's bosom. Luke 22.43.
Christ said to the thief on the cross, To day shall then be with me in
Paradise. 2. Corinthians. 5.1. We know (says the Apostle) if our earthly house of
this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God, not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens: and verse 8. Nevertheless (says he) we
are bold, and love rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the
Lord. Philip. 1.23. the Apostle says, he he sired to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. And to this purpose many other places might be brought, clearing and
confirming this truth; that though the bodies of Gods children, because of
sin, be frail and mortal, and subject to death, yet their souls are
immortal, and death cannot touch them: their sanctified souls now live the
life or grace, and so soon as they are loosed from their bodies, they live the
life of glory.

And the reason and ground of this, besides that which is here given by the
Apostle, namely, the righteousness of Christ imputed to Gods children, which
gives them right and title to life and salvation; besides this,

Happily some will say,

Answer. everlasting perdition. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
They shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. The wicked they are dead while they
live, as the Apostle says of the widow living in pleasure, 1. Tim. 4.6.
is dead while she lives: 1. Tim. 5.6. but Gods children live when they are
dead, their souls live an everlasting happy life, they are freed from the
sting of the first death, and the second death has no power over them. Revel.
20.6. Apocal. 20.6.


The souls of men being loosed from their bodies, wander not up and down nor
lie boiling in the fire of Purgatory, as Papists teach.
that the souls of men being loosed from their bodies, wander not up and
down, that it need be said, God rest their souls, or Gods peace be with them,
as idle superstitious people use to speak, neither are they boiling in the
fire of Purgatory as the Papists teach, and so need the prayers and alms
deeds of the living to help them out: that opinion cannot stand with this
truth, and it does derogate from the sufficiency of the blood of Christ, and
comfort of Gods children; as if the death of Christ were not sufficient fully
to abolish sin, but that his true members which live and die in him, and
whether they live or dye are his, must be cast into a fire to purge them: a
most gross and senseless conceit, I will not stand on it.

Comfort to Gods children against the fear of death.
and so soon as they are loosed from their bodies they live the life of
glory, may serve as a ground of sweet and of excellent comfort to Gods
children; and the consideration of it may much strengthen them against the
fear of death. For why should a child of God fear death? death strikes only
on his body, it cannot touch his soul, it only hits on his worst part the
body, his better part his soul, is free from it. Death only seuers the soul
of a child of God from his body, and then his soul lives an immortal and a
happy life; and death is so far from depriving a child of God of the comfort
of his hope, as it sends him to the present possession of that happiness which
he has long hoped for; and his soul being loosed from his body, it is freed
from sorrow and pain: yea from sin, which is the greatest evil of all to a
child of God, and it has full fruition of that it most desires, even of
perfect holiness and righteounesse, and enioyes fullness of joy in the
presence of the Lord. What cause then has a child of God to fear death? Yea
the truth now delivered may strengthen Gods children against the fear of their
enemies and persecutors: for why their persecuting enemies Comfort to Gods
children against their persecuting enemies.
they cannot come to their souls, those be out of their reach, they cannot
hurt thenm. The souls of Gods children are free from the rage and violence of
all Satan's instruments, therefore Christ says, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. And for further
encouragement herein, consider but this one thing: Thou that art a child of
God, the Lord has freed thee from the power of sin and Satan, and from the
rage and violence of thine own untruly passions and lusts, which are enemies
to thy soul and salvation; and will he then leave thee in the hands of
persecuting men malicious and strong? no, no, assuredly he will not, if it
stand with his glory and thy good to deliver thee: and if he see it good to
leave thee in their hands, what can they do? surely nothing but touch thy body
and thy out side, and only take away the life of thy body, not the life of
thy soul, that is out of their reach, that is immortal: and they taking away
the life of thy body, they but send thy soul into present possession of that
inheritance that thy heavenly father has provided for thee, even that
inheritance that is immortal and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved for
thee in the heavens. Now before I leave this point, an objection is to be
answered.

Some may happily say.

I answer: That abiuration, Christianity is but like the rauing of a child of
God in some extremity of sickness: a child of God may rave and show forth
strange behavior in time of some violent disease that is on his body, and yet
still be dear and precious to the Lord: so a true Christian may be forced
through great extremity and violence done to him, though it be a foul and
fearful failing in him so to do; yet (I say) a true Christian may through
such violence abjure Christianity, and yet still remain a true Christian: and
that abiuration that is so forced, may be when the seed of grace remains still
in the heart. And therefore all the tyrants in the world, all cruel
persecutors whatsoever they be, are not able to hurt the soul of the child of
God. The Apostle here affirming that the Spirit is life, and telling the
believing Romans, that though their bodies were frail and mortal because of
sin, yet their sanctified souls were alive, and did live the life of grace
herein this world, and should live the life of glory hereafter: he gives this
reason of it, Because of righteousness. The Spirit (says he) is life for
righteousness sake, or because of righteousness: that is, as we showed,
because of the righteousness of Christ imputed to you, which gives you right
and title to life and salvation, and also in regard of righteousness inherent
in you, not as a meritorious cause, but because it is a sure and infallible
sign of imputed righteousness, to which belongs life and salvation. Here note
we, I will but touch it in a word, because we spoke of it verse 4. here I say
note.

How it may be truly said that Gods children merit salvation.
That Gods children, true believers, have right and title to life and salvation
for righteousness sake, or because of righteousness It may be truly said,
that even by holiness and righteousness Gods children do merit eternal life
and salvation: but understand that aright, not by any holiness or
righteousness inherent in themselves, or wrought by themselves: for the best
thing in them, or done by them, if the Lord should examine it by the strict
rule of his Law, deserves the curse of God, and wrath of God, but by Christ his
righteousness imputed to them, by his holiness, and by his righteousness
imputed to them, they are accounted worthy of eternal life and salvation. And
they want not any merit to their eternal salvation, for the merit of Christ,
his holiness and righteousness is infinite, and that is imputed to them; and
they need not doubt of the sufficiency of that. Indeed, if it were as the
Papists teach, that the righteousness serving to justification in Gods sight,
were that which is inherent in Gods children, or the good works done by
themselves, they might justly doubt of the sufficiency of it: but being the
righteousness of Christ imputed, they have no cause of any such doubt, they
want no righteousness to their justification in the sight of God, nor any
merit to their eternal salvation.

Let that be thought on to the comfort of all Gods children; and so I pass
from that. Comfort to Gods children


Now in that the Apostle here says, The Spirit is life for righteousness
sake: meaning by righteousness, not only the righteousness of Christ imputed
to the believing Romans, but also righteousness inherent in them, not as a
meritorious cause, but as an infallible sign of imputed righteousness, to
which eternal life and salvation belongs: hence we may further gather and
conclude thus much.

That the sanctified soul of a child of God is sure to live The sanctified
soul of a child of God is sure to live the life of glory.
The life of grace and holiness in the heart and soul of a child of God, is
an infallible evidence to him that his soul shall hereafter live the life of
glory in heaven. And whosoever he be that finds true and sound holiness in
his own heart and soul, may undoubtedly assure himself that he shall live
for ever with God in heaven. Philip. 3.20. says the Apostle, Our conversation
is in heaven: we are truly sanctified, the life of grace is in our hearts and
souls, and we express it in our lives and conuersations: and then he
subioynes, From whence we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.14. the Apostle says to them of that
Church, God has chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit,
and faith of truth, whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Ioh. 3.14. We know (says Saint John) that
we are translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren: we show
forth the life of grace and holiness that is in us by love to our brethren,
and by that we know it, and are assured that we are translated, that we are set
out of the state of nature into the state of grace; and shall undoubtedly be
saved, and live for ever with God in heaven.

The reasons of this truth are these.

Examine your selves (says the Apostle) know ye not your own selves, how that
Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? thereby implying, that if
Christ were in them they might be sure that they were not reprobates, but in
the state of grace. And indeed in whomsoever Christ is, he is their hope: 1.
Tim. 1.1. yea their hope of glory. Colos. 1.27. they have an assured hope of
glory in heaven through him.



And let this in the first place serve to discover to wicked The folly of such
as live in their ignorance and sins discovered.
this may let them see that they deceive themselves. They commonly promise to
themselves happiness, life, and salvation, and they say, they hope to be saved
and come to heaven as well and as soon as the best: but poor souls they
deceive themselves. Art thou an ignorant person? do thou go on in thy
blindness wilfully as many do? they are blind and ignorant, and they will not
learn to know God and the good ways of God, though means of knowledge be
offered to them, art thou such an one? art thou even a sottish, blind, and
ignorant person? Surely then thou art a graceless person, thou have no grace
in thine heart: for illumination is the first work of Gods Spirit in those
that belong to Gods election: and sooth not thy self with a conceit that thou
have a good heart to Godward, and a good mind, and a good meaning: the holy
Ghost tells thee plainly and expressly, Prou. 19.2. Without knowledge the mind is
not good. Thou being void of knowledge, thou have no good mind in thee, thy
heart is not good, there is no true grace in thy soul: and thou being void of
grace, what hope can thou have to be saved? No, no, so long as thou
continuest in thy ignorance, thy case is desperate and hopeless.

Again, art thou a wicked and profane person? do thou live in thy sins,
and follow after thy sensual pleasures? and do thou promise to thy self
life and salvation in heaven? Alas poor soul, thou have no evidence to show
for it: no, no, thou art already marked out for the devil, thy profane heart
and life is the brand of the devil; and thy going on in thy sinful course, it
may certainly assure thee that thou shall live for ever with the devil and his
Angels in the bottomless pit of hell, thou have infallible evidence of thine
own everlasting perdition. Consider it but in reason: do thou think that
thou shall step out of a wicked and profane life in this world into a blessed
and happy life in heaven? if thou so think, thou deceiuest thy self, and the
devil blinds thee, it is but a dream: whosoever says he shall hereafter live
happily, and yet has now no care to live holily, he does but deceive himself,
he deals not truly with his own soul: and take heed of that deceit; yea take
heed of deceiving thy self in another respect, in respect of thy civil
honesty. Thousands deceive themselves in that respect, they think because
they are ciuilly honest, that they shall certainly go to heaven, they are right
honest men, and right honest women, and therefore they are sure to go to
heaven. Poor souls, they deceive themselves it is not thy civil honesty
that can give thee assurance that thou art in the comfortable state of a
Christian, and that thy soul shall be saved: it is only the power and life of
grace in thy heart and soul that can give that assurance.



Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees ye shall not be saved. And join to that the speech of the Apostle,
Philip. 3.6. He there says he was a Pharisie, and touching the righteousness
of the Law unreprovable: he was before his conversion a right honest man, and
went as far as any civil honest man can go, and yet in that Chapter he
accounted that righteousness of his but as dross and dung, that he might
win Christ, and that he might have his righteousness imputed to him: and not
only so, but that he might feel the power of Christ his death mortifying
sin in him, and the power of his resurrection quickening him to How a man may
certainly conclude that he shall be saved.


Now for further use is it so that the life of grace and holiness in the heart
and soul of a child of God, is an infallible evidence to him that his soul
shall hereafter live with God in heaven? Then if thou whosoever thou art,
would know it, and be sure of it that thou shall be saved, thou need not
as it were to climb up into heaven to search the Court rolls there, whether
thy name be there written, thou need not to fetch such a far compass: but
look into thine own heart and soul, and if there thou find the life and
power of grace, if thou find the lusts of thine own heart mortified, and thine
heart and soul truly sanctified, and that now Christ lives in thee, as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 2.20. thereupon thou may certainly conclude, to the
comfort of thine own soul, that thou shall live with Christ in glory, and
that thy soul shall hereafter live the life of glory in heaven; and that is
an excellent comfort. Comfort to such as are truly sanctified.
To speak something to the comfort of such as are truly sanctified; an holy
sanctified life is held a melancholicke life, and a life most uncomfortable,
but indeed it is not so, it is the only true comfortable life that can be. Is
there not wonderful comfort in assurance of Gods special love and favor, and
of right to all the comforts of the Saints of God in this life and in the life
to come? Can there be greater comfort then this, to have peace with God and
with a man's own conscience in this world, and assurance of everlasting
happiness, joy, and glory, hereafter in heaven? Certainly there can be no joy
nor comfort equal and matchable to it. And doubtless a child of God has most
comfort of his holiness when he draws near his end. Pro. 14.32. The
righteous has hope in his death. And let this be thought on to the comfort of
all such as are truly sanctified.

VERSE 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because that his Spirit dwells in you.


COme we now to the 11. Verse: But if the Spirit of him, etc. Our Apostle goes
further to cheer up the believing Romans, and he here makes known to them to
their further comfort, that though their bodies were subject to death by reason
of sin still abiding in them, and should dye, yet their bodies being dead,
should not remain perpetually and for ever under the power of death, but
should in time be quickened and raised up again from death to life, even to a
glorious life together with their souls. And this comfort the Apostle
propounds not barely, but in the proof of it he proves it by an argument taken
from the effect of Gods Spirit dwelling in them, on this mamanner, If the
Spirit of God dwell in you, he will certainly quicken your mortal bodies, he
will not suffer your dead bodies always to abide under the power of death; it
is his office to quicken, and to give life, and he will perform his office: he
will one day put life into your bodies though they be dead, and he will raise
them up again to an heavenly and glorious life, that the whole man may live
and be blessed for ever.

Now this proof of the quickening and raising up of the dead bodies of the
true believing Romans, from the indwelling of Gods Spirit in them, is amplified
and enlarged by the work of Gods Spirit in raising up Christ from the dead, a
paribus, namely thus, God raised up Christ from the dead by his Spirit, and
therefore by the same Spirit he will likewise or in like manner quicken and
raise up your mortal bodies, you being members of Christ: he raised up Christ
the head, he will likewise raise up the members. If the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because that his Spirit dwells
in you, by his Spirit dwelling in you. We see then that in this verse is laid
before us a proof of the resurrection of the bodies of Gods children, from the
indwelling of Gods Spirit in them, amplified by the work of Gods Spirit in
raising up Christ from the dead, with relation to that which went before verse
10. That howsoever death prevail over the bodies of Gods children, yet they
are to know to their comfort, that the Spirit of God dwelling in them, they
shall not always abide under death.

If the Spirit of him. By the word him, Interpretation.
is here meant God the Father, from whom the holy Ghost proceeds, and therefore
he is called his Spirit, as verse 9. That raised up Jesus from the dead: that
is, the body of Jesus, by a synecdoche the whole being put for the part,
raised up the body of Jesus which was crucified and dead, from death to life.
Dwell in you. That phrase we have formerly opened, and the meaning of it here
is this, Be in you by his true powerful working presence, by the efficacy and
power of his grace. He, namely, the same God that raised up Christ: that is,
the body of Christ, from death to life, shall also or in like manner quicken
your mortal bodies. Some think that the Apostle here speaks of the
continual working of Gods Spirit in mortifying the relics of sin in true
believers, but indeed that is not agreeable to the context, neither will the
word bear that construction: for the Apostle speaking of the time to come,
Shall quicken your mortal bodies, he points at the resurrection that shall
be, and not at that which is present in rising to newness of life. And the
word mortal, does give us to understand so much, that he intends the last and
final resurrection of the body, which is mortal and subject to death and
dissolution. Now the word quicken here used, is very emphaticall and weighty,
it signifies thus much, Shall not only raise from death to life, nor yet to an
immortal life only, for so the bodies of the wicked shall be, they shall be
raised from the dead, and they shall be made immortal, and able to abide for
ever in the state whereto they shall be judged: but to a further matter, shall
raise the bodies of Gods children to an immortal happy life, to a life
perfectly glorious, and shall make their bodies like the glorious body of
Christ, as Philip. 3.21. and shall make them spiritual bodies, as 1. Corinthians.
15.44. that is, bodies not only quickened by a living soul, but with a far
more excellent virtue, namely, the virtue of the Spirit descending from Christ
their head: so much is comprised and signified by the word quicken. Because, or
rather by, that his Spirit dwells in you, as it is in the original: that is,
by the power and virtue of that Spirit of God being in you by his true
powerful working presence, and by the efficacy of his grace in them. The
meaning then of the Apostle in the words of this verse is thus to be conceived,
as if the Apostle had said:

But if the holy Spirit of God the Father, who raised up the body of Jesus when
it was crucified and dead, from death to life, be in you by his true powerful
working presence, and by the efficacy of his grace, even the same God that did
raise up the body of Christ from death to life, shall also, and in like manner,
raise your bodies that are mortal and subject to death, even when they are
dead, from death to life, yea to an immortal happy life, and to a life
perfectly glorious: and shall make your bodies spiritual, and like to the
glorious body of Christ, by the power and virtue of that Spirit of his, being
in you by his true powerful working presence, and by the efficacy of his
grace.

First observe we, that the Apostle here chearing up the believing Romans, with
this comfort, that though their bodies were mortal, and though they were dead,
yet they should not always abide under the power of death, but should be
quickened and raised up again from death to life; he puts down this comfort
in the proof of it, that Gods Spirit dwelling in them, he would not suffer
their bodies to abide under the power of death, but would one day raise them up
again from death to life. Hence we are given to understand thus much.

The holy Spirit of God never forsakes the bodies of Gods children though they
be dead and buried.
though the bodies of Gods children be dead and buried: and though they be
turned into dust and ashes, yet they are still dear and precious to the Lord,
and he still watches over the very dust of them, and his hand does still hold
and keep them, in time to quicken them, and to restore them to life again:
the Lord has regard to the bodies of his children, and has a care over them,
though they be dead and rotten in their graves: for why.

The dead bodies of Gods children are still members of 1. These. 4.14.
If we believe that Jesus is dead and is risen, even so them which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him. Romans 14.8. Romans 14.8.
the Apostle says, Whether we live or dye we are the Lords. There is an
inseparable and perpetual union between Christ and every true believer, not
only in regard of the soul, but of the body also. 1. Cor. 6.15. 1. Cor. 6.15.
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? and the body being
once knit to Christ, it so continues for ever; though death sever the soul
from the body, yet it seuers not the body from Christ.

Again, the Lord has made an everlasting covenant of I am the God of Abraham,
his meaning is not that he is the God of Abraham's soul only, but also of his
body; and therefore doubtless the Lord has regard to the bodies of his
children, and has a care over them though they be dead and rotten in their
graves, and he still watches over the very dust of them, and his hand does
still hold and keep them, in time to quicken them, and to restore them to life
again.

Happily some may say, Christ says Mat. 22.32. God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living.

I answer. God is not the God of the dead, that was the opinion of the
Sadduces, they denied the resurrection, and according to that opinion of theirs
Christ there speaks, that God is not the God of the dead in that sort, for God
cannot suffer such a death to prevail over his, he is a God of mercy and of
life it self, and therefore will in time restore the dead bodies of his
children to life again. So that this we may set down as a certain truth,
that the Lord has regard to the bodies of his children, and has a care over
them though they be dead and rotten in their graves: yea though they be in the
bottom of the sea, or wheresoever they be, yet they are dear and precious to
the Lord, his hand does hold and keep them, in time to quicken them, and to
restore them to life again.

Comfort to Gods children in time of trouble, and when the pangs of death are
upon the^.
And this is a ground of sweet and of excellent comfort to all Gods children:
this may serve to arm and strengthen them against the fear of any trouble
whatsoever; yea to hold up their hearts with comfort when the pangs of death
are upon them. For what though the world tell them of perils and dangers, and
threaten much evil and mischief against them, yet let them remember not only
this, that the disposing of all events is in the hand of the Lord, but that
themselves are always his both alive and dead, and that even their dead bodies
are dear and precious to him; and that will stay them, and hold them up with
comfort and assurance, that come what can come to them, yet they shall be safe,
and well, and in good case, they are the Lords, and the Lord is all-sufficient
to keep his own, and will assuredly keep his own: and though death separate
body and soul asunder, yet remember thou being a child of God, it cannot
divide thee from thy God: no, no, it is a means to bring thy soul nearer to
God, and thy body laid up in the earth and there turned to dust, is still
within the covenant, and knit to Jesus Christ; and thou art still dear and
precious to the Lord both in thy soul and body: and why then should thou
fear the stroke of death, or the horror of the grave? It was an excellent
comfort the Lord gave Jacob when he was to go down into Egypt, Genesis 46.4. I
will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also bring thee up again. Jacob
died in Egypt, and his body when it was dead was brought back again into
Canaan, and yet the Lord says, that he would bring him back again, and that
he would still be with his body though it were dead, and bring that again
into Canaan. And thus is the Lord with the dead bodies of all his children, and
that is to be thought on to their comfort.

In the next place observe, that the Apostle here says, that the Spirit of
God, or God by his Spirit, raised up Jesus from the dead: and again; he that
raised up Christ from the dead. Whence note we.

That Christ in respect of the body was once among the Christ in respect of
his body was once in the state of the dead, and death had power over him for a
time.

How that is to be understood.


and his body lay down amongst the dead, yea the body of Christ was for a
time under the power of death: death had power and dominion over Christ for a
time, therefore the Apostle says, Romans 6.9. Christ being raised from the dead
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. Thereby implying and
giving us to understand, that death had once power over Christ for a time, yet
that is not to be understood as if Christ had been forced to yield to death, as
if death had been stronger then he, and yt by the power of it, it had overcome
Christ, he being not able to stand against the force and power of it: no, but
that Christ willingly and of his own accord did submit himself to death for
the sins of Gods chosen, he by voluntary dispensation taking on him their
sins, otherwise death had no power over him, but as he voluntarily took on
him the sins of Gods chosen, and did willingly submit himself to death: so
indeed death had power over Christ for a time, and he was amongst the dead in
respect of his body, and he descended into the state of the dead. And this
truth is evident and clear from the burial of Christ, in that he was buried
by Joseph of Arimathea, as appears Mat. 27.59.60. the text says, Joseph took
the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and put it into his
new tomb which he had hewed out in a rock, and rolled a great stone to the
door of the sepulcher. And with him joined Nicodemus that came to Jesus by
night, Ioh. 19.40.41.42. The burial of Christ shows the certainty and truth
of his death, that his death was not a fantastical death, a death only in
show, a seeming death, but that he was truly and certainly dead, that his body
was truly dead and buried, and descended into the state of the dead, and lay
amongst the dead for a time. And one special reason and ground of this truth
is this.

on the cross triumphed over the devil, and over all the powers of hell; as
Colos. 2.15. the Apostle says, He spoiled the principalities and powers, and
has made a show of them openly, ane has triumphed over them in the same
cross: but that he also as a most valiant and mighty conqueror, vanquished
death as it were at his own home, and plucked him out of his own cabin and
den. And therefore doubtless did Christ put himself under the power of death
for a time, and was amongst the dead in respect of his body, that he might get
the greater victory and conquest over death, and that he might more manifest
his power in subduing death, and triumphing over death more gloriously.

king of fear, (...) Job 18.14.
it is dreadful and terrible to nature; and the grave in it self is ugly and
loathsome, and the house of perdition, if a man look at it with the eye of
nature: but to Gods children, the nature both of death and of the grave is
changed, and they are made to them sweet and comfortable: and that on this
ground the blessed and glorious body of Christ Jesus was once amongst the
dead, and lay down amongst the dead for a time; and that holy and blessed
body has sanctified and sweetened death, and as it were perfumed the grave to
all Gods children, and made the grave to them but as a bed of down, and a
place of sweet repose and comfortable rest, wherein their bodies rest from all
their pains and labors, and rest in hope of glory hereafter to be given to
them. And that is an excellent comfort to all the children of God, and to all
such as rruly believe in Christ. It is but a poor and silly comfort that some
bastard Christians cheer up themselves withal, as that they hope to be
fairly and well buried, to have a fair and goodly tomb or sepulcher, to
leave abundance of wealth behind them to their children. Alas, as one says
well, if men have no better comfort then this, this is but comfortless
comfort: here is the sound comfort of a true believing Christian against the
fear of death, and against the terror of the grave, that the blessed body of
the Lord Jesus was once amongst the dead, and lay in the grave under the power
of death for a time, and that blessed body has sanctified death, and
sweetened the grave to all his members. And therefore thou that art a child of
God, consider this to thy comfort, when death has done as it were the worst,
when it has prevailed over thee, and brought thine head as low as thy feet,
yea lower, thy body is now enclosed in the bowels of the earth, it is
swallowed up of the grave, the grave has shut her mouth on thee, yet the grave
shall not always hold thy body: and though it do hold it for a time, yet thou
belonging to Christ, thy body is in the same condition that once the body of
the Lord Jesus was for a time; and therefore thou have no cause to be abashed,
and to be too much troubled with the fear of death, with the horror or
lothsomnesse of the grave. Think on that to thy comfort.

But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ. We see here, I will but point at it in a word, that the
Apostle calls the Saints departed this life dead men. The Papists take exception
against us, A foolish exception of the Papists touching the Saints departed met
withal.
that forsooth we call the Saints depa^ted dead men, when we reason against
their invocation of Saints departed, and tell them that they pray to the dead,
Oh (say they) you disdainfully call the triumphant Saints in heaven dead men,
as if they had no credit with God, nor any care or compassion of men. A foolish
cavil and an idle exception: we speak no otherwise then the holy Ghost has
taught us, we call the Saints departed this life dead men, not in disdain as
they charge us, but as the holy Ghost does in this and in many other places of
Scripture: as for their credit with God, and their care of men, we doubt not of
it, but yet we cannot thereupon yield to this, that they be mediators between
God and us, that is dishonorable and derogatorie to the perfect mediation of
Christ Jesus. Let it suffice to have touched that in a word.

Observe we further, the Apostle here says, that God b^ the power of his holy
Spirit raised up the body of the Lord Jesus, crucified, dead, and buried, from
the dead, from death to life again.

Ioh. 10.18.
No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to
lay it down, and have power to take it again: whence it is clear that Christ
raised up himself?

Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa.
all the external works of the Trinity being undivided, and so God the
Father raised up Christ from the dead, and Christ as God raised up himself,
and God the holy Ghost also raised him up. Now then hence we are given to
understand thus much.

The raising up of Christ from the dead was a work wherein God did manifest
the greatness of his power.
it was a work of the whole Trinity; yea not only so, for so is the raising
of our bodies, but a work as it were of the whole hand of God, we find it so
set forth to us in the book of God, as a work wherein the Lord did manifest
the greatness of his power. Ephesians. 1.19.20. the Apostle speaks plainly to
this purpose, That the eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that ye may
know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance is in the Saints: and what is the exceeding greatness of his power
toward us, which believe according to the working of his mighty power, which
he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Romans 1.4. the Apostle
says, Christ was declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the Spirit
of sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. Christ by raising himself
from the dead, declared the greatness of his power, even the power of his
Godhead: for why, sorrows of death, as they are called Act. 2.24. as Christ
was for a time. And therefore it must needs be, that in dissoluing and loosing
those bonds and those sorrows, the Lod did manifest the greatness of his
power.

And this is of use, A means to hold up the fainting hearts of Gods children
in their greatest extremities.
to this purpose we are to call to mind and to remember this truth; when we
are plonged into the greatest distress either of body or mind, the due
consideration of this truth will be a means to hold up our fainting hearts in
our greatest extremities. For why, consider with thy self, did the Lord
manifest the greatness of his power in raising up Christ from the dead? did he
then loose the bonds and sorrows of death, when death had as it were drawn
Christ into his cabin and den, and there held him in bondage for a time, yea
in such bondage as never was any, neither could be? and will he suffer any of
the members of Christ to be held under the bands and sorrows of death, not so
strong, and not loose them? No, doubtless he will not, he is the same mighty
and powerful God, he loosed the bonds of death, when death seemed to triumph
over Christ, and all hope seemed to be gone, he then put to his whole hand to
the loosing of those bonds, and he as it were with his little finger will loose
the bonds of thy sorrow and of thy distress, either of body or mind: even
then when in man's judgment thy distress is hopeless and remediless. And
assure thy self thou being a member of Christ, he will loose the bonds of thy
distress, if it may stand with the glory of his name and with thy good. And
indeed a child of God is vpheld by the hand and power of God in time of his
great distress, otherwise he would utterly fail, sink, and fall down flat
under the burden. But alas, Note.
a child of God cannot then so well discern the working power of the Lord, and
his hand supporting of him, nor so well take notice of it, because his
judgment is the^ ouershadowed with the feeling of his present distress, and
with the greatness of it. And therefore in time of our greatest extremities we
are to call to mind and to remember the mighty power of God, manifested in
loosing the bonds and sorrows with which Christ was held and bound, and in
raising up Christ from the dead; and that will be a means to confirm and
strengthen us in our hope and dependence on the Lord at all times. The raising
up of Christ from the dead, was a work of the whole hand of God, and the
loosing of thy sorrows and of the bonds of thy distress, is but a work as it
were of his little finger: and therefore be not discouraged in thy greatest
distress; thou being a child of God, he will set thee free from it in his due
time, if it may be for his own glory and thy good. Think on that to thy
comfort.

The Apostle here says, that he that raised up Christ from the Head, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies. He ascribes to God the raising up of the dead
body of the Lord Jesus, and also the quickening and raising up of the bodies
of the true believing Romans. Whence note we.

The raising up of the dead is a work of Gods own mighty hand alone. Deuteronomy.
32.39. 1. Sam. 2.6.
it is a work far above the strength of all creatures, men, or Angels; all
men and Angels in heaven or earth are not able to put life into a dead body,
and to raise it up from the dead, that is a work of Gods own mighty hand
alone. Deuteronomy. 32.39. the Lord takes it as proper to himself, Behold I kill, and
I give life: which is again remembered by Hannah in her song, 1. Sam. 2.6. The
Lord kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave and raises up. A
proof of the Godhead of Christ.
And this may serve as a special evidence and proof of the Godhead of Christ,
in that he raised up himself from the dead, and shall also raise up others at
the day of judgment. And indeed it is true, that the holy Prophets and
Apostles sometimes raised the dead, 1. King. 17.22. 2. King. 4.35. Act. 9.40.
as Eliah did, 1. King. 17.22. and Elisha, 2. King. 4.35. and Peter, Act. 9.40.
but that was by a borrowed power, by power from God, and in the name of Christ,
and not by any power of their own: but Christ raised up himself, and shall
raise up others from the dead, not as an instrument, but as a principal
efficient, and by his own proper power. And that strength proves the Godhead
of Christ, it is an infallible argument that Christ is truly God. I forbear
further to speak of it.

Now in that the Apostle here says, that God that raised up Christ should also
quicken the mortal bodies of the believing Romans, we are given to understand
thus much.

That the dead bodies of Gods children, and true believers, The dead bodies of
Gods children shall one day be quickened and raised up from death to life
again.
but shall one day be quickened and raised up from death to life again. It is
a fundamental truth, an article of our faith, we believe or at least ought to
believe the resurrection of the body, which being severed from the soul and so
dead, shall one day be revived and quickened, and have life put into it again.
The Scripture is plentiful in the proof of this truth, Job 19.25.26.27. I am
sure (says Job) that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the
earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh. Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and
none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me. Isay 26.19. the
Lord says by the Prophet, Thy dead men shall rise, even with my body shall
they rise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust. 1. Corin. 15. the Apostle
proves the resurrection of the dead bodies of true believers by many strong and
unanswerable arguments, I will not stand to repeat them particularly, only
mark what he says from verse 13. to 18. If there be no resurrection of the
dead, if the dead shall never rise again, then is Christ not risen, then the
faith of Christians is vain, the preaching of the Gospel vain: and the godly
departed this life are perished. All which are foul and gross absurdities,
therefore doubtless the bodies of Gods children and true believers shall not
always abide under the power of death, but shall one day be raised from death
to life again.

There be many grounds of this truth, Grounds of the resurrection of the body.
it is built on many strong grounds, as on the truth of the word of God,
wherein reward is promised to the good and godly, and the justice of God which
goes hand in hand with this truth, that whatsoever is promised in the word of
God, the equity of his justice requires the accomplishment of it. On his
mercy promised in the covenant of grace, and on his almighty power: yea on
the ground the Apostle here speaks of, namely, the being of the Spirit of
Christ in all true believers. The same Spirit that raised the body of Christ
being dead, shall also raise the dead bodies of his members: for the same
working cause will certainly bring forth the same effect, having nothing more
to hinder it in the one then in the other. And therefore it must needs be, that
the dead bodies of Gods children and true believers shall not always abide
under the power of death, but shall one day be raised up from death to life.







Job says, Job 19.27. I my self shall see God, and mine eyes shall behold,
and none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me: even these very
eyes. And the Apostle speaks (...), 1. Cor. 15.5^. This corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality: as it were pointing
at his own body. This then we may resolve on as a truth of God, that the dead
bodies of Gods children, yea the dead bodies of all both good and bad, shall
one day be raised from death to life, and shall have life put into them again:
yea even the self same bodies that now both the godly and the wicked are
clothed withal, and every part and parcel of those bodies, shall be restored,
and none other for them.

And this truth in the first place is to be thought on for our Confirmation of
that article of faith, the resurrection of the body
The resurrection of the body. On this ground we are to be further strengthened
in that article; it is an article above the reach of natural reason: it has
been strongly oppugned; the heathen Philosophers made a mock at it, yea they
said Act. 17.18. that Paul was a babbler and a setter forth of strange Gods,
when he preached to them of the resurrection. Yea howsoever many amongst us are
able to repeat that article of faith, and some do repeat it as a prayer
(which is gross ignorance) yet they hardly believe the truth of this article,
it will hardly sink into their heads and hearts, that the dead bodies of good
and bad shall one day be raised, or at least that the self same bodies shall
be restored and no other for them, that they can hardly believe: yea some
stick not to speak it in express words, that they cannot be persuaded of it,
you shall not make them believe that the self same eyes that now they carry
in their heads, and now see withal, shall be restored again. Why, these eyes
say they, shall be putrified and consumed, and can they be restored again? Ah
poor ignorant sot, whosoever thou art, thou speak ignorantly, thou know
not the Scriptures nor the power of God, as Christ said to the Sadduces, Mat.
22.29. yea thou speak as an Atheist; and herein thou show thy self no
better then a vile wicked Atheist, for herein thou deniest the truth of God,
the power of God, the justice of God, the mercy of God: and in so doing thou
deniest God himself, and thou art no better then a monstrous Atheist: for on
all these grounds stands the resurrection of the body, yea the restoring of
the self same bodies that now we have, with every part and parcel of them.
God who is truth it self and cannot lie, has said it shall be so: we find it
on record as part of Gods eternal truth revealed in his word.

And again, God who was able to make all things of nothing, is much more able
to make every man's body at the resurrection of his own matter, yea to
distinguish the dust of one man's body from the dust of another. Thou say,
thou can not believe that the self same eyes that are in thy head shall be
restored again. I pray thee who made the eyes? did not God? and whereof did he
make them? was it not of nothing? where were thine eyes an hundred years ago?
And is not he that made thine eyes of nothing, able to restore them being
dissolved and turned to dust? The Lord, says the Prophet Isay 40.12. has the
waters in his fist, and he comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure:
and it is more easy for him to discern the dust of one man's body from
another, then it is for a man that has his hand full of several seeds, to
open his hand, and to sever one kind of seed from another, and to put every
sort of seed by it self.

And further, the justice of God requires that the self same bodies should be
restored, and no other for them: for as the Apostle says, 2. Corinthians. 5.10.
Every one must receive the things done in his body according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil. And it stands not with the justice of God
that one body should do good things, or suffer for well doing, and another
body should receive the crown. Shall the bodies of the Saints in this world
endure bonds, imprisonment, racking and rending, whipping and scourging, and
the scorching heat of the fire till they be turned to ashes, and shall other
bodies for them be glorified? And shall the wicked in their bodies work
wickedness, and practice filthiness, and shall other bodies for them receive
the wages of their iniquity? No, no, it cannot be, the justice of God will not
suffer it. And lastly the glory of Gods mercy requires that the self same
body should be raised. For shall the malice of Satan and sin bring that on
the body which the mercy of God cannot remedy? it is not possible: and
therefore on these grounds learn we to be strengthened in that article of our
Christian faith, that the dead bodies of all, good and bad, shall one day be
raised up, and have life put into them again, yea even the self same bodies
that men, both the godly and wicked, are clothed withal, shall be restored,
and every part and parcel of those bodies, and none other for them. And let us
not hearken to any motions of infidelity, and of our own unbelieving hearts
in this point, moving and stirring us up to call this truth into question: if
we do, we call into question Gods truth, power, justice and mercy; and that is
a dangerous thing, we rush on a dangerous rock, it will crush us to dust and
powder: take we heed of it, and withal consider, that this truth is a ground
of special comfort to Gods children; take away this, and ye take away the
chief pillar and ground of comfort from a true believing Christian. Job. 19.25.
Job in his greatest extremity made this the comfort of his soul, that one
day he should rise again, and in his body enjoy the glorious presence of his
Creator and Redeemer, Job 19.25. And therefore labor we to be resolved and
settled in the truth of this article, and to be persuaded of it, that the dead
bodies of all shall one day be raised, and have life put into them again.

Yet further, is it so that the dead bodies of all, both good How careful we
ought to be in well using of our bodies.
and have life put into them again, shall even the self same bodies that now
we carry about, and every part and parcel of them, be restored, and no other
for them? Oh then I beseech you consider it, how careful ought we to be in
well using of our bodies, and of every part and member of them. We should
hereupon take notice of it, that we are to possess our vessels in holiness
and in honor, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Thessal. 4.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
that we are to use our bodies and every part and member of them, as
instruments of holiness, of Gods glory, and of doing good, and to take heed
we defile not our bodies, or any part or member of them with any known sin.

For why, we must one day see the Lord with these very eyes that now we carry
about us: and how shall we be able to look on him with defiled eyes? how shall
the adulterous eye, the hauhgty, proud, and scornful eye, the covetous eye,
and the like, be able to look God in the face? We commonly say of a man that
has done some vile notorious wicked act, that men take notice of, and cry
shame upon, he will never be able to show his face amongst honest men again;
and how do we think that a wicked debaushed wretch, a filthy adulterer, a
common blasphemer, a beastly drunkard, an usurer, or the like, shall be able to
show his face before the most great and glorious holy majesty of God? Every
one be he never so wicked and vile, will he, nil he, must one day appear
before the Lord face to face, even these very eyes of thine, that now it may
be are full of adultery, and cannot cease to sin, 2. Pet. 2.14. even those
lustful eyes of thine, and that body of thine that now thou abusest to
filthiness, that body of thine that now thou do disguise, and make even a
monster by thy new fangled attire, must one day come before the glorious
presence of the Lord: and that very mouth of thine that is now foul and
filthy, and powers out cursing, swearing, rotten and filthy speeches, shall
one day be presented before the Judge of all the world; and those hands of
thine that now are defiled with filching, with fraud, yea with telling and
taking thy cursed interest money, thou being a cursed usurer, must one day be
held up at the bar of Gods judgment seat. Oh that adulterers, proud
persons, blasphemers, usurers, and such like, had but hearts to consider this.
Well, let us think on it, and remember it, that these very eyes that now we
carry about, and no other, shall one day see the Lord. Hebr. 12.14.
And howsoever it is said, Hebr. 12.14. That without holiness no man shall see
the Lord: the meaning is, without holiness no man shall see the Lord to his
comfort. The most vile and wicked caitiffe that is shall see the Lord, and that
with his own eyes, and none other but he shall see him to his terror, and to
his utter amazement and confusion, and he shall wish that the hills and
mountains would fall on him and cover him from the glorious presence of the
Lord.

Then learn we to take heed that we do not pollute and defile our bodies, or
any part or member of them with any known sin; and let us on the ground of
comfort now delivered, learn to possess our vessels in holiness, and to use
our bodies, and every part and member of them, as instruments of Gods glory,
and of holiness, and of doing good: and then doubtless we shall be able to
look on the Lord, even with these eyes that now we carry about, with comfort,
yea to stand before the Lord with joy, and with much rejoicing.

Now further observe we the word the Apostle here uses, quickened, shall
quicken your mortal bodies. He says, He that raised up Christ from the dead
shall also quicken. The word quicken is very emphaticall and weighty (as I
showed:) it signifies not only a raising up from death to life, no, nor yet to
an immortal life only, but to an immortal happy life, to a spiritual
glorious life. So much is comprised under the word quicken: and hence this
conclusion arises.

That though the self same bodies that now Gods children Though the self same
bodies that Gods children carry about shall be raised from death to life at the
day of resurrection, yet they shall be altered and changed in quality.
shall be raised up from death to life at the day of resurrection, and the
very same bodies for substance shall be restored to them that now they are
clothed withal; yet those bodies shall be altered and changed in quality,
they shall then be endued with such excellent and heavenly qualities as now
they have not; as first, the bodies of Gods children shall then be made
immortal, and incorruptible, powerful, and free from all passion and
suffering, as the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 15.42.43. The body is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power. And verse 53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality. And the bodies of Gods children shall
not then be subject to weakness, infirmities, sicknesses, diseases, miseries,
and to death, neither shall they stand in need of meat, drink, apparel,
sleep, and the like, by which our natural life and our mortal bodies are now
preserved: but the bodies of Gods children raised up from the dead, shall be
made perfect bodies, perfect both in beauty and comeliness, and also in
respect of parts, every blemish and every deformity that is now in the body
of a child of God, shall then be removed, and the bodies of Gods children shall
then be most beautiful and comely, yea every defect in the body of a child
of God, as lamenesse, blindness, and the like, Note.
shall then be removed: and if any member of the body be lost or wanting, as
an arm, a leg, a finger, and such like, it shall then be restored and
supplied: for the perishing of a member is nothing else but the death of that
member, and the Lord restoring other parts and members of the body, he is
able, and he doubtless will also restore that lost member again. The Lord
Jesus who when he was on the face of the earth, gave sight to the blind, and
strength to the lame, is able and will without question give health and
soundness to the limbs that are lame, and will restore and supply every
part and member that is wanting. Yea it is the judgment of some Divines, that
the bodies of Gods children shall be raised up in perfect stature, even the
bodies of infants dying in their infancy, for they shall be like the bodies of
our first parents before the fall, yea like to the glorious body of the Lord
Jesus: and therefore the bodies of Gods children raised from the dead shall be
made spiritual bodies. 1. Cor. 15.44. It is sown a natural body, and is
raised a spiritual body: not spiritual in regard of substance but spiritual
in respect of quality, they shall then be of such a spiritual temper, as they
shall be acted and moved whither their souls will without resistance; yea they
shall then be so lightsome, quick, and nimble, as without any difficulty they
shall be able to move any way, even upwards, and to meet the Lord in the air.
1. Thessal. 4.17. Yea the bodies of Gods children shall then be fully acted,
and moved, and governed by the Spirit of God, and shall readily yield to the
motion and guidance of the Spirit in every part and member of them: they shall
then be fully and perfectly quickened with the life of the holy Spirit of God
descending from Christ their head, and so spiritual: for the bodies of Gods
children raised from the dead shall be made glorious bodies. 1. Corinthians. 15.43.
It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: yea they shall be made like
to the glorious body of the Lord Jesus, Philip. 3.21. they shall be like to
his body in brightness and glory, yet in different degrees, some shall be
clothed with a greater measure of glory, and some with a less, Dan. 12.3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.
Mat. 13.43. Christ says, The just shall shine as the Son in the kingdom of
their father. And 1. Cor. 15.41.42. the Apostle says, There is one glory of
the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the stars, for one
star differs from another star in glory: and so is the resurrection of
the dead. Thus then are we to conceive of the change that shall be of the
bodies of Gods children at the day of resurrection, that they shall be raised
up, changed, not in substance but in qualirie, and shall then be made
immortal, and incorruptible, powerful and free from all misery, perfect in
beauty and comeliness: and in respect of parts, spiritual and glorious, even
like to the glorious body of Christ in brightness and glory.

It may be demanded,

I answer. In part they shall, their worm shall not dye, neither shall their
fire be quenched, and they shall be abhorring unto all flesh, Isay 66.24. Isay
66.24. Apoc. 22.15.
They shall be as dogs, Revel. 22.15. how great, or how honorable, or
beautiful soever they have been in the world; and their bodies shall be
passible and liable to suffer extreme torments into which they shall be sent.
Mat. 21.46. Mat. 21.46. Use. Sweet comfort for all Gods children against the
weaknesses and frailties, they are now subject unto.


Now then this truth may serve as a ground of sweet and excellent comfort to
all Gods children; let us further meditate and think on it, and consider it
seriously: Thou that art a child of God, thy body is now weak and frail, and
subject to aches and pains, to sicknesses, to diseases, and to death it self;
the time shall come when that very body of thine that is now full of aches
and pains, and happily now lies under sore and grievous diseases, shall be free
from ach and pain, and from all manner of infirmities: and not only so, for
that is the condition of beasts when they are dead, but the body being dead
shall one day have life put into it again, and be made strong and powerful,
and shall feel unspeakable joy and delight, and most sweet ease and
contentment in every part and member of it. Thy body is now tumbled and
tossed up and down, and many ways turmoiled, and thou have cause of grief
and sorrow, weeping and mourning for thine own sins and for the sins of
others, but the time of refreshing will come from the presence of the Lord, as
Peter calls the day of resurrection. Act. 3.19. When all tears shall be wiped
away from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither
crying, neither shall there be any more pain. Revel. 21.4. Apoc. 21.4.
and thou shall be free from all things that may hurt or offend thee. The body
it may be is now deformed, crooked, blind, lame, or the like: the time shall
come when every deformity and every blemish that is in thy body shall be
removed and taken away, and every defect that is in it shall be supplied, and
thy body shall be made most comely, and most beautiful: yea thy vile and base
body shall be made like to the glorious body of the Lord Jesus: even that
body of thine that is now base in the world, and base in the estimation of
others, the wicked esteeming thee as they do all Gods children, base and
contemptible, and the refuse and offscouring of all things, even that base
body of thine shall one day shine like the most glorious body of Christ, in
brightness and in glory. Yea the wicked reprobate that now contemn thee, and
think basely of thee, because thou do not ruffle it out as they do, and thou
art not so brave and glittering in thy apparel as they be, shall then see the
brightness and glory of thy body, and be ashamed and confounded in
themselves, their own bodies being most foul and ugly to look on; yea they
shall then be foul themselves, and cry out, Oh we fools thought this man a
base precise fool, and now behold his brightness and glory, and behold our
own ugliness and baseness. Yea thy body that is now heavy and lumpish,
shall then be made a spiritual body; thou now complaining of the dullness and
heaviness of thy body in doing of good things, thou find as Christ said,
Matthew. 26.41. Mat. 26.41.
That the spirit is sometimes ready, but the flesh is weak: the time shall
come that thy body shall be no burden nor impediment to thy soul in doing of
good things, but shall be acted and moved by thy soul without resistance; yea
thy body in every part and member of it shall be acted and moved by the holy
Spirit of God. Think on that to thy comfort, and withal consider, that if thy
body shall be so glorious, if thy base body shall be made like to the
glorious body of the Lord Jesus, and shall shine as the Sun in the
firmament, oh what shall be the glory of thy soul? Undoubtedly the glory
wherewith thy soul shall be invested, shall be unspeakable, yea
inconceivable. Oh then cheer up thy self on this ground against contempt,
disgrace, and reproaches that are thrown on thee by the wicked and profane
world. They now cry down with Puritanes, but the time shall come, when the
wicked of the world shall sink down to everlasting perdition, and those that
now they cry shame on, shall be highly advanced, and be made most glorious in
their bodies and in their souls; and they shall see it to their utter
amazement and confusion. And that is a ground of excellent comfort, let it be
thought on for the comfort of every child of God: and care not then, thou
being a child of God, for the barking of dogs; wicked and profane persons
are no better in Gods account, but be encouraged to endure the cross, and to
despise the shame that is cast on thee in the world, and run the race that is
set before thee with patience and comfort.

Now before I come to further matter of doctrine, I hold it not amiss to
answer an idle cavil of the Papists, A cavil of the Papists answered.
which they would fasten on the truth now delivered; in that we affirm and
say, according to the truth of the word of God, that the bodies of Gods
children raised up from the dead, shall be made spiritual bodies. They would
draw this conclusion from it, that therefore the body of Christ already
raised from the dead, and now glorified, is invisible: it being a spiritual
body (say they) it is invisible, and so it may be really present in the
Sacrament and not be seen. A very idle and foolish cavil; the body of
Christ raised from the dead is a spiritual body: it is true, it is then still
a body not a spirit, it is not changed into a spiritual substance. No, no,
Christ in rising from the dead, did not put away the corporal substance of his
body, his body still remains a true body, a body changed, not in substance
but in quality; even a body of a spiritual temper, lightsome, active, and
able to move any way without difficulty or resistance. And that body of
Christ raised from the dead is still a visible body: the text is plain, Ioh.
20.20. after his rising from the dead he showed his hands and side: the text
says, They were glad when they had seen the Lord: and verse 27. he said to
Thomas, Put thy fingers here, and see my hands, and put forth thine hand, and
put it into my side, and be not faithless, but faithful. The body of Christ
raised from the dead was still a palpable body that might be felt, and a
visible body that might be seen: and therefore it is but a mere shift and
cavil of the Papists, in that they say the body of Christ raised from the
dead, and being a spiritual body is therefore invisible, and so may be really
present in the Sacrament and not be seen. And indeed if we mark and consider
it, we shall find that this argument of theirs makes against themselves, even
against their own ground, teaching the real presence of Christ his body in
the Sacrament; for they say (mark it I beseech you) the body of Christ raised
from the dead is a spiritual body, therefore invisible, and so really present
in the Sacrament and not seen: then it follows, that the body of Christ when
it was not a spiritual body but a natural body, as indeed it was before his
resurrection, it was then like to our bodies in all things sin only
excepted, that then it was not invisible, and that then it was not in the
Sacrament really present and not seen; for if it were, then their argument is
naught, and yet they ground the real presence of Christ his body in the
Sacrament, on the words of Christ in the institution of the Sacrament, This is
my body: which words were delivered before Christ was crucified, and so before
his body was raised from the dead; and how these things can agree and hang
together, let any man of any understanding judge; they entangle themselves in
their own words, and before they be aware they overthrow their own grounds. I
leave them, and go on to further matter: there is yet some thing of special
use offered unto us from this verse.

Observe we further, the Apostle says, He that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies: and he subioynes, by his Spirit dwelling
in you: that is, as we showed, by the power of his Spirit, being in you by his
true powerful working presence, by the efficacy and power of his grace. Hence
then we are further given to understand thus much.

That it is only the dwelling of Gods Spirit in men and True and comfortable
hope of resurrection to life and glory in heaven, belongs to none but such as
have Gods holy Spirit in them by his true powerful working presence.
by the efficacy and power of his grace, that gives them good and sound hope
and assurance of the quickening and raising up their bodies to an immortal,
happy, and glorious life. There is no true hope of the resurrection with
comfort, and to life and glory in heaven, to any but only to such as have the
Spirit of God dwelling in them, to such as have the holy Spirit of God in them
by his true powerful working presence, and by the efficacy and power of his
grace mortifying sin and corruption in them, and quickening them to newness
of life. And for further clearing and confirming of this, mark what the
Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. They that sleep in Jesus will God bring with
him: Only them that sleep in Christ, and only such as are dead in Christ,
will God bring with Christ at his coming to judgment with comfort. And who
are those that sleep in Christ and are departed this life in Christ? Surely
those that lived in Christ, or rather in whom Christ lived, as Galat. 2.20. by
his grace, and by the power of his Spirit, them only will God bring with
Christ at his coming, with joy and with comfort. And to the same purpose
speaks the Apostle, Colos. 3.4. When Christ which is our life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. He says not barely, when Christ
shall appear, but when Christ which is our life, when Christ who is the author
and matter of our spiritual life, and by the power of his Spirit does
communicate that life to us, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in glory. Revel. 20.6. it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has his part
in the first resurrection: he that is raised up from the death of sin to the
life of righteousness, which is the first resurrection, over him the second
death has no power: he shall be freed from the second death, and he shall be
partaker of the second resurrection, the resurrection of the body with
comfort. A most plain text proving the point in hand, that it is only the
dwelling of Gods Spirit in men, even the being of his holy Spirit in them by
his true powerful presence, that gives a good assurance of the quickening of
their bodies to an immortal life, to the life of glory in heaven.



An erroneous conceit of the Papists met withal.
they hold and teach, that the carnal presence of Christ his flesh in the
Sacrament, is the cause and seed of the resurrection of the body; and
therefore they housle the sick. Alas, they are deceived; indeed it is true
that Christ says, Ioh. 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day: but that is to be
understood of the spiritual eating of the flesh and drinking of the blood of
Christ by faith, by virtue whereof the bodies of true believers shall be raised
again at the last day. It is a spiritual eating of the flesh of Christ, and a
spiritual drinking of his blood, even a spiritual fellowship and communion
with Christ, which may be without the Sacrament, that is the cause of the
resurrection of the bodies of Gods children; and so it is only the being of
Gods holy Spirit in them, that gives them good hope of quickening and raising
to an immortal life, to the life of glory in heaven. And indeed that the
carnal eating of Christ his flesh in the Sacrament, (besides the
impossibility of it) is not requisite or necessary to the resurrection of the
body, is evident and clear by this, in that the Saints of God that died
before Christ was incarnate, could not in that manner eat and drink the flesh
and blood of Christ, and yet they died in hope of the resurrection to life and
glory in heaven. And therefore it is a gross error of the Papists, that
carnal eating and drinking of Christ his flesh and blood in the Sacrament, is
the cause and seed of the resurrection of the body.

Now for use of it to our selves: is it so that only the being How many
deceive themselves touching a joyful resurrection to life and glory in heaven.
is the thing that gives them good hope of quickening their bodies to an
immortal life, to life and glory in heaven? This then may serve to discover
that thousands in the world deceive themselves in this particular, every one
persuades himself well of himself, and he hopes to be saved, he hopes one day
to have an happy and joyful resurrection, and to rise to life and glory in
heaven: but alas few there be that are able to conclude their hope on this
ground, that the holy Spirit of God is in them by his true working presence,
and by the efficacy of his grace: Nay thousands in the world are so far from
this, as they have in them a contrary spirit, they are strongly possessed of
Satan, he rules and he reigns in them, and holds up his scepter in their
hearts, and carries them on after the lusts of their own hearts to do his
will, to pride, to drunkenness, to whoredom, to swearing, to Sabbath
breaking, and all manner of profaneness. Yea some are so far from having the
holy Spirit of God in them by his true powerful presence, by the efficacy of
his grace, as they scoff and scorn those that have, and in whom they may
discern the power of grace, and in mocking and derision they call them men of
the Spirit: Have such persons any sound hope of an happy resurrection to life
and glory in heaven? No, no, their hope is a fancy, it is but as the Prophet
speaks, Isay 29.8. As an hungry man that dreams he is eating, and when he
awaketh his soul is empty. They do but dream, yea in that they thus speak,
they do with their own mouths publish and pronounce their own damnation. If
thou whosoever thou art, would have good evidence and good hope that thy
body shall be raised unto life and glory in heaven, never rest till thou find
the holy Spirit of God in thee by his true powerful working presence, and by
the efficacy and power of his grace; and if thou find not that, though thou
be the greatest Monarch in the world, thy body shall but lie down in
dishonor, and be raised up to greater dishonor, even to everlasting shame and
perpetual contempt, Dan. 12.2. And to speak one word of comfort to Gods
children, Comfort to Gods children
that holy Spirit of God will never leave thy body; thy body is here a
vessel of honor, an house and temple of the holy Ghost: and assure thy self
though thy body die, and be turned into dust, and taste of corruption, the holy
Spirit of God that now dwells in thy body, shall be as a precious balm to
preserve it to immortality, and he shall raise it up again to endless honor
and glory: think on that to thy comfor. Come we now to verse 12.

VERSE 12. Therefore brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh to live after
the flesh.


Our Apostle having from the beginning of this Chapter hitherto, dealt by way
of instruction, he now comes to deal by way of exhortation, exhorting the
believing Romans to an holy and spiritual life.

The first word of this verse, Therefore, points out a respect that this Verse
has to foregoing matter, and the dependence is this: The Apostle having before
made known to the Romans by way of instruction, that they that are in Christ
Jesus are freed from condemnation, flesh, savor the things of the flesh, and
they that Romans to an holy and spiritual life, that therefore they should
live such a life. And he does not barely propound his exhortation, and say,
Therefore live an holy life: but he does press and enforce it by strong and
weighty reasons: as first, in this verse by an argument from common equity
and honesty: even common honesty requires that every one should pay his
debt. Now says the Apostle, we are debtors: so he reasons, we are now to yield
it as due debt; styling the Romans with a kind and loving title, Brethren.
Therefore brethren we are debtors. And then he makes known to them to whom
they were indebted, and what their debt was, yet not expressly and plainly, but
by removing a false creditor, and an unjust debt: as namely, that they were not
indebted to the flesh to live after the flesh; they ought no such thing to the
flesh, and that the flesh could challenge no such thing at their hands: and he
leaves the true creditor and the due debt to be gathered by themselves, as they
might easily gather it by the law of contraries, that they were indebted to the
Spirit, to live after the Spirit: for that is the nature of contraries, that
one may easily be understood by the other, though it be not expressed, as if
the Apostle had said, We are debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh:
but we are debtors to the Spirit, to live after the Spirit. And so we see the
dependence of this verse on foregoing matter, and the general matter and
substance of it. I will now as briefly as I can open the sense and meaning of
the words.

Interpretation.
Therefore brethren. The word brethren is a title of love and kindness, and
the Apostle uses it to sweeten his exhortation, and it is as if he had said,
My beloved, whom I love and affect in the Lord, even as my dear brethren in
Christ, and as those that are conjoined with me by the bond of one truth, one
faith, and one hope of salvation; by the bond of the same Spirit of Christ. We
are debtors. We, that is, both I and you, and all true believers, are debtors.
The word debtors is metaphorical, borrowed and taken from such as owe homage,
duty, service, money, or the like, to others, and are engaged and bound to
others in any bond whatsoever: and the meaning is, we are engaged, we are
bound, there is a debt lies on us, and we are bound in equity and conscience
to pay it: and if we pay it not, we fail in our bounden duty, and we perform
not the part of honest men, and we may justly be taxed with dishonest dealing.
Not to the flesh. The word flesh is not here to be taken for the substantial
body, the substance of the body, for that we tender, and love, and cherish,
by meat, drink, apparel, and the like: but by flesh, as it is many times in
this Chapter, for the corruption of nature, and for the sinful lusts of
corrupt nature; for so we are no debtors to the flesh. Romans 13.14. Take no
thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. To live after the flesh: that
is, to lead our lives according to the motion and guidance of corrupt nature,
to live a carnal life. Now the contrary must be understood, But to the
Spirit: that is, according to the motion and guidance of the Spirit, of the
Spirit of God, even the Spirit of grace and sanctification, to live an holy,
heavenly, and spiritual life. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle
in the words of this verse, as if he had said:

My beloved, whom I love and affect in the Lord as my dear brethren in Christ,
conjoined with me by the bond of one truth, both I and you, and all true
believers, are engaged and bound, we are indebted, there is a debt due from us,
which in equity and conscience we are bound to pay, and I beseech you
understand me aright, we are not indebted to the corruption of our nature, and
to the sinful lusts of our own hearts; they cannot challenge it at our hands,
that we should live according to their motion and guidance a carnal life, but
we are indebted to the Spirit of God, to the Spirit of grace and
sanctification: we are bound to live according to the motion and guidance of
that holy and blessed Spirit, even an holy, an heavenly, and spiritual life.

Here first mark, the Apostle having before dealt by way of instruction, he
now falls on exhortation, and to his doctrine of consolation he subioynes
exhortation: whence note we.

That in the right and good order of teaching, Exhortation must follow doctrine
in the right order of teaching.
exhortation of errors, must be added exhortation and a stirring up to good
life. I might prove this by the constant course of the Apostle in all his
Epistles: but to forbear that, there is good reason why this order ought to be
held in teaching the word: for why,

It is exhortation that makes doctrine powerful, effectual, and lively;

Good hearers must answer the order of teaching by doctrine and exhortation in
their lives and conuersations.
And touching our selves, is it so that teaching and exhortation must go
together? Surely then where these two are conjoined, it is the part of good
hearers to be answerable to them both. Is this order of teaching observed? is
the truth taught, and errors confuted, and thereunto added exhortation to godly
life? then it is not enough for the hearers of the word so taught, to have
knowledge of the truth, and to have errors rooted out of their minds; but they
must be further answerable to their teaching, in being careful to lead a
godly, righteous, and sober life. And deceive not thy self in this case; if
thou be able to speak of the truth, and if thou say, thou art of sound
religion, thou hate Popery, and all superstitions, and false doctrines, and
yet go on in thy old wicked way and works of darkness, the word of God
being truly taught and applied to thee, thou deceiuest thy self, that word of
God so taught and so applied shall one day rise up in judgment against thee,
yea thine own knowledge shall be a witness against thee. Mark what Christ
says, Luke 12.47. He that knows his masters will and prepares not
himself, neither does according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes. If thou answer the teaching of the word in knowledge and not in
practice, it shall one day be a bill of indictment against thee.

In the next place, observe we the inference of this verse on foregoing matter.
The Apostle having cheared up the believing Romans with this, that they were
not in the flesh but in the Spirit, in that the Spirit of God dwelt in them,
and he dwelling in them, made them partakers of the excellent benefits of the
life of grace here in this world, and of certain hope of the life of glory
hereafter, both in their souls and also in their bodies: thereupon in this
verse he concludes, that therefore they were debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh, but to the Spirit, to live after the Spirit. He reasons thus,
God has given them his Spirit, and made them partakers of excellent spiritual
benefits, and therefore they were more bound to an holy and spiritual life.
Mark this manner of reasoning, and the point hence is this.

That it is an usual thing with the holy Ghost in Scripture, It is an usual
reasoning in Scripture, from a benefit to a duty, and to urge the one from the
other.
The holy Prophets and the holy Apostles, the pen men of Scripture, usually
urge and press holy duties on people and on particular persons, from benefits
received, and from good things bestowed on them. 2. Sam. 12.7.8.9. Nathan
reasons thus with David, The Lord anointed thee king over Israel, and
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and gave thee thy Lords house, and thy
Lords wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah,
and would moreover (if that had been too little) have given thee such and such
things: wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil
in his sight? As if he had said, The Lord did great things for thee, and
bestowed many benefits on thee, and therefore thou should not have so
despised the commandment of the Lord; thou wast bound to the Lord, and thou
did owe to him in lieu of his benefits, homage, service, and all holy
obedience. And this manner of reasoning is used in the forefront of the
Commandments: when the Lord published his Law the rule of all holy obedience,
he pressed it on his people with this very argument, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord
thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage: therefore thou shall have no other gods before me. Many other
Scriptures might be brought to show it to be usual with the holy Ghost in
Scripture thus to deal, and to reason from a benefit to a duty, and to urge
and press holy duties on people, or on particular persons, from benefits
received, and from good things bestowed on them.

The reasoning of Gods Spirit and the reasoning of Satan, the world, and the
flesh, are flat contrary one to the other.
And this may serve to discover a flat contrariety between the reasoning of
Gods Spirit, and the reasoning of Satan, the world, and the flesh. Gods Spirit
reasons from a benefit to a duty; but Satan, the world, and the flesh,
commonly reason from a benefit to the neglect of duty, and to sin: as thus,
I am great, I am noble, I am rich, I am wealthy, and therefore I may do this
and that evil, I may swagger, and swear, and be profane, I may oppress and
do wrong to others, and who shall be so bold as to check and control me?
Doubtless Satan taught David thus to reason when he tempted him to number the
people. What? thou art a king, and will thou be crossed in thy pleasure? as
Iesabell said to Ahab, 1. King. 21.7. Do thou now govern Israel? as if she
had said, Art not thou king over Israel, and may not thou do what thou will
without controlment? And hereby let every one of us try our selves. Do thou
reason thus: I am great, I am rich, or the like, and therefore I may do this or
that evil, and who shall control me? who shall say contrary unto it? And
thou being a woman, do thou reason thus, I am the wife of such a man, my
husband is so rich and wealthy, and though he be but a tradesman, yet I may
attire my self like the wife of an Esquire or Knight, my husband is of
ability able to maintain it? Surely that is the devils argument, and that is
a plain evidence thou have no true grace in thy heart. On the other side, An
argument of a good heart.
do thou reason thus, I am rich, I am great, and such like, therefore I am
exceedingly bound to the Lord, I would feign show my self thankful, and I
cannot be sufficiently thankful to God for his goodness and bounty toward
me: and thou say with David, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord
for all his benefits? I would feign devise if it were possible some
retribution; and when thou art tempted to any sin, thou reasonest thus with
thy self, The Lord has been good to me, and especially good to my soul, he
has given his Son Christ to me, he has given me pardon of my sins, and
many evidences and testimonies of his special love to me: and as Nehemiah
said, Nehem. 6.11. Should such a man as I fly? so should such a man or such a
woman as I, be covetous, or proud, or vain, and garish in apparel? should I
do this wickedness, and sin against my good God, who has done so great
things for me? no, no, I may not, I will not do it, I am bound in lieu of Gods
goodness and bounty toward me, to yield to him all homage, duty, fear,
reverence, and all holy obedience. If this be thy reasoning, that is an
argument of a good heart, and it is an evidence that thy heart is right within
thee, and that there is true and sound grace in thy soul: and thus is every
one to try himself.

The Apostle here uses this title of love and kindness, Brethren, as we
showed, to sweeten his exhortation, that the believing Romans might more
willingly embrace it, and yield to it, and that it might have a kindly working
in them, they being persuaded of the Apostles love toward them. And indeed it
is the persuasion of love that gives entrance and passage to an exhortation, to
advice and counsel, yea to reproof and reprehension. When men are persuaded
of the love of those that deal with them by way of exhortation, or advice and
counsel, they do then more willingly yield to them, they suffer their
exhortation, their advice and counsel, to sink into their hearts, and to
prevail with them. If then such as are to advise and counsel others, or to
exhort and stir them up to any duty, or to admonish or reprove them,
especially Ministers, Advice, counsel, admonition, or exhortation, coming
from love, most powerful and preualent.
who are to deal in these kinds with their hearers, would have their
counsel, exhortation, admonition, or reproof, to take place and to prevail,
they must give some evidence and testimony of their love to those with whom
they deal; and they must make it appear that they love them dearly, and
affect them tenderly, and esteem them as their brethren, and as those with
whom they are conjoined by many strong bonds. If people be persuaded that the
words of their teachers, whether they be words of instruction, of advice and
counsel, of comfort, or of reproof, or the like, be not words of course and
complement, but words proceeding out of a tender love and affection toward
them for their good, it will make them willing to listen to them, and to make
precious account of them, and to take profit by them. I will not further stand
on that. This word brethren is here only a title of love given to the Romans,
and so not so material in this verse, and therefore I pass from it.

We are debtors. The Apostle here includes himself, that he himself was a
debtor as well as the believing Romans. He says not, therefore ye are debtors,
but therefore we are debtors. Hence note we.

Ministers and teachers of the word must hold themselves as much bound to the
good duties which they press on others, being duties common to all Christians,
as those on who^ they urge and press them
being duties common to all Christians, as those on whom they urge and press
them. Luke 11.46. the Lord Jesus pronounces a fearful woe on the expounders
of the Law, in that they laded men with burdens grievous to be borne, and yet
they themselves touch them not with one of their fingers. Doubtless the same
woe abides those Ministers and Preachers of the word, who require good duties
of people, duties that concern all Christians, and yet themselves never care
to practice them. It is a fearful aggrauation of the sin of teachers, when
they teach that to others which they themselves will not practice, being a
duty common to all Christians. Rom 2.21. If thou that teach another,
teach not thy self: they that so do, may preach salvation to others, but
certainly they preach damnation to themselves; and of their own mouths will
the Lord one day judge them, as Luke 19.22.

I come to that which is here more properly intended by the Apostle. We are
debtors: that is, as we showed, I and you, and all true believers, are engaged,
we stand bound, and we are indebted, there is a debt that lies on us which in
equity and conscience we are bound to pay; and if we pay it not, we deal not
as honest men ought to do, we owe to the Lord an holy life.

The point hence offered is this, That an holy, heavenly, Gods children owe to
the Lord the debt of an holy, heavenly, and spiritual life.
is a due debt which Gods children and true believers owe to the Lord, and they
are bound in equity and conscience to yield it to him: it is dishonest dealing
in them if they yield it not to the Lord. Indeed Gods children are the freest
people in the world: being made free by the Son of God, they are free indeed,
Ioh. 8.36. They are free from the rigor and curse of the Law, free from the
guilt and punishment of sin, the debt of sin being discharged for them in
Christ: and they have the Spirit of God, and where the Spirit of God is, there
is liberty. 2. Cor. 3.17. Yet there is still a debt lying on them, even the
debt of holy obedience, they are still bound to live an holy and godly life;
therein they are still engaged to the Lord, and he may still challenge that at
their hands as a due debt to him. And to this purpose mark what old Zachary
says. Luke 1.74.75. says he, We are delivered out of the hands of our
enemies: out of the hands of sin, Satan, and all the enemies of our
salvation, that we should serve the Lord without fear all the days of our
life, in holiness and righteousness before him; that is a thing we still owe
to the Lord. Galat. 5.13. says the Apostle, Brethren, ye have been called unto
liberty: ye have been effectually wrought on by the word and Spirit of God,
and set out of the kingdom of darkness into Gods kingdom of grace, into a
glorious liberty. Now then use not your liberty as an occasion unto the
flesh, but by love serve one another. You are still bound to serve one another
in duties of love, and therein to yield obedience to the Lord. 1. Pet. 2.16. As
free (says the Apostle) and not as having the liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God. As if he had said, Though you be
free by grace in Christ, yet abuse not your liberty, but still carry your
selves as the servants of God; you are still bound so to do. Tit. 2.11.12. the
Apostle says, that the grace of God bringing salvation to all men has
appeared: to what purpose? that men should live as they list, and go on in the
practice of sin? no, no. Teaching us that we should deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live soberly, says the Apostle. Gods children that are
partakers of Gods grace to salvation, are still bound to live an holy and godly
life: yea they are bound to it by many bonds, not only common to them with
others, as by their creation, their preservation, and many blessings they enjoy
together with others, but also by many special bonds, and by the bond of
their redemption, that they are bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6.20. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit,
for they are Gods: and by many special favors vouchsafed to them, and many
pledges of Gods special love toward them: by their vow and covenant made in
baptism, often renewed on special occasions; yea it is the very end of all
Gods graces and benefits bestowed on his children, that they should live an
holy and godly life. They are elected that they might be holy. Ephesians. 1.4. They
are called that they should walk worthy the vocation whereunto they are
called. Ephesians. 4.1. And the grace of justification freeth them from the
guiltiness of sin, and the grace of sanctification from the corruption of
sin. Faith is given them to purify their hearts. Act. 15.9. love to continue
them in obedience; hope of salvation, that they might purge themselves. 1. Ioh.
3.3. And therefore on these grounds we may resolve on this as a certain truth,
that an holy heavenly life is a due debt which Gods children and true believers
owe to the Lord, and they are bound in equity and conscience to yield it to
him: and they may be justly taxed for dishonest dealing, if they yield it not
to the Lord.

The Popish opinion touching the merit of good works met withal.
For why, is an holy and heavenly life a due debt which we owe to the Lord?
then it can merit nothing at the hands of God for our selves, much less for
others by the merit of supererogation, as the Papists hold and teach, for that
which is a debt cannot be a merit. A man merits nothing no not so much as
thanks, for paying that which he owes, Luke 17.9.10. (says Christ) Does a man
thank his servant for doing that which he commands him to do? I trow not. So
likewise (says he) when ye have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do
As for that distinction the Papists use, that our works merit not in the
rigor of Gods justice, but through divine acceptance, it helps them nothing at
all. God indeed accepts of our good works in Christ, not as merits, but of
grace, and so in mercy rewards them; and therefore here is no place for merit
of our good works, as the Papists teach. I leave them, and for use to our
selves; Is it so that an holy, heavenly, and spiritual life, is a due debt
that Gods children and true believers owe to the Lord? are they bound in
equity and conscience to yield it to him? is it dishonest dealing in them if
they yield it not to the Lord? Then no marvel though Gods children be so
strict in their lives, The strictnes of Gods children is not to be wondered at.
to live an holy and godly life. The world wonders at the strictness of Gods
children, and men commonly blame them for their too much niceness, and too
much preciseness; and they say, what? cannot they content themselves to be
neighborlike, and to do as other men do, what need they make such ado in
hearing the word, in reading, in sanctifying the Sabbath? cannot they walk
abroad, sit at their doors, take liberty as their honest neighbors do, but
they must make such ado in hearing the word, in repeating Sermons, and the
like? Alas poor souls, they consider not that Gods children are bound to be
thus strict, and thus careful to live an holy life, it is a debt, and Gods
children know it stands with their honesty so to be. Thou whosoever thou art,
though thou be but a man of common sense and reason, thou will grant this,
that it concerns an honest man to be careful to pay his debts, and thou will
commend a man that is careful that way for a right honest man, and indeed it
is a commendable thing: a man that is in debt is to give satisfaction so far
as he is able to the uttermost farthing. Elishah said to the widow, Sell the
oil, and pay them that thou art indebted unto. 2. King. 4.7. and yet will thou
blame a child of God for being careful to pay that he owes to the Lord? will thou commend a man that is careful to pay his debts to men, and will thou
blame him that endeavors to answer the debt that is due from him to the Lord?
how partial and how unequal art thou in thy judgment? can a child of God
yield more holy obedience then he owes to the Lord? is it possible? no, no, it
is not possible, and therefore do not thou blame a child of God for too much
strictness, and too much forwardness in holiness.

It is necessary that a child of God should live an holy and heavenly life.
take notice of it, that it is necessary that he live an holy and heavenly
life; it is requisite and needful that every man pay his debts, common
honesty requires it. Now an holy and heavenly life is the debt of a child of
God, he is bound to yield it to the Lord. Do thou then persuade thy self
that thou art a child of God? consider what thou owe to the Lord, and be
careful to pay it. Thou stand on thy reputation, that thou art an honest
man, and thou owe no man a groate: yea but thou art in debt to the Lord, be
thou careful to pay him his debt, thou owe to him all holy obedience both in
heart and life. And thou will say, that is to be a Puritan. I answer, If that
be to be a Puritan, thou must be a Puritan, or else thou art no honest man:
it is not thy civil honest life that will serve the turn: no, no, that is not
full weight, that is too light, and that will not go for good payment with the
Lord; thou owe to him an holy and heavenly life, and thou art to yield it to
him: yea know it, thou being a child of God, thou art more deeply bound to an
holy life then others, the Lord looks for it at thy hands especially. Psalm.
33.1. It becomes the upright men to be thankful. and know to thy comfort, if
thou endeavor and set thy self in truth and uprightness of heart, to yield
this debt to the Lord, the Lord will put ability into thine hand, and make
thee able in some measure to yield it to him; and he will accept of thy true
and sound endeavor to yield holy obedience to him, though it be but weak and
full of many imperfections. And though it be but part of payment, thou being
able to yield him no better satisfaction for the present, he will accept of that
as full payment in and through Christ. And withal know to thy comfort, Note.
That the more thou do pay of this debt, the more and the better able shall
thou be to make further payment; the more thou do practice holy duties, the
more strength thou shall get over sin, and the more will grace increase in
thine own soul: as the more thou did practice the duty of prayer, the more
strength thou shall get against sin; and the more thou do practice the
duties of love toward thy brethren, the more will Christian love increase in
thine own heart: and so in other particulars. Oh then set thy self, thou that
art a child of God, on every good way, and to yield that thou owe to the
Lord, even all holy obedience both in heart and life; and thou shall find that
the Lord will enable thee to yield it to him in some comfortable measure, and
he will accept of that thou art able to yield to him in uprightness of heart:
and the more thou do pay of this debt, the more able shall thou be to make
further payment. The proverb holds true in this, use legs and have legs,
so use grace and thou shall find an increase of grace, to him that has shall
be given, and he shall have abundance. Matthew. 25.29. Think on that to thy
comfort and encouragement.

The Apostle having made known to the believing Romans that he and they and
all true believers were debtors, he further subioynes, that they were not
debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh: as if he had said, mistake me
not, I would have you to know, we are not debtors to the flesh to live after
the flesh, we are not bound to live according to the motion and guidance of our
own corrupt nature, and sinful lusts of our hearts, that is not our debt, we
owe no such thing, the flesh and the sinful lusts of our hearts can challenge
no such thing at our hands. Hence we are given to understand thus much: we may
hence take up this conclusion.

Gods children owe no service at all to the corruption of their nature, and to
the sinful lusts that are still stirring in them.
and to the sinful lusts that are still stirring in them: they are not to do
any thing that their own corruption moves them to, and that their sinful
lusts stir them up to do, they owe no such thing to them. Indeed Gods
children sometimes be ouercarried by the strength of their corruption abiding
in them, and their rebellious lusts may draw that from them which they owe not
to them, but they must not yield them service as of right, any willing service,
as if they were bound to yield it. When a child of God feels his own
corruption, and lust of his heart stirring in him, moving, and egging, and
soliciting him to yield to it, he must give it a flat denial; and thought it
still follow him, and as it were pull him by the sleeue, and challenge something
at his hands, he must shake it off, and tell it he owes no service to it at
all: he must give it no contentment, he must not willingly satisfy the sinful
lust of his own heart in any thing. This is one special thing that the Lord
Jesus requires of his followers, even of all that profess his name and his
truth and Gospel in truth and soundness, Luke 9.23. If any man (says he)
will come after me, let him deny himself: let him lay aside his own reason,
will, and affections, and all that nature has endued him withal, let him not
willingly yield to the sinful lusts of his own heart in any thing: when they
move and stir him up, and solicit him to yield to them, let him give them a
flat denial, he owes no service to them. 1. Pet. 4.1.2.3. says the Apostle,
Forasmuch as Christ suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise
with the same mind, which is, that he which has suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin, that he hence forward should live (as much time as
remains in the flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.
For it is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of the life, after
the lust of the Gentiles. As if he had said, It is enough, and more then
enough, that we have hitherto lived according to the lusts of our own hearts,
we now owe no service to them, we are not now to yield to them, but to renounce
them, and to betake our selves to live wholly according to the will of God.
Tit. 3.3. says the Apostle, We our selves, even we that are now true
believers, were in times past, unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts
and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and envy, hateful, and hating
one another. We did yield to the sinful lusts of our own hearts as servants,
we did willingly yield to them as bound so to do, and as of duty; thereby
implying, that now it was not so, and thereby teaching the truth of the point
in hand, that Gods children, true believers, owe no service at all to the
corruption that still abides in them, and to the sinful lusts of their own
hearts, they are to give no contentment to them, they are not willingly to
satisfy the lusts of their own hearts, but when they move and solicit them
to yield them service, they are to give them a flat denial, and to tell them,
they owe them no service at all. For why.

The corruption of nature and sinful lusts that are still in Gods children and
true believers,

And this serves first to discover, How they deceive themselves who think they
may yield a little to their own corrupt hearts.
that they deceive themselves whosoever they be, that think they may yield a
little to their own hearts, and to the sinful lusts of them, and that they
may give their hearts contentment in some things. What? deny their own hearts
every thing they move and stir them up to, that is too much strictness:
why, their own hearts tell them they may make the most they can of their own,
and may they not a little yield to them, to the raising of their rents, and to
the enhancing of their commodities, in their attire to follow the fashions in
some things; and may they not do it? if they do it not they shall be of no
account in the world: and therefore they think they may in some things follow
the fashion, and may satisfy their own minds, and please their own humors.
Surely such persons persuading themselves they are Gods children, and yet
taking this liberty, they deceive themselves, they carry not themselves as
Gods children ought to do; a child of God owes no service at all to the
sinful lusts of his own heart, he is not to yield to their motions and
stirrings in any thing willingly and wittingly; it is a sin and a fault in
any to satisfy the sinful lusts of his own heart. The Apostle makes it an
opposite member to the putting on of Christ, Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord
Jesus, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. And
therefore deceive not thy self whosoever thou art, do not thou think that
thou may without danger willingly yield to the evil motions and stirrings of
thine own corrupt heart in the least measure. And

Every child of God must learn to give the lust of his own carnal heart
stirring in him, a flat denial.
Do thou persuade thy self thou art a child of God? why then when thou
feel any evil lust stirring in thy heart, moving and soliciting thee to
pride, to covetousness, to envy, to malice, to uncleanness, and the like,
then call to mind and remember this truth, that thou owe no service at all to
the corruption that still abides in thee, and to the sinful lusts of thine
own heart: and learn to give that lust so stirring in thee a flat denial,
tell it thou owe to it no service at all, and though it still follow thee and
urge thee to yield something to it, yet shake it off, and say unto it, away,
hence, I owe thee nothing at all, get thee from me, thou art an offense to me,
as Christ said to Peter, Mat. 16.23. And if at any time thou be overcome of any
sinful lust of thine own heart, look that thy yielding to it be wrested from
thee, let it not come from thee willingly as of due. And to this purpose
consider with me thus much, If thou professing thy self a child of God, yield
any service to the lusts of thine own heart, thou do it to an unjust Lord,
to one that cannot challenge it at thy hands, yea to one that draws thee from
the service of him who indeed is thy Lord of right, and to whom thou owe thy
self, thy soul, thy body, and all thy strength and ability, and service
both of thy soul and body, even from the service of the Lord, yea to that
which is evil and sinful, and displeasing to the holy majesty of God, and
prouokes him to anger against thee. Yea further consider, thou professing thy
self to be a child of God, and yet yielding service to the lusts of thine own
heart, thou do as much as in thee is, frustrate the end of Gods saving grace
toward thee; for to that end has the grace of God that brings salvation to
all, appeared to thee in particular, that thou should deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and that thou should live soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this present world, Tit. 2.12. that thou should give the denial to all
the lusts of thine own heart when they challenge any service at thine hands.
See thou think on these things, and when thou feel any evil lust stirring
in thine heart, moving thee to pride, to covetousness, check it, snib it,
give it a flat denial, tell it, thou owe it no service at all: yea take thou
notice of that lust that for the present is stirring in thee, and moving thee
to any sin; it is not enough to take notice that thou have heretofore yielded
to some corrupt lust of thine own heart, by doing of this or that evil, as
that thou have been prodigal, covetous, or the like, and to acknowledge that,
it may be that lust is not now so strong in thee as it has been, but mark
thou that lust that for the present is stirring in thee, and labor thou to
snib and to repel that, and to give it a flat denial: and know this to thy
comfort, Note.
That the devil cannot draw thee to yield to the lusts of thine own heart,
but by the consent of thine own will, he has no power to enforce thee to
yield to it, but only a slight to persuade thee to it. And therefore take
thou notice of the lust that for the present is stirring in thine heart, and
set thy self against it, suffer it not to gain the consent of thy will, give
it a flat denial, and thou shall find that the Lord will enable thee to
overcome it. That is the duty of every child of God, let it be thought on and
remembered.

Now lastly observe we, the Apostle does here suppress the other contrary,
that he and the believing Romans, and all true believers, were debtors to the
Spirit, to live according to the motion and guidance of the Spirit. He speaks
not thus, we are debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but to the
Spirit to live after the Spirit; he suppresseth that, and leaves it to be
gathered by the believing Romans themselves: because indeed to live after the
flesh, and to live after the Spirit are such contraries, that one being denied,
the other might easily be gathered: and concluded, that if they were not
debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh then certainly they were debtors
to the Spirit, to live after the Spirit. Hence then note we in a word.

Every man in the world lives either a carnal life, or an holy and spiritual
life.
man or woman, they either live after the flesh, or they live after the Spirit.
Every man in the world either lives a carnal life, or he lives an holy and
spiritual life: and every man either lives the life of God, as the Apostle
calls it, Ephesians 4.18. that is, that life that is wrought in him by the Spirit of
God, and as he is acted and moved by the Spirit of God, or he is a mere
stranger from that life. He says, the Gentiles being in the state of nature,
were strangers from the life of God it is the speech of Christ himself, Mat
12.30. He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters. Every one is either with Christ or against him, he is either a
friend to Christ, or he is an enemy to him; he either lives to the glory o^
God, and to the honor of Christ, or he lives to his dishonor: and so his life
is eith^r carnal, or it is holy and spiritual; and indeed there is no medium,
there is no middle course between these two.

must needs be surable and agreeable; and therefore it may be truly said, that
every one in the world either lives after the flesh or he lives after the
Spirit; and the life of every one is either carnal, or it is holy and
spiritual.

Oh then for use of this, think not whosoever thou art, Civil honesty is not
sufficient to free a man or woman from being taxed to be a a carnal person.
that thou can as it were go between the bark and the tree, and fancy not
to thy self, though thou live not so holily and so strictly as some do, yet
thou art not a carnal person, thou art no wicked and debaushed wretch, thou
art no filthy person, thou art no drunkard, nor the like: but thou live
ciuilly and honestly, and therefore thou art not to be taxed for a carnal
person, and that thou live a carnal lif^. Deceive not thy self, it is not
thy civil, honest, orderly life that will free ^hee from being justly taxed
with carnalitie, from being truly said to be a carnal person: no, no, if thou
live not after the Spirit, certainly thou live after the flesh; if thy life
be not holy an^ spiritual, certainly it is carnal, and thou have not yet g^ne
one step beyond a carnal person. And howsoever thy civil orderly life, thy
luke warm profession, may seem to be a middl^ course between both, as Revel.
3.16. thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot: yet indeed in that thou
art only ciuilly honest, and lukewarm, thou art carnal, and thou go
against the work of the Lord Jesus, thou prouokest him to cast thee out as
loathsome and abominable: there is no middle course of life between a carnal
life and an holy spiritual life. Oh then sooth not thy self in thy civil
honest life, of going on in that course of life, and please thy self in it,
and think thou have part in any benefit or comfort that belongs to Gods
children; thou deceiuest thy self if thou so think, and take heed of that.
And let every one learn on the ground of truth now delivered, to see how the
case stands with us: if our lives be not holy and spiritual, out of all
question they are sensual and carnal, and there is no true comfort in them.
Come we now to the 13. verse.

VERSE 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live.


Our Apostle in this Verse goes on further to enforce and press this
exhortation on the believing Romans, that they ought to live an holy and
spiritual life; and here adds two other arguments to that purpose.

The first is from the danger and unprofitable effect of a contrary course of
life, namely, of living after the flesh, that if they did so live, death would
be the fruit and effect of that kind of life: If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall dye. And this argument depends on foregoing matter, as a reason
dissuading from living after the flesh, For if ye live after the flesh (says
the Apostle) ye shall dye. As if he had said, Live not after the flesh, for if
ye so do, ye shall dye.

The second argument is from the benefit and profit that will follow on an holy
and spiritual life, as namely, that such a life would be very comfortable,
that the benefit and fruit that would follow on that, would be an happy life;
yet the antecedent of that argument is not in these terms expressed, if ye
live an holy and spiritual life, but one part of that life, namely,
mortification of si^ne is put for the whole. If ye mortify the deeds of the
body by the Spirit (says the Apostle) ye shall live. And he makes an
opposition between living after the flesh, and mortifying the deeds of the
body by the Spirit, and compares them together as contrary courses of life,
and as tending to contrary ends: If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, but
(says he on the other side) if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the
Spirit, ye shall live.

We see then the matter and substance of this verse, the words of it are now to
be opened and explaned. Interpretation.
If ye live after the flesh. The meaning of that phrase we gave in the verse
before, and it is this: If ye live and lead your lives according to the motion
and guidance of your own corrupt minds and wills, and according to the corrupt
and sinful lusts of your own hearts, if the course of your life be carnal,
if you live a carnal life. Ye shall dye. In these words no doubt the Apostle
had respect to that threatening, Genes. 2.17. In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death. His meaning is, Ye shall not only dye the
death of the body, which is a separation of the soul from the body, and is
common to all, but ye shall dye eternally, ye shall be for ever severed from
the comfortable presence of God, and ye shall feel the full wrath of God on
your souls and bodies in hell for ever; ye shall dye both death temporal, and
death eternal: yea your temporal death shall be as it is in it self a cursed
death. But if ye mortify the deeds of the body. By the deeds of the body, we
are not to understand the acts and deeds of the body either natural or
indifferent, as eating, drinking, walking sleeping, and such like: but the
evil and sinful motions and stirrings that do arise from the inborne
corruption in the mind and in the heart, and do entice and stir up to sin,
as Iam. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence and is entised, and are acted and executed by the body, and
therefore called the deeds of the body and works of the flesh, Galat. 5.19.
The word mortify, is metaphorical, drawn and taken from Chyrurgions, who
when they are of necessity to cut off a leg or an arm, use means to
benumme that part of the body, and to make it without sense and feeling, that
it may be cut off with as little pain to the party as is possible; and so the
Apostles meaning in this word is this, if you use all good means as it were to
benumme and to take away the moving, stirring, and life of those sinful
motions that arise in your hearts and minds, if you suppress them and keep
them under. By the Spirit. That is, by the Spirit of Christ, and by the power
of his sanctifying grace that is in you. Ye shall live. The Apostle here
intends and means a twofold life, namely, life temporal, and life eternal;
in opposition to the twofold death we spoke of before: as if he had said, Ye
shall live a comfortable life, a life full of sweetness and comfort here in
this world, and ye shall never see death, as Ioh. 8.51. that is, death
eternal; but you shall assuredly hereafter live the life of happiness and
glory in heaven. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words
of this verse, as if he had said.

For if ye live and lead your lives according to the motion and guidance of
your own corrupt minds and wills, and the corrupt and sinful lusts of your
own hearts; if you live a carnal life, you shall certainly not only dye the
death of the body, and that an accursed death, but you shall also dye
eternally, and be for ever severed from the comfortable presence of God, and
feel the full wrath of God in your souls and bodies in hell fire for ever.
But if so be you do use all good means as it were to benumme and to take away
the moving and stirring of those evil and sinful motions and lusts that arise
from your inborne corruption in your minds and hearts, enticing and stirring
you up to sin, if you suppress them, and keep them under by the Spirit of
Christ, and by the power of his sanctifying grace in your hearts, you shall
assuredly live a comfortable life here in this world, and you shall hereafter
live the life of happiness and glory with the Lord in heaven.

First observe we how the Apostle here disswades from living after the flesh:
for I told you, his first argument is a reason dissuading from so living; his
argument to that purpose is a terrifying argument, an argument of terror and
threatening, he threatens no less then eternal death and damnation against
such as live after the flesh: he tells the Romans, that if they did live after
the flesh, and held on that course of life to the end, they should certainly
dye, they should be sure to be damned: as if he had said, take heed of living a
carnal life, for if you so live, you shall certainly dye. Whence note we thus
much.

Ministers and Preachers of the word may threaten men with hell and damnation,
to drive them from a wicked and sinful course of life.
arguments full of dread and terror, to dissuade men from a carnal course of
life. Preachers of the word may threaten plagues and judgments of God against
men, yea they may threaten them with hell and damnation, to this end, to drive
them from a wicked and sinful course, they shall be sure to go to hell and to
be damned. This the Ministers and Preachers of the word may do warrantablie,
they have warrant for it, not only from the practice of the Apostle in this
text, but from the constant and continual practice of holy men of God in all
ages. Instance in one or two places. Ephesians. 5. the Apostle having verse 3.4.
dissuaded from fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish
talking, jesting, and other foul sins, and told the Ephesians verse 5. That
no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person which is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God, he stays
not there, but he subioynes verse 6. a terrifying argument, and he tells them
further, that if any of them should go on in the practice of any of those
sins, they should be sure to meet with the wrath of God. Says he, Let no
man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. As if he had said, If any tell you to the
contrary, he does but deceive you: assure your selves that men or women that
live in the practice of those sins, shall not escape the wrath and vengeance
of God, it shall certainly overtake them, it shall light on them. 2. Corinthians.
5. the Apostle having verse 10. made known that all men must appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, he adds verse 11. Knowing therefore the terror
of the Lord, we persuade men. Mark, he affirms that from the terror of the
day of judgment, and from the dreadful doom that the wicked shall then
receive, he and other Apostles did persuade men to avoid sin. Mat. 23.23.
Mat. 23.23.
we find that the Lord Jesus denounces woe after woe against the Scribes and
Pharisees, and verse 33. Verse 33.
he sends out against them a terrible thunderbolt, Oh serpents, the generation
of vipers, how should ye escape the damnation of hell: he threatens them with
hell and damnation. And we need no further evidence for the clearing and
confirming the point in hand, that the Ministers and Preachers of the word may
warrantablie use terrifying arguments to dissuade men from a carnal course of
life, they may lawfully threaten them with hell and damnation; and there is
reason for it.



An unjust exception against Ministers of the word in executing their
ministry discovered.
This then may serve to discover, that men do unjustly except against the
Ministers of the word, in that they as occasion is offered to them, do terrify
men, and do sometimes threaten them with hell, and with damnation. When the
Preachers of the word, in dispencing of the word, and especially in application
of it, do put a difference between the precious and the vile, Ierem. 15.19.
and give comfort to whom comfort belongs, and reproof to whom reproof
belongs, and do threaten judgment to whom judgment and plagues are due, men
of corrupt and carnal minds commonly except against them, and say, they
preach nothing but judgment and damnation, though many times they deliver
excellent and heavenly comforts: yet in that they reach out that comfort only
to those to whom it belongs, carnal minded men say they preach nothing but
judgment and damnation, and they cannot endure such Preachers: no, they like
those Preachers that send all to heaven, and never speak of hell and damnation
but in general terms, and those are Preachers for their turn. Poor souls,
they consider not that in the right dispencing of the word of God, not only
mercy is to be promised, but judgment also must be threatened as just occasion
is offered, and that threatening of judgment and terrifying of men with hell
and with damnation is sometimes warrantable, yea of special good use, both in
respect of the godly, and also in regard of the wicked, they would hear of
nothing but mercy. Alas, mercy preached to carnal persons, does but lull
them asleep in their senseless security, and help them forward with more
delight toward hell. Gal. 3.24.
And if the reprobate be thereupon brought to utter despair, that is not the
proper effect of the word so dispensed; no, that despair comes properly from
their own corruption and guiltiness: the proper effect of the word so
dispensed, in the reprobate is to abate their pleasure in sin, and to
restrain them from extremity and outrage in sin, and so it is of good use
to them. And therefore the Preachers of the word may warrantably use terrifying
arguments to dissuade men from a carnal course of life, and they may tell
them, yea they ought to tell them, when they see them go on in an evil course
of life, if they hold on that course they shall dye and that eternally, and
that they shall be sure to go to hell and be damned. When Preachers of the word
deal on this manner, men are not to except against them. Now here comes a
question to be answered, occasioned from this argument of the Apostle, in that
the Apostle here uses a terrifying argument to dissuade from a carnal course
of life, and directs his speech to the believing Romans, and says, If ye live
after the flesh ye shall dye. The question is this.

Whether Gods children are to avoid evil and sin,

I answer. evil, and to abstain from sin, because it is evil, and sin,
and displeasing to God; as if there were no hell to punish it, yet they may and
they ought in the second place to avoid evil, and to abstain from sin in
respect of Gods wrath and judgments. David says, Psalm. 119.120. Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembled for fear of thee, and he ads further, and I am afraid of
thy judgments. David had a childlike fear of God, he feared God himself, he
feared to offend God out of his love to God, and yet in the second place he
stood in awe of his judgments. And indeed such is the canker of our corrupt
nature, that the best of Gods children have need to think on the wrath and
judgments of God due to sin, that even in consideration thereof they may be
afraid to sin: as Job says, Gods punishment was fearful unto him, Job
31.23. And howsoever Gods children are freed from the wrath of God by Christ,
and do fear God for his mercy, yet that does not exempt them from all fear
of Gods judgments, to keep them from sin. We being therefore Gods children,
we are chiefly and in the first place to avoid sin, and to abstain from
doing evil, because it is evil, and sin, and displeasing to God; but in the
second place, we are to fear the wrath of God against sin; yea we are to
call to mind, and seriously to think on the judgments of God denounced in the
word against particular sins, yea to call to mind the execution of Gods
judgments on hard hearted and impenitent sinners, seen or heard of in the
world, especially the judgments of God that of late have been executed on
wicked persons, and such as are fresh in memory: and the consideration thereof
may preserve in us a reverent awe and fear of the great and glorious majesty
of the Lord.

Note we one thing further concerning the persons more generally The Apostle
here threatens death and damnation against such persons as live after the
flesh: Note.
he directs his speeches indeed in particular to the believing Romans, Such
persons as live after the flesh shall dye and be damned.
yet the general may be concluded and gathered, that all such persons as live
after the flesh shall dye, and shall be damned. I note this in a word, to show
the folly and madness of those idle and phantastike spirits the Familists; A
foolish conceit of the Familists met withal.
they have this fond conceit, that though they make no conscience of any soul
sin, as of swearing, lying, Sabbath breaking, whoredom, and filthiness, but
give themselves to the practice of these sins, yet they are excusable, and
they are in no danger at all: and why so? forsooth they say it is the flesh
that sins, and not they, and they think to shift off the matter by laying the
burden on the flesh. Poor souls, they are maruellously blinded and deluded by
the devil, they shall find one day that they themselves shall smart for their
sins, and they themselves shall be punished for them: and if they go on in
the practice of any foul sin without repentance, they themselves shall dye
and be damned. The Apostle says not, If ye live in the flesh, the flesh shall
carry the burden, the flesh shall be punished, or the flesh shall dye, but ye
your selves shall be sure to carry the burden, ye your selves shall dye and be
damned: And therefore the conceit of the Familists is most vain and foolish.

Come we to the matter of the Apostles argument. If ye live after the flefl ye
shall dye. We see here the Apostle couples these two together, living after the
flesh, and death, as the antecedent and consequent, and he affirms it, that
death, even death of body, and death of soul, death temporal, and that an
accursed death, and death eternal, follow necessarily They that live wickedly
and carnally, and hold on a constant course in that kind of life, shall
certainly dye an accursed death of body, and shall be sure also to go to hell
and to perish for ever. Iud. Epist. verse 18.


The point hence offered is this. That the certain and undoubted fruit and
effect of a carnal life, is death temporal, and that an accursed death, and
also death eternal: the living after the flesh, the living after the corrupt
and sensual lusts of the flesh, the leading of a carnal course of life, and
holding on a constant course in that kind of life, shall certainly and
undoubtedly bring death and destruction both on body and soul. They that live
wickedly and carnally, and walk after their own ungodly lusts, as Jude speaks
verse 18. shall assuredly dye an accursed death of body, and they shall be
sure also to go to hell, and to perish for ever. Besides the evidence of this
text, we have further testimony of Scripture for the proof and confirmation
of this point. To cite some few places to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Moses
says, If any man bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace
although I walk according to the stubburnnesse of mine own heart, in a wicked
and carnal course of life, and walk stubburnly after the lusts of his own
heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, that is, one sin to another, and so go
on and hold on in a constant course in sin, The Lord will not be merciful to
that man, but his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against him, and every curse
written in the book of God shall light on him. 1. Corinthians. 6.9.10. The Apostle
reckens up a rabble of wicked and carnal persons, and he shuts them all out of
Gods kingdom, and being shut out from thence, without question they must needs
go to hell and be damned. Know ye not says the Apostle, as if he had said, it
is a known thing, and ye cannot be ignorant of it, that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. And again, Be not deceived, neither
fornicators nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. The like threatening we find Galat. 5.21. Galat.
5.21.
The Apostle having reckoned up many particular works of the flesh, he says,
verse 21. Whereof I tell you before, as also I have told you before, that they
which do such things, and so are carnal persons, and lead a carnal life,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And Galat. 6.8. Galat. 6.8.
says the Apostle, He that sows to the flesh, he that follows the sinful
desires of the flesh, and fulfils the lusts of it, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, shall be sure in the end to reap the fruit of death and
damnation. Revel. 21.8. Apoc. 21.8.
it is said, that the fearful, and unbelieving and abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. These and many other places do plainly evidence to us this
to be a truth, that the certain fruit of a carnal life is an accursed death
of the body, and also death eternal: and that whosoever they be, that live a
carnal life, walking after the sinful lusts of their own hearts, and go on
in a constant course in that kind of life, shall certainly dye an accursed
death of body, and shall be sure also to go to hell and be damned. And there
be also reasons and grounds of this truth. As

First, the proper cause must needs bring forth the proper

And again, the Lord is most just, and it stands with his justice It is the
wages of sin, Romans 6.23. And therefore doubtless an accursed death of body,
and also death eternal, is the certain fruit of a carnal life, and they
that live a carnal life, and follow the sinful lusts of their own hearts,
and hold on a constant course in that kind of life, shall assuredly dye an
accursed death of body, and shall be sure also to go to hell, and to be damned.

And this being a truth, it serves to discover that thousands How carnal
persons deceive themselves.
Are there not many men who think that though they be carnal persons, and
live a carnal life, though they follow the sinful lusts of their own hearts,
and give themselves over to do whatsoever their own sinful and carnal hearts
suggest to them, they are ignorant persons, and so have no dram of
sanctifying grace in them; they are drunkards, filthy persons, common
swearers, they are usurers, worldlings, earth worms, and such like, and they
hold on their course in these evil sins, and yet think they shall do well
enough, and there is no such matter that they shall dye an accursed death, and
that they shall go to hell and be damned. And when Preachers threaten these
things against them, they think, and sometimes stick not to speak it, that
Preachers make the matter worse then it is, God is much more merciful then so,
and there is no such danger in that course they hold as Preachers would make
them believe. Poor souls, they deceive themselves exceedingly: what is this I
beseech you, but to join hands with the devil, and to show that they are
taught of him, in evil things to sever the end from the means, for that is
the devils lessen, to think that though they go on in the way that leads to
hell, and do hold on in that way, yet they shall never come there, and to
contradict the Lord, as the devil did when he set on our grandmother Eve, Genesis
3.3.4.
The Lord had told her, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the
death, the devil comes and he says, no thou shall not dye at all. And even so
think and many times speak carnal persons; The Lord says, they that live
after the flesh, lead a carnal life, they shall dye death of body, an
accursed death, and they shall also go to hell and be damned. No, says the
carnal person, the sensual person, the worldling, and such like, I hope there
is no such matter, I hope God will be more merciful then so. And thus they
cross and contradict the Lord himself.

Well, consider it whosoever thou art, do thou think (thou that art an
ignorant person, thou that art a drunkard, a filthy person, a common swearer,
a worldling, or the like) thou that go on in a carnal course of life, that
thou shall dye a blessed and comfortable death? why the Lord has said to the
contrary, If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye: and dare thou contradict
the Lord? if thou so do but in thy very thought, if thou do but so imagine,
thou do therein add to the measure of thy sin, and the Lord will not be
merciful to thee: they are the words of Moses in the place alleged, Deuteronomy.
29.19.20. If any man bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
although I walk according to the stubburnnesse of mine heart, adding
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every
curse that is written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall
put out his name from under heaven. And consider with thy self, if thou
observe it, thou shall find it commonly most true, that qualis vita, finis ita,
such as a man's life is, such is commonly his death: they that live carnally,
they commonly dye wretchedly and cursedly. The Lord leaves not himself without
witness in this case; do we not see (if we observe it we may see) that wicked
and carnal persons, such as go on in a carnal course of life, and yet promise
to themselves a comfortable and blessed death, and think to call on God at
their last hour, when they are gasping for breath, and then to find mercy;
do we not see such persons are sometimes suddenly overtaken by the hand of God
in the very act of sin, or they are sometimes cut off by the hand of the
Magistrate, or if they have time given them, and they lie on their sick beds,
yet then they are sensl^sse, or they feel the very flames of hell flashing up
in their souls, and in stead of calling on God, they belch out cursing and
bitterness: does not woeful experience show this to be so? How then dare
thou that art a carnal person, and go on in a carnal course of life, thou
that art a drunkard, or the like, how dare thou (I say) go on in thy carnal
course, and yet promise thy self a blessed and comfortable death, and so
contradict both the plain evidence of the word of God and common experience,
and so deceive thine own soul? Oh take heed of so deceiving thy self, think
not, because happily thou do thrive in a carnal course of life, therefore thou
shall escape the punishing hand of God altogether: no, no, as the Preacher
says, Eccles. 8.12.13. A sinner may go on an hundred times, and the Lord may
prolong his days, but it shall not be well with him in the end. The fruit of
a carnal life is certainly an accursed death of body, and after that hell and
damnation: and though now thou may stop thine ear, and harden thy heart
against the threats of death and damnation, yet if thou go on in thy The
bitter fruit of a carnal course of li^e ought to teach us to take heed of uch
a course.
thou can not stop the coming of death and damnation in the Lords time
appointed: and therefore do not thou deceive thine own soul.

Again, is it so that the certain fruit of a carnal life is an accursed
death of body, and also eternal death and damnation? Oh then take we heed of
going on in a carnal course of life, take we heed of following the sinful
lusts of our own hearts, and of holding on a constant course in so doing. Thou
that art a carnal person, remember the bitter fruit of a carnal course of
life, and labor thou to break it off before it bring that fruit on thee; for
then it will be too late, when thou reapest the fruit of thy carnal course,
it will be in vain and to no purpose then to cry out, what have I gotten by
my vile and sinful course of life? If thou come once to use this note in hell,
and there to cry out, what has pride profited me? what has my covetousness,
my drunkenness, and such like, done me good? and what have I got by it? oh it
had been good for thee thou had never been borne: therefore now break off
thy carnal course of life before the fruit of it be brought on thee. Look
not on the painted face of sin, promising pleasure and much profit, but
consider what will be the fruit of it, and of a carnal course of life; even
shame and sorrow, anguish, and grief, and vexation, and perplexity of mind
and conscience, a troubled mind and wounded spirit, which is a burden
unsupportable, Prou. 18.14. and death of body, and that an accursed death, and
death also eternal, even a final separation from the comfortable presence of
God, and a feeling of his full wrath on soul and body forever in hell. Note.
And make account of Gods threatening of these things, as of present executions,
for the Lord can as soon bring them on thee as threaten them against thee. And
thou that art a carnal person have no assurance to be freed from them one
minute of an hour: and therefore now this hour before the next, labor to
break off thy carnal course of life.

Come we now to the second argument here used, the third in order, but the
second used by the Apostle in this verse, to urge and press his exhortation on
the believing Romans, that they ought to live an holy life, in these words, If
ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. To pass by
that which is offered from the opposition here made between living after the
flesh, and mortifying the deeds of the body, the Apostle opposing these two as
contrary courses of life, and tending to contrary ends, If ye live after the
flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit,
ye shall live. The point thence offered we spoke of for the substance of it
verse 6. therefore I will not now meddle with it. But first observe we the
quality of the Apostles argument, by which he persuades to an holy and
spiritual life: his argument to that purpose is a comfortable argument, an
argument full of sweetness, and he promises no less then eternal life and
glory, to such as live an holy and spiritual life, and do mortify the deeds
of the body by the Spirit. He tells the believing Romans, that if they did live
an holy life, if they did mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, they
should then be sure to live a comfortable life here in this world, and they
should be also sure to live the life of happiness and glory with the Lord in
heaven hereafter. Hence we may gather:

That Ministers and Preachers of the word may promise Ministers and Preachers
of the word may promise both a blessed life in this world, and happiness and
glory in heaven, to such as live an hol^ and spiritual life.
and happiness and glory in heaven, to such persons as live an holy and
spiritual life. The Ministers of the word may tell men and women, that if they
live an holy life, and hold on a constant course in that kind of life, they
shall be sure to go to heaven, and to be saved; they may assure them to their
comfort, that they shall not miss of eternal happiness and salvation: yea
they may say to this or that particular person, man or woman, if thou show
forth the power of a sound faith in an holy life, and go on constantly in that
course, thou shall certainly go to heaven, thou shall be sure to be saved: for
why,

The Lord has ordained the ministry of the word, joy unspeakable and
glorious: as 1. Pet. 1.8. 1. Corinthians. 14.3. the Apostle says, He that
prophesies speaks to men to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort, or
to encouragement. The principal end to be driven at in preaching and
dispencing the word of God, is the comfort of Gods chosen, they are to be
cheared up by assuring them that they believing in Christ are reconciled to
God, and they expressing the power of faith in an holy life, shall assuredly go
to heaven and be saved. And therefore doubtless the Ministers of the word may
deal in this manner, they may tell men and women, yea particular persons, that
they believing the promises of the Gospel, and showing forth the power of
grace in an holy life, they shall assuredly go to heaven and be saved,
Confutation of the Papists, who affirm the contrary.
they may assure them of it. The Papists against whom I bend this doctrine,
(for it meets with a conceit of theirs) they affirm the contrary; they say,
the Ministers of the word cannot assure any man of his own salvation, they
themselves hold men in suspense, and they teach a doctrine of doubting of
salvation, and thereupon they charge us to go too far, in that we say, that
we may assure men or women in particular, that they shall go to heaven and be
saved; but indeed they wrong us and tax us unjustly. The Minister of the word
on the ground of sound faith, and of an holy and sanctified life, may assure
men or women in particular that they shall be saved. man on the ground of sound
faith seconded with an holy life, that he shall be saved, it is all one as if
Christ himself should tell him so by his own immediate voice from heaven; for
to his Ministers he has given that power and that authority; he has
committed to them the word of reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.19. And therefore when
a Minister tells a man that truly believes in Christ, and does express the
power of grace in an holy and sanctified life, that he shall be saved, it is a
great comfort to him, it must needs fill his heart with exceeding great and
unspeakable comfort.

But to go on to further matter. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the
Spirit, ye shall live. We see here the Apostle says to the Romans, of whom he
was well persuaded, verse 9. that they were not in the flesh but in the Spirit;
that they were persons already sanctified, and already mortified, yet here he
says to them, If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall
live. Whence we are given to understand thus much.

That such persons as are already in some measure mortified, The best of Gods
children must still go on in the work of mortification.
must still go on and proceed in that work: even the best of Gods children,
and such as have proceeded furthest in the work of mortification, and have
gotten the greatest maisterie over their own vile corruptions and sinful
lusts, must still be exercised in that work of mortification; and they must
still by particular application of the word, by prayer, by avoiding all
occasions of sin, and by all other good means, be subduing and beating down
their own rebellious lusts and vile corruptions. The life of every true
believing Christian must be a continual mortification, and a going from one
degree of mortification to another. And for further strength to this point,
observe what we find Coloss. 3. in verse 3. The Apostle says, the believing
Colossians were dead, Ye are dead (says he) and your life is hid with Christ
in God. He affirms that by means of their conjunction with Christ, there was
wrought in them a spiritual death of sin, they were already mortified: and
yet verse 5. he subioynes this exhortation, Mortify therefore your members
which are on the earth: thereby giving them to understand, that they ought
still to go on in the act of mortification: yea verse 8. he exhorts them to put
away their vile lusts and sins, or rather (as the word signifies) to put them
aside, clean out of sight, as dead bodies are when they are buried: as if he
had said, So proceed in mortifying and killing your vile lusts and sins, as
that ye never leave them till ye have blotted them, and put clean out of your
sight, that is the course you must take with them: you must continually proceed
from one degree of mortification to another. And to this purpose tend those
exhortations of the Apostle to such as had already begun to mortify sin,
and had already begun to put off the old man, still to cleanse themselves,
and still to put off the old man, as 2. Corinthians. 7.1. Seeing then we have these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God. Even we that have
right to the promises of the Gospel, and are already sanctified and cleansed,
let us more and more cleanse our selves. And so Ephesians. 4.20.21.22. says the
Apostle, Ye that have learned Christ, as the truth is in Jesus, cast ye off
concerning the conversation in time past, the old man, which is corrupt through
the deceivable lusts. These and the like exhortations do plainly euince and
prove to us, that mortification of sin, even the mortifying of the vile lusts
and corruptions of the heart, must be a continual act of the whole life of
every true believing Christian: and that every true believer must proceed
from one degree of mortification to another: and the reason of it is plain.

Methushelahs days: and therefore the mortifying of the vile lusts and
corruptions of the heart must be a continual act of the whole life of every
true believer; and he must proceed from one degree of mortification to another.

This then for the use of it, discouers that they are deceived They deceive
themselves who think that the work of mortificatio^ may come to a full period
in time of this life.
that think that the work of mortification may come to a period and to a full
point in time of this life. Some idle and brainesicke persons there be, who
think they have gone far enough in the work of mortification, in the work
of humiliation and repentance, and they need be humbled no further, they have
no further matter in them to be mortified, they imagine they have finished that
work, the work of mortification is at an end with them. Poor souls, they
deceive themselves exceedingly, it is out of their ignorance and pride that
they have this conceit, yea it is a plain evidence against them, they know not
what mortification means; if they had eyes to see it, they might have cause to
be humbled for that proud conceit of theirs, and that they have need to
mortify the pride of their hearts. And indeed to leave them, and to make our
benefit of this, such is the corruption of our nature, that men or women that
have made the best progress, and have gone furthest in mortification, are in
danger, unless they look to it, to grow proud of it. In men or women most
humbled and most mortified, unless they watch over their hearts, pride will be
ready to start up, yea many times Gods children are ready to be proud in that
they see their pride, and their other corruptions.

Therefore for a second use of the point, art thou a man or We are to take
notice of it, that the work of mortification is never at an end in time of this
life.
and strength of sin weakened? have thou begun to mortify sin in thy
self? then know and take notice of it, thy work in that kind is never at an
end; so long as thou art in this world thou must proceed from one degree of
mortification to another: unless thou dissemble, thou shall ever find within
thy self something that has need to be mortified. Thine heart is a fruitful
mother, and be thou stirred up to make it thy continual work, yea thy chief
work, to keep under and to subdue thy rebellious lusts, and thy vile
affections: and every day and every hour labor thou to cut off some vile
lust of thine own heart, as anger, envy, hatred, pride, and such like: make
all things thou do, either privately or in public, in thy calling, or in
the service of God, thy hearing the word, reading, praying, and such like, as
helps to mortify sin in thee: apply the word in every part of it, the
promises, the Commandments, the threatenings of it, to the cutting down of
some corruption in thee: yea make all the Lords dealings with thee, his
mercies, his corrections, his chastisements, yea the assurance of his love to
thee in Christ, and the assurance of thine own salvation, tend to this
purpose, even to the renting down of some rebellious lust in thine own heart.
Be thou ever dealing with thine own heart, and labor to weed some corrupt
lust out of it continually: and know, that if thou slack this business,
though thou have gotten some maisterie over thine own corruptions, yet it will
gather strength again: the lusts of thine own heart are like the hairs of
Sampsons head, Judges 16.22. though they be clipped and shaven they will grow
again, and they will betray thee into the hands of Satan, and cause thee to
fall, it may be foully into some foul sin, and that will wound thy
conscience and weaken thy hold in Christ, and shake thy comfort, and thou shall
never fully recover that loss all the days of thy life. And therefore be thou
stirred up to be continually exercised in the mortifying of the lust of thine
own heart, and especially the lusts and sins that are most agreeable to thy
complexion, to thy trade and calling, and to the condition of the times wherein
thou live: for these being maistered, other lusts and sins will be more
easily prevailed against. That is thy duty, let it be thought on and remembered.

For the grounding of the next point observe, the Apostle here says not as the
direct opposion required, If ye live after the Spirit, as he said in the sormer
part, If ye live after the flesh, so here, if ye live after the Spirit, or if
ye live an holy life. But if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit,
ye shall live. The Apostle being guided by the Spirit of God, puts down one
part of an holy life for the whole, and he expresses living after the Spirit,
or living of an holy and spiritual life, in these terms, mortifying the deeds
of the body by the Spirit: and applying his speech to the believing Romans, he
says, If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. Now
hence we may easily gather and conclude thus much.

That the mortified Christian is the true holy Christian indeed. The mortified
Christian is the true holy Christian indeed.
Such Christians as have the power and strength of grace vouchsafed to them, to
mortify sin in themselves, to subdue and to keep under their own
rebellious lusts and affections, and the vile corruptions of their own hearts,
they indeed are true holy ones, true holy Christians: and there are none truly
holy but such as are truly mortified. It is worth our marking to this purpose
that we find Psalm. 32.6. (...) Psalm. 32.6.
David there puts one word to signify both humble, and mortified, and also
godly, Therefore shall every one that is godly, or that is humble, or that is
mortified, make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be found.
Thereby (no doubt) the holy Ghost would give us to understand, that humble, and
godly, and mortified, and holy, are so far conuertible, as the one cannot be
affirmed of any without the other. A godly man is an humble man, and an humble
mortified man is undoubtedly godly and truly holy. It is usual with the
Apostle in describing such as are holy Christians indeed, and true members of
Christ, to set them out thus, that they are crucified with Christ, and dead
with Christ, and that they are partakers both of the merit and benefit of
Christ his death, and also of the virtue and power of his death, to the
mortification of sin in themselves, as Romans 6.6. Romans 6.6.
Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin. And verse 8. If we be dead with
Christ, Romans 6.8.
we believe that we shall live also with him. Yea the Apostle affirms in
express terms of them that are in Christ, and so are truly spiritual and
holy persons indeed, Galat. 5.24. Galat. 5.24.
that they are such as have crucified the flesh with the affections and the
lusts: that they are such as are truly mortified: plainly teaching that the
mortified Christian is indeed the downeright holy Christian. And hence it is
that such persons as make but a show of holiness, and have but the outside of
Christians, and yet would carry the name of right holy persons, they commonly
shroud themselves under the mask and vizour of mortification, they seem to be
humbled and to be mortified: They afflict themselves, and hang down their
heads like a bull rush, as the Lord complains of hypocrites, Isay 58.5. Isay
58.5.
they think that that will gain them the name of holiness, and thereby they
shall come to be counted holy ones indeed. Yea the Papists, that are mere
counterfeit holy ones, are then (as they imagine) most holy, when they seem
most mortified, when they retire themselves to some cloister, and tie
themselves to strict fasts, canonical hours, to hard lodging, to course
apparel, haire-cloth, or the like: oh then they think they are most holy, and
others that are ensnared by them do then so account of them, and admire them
for their holiness; and it may be an evidence to us, that the true mortified
life is the true and right holy life, and that such persons as are truly
mortified, are undoubtedly truly holy and righteous persons indeed: for why,



receives the word with meekness, according to the exhortation of the
Apostle, Iam. 1.21. it is the humble and mortified soul that yields willingly
to the word of God in time of affliction, that yields to the word of counsel,
of admonition, and of reproof. The unmortified heart cannot abide to be
touched, it reiects the word of counsel, and admonition, and reproof, and it
makes men stubburne, and refractarie, and contentious, Prou. 13.10. Prou. 13.10.
Through pride men make contention; but with the well advised is wisdom. It
is the humble and mortified heart that makes men profit by the examples of
others, Psalm. 34.2. Psalm. 34.2.
My soul (says David) shall glory in the Lord: the humble shall hear it and
be glad. The humble and mortified person hearing of my souls joy in the Lord,
shall also hear, and be glad, and rejoice. And therefore doubtless the
mortified person is the right holy person, and none are truly holy, but such as
are truly mortified.

It is not then as the Papists imagine, a monastical life, the A monastical
life makes not a man or woman truly holy
and shut up in a cloister, that makes a man or woman truly holy: a man or
woman may live such a life, and yet be most fleshly and carnal. And indeed
those amongst the Papists that live that kind of life are the most unmortified
persons that live in the world. Instance might be given if it were needful,
but to pass from them.

Is it so that the mortified person is the right holy person? How many deceive
them selves in a conceit of holiness in themselves discovered.
think not thou art a man or woman truly holy, unless thou find that thou
art a man or woman truly mortified. Many men and women would willingly be
thought to be holy, and they think wrong is done them if they be not so
accounted, and it may be have a good conceit of themselves: but would thou
whosoever thou art, prove thy self to be a right holy man or woman indeed?
then never rest till thou find that thou art a man or woman truly mortified.
Thou may suppress the outward act of sin, and keep thy self from
dishonest words and deeds, thou may live ciuilly and orderly in the world;
yea thou may do many good things, thou may hear the word, read, pray, and
perform all good duties of piety, and so seem to thy self, and it may be to
others, to be marvelous holy and religious, and yet for all that be far from
true holiness: thou may notwithstanding this be a person unmortified, thou
may still carry in thy heart vile affections, as anger, pride, self love,
self conceit, covetousness, and other damnable lusts unmortified; and so thou
have but the outside of holiness, which is no better in Gods sight then a
glittering abomination. If thou would have good evidence to the comfort of
thine own soul, that thou art a man or woman truly holy, never rest till thou
find that thou art truly mortified, that thou have power and strength of grace
given thee to mortify, to subdue, and to keep under thine own rebellious
lusts, and thine own vile affections.



Thou suffer wrong, and thou threatenest not: 1. Pet. 2.23. 1. Pet. 2.23.
thou art justly reproved, and thou art not angry with the reprouer, but
accountest that a benefit, Psalm. 141.5. If it be thus with thee, certainly then
thou art truly mortified, and that will yield thee this comfort, that thou art
a right holy man or woman. And hereby try thy self, and never rest till thou
find thy self truly mortified; and thereupon thou may conclude to the
comfort of thine own soul, that thou art truly holy and religious, and that
will yield thee comfort both in life and death.

Now touching the matter of the Apostles argument, If ye mortify the deeds of
the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. See here the Apostle makes mortifying
the deeds of the body by the Spirit, or living an holy and sanctified life,
the antecedent, and a comfortable life here in this world, and also eternal
life and happiness in heaven hereafter, the consequent: yea the one the
antecedent, and the other the necessary consequent, one going before, and the
other necessarily following after. The point hence offered is this.

That the certain fruit and consequent of an holy and sanctified life, is
both a comfortable life here in this world, The certain and necessary
consequent of an holy life is both a comfortable life in this world, and also
happiness and glory hereafter in heaven.
and also eternal life, happiness and glory hereafter in heaven. I say, the
certain consequent, not the effect, to prevent an objection: for indeed a
carnal life is the proper cause of death and damnation, because sin is
perfectly evil: but an holy life is not the cause of eternal life and
salvation, it being imperfectly holy: therefore I say, the certain and
necessary consequent of an holy life, is both a comfortable life here in this
world, and also happiness and glory hereafter in heaven. They that live
holily and in the fear of God, and hold on a constant course in that kind of
life, shall be sure to find sweetness and comfort here, and shall be sure
also hereafter to go to heaven and to be saved: the Lord has coupled these two
together as the antecedent and necessary consequent. We find evidence for it
in many places of Scripture. Isay 33.15.16. says the Prophet, He that walks
in justice, Isay 33.15.16.
and speaks righteous things, refusing gain of opression. shaking his hands
from taking of gifts, stopping his eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on
high, his defense shall be the munitions of rocks, bread shall be given him and
his waters shall be sure. So Psalm. 15.1. Psalm. 15.1.2.
the Psalmist moves the question, Lord, who shall dwell in tht tabernacle? who
shall rest in thy holy mountain? then he subioynes this answer, verse 2. He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in
his heart. Hebr. 12.14. Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord: thereby implying, such as are
truly holy shall see God to their comfort. As Matthew. 5.8. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: and they doubtless are
also pure and holy in life, they shall see God to their comfort. Colos. 3.4.
Col. 3 4.
When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory. 1. Ioh. 3.2. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him. The Scripture is
plentiful in the proof of this, That the Lord has coupled together
inseparably, an holy life and comfort here in this world, and also happiness
and glory hereafter, as the antecedent and necessary consequent, that the one
going before, the other shall follow after: for why





They who think to attain happiness without holiness, deceive themselves.
holiness of life and comfort here, and happiness and glory hereafter in
heaven? has the Lord joined together grace and glory as the antecedent and
consequent? then let no man put asunder those things which the Lord has so
conjoined. Do thou think, whosoever thou art, that thou shall attain the
one without the other? do thou undertake for the comfort of thy soul here,
and for the safety and salvation of it hereafter, without any dram of true
holiness? Thou have no jot of true holiness in thee: no, thou art unholy and
filthy both in heart and life: whatsoever is holy thou do hate and loath, and
thou can not abide it, no, not in others: and do thou sooth up thy self in
a conceit of a blessed death, and after death of happiness and glory in
heaven? do thou think that thou can step out of a filthy and profane
life, into an happy and blessed life in heaven? has the Lord need of such as
thou art to fill up his kingdom? Satan sophistry.
No, no; poor soul, thou deceiuest thy self, the devil blinds thee, it is
his sophistry to make thee sever the means from the end in good things, and
to sever the antecedent from the consequent. Did heaven spue out the wicked
Angels when they had sinned, and will it as it were lick up thee the vomit and
spawne of the devil? for thou art no better so long as thou art a filthy and
profane person. It is monstrous presumption and sauciness in drunkards, in
blasphemers, in filthy persons, in that they think themselves fit companions
for the blessed Trinity: they deceive themselves exceedingly. And know this
for a truth whosoever thou art, that art a filthy and profane person, if grace
to amend thy life be denied thee, God never couenanted with thee to save thy
soul, God has coupled grace and glory, and holiness and happiness together
with an inseparable knot, and take heed of seuering them and putting them
asunder.

And in the next place, is it so that the certain fruit and An unjust
imputation laid on us by the Papists touching the matter of holiness of life,
met withal.
is both comfort here in this world, and happiness and glory hereafter in
heaven? is this a truth? and do we thus teach? surely then it is an unjust
imputation the Papists lay upon us, touching the matter of holiness of life:
they say we hold and teach holiness of life, and walking in the ways of God
to be fruitless, and to be unprofitable. And why forsooth? Because we admit
not holiness of life to justify us in the sight of God. See the wilful
blindness of such as are wedded and devoted to their own pleasing opinions:
they dote so much on the merit of holiness and of good works, as they cannot
(or at least will not) see any other use of them, but that which must needs
shoulder out Gods grace and the merits of Christ. We advance holiness of li^e
to that height of dignity in which the holy Ghost has set it; we hold it to
be of profitable and necessary use in the life of every true believing
Christian, we esteem it to be a testimony of our thankfulness to God for his
mercy, a means to set forth the glory of God, as the beaten high way to
eternal life, as a necessary antecedent of the promised reward of eternal
glory, and a thing that yields sound peace and true comfort to the soul of
every true believer. And therefore that is but a mere slander of the Papists,
that we hold holiness of life to be unprofitable.

Comfort to such a^ live an holy life, and continue constant in that kind of
life.
is both sweetness and comfort here, and also happiness and glory in heaven?
then here is a ground of sweet and of excellent comfort to al Gods children,
even to all that truly fear God, and live an holy life, and hold on a constant
course in that kind of life. Wicked worldlings and profane persons they think
the holy and mortified life of Gods children is the most uncomfortable life
that can be: they seeing Gods children hold on a constant course in holiness
and in the fear of God, that they will not drink, swear, and swagger, break
the Sabbath, that they will not do as others do, to enjoy the pleasures,
profits, and honors of the world; they commonly open their mouths against
them on this or the like manner; Oh say they, what get you by your strict and
precise course of life? what are you the better for it? do not you see you are
hated and contemned in the world? you forgo many pleasures and profits that
others enjoy, and that you might enjoy if you would do as they do, what then
get you by your precise course? Thus wicked worldlings commonly open their
mouths against the holy life of Gods children. Now the doctrine delivered puts
an answer into the mouth of Gods children to this cavil of the wicked: they
may tell them and that truly, their holy and mortified life does much advantage
them, they gain much good by it; for why, the fruit of it is sweetness and
comfort here in this world, even peace of their consciences, which is better
then all the riches in the world, yea a continual feast. Prou. 15.15. Prou.
15.15.
and assurance of Gods special love and favor toward them, which is better
then life it self; and after this life is ended, the fruit of it shall be
eternal happiness and glory in heaven: and is that no gain? Can Gods
children be said to get no good by their holy and mortified life? Oh the gain
of it is unspeakable. And the consideration of the fruit and consequent of it
may comfort and cheer up Gods children, and hold up their fainting hearts in
the time of their greatest affliction. What though they be much troubled and
molested in the world, they are slandered, reproached, they are accounted the
offscouring of all things, they are many ways hardly dealt withal? yet let
them consider that they carrying themselves as they ought to do, they have much
peace and comfort within; and they continuing constant in an holy course, they
may assure themselves that at length all tears shall be wiped away from their
eyes, and their holy course shall certainly end in the everlasting salvation of
their souls in the kingdom of heaven, as David says, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the
upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that man it peace. Howsoever
his life maybe full of troubles from Satan and from the world, yet certainly
his end will be peace and much comfort, yea an eternal weight of glory. Oh
then thou that art a child of God, and live holily, and go on in a
constant course of holiness, and yet meetest with many crosses and troubles in
the world, consider with thy self, the end will be happiness, and fullness of
joy, and glory in the presence of the Lord for ever, and that will make thee
do as Christ did, Hebr. 12.2. Endure the cross and despise the shame. Yea
remember that the Lord having promised thee happiness and glory in heaven, it
is as possible that the Lords own nature and being should fail, as that thou
should fail to obtain eternal life and glory in heaven.

Now we are to stand on the antecedent of the argument of the Apostle more
particularly. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall
live. We have here two particulars offered to us.

First, an act or work, mortifying the deeds of the body.

The second, how that work is wrought, or whence it proceeds, namely, by the
Spirit, or from the Spirit.

For the first, If ye mortify, that is, as we showed, if you as it were
benumme and take away the moving, stirring, and life of those lusts and sinful
motions that arise in your hearts and minds, and are acted and executed by your
bodies, and therefore called the deeds of the flesh. Here then we see how the
vile and sinful lusts of the heart are to be dealt withal: and the point is
briefly this.

Sinful motions and lusts of the heart must be mortified.
That the sinful motions and lusts of the heart must be mortified, they must be
as it were benumbed: the moving, stirring, and the very life of the vile lusts
and sinful motions of the heart must be taken away, we must never rest till we
have as it were the heart blood of our own vile and sinful lusts: and though
they be still stirring in us in part, (as they will so long as we are in this
world) yet the vigor, force, and strong working of them must be abated and
weakened, for that is (indeed) the mortification of them. And to this purpose
are those phrases and forms of speech, of crucifying the flesh with the
affections and the lusts, Galat. 5.25.
as Galat. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucifed the flesh with the
affections and the lusts. Of circumcising the hearts, as Deuter. 10.16. Deuteronomy.
10.16.
Circumcise the foreskinne of your hearts. Ier. 4.4.
And Ierem. 4.4. Be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskinne of
your hearts. Thereby no doubt the holy Ghost would have us to understand, that
we are so to deal with the vile lusts and sinful corruptions of our hearts,
we are as it were to nail them to a cross, and to cause them to dye by little
and little; and that we are as it were to let out the blood of them, and so to
abate and weaken the power, and force, and strong working of them: for why,



It is no easy matt^r to deal with the vile and sinful lusts of the heart as
they ought to be dealt withal.
It is not then an easy matter to deal with the vile lusts and sinful
corruptions of our hearts as they ought to be dealt withal: many imagine it to
be an easy thing, but they are deceived; they must be mortified, there must be
an holy violence used toward them, they are deeply rooted and stick fast in
our nature, as fast as any tooth in our heads, or our souls in our bodies, and
they are as near and as dear to us as any member in our bodies. The Apostle
so calls them, Colos. 3.5. Coloss. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
idolatry. And Christ compares the mortifying of them to the plucking out of
the right eye, and to the cutting off the right hand, Matthew. 5.29.30. Mat.
5.29.30.
and therefore doubtless to deal with the vile lusts of our hearts as they
ought to be dealt withal, requires much time, and great labor and pains,
much tugging with them, by many sighs and groans, and by prayer, and
watching, and fasting, and continual strife. If a man that is given to pride,
or to uncleanness, or the like, set himself to mortify that lust of his
heart, he shall find it an harder matter then he thinks of: therefore let none
deceive himself, and think it an easy matter to deal with the vile lusts of
his heart as they ought to be dealt withal. Indeed to restrain them may be
done with less labor and pains, but that restraint will yield us no true
comfort; let us remember they must be mortified, and let us never rest till we
find that they are mortified, and that the power, and force, and strong
working of them is abated in us.

How shall I know that, will some say.

I answer thee. most likes. Hereby then try thy self: if thou find it thus
with thee thou art truly mortified, and thereupon thou may conclude that thou
art justified, and in the state of grace and salvation.

Now as briefly touching the second particular, how the work of mortifying the
deeds of the body is wrought, or whence it comes, namely, by the Spirit or
from the Spirit, If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, says the
Apostle. The point hence briefly is this, Mortification of sin is a work of
the holy Spirit of God.
That the work of mortification, the mortifying of the vile lusts of the
heart, is a work of the holy Spirit of God, and wrought in man or woman only
by the power of sanctifying grace. No man is able to mortify the least vile
lust of his heart, but by the power of grace vouchsa^ed to him. And hence it
was that Moses said, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
And the Apostle says of the Colossians, Colos. 2.11.
Chap. 2.11. that they were circumcised with circumcision made without hands:
thereby signifying, that their inward circumcision or their mortification was
not a work of man's hand, but of the powerful hand of God.

The reason



to seek for help where it is to be had, even at the hands of God.

And so for the use of this, do thou whosoever thou art, It is not in the
power of ^ree will to mortify sin.
it is not (as some do imagine) in the power of thine own free will to master
them: no, no, thou must seek for power and strength against them where it is
to be found, even at the hands of the Lord. When thou feel pride,
covetousness, or any vile lust growing in thee, go to the Lord, crave his aid
and help, even the help of his Spirit against them, and be earnest with the
Lord, cry to him as good Iehoshaphat did, 2. Chron. 20.12. 2. Chron. 20.12.
when he saw a great army coming against him: so when thou see an army of
vile lusts rising up in thine heart, cry to the Lord, and say, Lord God there
is no strength in me to stand against these vile lusts, neither do I know what
to do, but mine eyes are toward thee, I beseech thee vouchsafe me strength
from above, even power and strength of thy grace, that I may be able to subdue
them: that is thy duty.

And again, when the Lord gives thee power and strength The whole glory of
the work of mortification of sin belongs to God.
give him the whole praise and glory of that work; look not too much on the
means by which that work has been effected, the ministry of this or that
man, though never so well qualified, and of never so excellent gifts, lest so
doing, thou give part of the glory that belongs to God to the instrument: but
ever have thine eye on the mighty power of God whose only work it has been.
And remember as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.5. that Paul or Apollos, this or
that Minister, has been but an instrument by whom thou have been wrought on to
thy sanctification, and to thy mortification; bless God for him, and for his
gifts, but give God alone all the praise, and all the glory of that great and
mighty work, to him of right it belongs. Come we now to the 14. Verse.

VERSE 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.


IN this 14. Verse, our Apostle confirms and proves that which he put down in
the latter part of the verse foregoing, namely this, that all true believers
mortifying the deeds of the body by the Spirit, shall live: that they shall
live both co^fortably here in this world, and that they shall also live
eternally in happiness and glory hereafter in heaven. The Apostles argument
to that purpose is from the proper subject of that life, or from the persons
that are capable of it, and fit to be partakers of it, and those are the sons
of God, the children of God. And thus he reasons, the sons of God, or the
children of God shall assuredly live both comfortably here, and also happily
and gloriously hereafter. Now such are they that mortify the deeds of the
body, which the Apostle expresses in terms equivalent, and of the same
signification, such are they that are led by the Spirit: and making his speech
general, he says, As many as are led by the Spirit, they are the sons of
God. They are the children of God, therefore they must needs live, and they
shall certainly live both a comfortable life here in this world, and they shall
also be sure to go to heaven. And this argument the Apostle does further
confirm and amplify in 15.16.17. verses. I spare to lay forth the resolution
of these words, till we come to the handling of them.

Interpretation.
Now touching the words of this 14. verse, I will stand a while to unfold the
sense and meaning of them. For as many as: or whosoever they be, of what place,
calling, or condition: the proposition is general. Are led by the Spirit. The
Spirit is here put metaphorically for the effect and work of the Spirit. The
word here rendered led, signifies acted, moved, or stirred forward, (...). Now
the acting, or moving of the Spirit is either general (for the Spirit works
in all creatures:) In him they live move, and have their being, Act. 17.28. or
it is more special, namely, in men. And again, in men the Spirit of God
works diversely, as by enduing some men with skill and cunning in trades,
others with gifts fit for regiment and government, others with the gift of
prophesying, and preaching, and such like. Now these works and actions of the
Spirit are not here meant, because thus the Spirit may work in the wicked and
reprobate, but here the Apostle intends a more special work of the Spirit,
namely, that work of the Spirit that is proper to Gods children, for so he
does limit it: As many as are led by the Spirit, they are the sons of God.
And for the understanding of this word led, acted, or moved, we must know it is
a metaphorical word, borrowed and taken either from such as are blind, and
cannot see their way, but must have one to lead them, and guide them, or from
such as want strength to go by themselves, as weak persons, or young children,
that must have the hand of another to support them, and to lead, and to guide
them; as a little child, when it begins to go, must have the hand or finger of
the nurse or mother to hold it up and to lead it. And so indeed are Gods
children led by the Spirit, the Spirit by his working does enlighten their
minds to understand and know the will of God revealed in his word, and to
discern such instructions as be from God. They are taught of God Ioh. 6.45.
And he does also incline and bend their wills and affections to will and to
affect good things, and inables them with strength to do good things. And yet
that we mistake not this leading of the Spirit, know further that the Spirit of
God leads Gods children, not as a cart or a dead thing, or as a brute
creature is led or drawn, but as reasonable creatures. And again, the Spirit
of God leads them not violently, and by coaction and compulsion, and against
their wills, as the Papists say we hold, but willingly: for the Spirit of God
alters and changes their wills by grace, and of unwilling makes them
willing, as Christ says, Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him. And so he leads them, being willing consequenter,
not antecedenter, after their change and not before. And yet further, Gods
children are so led by the Spirit of God, as that they follow his motion and
guidance necessarily, and so as they cannot but follow it, as a blind man
follows his leader willingly, though it be not free for him to go which way
himself will. Thus we are to conceive of the work of Gods Spirit in leading
Gods children, they are led as it were by the hand of Gods Spirit, as
reasonable creatures, and willingly, their wills of unwilling being made
willing, and they follow the motion, guidance, and conduction of the Spirit of
God necessarily. They are the sons of God. That is, the children of God, as
verse 16. and that not by nature, for so is Christ only the Son of God, nor
by creation, as the Angels be, Job 1.6. Job. 1.6.
but by adoption and grace. Thus then take we up the sense and meaning of the
Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said:

For all they, whosoever they be, high or low, rich or poor, of what place,
calling, or condition, that are by the special work of Gods Spirit, acted,
moved, and guided, that holy Spirit of God both enlightening their minds to
understand and know the will of God revealed in his word, and to discern
things therein taught, and also inclining and bending their wills and affections
to will and to affect good things, and inabling them with strength to do good
things, so as they now will, affect, and do good things, as reasonable
creatures, and willingly, their wills being changed by the power of sanctifying
grace, and of unwilling made willing, and so as they now follow the motion and
guidance of the Spirit of God necessarily, he working in them effectually; they
are the sons and daughters of God, the children of God by grace and adoption:
the Lord does so esteem and so account of them.

Observe we how the Apostle proves, that such as mortify the deeds of the
body by the Spirit, or such as are mortified persons shall live, he proves it
by this medium, by this argument, they are the sons of God, or children of
God, therefore they shall live both comfortably here, and they shall also be
sure to live happily in heaven hereafter. Now this being the Apostles argument,
it yields to us this point of instruction.

That Gods children, and only Gods children, are sure to True comfort here,
and happiness and glory in heaven, belongs properly and only to Gods childred.
and are sure also to go to heaven, and to be saved, and to enjoy happiness
and glory with the Lord in heaven. True comfort here in this world, and
happiness and glory in heaven hereafter, properly and only belongs to Gods
children, they only are such as live both comfortably here, and are sure to
live happily and gloriously hereafter in heaven; for why,

Only to Gods children belong the promises of peace, of 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness has the promise of this life present, and of that that is to come.
From the beginning of the book of God to the end of it, we find not any one
promise of any one good thing made to any but only to such as truly fear God,
and to such as love God, and to such as trust in God, and only to such as are
the children of God: they are pronounced happy, and blessed in many places of
Scripture, the Lord sets many blessednesses on their heads, Mat. 5. from verse
3. to 12. Mat. 5.3.4. to 12.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit; blessed are they that mourn: blessed are the
meek: blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness: blessed are
the merciful: blessed are the pure in heart: blessed are the peace makers: and
so forward.

Again, Gods children are borne of God, and begotten 1. Ioh. 5.1.
who is the fountain of all true happiness and comfort, they are joined to
the Son, who is the heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2. Heb. 1.2.
they are begotten of the immortal seed the word of God, 1. Pet. 1.23. 1. Pet.
1.23.
they are fed with immortal food, even the word of God, and with the blessed
body and blood of Christ to eternal life, as Christ says, Ioh. 6.54. Ioh.
6.54.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. And therefore it must needs be, that true comfort
here in this world, and happiness and glory hereafter in heaven, do properly
and only belong to Gods children, and they only are sure to live both
comfortably here in this word, and also to live happily and gloriously in
heaven.

A privilege Gods children have above all others, discovered.
even a privilege that Gods children have above all other men in the world,
whatsoever they be, that are not Gods children: men may be rich and wealthy,
they may have abundance, gold may be as plentiful with them as chippes, they
may be great, and mighty, puissant and strong, and honorable in the world,
and the like: and yet for all this, being not the children of God, they are but
in a miserable state and condition, they have no right nor title to any true
comfort, all their wealth, and all their honor and greatness, cannot yield
them one dram of true comfort; they shall find it so when they stand in most
need of comfort, and in the time of trial, and at the hour of death. They
being not the children of God, their riches, their honor, and the like, are
but given them to leave them without excuse, and to increase their judgment:
yea they being out of Christ, they have no right to one bit of bread, or to one
ragge; they cannot go to God in time of their distress with comfort, and call
on him as a gracious father, they cannot speak to him but as to an angry
judge, ready to power out his wrath and vengeance on them; they have no
promise of any the least comfort belonging to them. All the promises of God
touching the good things of this life and of the life to come, are appropriated
to Gods children, and they alone have right and title to them, and they only
are sure to find true comfort here in this world, and are sure also to enjoy
happiness and glory hereafter in heaven: that is the privilege of Gods
children. And therefore if thou (whosoever thou art) would be sure to live
comfortably here in this world, and to live happily and gloriously hereafter in
heaven, then never rest till thou be sure that thou art in the number of Gods
children: if thou once come to have good evidence of that, that thou art borne
of God, and begotten of God, that thou art borne of the Spirit, Ioh. 3.6. Ioh.
3.6.
and borne anew by the immortal seed of the word of God, then (indeed) thou
art in a most happy state and condition, thou have then assurance of Gods
special presence and protection, thou may then go with boldness to the
throne of grace, and find help in the time of need; thou have then right and
title to all the good things of this life and of the life to come, and thou
shall be sure to find sweetness and true comfort here in this world, and thou
shall be sure also to go to heaven and to be saved: and that is an excellent
comfort.

Again for a second use, is it so that Gods children and How only we may lay
claim to heaven.
and are sure also to go to heaven and to be saved? then we must look that we
lay claim to heaven only as we are the children of God, and have right to it
as adopted sons in and through the merits of Christ: and we are to renounce
all things in our selves, and not as blind and ignorant persons do, hope to be
saved for our good meaning and good dealing; yea we must go out of our selves,
and look to be saved only as we are the adopted sons and daughters of God
in and through Christ.

Yea will some say,

To this I answer. Such as are justified by Christ, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, and made under the Law, not borne but made, that he might
redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. The obedience of the Son of God, made man, and made under the Law, is
that which freeth true believers from under the Law, and gives them the
adoption of sons. Christ as the natural Son of God is heir of his fathers
kingdom: and true believers as adopted sons and daughters of God, have right
and title to the same inheritance. Now Christ his mediation yields them the
grace of adoption, and his mediation is his holy incarnation, and his
fulfilling of the Law, and his suffering for sin: and therefore Christ his
active obedience is needful to our justification in the sight of God, and to
give us right and title to heaven: and we are to lay claim to heaven only as
we are the adopted sons and daughters of God, and as we have right and title
to it only by the merit of Christ his obedience imputed to us.

Note we in the next place the generality of the Apostles proposition. The
Apostle here puts it down generally, As many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the sons of God.

God respects not the state, condition, or degree of me^ in the world, in
bestowing his grace and adoption.
they are the children of God, whether they be high or low, rich or poor: the
Lord respects not the state, condition, or degree of men in the world in
bestowing his grace and adoption. It is neither outward honor, dignity, or
privilege in the world, that is any help or furtherance to men, nor any
meannesse or baseness of place, calling, or degree in the world, that is an
hinderance to them in obtaining Gods grace and favor; there is no respect of
persons with the Lord; there is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond
nor free, there is neither male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus.
Whosoever he be that truly fears God, and works righteousness, and shows
forth the power of grace, that he is led by the Spirit of God, Comfort for
poor despised ones truly fearing God.
is assuredly the child of God. Here is then matter of sweet comfort for poor
despised ones that truly fear the Lord; do thou truly fear God? do thou
find the power of grace in thine heart? art thou led by the Spirit of God? and
yet art thou poor, and of mean place and condition in the world? and art thou
despised of great ones in the world? do proud rufflers look big on thee, and
account thee not worthy to wipe their shoes? Care not for it, comfort thy
self with this, thou art a child of God, and thou art as highly in the favor
of God as the greatest Monarch in the world, yea thou art more dear and
precious to the Lord then the greatest man in the world he being not the child
of God. It is not thy poverty, nor thy meannesse and baseness of condition in
the world, that can hinder thee from having part with Christ, and from having
interest in Gods special love and favor: and let that comfort thee, and
cheer up thy heart, when thou art most poor and most despised in the world.

In the next place observe we, the Apostle here makes the leading, guiding and
conducting of men by the Spirit of God, to be an infallible proof of their
adoption; he affirms that they are the adopted sons and daughters of God,
whosoever they be that are led by the Spirit of God. Yea we see it is the very
proposition of the Apostle, that as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the sons of God. So the point offered from the substance of this verse is
this.

That such persons as have the good hand of the holy Spirit An infallible
evidence of adoption is the special leading, guidance and conduction of men by
the holy Spirit of God.
they are undoubtedly the children of God. Such men or women as are by the
special work of Gods Spirit acted, moved, and guided, the holy Spirit of God
enlightening their minds to understand the will of God revealed in his word,
and to discern of the things taught of God, and also effectually bending and
inclining their wills and their affections to will and to affect good things,
and enabling them in some measure with strength to will those things, so as now
they will affect and do good things willingly, and follow that special motion,
and guidance, and conduction of the Spirit of God necessarily; they that are
thus acted, moved, and guided by the holy Spirit of God, are certainly the
children of God. This special leading, guidance, and conduction of them by the
hand of the Spirit of God, is an infallible evidence and proof of their
adoption, that they are the adopted sons and daughters of God. And to this the
Apostle gives further plain evidence. Galat. 5.18. Gal. 5.18.
(says he) If ye be led by the Spirit, if ye be acted, moved, and guided by
the special work of the Spirit, ye are not under the Law: for of that he
spoke in the verse foregoing, ye are not under the Law; as if he had said, ye
are not under the rigor and curse of the Law, ye are freed from it, and ye are
under grace: for as the Apostle says, Romans 6.14. Romans 6.14.
ye are then justified by Christ, and freed from the curse of the Law, and ye
are under the special grace and favor of God, and ye are in the state of Gods
children. 1. Ioh. 4.13. 1. Ioh. 4.13.
says Saint John, Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, that we
dwell in God and God in us: that is, we have fellowship and communion with God,
Because he has given us of his Spirit. Because we find and feel the special
work of the holy Spirit of God in us, and that we are acted, moved, and guided
by his good Spirit, in our minds, wills, and affections, and in our words and
actions, thereby we know it, and thereupon we can conclude to the comfort of
our own souls, that we have fellowship with God, and so are the adopted
sons and daughters of God, in and through Christ: for none but such as are
the adopted children of God, have or can have fellowship with God.

Now the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.



Again, the special leading, and guidance, and conduction

Now this truth discouers, that ignorant persons, such as Ignorant persons have
no good evidence that they are Gods children.
cannot possibly have any good evidence to the comfort of their own souls,
that they are in the number of Gods children. Ignorant persons are so far from
being acted, moved, and guided by the good hand of the holy Spirit of God in
special manner, as that they are not yet partakers of the first work of Gods
Spirit in those that belong to God: Note.
for illumination is the first work that the Spirit of God works in them that
belong to Gods election; now ignorant persons are not partakers of that first
work of the Spirit, they are not enlightened, they are yet in their natural
blindness and darkness, the holy Spirit of God has not yet set his hand to
work in them at all to their sanctification, and therefore they cannot
possibly have any good evidence to their comfort, that they are such as belong
to God; they may sooth up themselves as commonly they do, that their case is
good enough, that they are not book learned, and therefore they hope God will
hold them excused: but alas, they deceive themselves, they cannot possibly have
any sound comfort so long as they continue in that state of ignorance, let
ignorant persons take notice of it. Yea further, the truth now delivered
discouers, that civil honest persons, such as are only ciuilly honest,
neither have, nor possibly can have any good evidence, to the comfort of their
own souls, that they are in the number of Gods children: for why, they live
not as they are acted, moved, and guided by the good hand of the holy Spirit of
God in special manner; no, they only live as they are led by the light of
natural reason, or by the common grace of Gods Spirit, even by that grace that
is common to them with the reprobate, and may be found, and is many times found
in the very reprobate, and such as shall be damned: the holy Spirit of God has
not yet had any special working in their minds and hearts, and in ordering and
guiding of their words, and works, and actions. And therefore if civil honest
persons think that they have good evidence and proof of their adoption, that
they are the adopted sons and daughters of God, they are exceedingly
deceived, their own hearts deceive them: and let such persons as are only
ciuilly honest take notice of it.

The leading, guidance, and conduction of men by the flesh and by Satan, what
it proves.
and conduction of men by the good hand of the holy Spirit of God, is an
infallible evidence and proof of their adoption? does it manifest and prove
both to themselves and to others, that they are the sons and daughters of
God, and that God is their father and they his children? Why then I beseech
you, what does the leading, guidance and conduction by the flesh and by Satan
evidence and prove to them? Surely it must needs prove to them that they are
the children of Satan, that they are the sons and daughters of the devil, as
the Apostle says, Romans 6.16. Romans 6.16.
His servants ye are to whom ye obey: so indeed it may be truly said, his
sons and daughters ye are by whom ye are led Art thou then whosoever thou
art, art thou (I say) led by the lusts of thine own heart? do thou follow
and obey thine own corrupt and sinful lusts? do thou do the will of the
devil in sinning against God? thou do thereby evidence both to thy self and
to others, that thou art a child of the devil; and a man may be bold to say,
that thou art a limme of the devil: there is warrant so to speak from the
mouth of the Lord Jesus, Ioh. 8.44. Ioh. 8.44.
Ye are of your father the devil: And why so? Why the lusts of your father ye
will do. So indeed if thou do the lusts of the devil, if thou be once taken of
him at his will. 2. Tim. 2.16. 2. Tim. 2.16.
if thou suffer thy self willingly to be led by the devil, and he leads thee
to pride, to covetousness, and to drunkenness, and to swearing, and such
like, thou art no better then as Paul said to Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 13.10.
Act. 13.10.
The child of the devil, and that is a state and condition most wretched and
damnable. Thou lie open to all the plagues and judgments of God in this
world, and to the eternal wrath and vengeance of God in the bottomless pit of
hell: a condition to be thought on with trembling.

I come to a third use of the point: Comfort to such as find themselves led by
the good Spirit of God in special manner.
Is it so that the special leading, guidance, and conduction of men by the
good hand of Gods Spirit, is an infallible evidence and proof of their
adoption? then here is matter of sweet comfort for all such as find themselves
acted, moved, guided, and led by the good Spirit of God in special manner:
they may thereupon conclude, to the comfort of their own souls, that they are
in the number of Gods children, and have right and title to all comforts that
belong to Gods children, both in this life and in the life to come: and this
ground of comfort should every one of us labor to find in our selves. The
devil will suffer thee to say, I am the child of God, and I hope to be saved;
but would thou have good evidence of it, that thou art indeed the child of
God, even such evidence as will comfort thine own soul in time of trial, and
silence the devil when he shall call thy state into question, and put thee to
the trial? then never rest till thou find that thou art led by the Spirit of
God, that thou art acted, moved and guided by the good hand of the holy Spirit
of God in special manner, and that he has a special working in thy mind,
will, and affections, and in thy words and actions.





David speaks, Psalm. 119.33.35. Psalm. 119.33.35.
if thou walk on in the way of holiness, and fear of God, in the way of
humility, in the duties of the worship and service of God, and in the duties
of thine own particular calling, and that in conscience toward God,
endeavoring therein to approve thine heart to God, and keeping thy self within
the bounds of thine own place and calling, wherein thou have the promise of
Gods special protection, Psalm. 91.11. Psalm. 91.11.
He will give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. If
thou thus walk on in good ways, it is the Spirit of God that leads thee:
when men straggle and wander into by-pathes of error and sin, it is the
devil that leads them.

the Commandments of God are not grievous to thee, 1. Ioh. 5.3. thou art never
so well as when thou art exercised in good duties, either of piety and
religion, or of love, mercy, equity and justice, or in the duties of thine
own particular place and calling; if it be thus with thee, certainly then thou
art acted, moved, and guided by the good hand of the holy Spirit of God in
special manner: and hereby try thy self, and let every one of us labor to
come to this, let us never rest till we find that we walk on in Gods ways, in
the ways that he has appointed us to walk in, and that we walk in those
ways with cheerfulness and delight. Thereupon we may certainly conclude,
that we are led by the good hand of the holy Spirit of God, and that will yield
us this comfort, that we are in the number of Gods children, and have right and
title to all the comforts that belong to Gods children, both in this life and
in the life to come, and that will be an excellent comfort to us at all times.

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God.

By the Spirit of God, (as I showed) we are here to understand the effect and
work of Gods Spirit. Now in that the Apostle here says, As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, you see he speaks of many, that are or may be led, and but
of one Spirit of God, meaning by the Spirit, the work of Gods Spirit. Note we
briefly,

That the special work of Gods Spirit is but one and the The special work of
Gods Spirit is but one and the same in many persons.
and many are acted, moved, and guided in special manner, by one and the same
good hand of the holy Spirit of God, and there is but one and the same special
working of the good Spirit of God in many persons. And indeed in all persons
that are truly regenerate, howsoever the holy Spirit of God does work in the
regenerate in different degrees, in some he works more and in some less, yet
his special working is in all that are regenerate but one and the same in
regard of the kind of working. There is one and the same illumination of the
mind, and one and the same inclination of the will, and of the affections to
good things, in all and every regenerate person: all regenerate persons are
guided by the good Spirit of God, to know and understand the same good things,
even the good things that God has revealed in his written word, and to mind,
will, and affect the same good things, though in different degrees.

There is one body and one spirit. All the members of Christ are one body,
and they are guided by one and the same Spirit, and therefore they all
understand, and know, and they all mind, will, and affect the same good things.

They deceive themselves, who follow visions and revelations besides the
written word of God.
that think that they are guided by the Spirit of God, and that they follow
the lending of Gods Spirit, who follow visions and revelations besides the
written word of God, as swelling Enthusiasts, Familists, Anabaptists do; they
brag of their private illumination by the Spirit, and they take on them the
knowledge of some things without the word of God. Poor souls, they are
deceived, they are led with a spirit of error. The Apostle calls his preaching
the ministration of the Spirit, 2. Corinthians. 3.8. 2. Cor. 3.8.
giving us to understand, that the word and the Spirit are so nearely
conjoined, that they must always go together: the Spirit shines in the word,
and the word is powerful by the Spirit, and the regenerate are taught of God
indeed, Ioh. 6.45. Ioh. 6.45.
but it is by the word of God, they are enabled to understand the same good
things, even the good things God has revealed in his written word, To the Law
and to the testimony, (Isay 8.20. Isay 8.20.
) If men speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Let then Familists pretend what light or illumination they will, if it be
not according to the written word of God, it is no true knowledge nor
illumination, but a mere illusion of Satan.

Now further observe we, that the Apostle here speaking of leading by the
Spirit of God, the word here rendered led, being metaphorical, and borrowed
from blind men, or from young children, or weak persons, he limits his speech
to the children of God, to such as are already begotten of God, and borne of
the Spirit of God. Hence two things are further offered, I will speak of them
in order.

First, hence we learn, that Gods children, and such as are The best of Gods
children have still need of the leading and conduction of Gods Spirit.
they have still need of the leading and conduction of Gods Spirit. The best
and the most regenerate that live on the face of the earth, have still need, as
blind men, or as babes, to have the holy Spirit of God to be their leader, and
to be their supporter and their guide; they have still need of the special
working of the holy Spirit of God, to make them to understand, and know, and to
will, and affect, and to do good things. Though regenerate persons be altered,
and changed, and quickened, and by the first grace, the grace of regeneration,
made able to mind, will, and affect, and do good things, yet they have still
need of subsequent grace and of continual following grace, to make them
actually and indeed to mind, to will, and to affect, and to do good things,
otherwise they neither mind, will, nor affect, nor do any thing that is truly
good. And this David knew well, and therefore after he was a man truly
regenerate, he often called on the Lord, that he would still lead him, and
guide him, and direct him by his good Spirit, and that he would make him
actually and indeed to understand, and to will, and affect, and to do good
things. Psalm. 119.18. Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law. He was no doubt
already enlightened, yet verse 33.34.35.36. says he, Psalm. 119.33.34.35.36.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding and I will keep thy Law, yea I will keep it with my
whole heart. Direct me in the path of thy Commandments, for therein is my
delight. Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. And
Psalm. 143.10. Psalm. 143.10.
he says, the Lord was his God: he was persuaded that God was his father, and
that he was his child, and yet he presently subioynes, Let thy good Spirit
lead me unto the land of righteousness. 2. Corinthians. 3.5. 2. Cor. 3.5.
the Apostle speaking of himself and of other able Ministers of the Gospel,
who no doubt were truly regenerate, he says, We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing that is good: any good thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God. A plain text clearing and confirming the truth of
the point, that the best and most regenerate that are in the world, have still
need, as blind men or babes, to have the holy Spirit of God supporting them,
and leading them, and conducting them in the way of holiness. And though by
the grace of regeneration they have power put into them to mind, to will, and
affect, and to do good things, yet they have still need of the continual
following grace of the Spirit of God, to make them actually to mind, to will,
and affect, and do good things, otherwise they neither mind, nor will, nor
affect, nor do any thing truly good: for why



A special means to beat down pride in us.
and for the beating down of the pride of our hearts, and may teach us not to
ascribe any thing to our own wit or strength, in that we mind, will, and
affect, or do any thing that is truly good. We are ready to pride our selves
in that we mind, will, affect, or do any good thing; yea some are so far over
carried in the pride of their hearts, as they foolishly think they are come to
a perfection of holiness in themselves. Alas, we are so far from that,
though we be truly regenerate, as that we cannot actually think, will, affect,
or do any good thing, but as we are acted, moved, and helped by the continual
following grace of Gods Spirit. Do thou mind, will, and affect good things?
do thou love and like good things? and do thou indeed do any good thing?
Bless God for it, it is of his grace thou do so; it is of grace that thou
have any power to mind, will, affect, and do good things: yea it is of a second
following grace that thou do the good thou art made able to do by the first
grace. And therefore give all the praise to the Lord, and magnify his grace,
both for thy ability to mind, will, affect, or do good things, and also for
thy minding, willing, affecting, or doing of any good thing actually: the
praise of that also belongs to the Lord, and to the grace of his good Spirit.

And for a second use of the truth now delivered, it serves Whence is is that
Gods children are not at al times alike able to mind, will, affect, and do good
things.
Gods children at sometimes find themselves as it were barren of good
thoughts, and of good affections, and that they do not the good things they
ought to do: they must consider, though they be regenerate, and made able to
mind, will, affect, and do good things, yet they cannot actually mind, will,
affect, and do good things, unless the Lord vouchsafe unto them the continual
following grace of his good Spirit. Now the Lord is pleased sometimes for
causes best known to his holy Majesty, as for this amongst the rest, as one
special cause, to make his children know and acknowledge that it is of his
grace that they think the least good thought, and that it is he that works in
them both the will and the deed, of his good pleasure, Philip. 2.13. Philip.
2.13.
For this, I say, and for other good causes, the Lord is pleased sometimes to
withhold his following grace from his children: and thence it is that they do
not at all times alike mind, will, affect, and do good things. And hereupon
Gods children are to be stirred up to be earnest with the Lord in prayer, that
he would vouchsafe to them the continual guidance and conduction of his good
Spirit, and his continual following grace, without which they neither discern
nor walk in the good way. And therefore as the little infant when it begins to
go, it reaches out for the nurses hand or finger, so do thou that art a child
of God, reach out by prayer for the hand or finger of Gods good Spirit, to
lead thee in the way of truth and holiness; yea turn thou the Lords precepts
into prayers, say with Augustine, Da quod iubes, and iube quid vis: Lord give
that thou command, and command what thou will. And thus ought every child of
God to do in regard of this, that though he be regenerate, yet he cannot
actually think, will, affect or do good, but as it is acted by the continual
following grace.

Now the second thing offered from hence, that the Apostle here speaking of the
leading by the Spirit of God, limits his speech to the children of God: the
point is this.

Gods children are led by Gods Spirit in special manner
and he leads and guides them in special manner: for why,

He leads them by his special grace, even by that grace of his that is proper
to them, and which he communicates to none but to them; he reueales to them
those things that others are not acquainted withal, even the deep things of
God, 1. Corinthians. 2.10. He leads them by the still waters, Psalm. 23.2. He
leads them in the way of truth and holiness, in the way that they ought to
walk to life and salvation, as the Lord says, Isay 48.17. I am the Lord thy
God, which teach thee to profit, and lead thee by the way that thou should
go. And hereby further appears to us the excellent state of Gods children: The
excellent state of Gods children in regard of their leader, discovered.
they have the holy Spirit of God their leader and guide in special manner,
and therefore they cannot possibly miscarrie. Art thou a child of God? has the
holy Spirit of God begun to lead thee in the way of truth and holiness? Fear
not that thou shall fail or miscarrie, it is but thine own corruption and
weakness that makes thee think so, if thou have that conceit that thou shall
fail, and not be able to hold out in time of trial, fear it not, comfort thy
self with this, thou have the good Angels of God for thy guard, and the holy
Spirit of God for thy guide, and he will assuredly conduct thee safe and sound
through all dangers, difficulties, and impediments. Has the holy Spirit of God
as it were given thee his hand, and taken thee by the hand, to lead thee in
the right way that leads to life and salvation, and will he fail to bring
thee thither? no, no, assure thy self he will lead thee on by his grace with
daily increase of it, till thou come to the end of thy race; he having begun in
thee his special work of grace, he will finish it, Philip. 1.6. Neither the
devil with his temptations, nor the world with her allurements, nor
persecutions, nor death, nor grave, nor hell, shall disappoint thee of coming
whither the holy Spirit of God intends to bring thee, and that is into the land
of everlasting rest, even into Gods heavenly kingdom of happiness and glory;
he is able to break through all difficulties. Come we now to the 15. verse.

VERSE 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but
ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


IN this Verse the Apostle proves that he put down in the verse before, That
they that are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. His
argument here is from the property of that Spirit that is working in them,
that it is the Spirit of adoption, that they have received the Spirit of
adoption, and therefore they are the children of God. And this the Apostle puts
down with particular instance in the believing Romans, that they have received
the Spirit of adoption, and to that he opposes the spirit of bondage, denying
that to be received by them: for says he, Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption. And he further sets out
the spirit of bondage and the Spirit of adoption, by the effects, as namely,
that the spirit of bondage caused fear in them. Amplified by the time in the
word again, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: and
that the Spirit of adoption now caused in himself, and in them, and in all
true believers, (for he changes the person) and says we, that is, caused in
them invocation, prayer, a calling on the name of God, yea a crying to God,
expressing what title it made them give to God, and how to style him, namely,
by the name of father, which the Apostle puts down in two words signifying the
same thing, Abba, Father: Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby
(says he) we cry Abba, Father.

So then the sum and substance of this verse, is a proof, that such as are
led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, that they have the Spirit of
adoption working in them, and not the spirit of bondage: amplified by the
effects, both of the spirit of bondage, namely, fear, and of the Spirit of
adoption, namely, invocation, and calling on the name of God, yea a crying to
God, and calling him Abba, Father.

Interpretation.
Let us now examine the words touching the sense and meaning of them. Ye have
not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but ye have received the
Spirit of adoption. The word received, is here put for a feeling of the
powerful work of the Spirit of God: for the Spirit of God is received when he
works effectually in the hearts of men. Ioh. 14.17. it is said, The world
cannot receive the Spirit, because the Spirit never works powerfully in the
world. Now by the spirit of bondage, and by the Spirit of Adoption, we are here
to understand one and the same Spirit, even the holy Spirit of God, who is but
one and the same, and yet has several operations and workings in men, yea in
the self same men, and is therefore sometimes called the spirit of bondage and
sometimes the Spirit of adoption. And we must know, that the Apostle here calls
the Spirit of God the spirit of bondage and the Spirit of adoption, not with
respect to the time before men be truly converted, and the time after true
conversion, as some do expound this text; that the Spirit of God is to men
before their conversion a spirit of bondage, and after their conversion a
Spirit of adoption, but (as I take it) the Apostle here calls the Spirit of
God the Spirit of bondage and the Spirit of adoption, in respect of his
different working in such as are truly converted, at several times, as namely,
at the beginning of their conversion, and afterward. As first, he is called
the spirit of bondage, in that when he begins to work in such as belong to
Gods election to their conversion, he discouers to them their sins by the Law
of God, and what they have deserved by their sins, and makes them see
themselves for their sins bound over to the curse of the Law, to the wrath of
God, and to eternal death and damnation, and so in a miserable bondage; and
thereupon they are terrified, and affrighted, and brought to a wonderful
amazement, fear and trembling, in respect of that they have deserved by their
sins, even to cry out with them Act. 2.37. What shall we do? And that is the
fear the Apostle here intends, caused by the spirit of bondage, when he says,
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, to fear: he adds again: meaning
as yet, or any more, as then you did in the beginning of your conversion.

And secondly, the Spirit of God is called the Spirit of adoption in that after
men are by the work of the Spirit converted, and now believe in Christ, and
are by him justified, and in and through him adopted to be the sons of God,
he does then work in them by the preaching of the Gospel a sense and feeling
of Gods love to them in Christ, and persuades them that God is their father,
and that by his special grace and favor they are adopted to be his children
in and through Christ Jesus: he does witness that to them, as the Apostle
says in the next verse. And hence he is called the earnest of our inheritance,
Ephesians 1.14. For the Spirit of God is called the Spirit of adoption, because he
both works adoption, and also works the sense of it in the hearts of true
believers. Whereby, or by whom, that is, by which Spirit. We. You, and I, and
all true believers. Cry Abba, Father: that is, call on God earnestly and
fervently, with a childlike boldness and confidence: we call on him as our
gracious and loving father in Jesus Christ. The word is here doubled, (...) ^d
est, pater, Pater noster. (...).
Abba, Father, and so in the original, one an Hebrew or Syriacke word, and the
other a Greek word, one to expound the other, and to signify the greater
vehemency, as if he had said, whereby we cry Father, Father. Thus then
conceive we the meaning of the words of this verse.

For ye do not yet or now any more feel the powerful work of the holy Spirit
of God in your selves, discovering to you your sins by the Law of God, and
making you see your selves for your sins bound over to the curse of the Law,
to the wrath of God, and to eternal damnation, thereby working in you a
wonderful amazement, fear, and trembling, and an holy despair, in respect of
that you deserve for your sins, as you did in the beginning of your
conversion: but now you feel the holy Spirit of God working in you powerfully
by the preaching of the Gospel, a sense and feeling of Gods love to you in
Christ, and persuading you that God is your Father, you by his special love
and favor his adopted children in and through Christ Jesus; by which holy
Spirit of God thus working in us, both I and you, and all true believers are
able, and do call on God earnestly, and fervently, and with childlike boldness
and confidence, as our gracious and loving father in Jesus Christ, yea we call
on him with vehemency, and feeling affections, Father, Father.

Now from the Apostles argument, by which he proves that such as are led by the
Spirit of God are the children of God, because they have received the Spirit of
adoption, witnessing to them Gods love to them in Christ, I forbear to speak,
we shall more fitly speak of that in the next verse.

In the first place here observe we, the Apostle says, the believing Romans
had not now the Spirit working in them as a spirit of bondage, as they had in
the beginning of their conversion, but now they felt him working in them as a
Spirit of adoption; they had not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again, but they had received the Spirit of adoption: whence we are given to
understand thus much.

The holy Spirit of God is to all Gods children first a spirit of bondage, and
then a Spirit of adoption.
and then a Spirit of adoption. The holy Spirit of God holds this course in all
that belong to Gods election: he discouers to them by the Law of God their
sins, and what they have deserved by them, even the curse of the Law, the
wrath of God; and thereby he brings them to amazement, fear, and trembling.
And then he works in them by the preaching of the Gospel a sense and feeling
of Gods love to them in Christ, and a persuasion that God is their father, and
they his adopted children in and through Christ Jesus. He first humbles them by
the Law, with a sight of their sins, and of the wrath of God due to them for
their sins, and then he raises them up by the Gospel, with comfort in
Christ, in the apprehension of Gods love to them in and through him. Hoze.
6.1.2.
And this is that the people speak of in Hozea 6.1.2. Come (say they) let us
return to the Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has wounded
us, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us, and in the third
day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Where we see plainly
the Lords order: first he wounds, and then he binds up: he humbles, and then
he raises up with comfort. And thus dealt the holy Spirit of God with the
Jews, Act. 2. Act. 2.14. to 41.
he first brought them by Peter's preaching of the Law to them, to a sight of
their sins, even of that sin of crucifying Christ, and what they had
deserved by that sin, and so to utter amazement in themselves, so as they
cried out verse 37. Men and brethren, what shall we do? They were terrified and
trembled, and knew not what to do; then he raised them up with comfort in the
assurance of the pardon of their sins. And thus dealt the Lord Jesus with
Saul, Acts 9.4.6. Act. 9.4.6.
we read that he cast him down to the earth, he humbled him, he brought him
to trembling and astonishment, and then he lifted him up again with comfort.
Thus indeed deals the holy Spirit with all that belong to Gods election. And
the reasons why he thus deals are these.

First, the Lord has so appointed, that his elect should be The Spirit of the
Lord God is on me, and the Lord has anointed me, he has sent me to preach
good tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty
to the captives, and to them that are bound, the opening of the prison.

And again, secondly, the holy Spirit of God knows well, that none are fit to
receive comfort but such as are truly humbled with the sight of their sins,
and of the wrath of God deserved by their sins: and he knows well that the
fallow ground of men's hearts must first be plowed and furrowed, and then the
seed of grace and comfort cast into them, Ierem. 4.4. Break up your fallow
ground, and sow not among the thorns. Thus the holy Spirit of God is to all
Gods children, first a spirit of bondage, and then a Spirit of adoption: he
first humbles them that belong to Gods election by the Law of God, bringing
them to a sight of their sins, and of the wrath of God due to them for their
sins; and then he raises them up by the Gospel with comfort in Christ, in
the apprehension of Gods love to them in and through Christ.

The opening of the Law of God and the applying of it to the discovering of
men's sin, is very needful.
and the applying of the Law to the discovering of the sins of men, and what
men deserve by their sins, is very needful. And men do unjustly except
against the Ministers of the word, in that they as occasion is offered, do in
the preaching of the word lay men's sins open, yea their particular sins,
and tell them plainly, that hell and damnation is due to them for the same. Oh
men cannot abide this, they would hear of nothing but the Gospel, nothing but
mercy: alas they consider not, that the holy Spirit of God humbles men that
belong to God by the Law of God truly opened and rightly applied, and thereby
brings them to a sight of their sins, and of the wrath of God due to them for
their sins, that so he may raise them up by the Gospel with true and sound
comfort in Christ: this they consider not, but indeed so it is. And therefore
the opening of the Law of God, and the applying it to the discovering of sin,
and what men deserve by the same, is a needful thing in the first place.

Men deceive themselves who think that the Spirit of God is to them a Spirit
of adoption, and yet never found him to them a spirit of bondage.
Secondly, is it so that the holy Spirit of God is to all Gods children first a
spirit of bondage, and then a Spirit of adoption? does he first humble them
that belong to Gods election by the Law of God, and then raise them up by the
Gospel with comfort in Christ? Then learn we to take heed we deceive not our
selves, let us not think that the holy Spirit of God is to us a Spirit of
adoption, and that it is he that does witness to us Gods love in Christ,
unless we have first found him to us a spirit of bondage, that he has brought
us to a sight of our sins, yea of our particular sins, and of Gods wrath
due unto us for our particular sins, and that in regard of them our hearts
have been wounded, and that we have been terrified and affrighted in regard of
our particular sins. Alas, thousands in the world content themselves with a
general sight of sin, as happily when Gods hand is on them in some grievous
affliction, they can then say we are sinners, yea we are great and grievous
sinners, God help us: and they content themselves with some light vanishing
touch of conscience, causing them to send out a natural sigh or sob, as the
brute beast groans under the burden, but their hearts were never truly
pressed and broken with the weight and burden of one particular sin, and so
they deceive themselves. We must come to this, even to have our hearts smitten
and wounded, and broken, in regard of our particular sins: and if we never
felt this, the comfort we frame to our selves in Christ is not the comfort of
Gods children. Have thou been a lewd wicked wretch, and did thou never yet
find thy self humbled, and terrified, and affrighted with the sight of thy
particular sins? Surely then Judas was nearer heaven then thou art as yet. We
must every one come to this in some measure, we must in some measure be
humbled and broken for our particular sins, I say in some measure: Note.
for all that belong to Gods election are not in the like measure humbled and
broken for their sins, in the beginning of their conversion, the Lord in his
wise disposition humbles some men more and some less. Lydia and the Iaylor,
Act. 16. are pregnant examples to this purpose, they being but newly converted
were able to eat and drink, and to rejoice, and yet every one must in some
measure be humbled for his particular sins; and we must every one of us find
the holy Spirit of God to be to us a spirit of bondage before we find him to be
a Spirit of adoption: and if we have not found the holy Spirit of God a spirit
of bondage, if we have not found that he has brought us to a sight of our
sins, yea of our particular sins, and that we have been terrified with a
sight of them, and with an apprehension of Gods wrath due to us for the same;
we do but in vain imagine that the Spirit of God is to us a Spirit of
adoption, and that it is he that does witn^sse to us the love of God in Christ.
And therefore this we must labor for, and never rest till we come to it, and
then finding comfort in Christ, we may be sure it is the holy Spirit of God
that does comfor us, and is to us a Spirit of adoption.

But ye have not received the spirit of bond^ge to fear again: but the Spirit
of adoption, etc.

In the next place observe we, the Apostle here says, it was the Spirit of God
that wrought in the believing Romans at the beginning of their conversion as a
spirit of bond^ge, causing then a fear in them by the preaching of the Law of
God, and it was also the Spirit of God that now wrought in them as a Spirit of
adoption, working in them by the preaching of the Gospel a sense and feeling
of Gods love to them in Christ, persuading them that God was their father in
and through Christ. Now the doctrine hence offered is this.

The Spirit of God makes both the Law and the Gospel preched effectual.
and makes both the Law and the Gospel preached to have a kindly working in
the souls of men. It is the Spirit of God that works humiliation by the
preaching of the Law, and it is also the Spirit of God that works comfort by
the preaching of the Gospel. The holy Spirit of God makes the preaching of the
Law and of the Gospel to become effectual, and to have their proper work and
effect in the hearts and souls of men and women: and without the Spirit of God
neither the Law preached has power to bring men to a sight of their sins,
and to work in them fear, terror, and amazement in the apprehension of Gods
wrath due to them for their sins; or the Gospel preached has power to work
in them that are humbled for their sins any sense and feeling of Gods love to
them in Christ, or any true saving comfort. And to this purpose is that text,
Isay 48.17. Isay 48.17.
where the Lord says, I am the Lord thy God, which teach thee to profit, and
lead thee by the way that thou should go. I teach thee to thy profit and to
thy comfort and unless I teach thee, thou can not reap either profit or
comfort by any teaching whatsoever. And hence it is yt the Lord says, Isay
57.19. Isay 57.19.
I create the fruit of the lips to be peace: peace unto them that are afar
off, and to them that are near, says the Lord. And to the same purpose
speaks the Apostle most plainly, 1. Cor. 3.6.7. 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. So then neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the
increase. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is the Spirit of God alone
that makes the word profitable and fruitful 2. Corin. 4.6. the Apostle says,
that by the same almighty power whereby the Lord brought light out of darkness
at the first creation of all things, does he shine in the hearts of men, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. It is the mighty power of God, even that power by which he brought the
light out of darkness at the first creation, that makes men sauingly to
apprehend, to know, and to understand the sweet comforts of the Gospel. And to
these we might add many other testimonies of Scripture, clearing and
confirming this truth, that it is the holy Spirit of God that works both by the
Law and by the Gospel and makes both the Law and the Gospel preached to have a
kindly working in the souls of men, and that it is the holy Spirit of God that
works humiliation by the preaching of the Law, and that works also true and
saving comfort by the preaching of the Gospel. And there be also reasons and
grounds of this truth. As

First both the Law and the Gospel are the breath of the



Strength against offense arising from this, that the word of God truly
preached works kindly on some, and not on others.
that the word of God truly and faithfully preached, has a kindly working in
some and not in others. We are not to stumble at it, in that we see where the
Law and Gospel are truly opened and expounded, and rightly applied, yet there
all are not wrought on, but many still continue in their hardness, and go on
in their sins, and are not reformed; yea the sharpest edge of the Law is
blunted on the hardness of their hearts. We must remember it is the holy
Spirit of God that works both humiliation by the preaching of the Law, and
that works also true and saving comfort by the preaching of the Gospel. The
Spirit of God is like the wind, so compared, Ioh. 3.8. Ioh. 3.8.
As the wind blows where it lists, so the Spirit of God works where it
pleases him. And though the Preachers of the word take never so much pains,
and should wish themselves with Paul, Romans 9.3. Romans 9.3.
Severed from Christ, that men might be wrought on by their preaching, yet
shall no more be wrought on, then those to whom it pleases the good Spirit of
God to make the word powerful and effectual. Without question Christ preached
most holily, and most powerfully, yet were not all wrought on that heard him:
no, his disciples were not so thoroughly wrought on as they ought to have been:
he often reproved them for their want of faith. And therefore we are not to
stumble at it, and to think it strange, that some are wrought on by the word
of God truly preached, and others still continue in their hardness and sins
unreformed.

And for a second use of the point. Is it so that it is the We are not to rest
on the excellency of any man's gift in preaching, as sufficient to make the
word preached effectual.
Then learn we not to rest on the excellency of any man's gift in preaching,
as able and sufficient to make the word preached to have a kindly working in
our souls. Indeed a good gift that way is a good means, but be a man's gift
never so excellent, it is but a means, and it is from the good hand of God,
and power of the holy Spirit of God, that alone makes man's preaching
effectual, be his gift never so excellent. And when we come to the hearing of
the word of God, Neither are we to rest on any excellency of wit or
understanding in our selves, for conceruing the word of God, or profiting by it
take we heed that we rest not on any excellency of wit, or understanding in
our selves, as if we were able to conceive the word of God and to profit by it,
by any strength or ability in our selves: no, no, when we go to a Sermon, pray
we with David, Psalm. 119.18. Lord open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law, and the secrets of thy Gospel: Lord let thy good Spirit make thy good
word both in the instructions and comforts of it, to have a kindly working in
my soul. And on this ground learn we not to rest in that we conceive out of
the word of God by our own heads, nor yet in that we barely conceive by the
teaching of others, for so we shall have but a general notion, and a vanishing
speculation of the good word of God, and that will fail us in time of trial:
but let us be earnest with the Lord in prayer, that he would also inwardly
teach us by his good Spirit, and that his holy Spirit would instruct us, and
comfort us, and cause his good word to have the proper and kindly working in
our souls: and when thou find the word of God kindly working on thy soul,
when thou find thine hard heart hammered and humbled by the Law of God truly
opened and applied, and when thou find thy broken heart bound up, and thy
weary soul refreshed, cheared up, and comforted by the preaching of the
Gospel, acknowledge that to be the special work of Gods holy Spirit, and
^lesse him for it: all the praise and all the glory of that work belongs to
him alone. Thou see many others partakers of the same means that thou art,
and that hear the same Sermons that thou do, and yet still they go on in
their hardness, and in their sins without any remorse or touch of
conscience, and so are far from true comfort; and what art thou better then
they by nature? surely nothing at all, thou art no more capable of good things
of thy self then they are, thy heart was once as fast locked up against the
good word of God as theirs now is, and it is the holy Spirit of God that has
opened it, and it is he that of his mere goodness and mercy has put that
difference between thee and them, and bless him for it.

Now further, in that the Apostle says, the believing Romans had not received
the spirit of bondage to fear again, but they had received the Spirit of
adoption, that is, they had not the Spirit of God powerfully working in them,
discovering sin to them, and making them see themselves for their sins
bound over to the curse of the Law, and thereby causing fear, amazement, and
trembling in them, Again, that is, as yet, and now any more, but now they had
the Spirit of God working in them as a Spirit of adoption: hence then a
question may arise, namely, this.



have the Spirit of God working in him as a Spirit of bondage. Indeed, I grant
that a child of God, one that has now the Spirit of adoption, and feels Gods
love shed abroad in his heart by the Spirit of God given to him, may by reason
of some sin he has fallen into, feel his conscience terrified and
affrighted, and he may feel in himself wonderful terrors, and fears, and
amazement; yea he may think himself for a time no better then a reprobate,
and a very castaway: but that is not properly the working of the Spirit of
God in him, but indeed that is the work of his own corruption still abiding
in him. As Bradford Bradford.
the holy Martyr said well, Our cecitie, and blindness, and corrupt
affections, do often shadow the sight of Gods seed in Gods children, as though
they were plain reprobates, whereof it comes, that they praying according to
their sense, but not according to truth, desire of God to give them again his
Spirit, as though they had lost it and he had taken it away, which thing God
never does indeed, although he make us to think so for a time. These are his
words; whence it is clear, that the amazement, terrors, and fears that are in
a child of God after some sin committed by him, and his thinking of himself
for a time no better then a reprobate and a forlorn person, are not properly
wrought in him by the holy Spirit of God, but they come from his own
blindness, and from his own weakness and corruption still abiding in him.
The work of the Spirit of God in a child of God at such a time is to another
purpose, even to make him cry with David, Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Where we see, that David according to the sense and judgment
of flesh, still felt himself forlorn, and utterly rejected of God, yet the
Spirit of God had another working in him, that made him by faith to apprehend
the hidden mercy of God, and to say, My God, my God: and thus it is with a
child of God after some sin committed by him. And therefore though a child of
God after some sin committed, may have amazement, terrors, and fears, yet
those terrors and fears come not properly from the holy Spirit of God in him,
but from his own corruption still abiding in him. Note.
And the Spirit of God never works in a child of God after he has received
the Spirit of adoption, as a spirit of bondage.

Now in that the Apostle here says, the believing Romans had not received the
spirit of bondage to fear again, that is, they had not now the holy Spirit of
God working in them to their deiection and humiliation by the Law, as they had
in former times: hence a question may arise; it might have been more fitly
handled before, but I hope it will not now be unseasonable.

Abimelech knew by the light of nature, that the gross act of adultery was a
sin, Genesis 20.9.
Genes. 20.9. And he works in them sometimes by the light of nature, some
touch of conscience for sin, namely, some confused touch of conscience, as
the heathen had sometimes some confused touch of conscience for sin, and
thereupon they had a conceit and an apprehension of infernal furies that
should torment men for their sins, and they gave special names to those
furies, as Nemesis, Eumenides, Alecto, and such like: and they imagined that
those furies should torment men for their sins after diverse manners, as some
they should burn with torches, and sting some with adders, and the like: yea
they had a conceit that for some foul sin committed, they should never be in
quiet till they had offered some sacrifice. Thus far the heathen were able to
see their sins by the glimmering light of nature. And thus sometimes the holy
Spirit of God works in men a confused touch of conscience for sin by the
light of nature, but the Spirit of God never brings men by the light of nature
to a sight of their inward corruptions and sins, and to see the rebellions of
their hearts to be sin, neither does he ever work in men by the light of
nature any sound touch of conscience for any particular sin; only by the Law
of God opened and applied, does the holy Spirit of God bring men to a sight of
particular inward corruptions and sins, as Romans 3.20. Romans 3.20.
By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. And Romans 7.7. Romans 7.7.
The Apostle says I had not known sin but by the Law. And only by the Law
of God opened and rightly applied, does the holy Spirit of God bring men to a
through and sound touch of conscience for particular sins, as Romans 4.15. Romans
4.15.
The Law causes wrath: the meaning is, it accuses men for the transgression
of it, and condemns them, and so makes them see themselves liable to the wrath
of God, and to eternal death and damnation. And not to pass from this without
some short use of it,

Let us take heed on this ground we deceive not our selves: Beware of deceiving
your selves touching the sight of sins and touch of conscience for the same.
and we may have some touch of conscience for sin, and yet it may be the holy
Spirit of God has wrought no further on us but only by the light of nature,
and so far as heathen men were sometimes wrought on. It may be we see only our
particular gross sins, and we have only a confused touch of conscience for
our sins: if we rest in that, we deceive our selves, let us never rest till
we find that we are brought to a sight of our particular sins, yea of our
inward corruptions, and that there is wrought in us a through and sound touch of
conscience for our particular sins. That only is the work of the holy Spirit
of God in men, by the Law of God opened and rightly applied.

Now further, in that the Apostle here says, that the believing Romans had
not the holy Spirit of God working in them as a Spirit of bondage, as sometimes
they had, but now working in them as a Spirit of adoption; we see that the
Spirit of God had not left them in their deiection, and in their amazement, and
in their terror and fear which he wrought in them by the preaching of the Law,
but was now working in them to their comfort, witnessing Gods love to them in
Christ: and hence we are given to understand thus much.

The terrors and fears Gods Spirit works in Gods cho^en, are as preparatiues
to their consolation and comfort.
terror, fear, and amazement in the sight of their sins, and of Gods wrath
due to them for the same, yet he leaves them not in that terror, and fear, and
amazement, but he further works in the^ to their comfort. The holy Spirit of
God works terrors and fears, with which he is pleased to humble those that
belong to God for a time, but as preparatiues to their consolation and comfort:
they are but as the needle to the thread, as the needle in sowing makes way for
the thread, so do terrors and fears in them that belong to God, make way to
true and sound comfort. And thus dealt the holy Spirit of God with those Jews
Act. 2. he brought them by Peter's Sermon to the sight of their sins, yea of
that sin of crucifying Christ the Lord of life and glory, and on the sight of
their sins he wrought in them terror, and fear, compunction, and pricking in
their hearts, as the text says verse. 37. Act. v. 37.
yet he did not leave them, but he further wrought in them to their comfort, he
made them cry out, Men and brethren what shall we do? They did not altogether
despair of Gods mercy, but conceived hope of remedy, and therefore desired to
be instructed what they should do: and Peter further instructed them, and the
holy Spirit of God fu^ther wrought in them to their saving comfort. Galat.
3.24. Galat. 3.24.
the Apostle says, The Law is our Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ. Now
the Law only discouers to men their sins, and what they have deserved by their
sins: it terrifies them with the curse, and with death and damnation due to
them for their sins, and it shows no remedy how to escape them: yet the
holy Spirit of God does not here leave Gods elect, but he makes their humbling
and their schooling by the smart rod of the Law, to be a preparatiue to their
true and sound comfort: he works further in them graciously, even a sight of
Gods mercy in Christ, and makes them fly to the throne of grace, and to seek
for help, and remedy, and comfort in Christ: he leaves them not in their
terror, fear, and amazement wrought in them by the Law, but he further works
in them to their comfort. For why, to give the reason of this truth.

The holy Spirit of God works nothing in Gods elect but sauingly,

And this in the first place discouers a manifest difference of A difference of
the working of Gods Spirit in the elect and in the reprobate discovered.
In the elect he works in the beginning of their conversion, terror, fear,
and amazement on the sight of their sins, and of Gods wrath due to them for
their sins: yet he leaves them not in that terror and fear, but he further
works in them to their comfort, and he becomes to them a Spirit of adoption.
And the terrors and fears with which the Spirit of God is pleased to humble
Gods elect for a time, are saving terrors and fears, and the Spirit of God
makes them tend to their comfort and salvation. But in the reprobate the holy
Spirit of God works terrors, and fears, and amazement on the sight of their
sins, and of Gods wrath due to them for their sins, and then he leaves them
in those terrors and fears, and so through their own corruption, those
terrors and fears tend to their destruction, and are but beginnings of
everlasting horror and confusion; and they bring forth in them either fearful
and final desperation, as in Cain, in Saul, in Judas, and such like, or
further hardness of heart. As heat does harden iron after it has been cast
into the fire; so terrors and fears in the reprobate, on the sight of their
sins, and of Gods wrath due to them for their sins, do many times harden
their hearts, and make them desperate in sinning against God. So different is
the working of the holy Spirit of God in the elect and in the reprobate, he
working terror, fear, and amazement in them both; and on the sight of their
sins, and of Gods wrath due to them for the same, in the one he works
sauingly, but in the other to their eternal horror and confusion.

Comfort to them in who^ the Spirit of God has wrought terror, fear, and
amazement, on the sight of their sins, and has not left them in that case, but
has begun to work in them to their comfort.
in the beginning of their conversion, terror, fear, and amazement, on the
sight of their sins, and of Gods wrath due to them for the fame, yet he
leaves them not in that terror, fear, and amazement, but he further works in
them to their comfort? then hereupon learn to cheer up thy self, whosoever
thou art, in whom the holy Spirit of God has wrought terror, fear, and
amazement on the sight of thy sins, and of Gods wrath due to thee for the same,
if so be the holy Spirit of God have not left thee in that case, and given thee
over to utter desperation, which is the case of the reprobate, but has begun
to work in thee to thy comfort.

Yea but, alas, thou will say, How shall I know that? I feel my conscience
terrified, of God has not left me in my terror, fear, and amazement, but has
begun to work in me to my comfort?

I answer thee. Try thy self by this:

I might here stand to show, how Gods elect come to be actually accounted Gods
children, namely, by adoption; and also that the Spirit of God is to Gods
children a Spirit of adoption, witnessing Gods love to them in Christ; but of
those things we shall speak more fitly in the next verse: only one thing I
will note briefly. In that the Apostle says, the believing Romans had received
the Spirit of adoption, that is, they had the Spirit of God working in them a
sense and feeling of Gods love to them in Christ. Hence it is evident and
clear,

The sense and feeling of Gods special love in Christ comes only from the
work of Gods Spirit Romans 5.5.
it is only from the working of the holy Spirit of God that men or women have
any true sense and feeling of Gods love to them in Christ. Romans 5.5. the
Apostle says, The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost
which is given to us. Ephesians. 1.13. he says, the Ephesians believing the
Gospel, they were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. The holy Spirit of
God did seal up in their hearts the comforts and promises of the Gospel, the
love of God in Christ made known and promised in the Gospel. It was the holy
Spirit of God that did seal up to them, and gave them a true sense and feeling
of it: for why, not to enlarge the point.



How many deceive them selves touching the feeling of Gods love.
And for the use of this, it makes known to us that thousands in the world
deceive themselves touching the apprehension and feeling of Gods love. Many
brag of it, that God loves them, and that they find and feel Gods love to
them in Christ, they doubt not of it, and yet alas they do but flatter
themselves, they have nothing in them but a mere presumption and a blind
conceit, they are ignorant persons, or they go on in the practice of known
gross sins without repentance, and they cannot possibly have any true sense
and feeling of Gods love to them in Christ, that comes only from the working of
the holy Spirit of God in men or women, which they want: and they deceive their
own souls in a matter of special weight and consequence. In the sense and
feeling of Gods love in Christ, is the depth of all true comfort, it is that
alone which makes our prosperity truly pleasant and comfortable, that sweetens
all our trials and afflictions, and none can have that, but only such men or
women as have it from the working of the holy Spirit of God. And therefore let
us take heed we do not thus deceive our selves; and on this ground of truth
there is comfort for all them whosoever they be, that find and feel the holy
Spirit of God working in them in special manner, though as yet they have not a
sense and feeling of Gods love to them in Christ, which they would feign have,
and desire above all things in the world: for so the case my be, and is with
some. Do thou feel the holy Spirit of God working in thee in special
manner, an hatred of all sin, a purpose to please God in all things, and a
true fear of God? comfort thy self, the holy Spirit of God is now to thee a
Spirit of life and power, and assuredly he will be to thee in time a Spirit of
comfort, filling thy hearr with joy in believing, and will certainly in the end
work in thee a lively sense and feeling of Gods love to thee in Christ; fear
it not, and let it be thy comfort.

Come we now to the effect that the Spirit of adoption wrought in the Apostle
himself and in the believing Romans, in these words, Whereby we cry Abba,
Father. The effect we see in general was invocation, prayer, and calling on the
name of the Lord: Ye have received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba,
Father. Now the conclusion hence offered is this.

That invocation, prayer, and calling on the name of Invocation and calling on
the name of the Lord is a certain fruit of the Spirit of adoption.
is a certain fruit and effect caused by the holy Spirit of God, even by the
Spirit of adoption. Such as have the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of God
witnessing Gods love to them in Christ, they have their hearts moved by that
Spirit to pray to God, and by that Spirit they have their mouths opened in
prayer, and in calling on the name of the Lord. The Spirit of adoption causes
invocation, and prayer, and calling on the name of the Lord. And to this
purpose we find. 1. Cor. 1.2. 1. Cor. 1.2.
the Apostle ioynes together, Sanctified in Christ Jesus, and calling on the
name of the Lord. Such as are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and have the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ in them, who doubtless does witness Gods love to
them in Christ, they call on the name of the Lord. Zach. 12.10. Zach. 12.10.
the Lord promised to power on the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of compassion or deprecation. Rom 8.26.
Verse 26. of this Chapter, the Apostle says, The Spirit makes requests for
us, with sighs which cannot be expressed, that is, the Spirit of God stirs
up and frames such desires in us, by which we pray to God. Galat. 4.6. Galat.
4.6.
the Apostle speaks expressly to this purpose, Because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba
father. Act. 9.14. it is made a note of the people of God, even such as did
profess the name of Christ, and did belong to Christ, and were the children of
God, that they called on the name of the Lord. And these testimonies do
sufficiently clear and confirm the truth of the point in hand, that
invocation, and prayer, and calling on the name of the Lord, is a certain
fruit caused by the holy Spirit of God, even by the Spirit of adoption: that
such as have the Spirit of adoption, their hearts are by that Spirit stirred up
to pray to God, and by that Spirit they have their mouths opened in prayer,
and in calling on the name of the Lord. And the Spirit of adoption does
certainly cause inuocarion, prayer, and calling on the name of the Lord: for
why? the reason and ground of it is this; stirs up their hearts to pray to
God, and he opens their mouths in prayer and in calling on the name of the
Lord.

Now then for use of this, first this truth may serve as a How we may know
whether we have the- Spirit of adoption or no.
and of discerning whether we have the Spirit of adoption or no, and whether we
be the adopted sons and daughters of God or no. Do thou find this blessed
fruit of the Spirit wrought in thee? do thou find thine heart stirred up to
pray to God, and thy mouth opened in prayer and calling on the name of the Lord
on every occasion? when thou art to use the holy things and the ordinances of
God, art thou stirred up to seek to God for a blessing on them? when thou art
to use the cratures of God, meat, drink, and apparel, or thine house or
lands, art thon stirred up to sanctify them by prayer, as 1. Tim. 4.5. Every
creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. In the
time of thy wants either of body or soul, and especially in regard of the
wants of thy soul, art thou moved to go to God by prayer, howsoever thou do
use all good means for the supply of them, yet thou art stirred up to seek to
God by prayer, especially for the supply of them? Surely then thou have the
Spirit of adoption and that is an infallible note and evidence that thou art an
adopted son or daughter of God. But on the other side, do thou find that
thou have no mind to call on the name of the Lord? do thou rush on holy
things, and the ordinances of God without seeking to God for a blessing on
them? do thou fall to thy meat and drink, and use thy apparel, and house
and land, and art not stirred up to go to God by prayer, that he would
sanctify and bless them to thee, or if thou do, it is but for form and
fashion? when the hand of God is on thee by sickness or any distress, can
thou not then call on the name of the Lord, but thou sendest to the Church to
be prayed for (which I speak not against, the best have need of the prayers of
others) but art thou like the foolish virgins Mat. 25.3. have thou no oil in
thy lamp? have thou no ability at all to pray for thy self at any time?
deceive not thy self, thou have not the Spirit of adoption, thou have no
evidence to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou art an adopted son or
daughter of God: where there is no calling on God by prayer, certainly there
is no Spirit of grace, no Spirit of adoption, no Spirit of God witnessing Gods
love in Christ. Psalm. 14.4. it is a note of an hypocrite and wicked man, Not to
call on God, and therefore do not sooth up thy self in a conceit, that thou
art a child of God, if thou find not that the Spirit of God has wrought in
thee this blessed fruit, invocation, prayer, and calling on the name of the
Lord.

Comfort for them whose hearts are stirred up to prayer on every occasion.
prayer, and calling on the name of the Lord? then here is matter of comfort
for thee, whosoever thou art that have thine heart stirred up to pray to God,
and thy mouth opened in invocation, prayer, and calling on the name of the Lord
on every occasion. Have thou the Spirit of prayer and invocation? certainly
then thou have the Spirit of adoption. Have thou the gift of prayer, and not to
utter words of prayer only, (for that an hypocrite may do,) but to power out
thine heart to the Lord, and to lift up thy prayers unto him? Have thou that
gift in any measure? (for all have it not in like measure, but some in a
greater measure some in less.) Have thou that gift in any measure, and have
thou a willingness to pray to God on every occasion? yea can thou but sigh
and groan to God as occasion is offered? Then comfort thy self, that is a sure
note and evidence to thee, that thou art an adopted son or daughter of God,
and that God is thy father, and he has set his own stamp and seal on thee,
and marked thee out for one of his own, and he will hear and fulfill thy
desire, Psalm. 145.19. Yea so soon as a holy desire is stirred up in thine
heart by his good Spirit, he will hear and answer thee. Isai. 65.24. Before
they call I will answer. And that may be a matter of sweet comfort to thee.

Now it is not to be passed by without observation, that the Apostle hear
changes the term, and says, We: hereby we cry, Abba, Father: he says not,
ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba, Father: but
whereby we, that is, I, and you, and all true believers, cry Abba, Father. The
Spirit of adoption stirs up and causes me, and you, and all true believers,
to call on the name of the Lord.

Now hence note we, that the Spirit of adoption causes all Every one who has
the Spirit of grace has also the Spirit of prayer, in some measure.
has his heart stirred up by that Spirit to pray to the Lord, and by that
Spirit he has his mouth opened in invocation, and prayer, and calling on the
name of the Lord. Every child of God, every one that has the Spirit of
grace, has also the Spirit of prayer in some measure. Some indeed have it in a
greater measure, and some in a lesser, but every one of Gods children have it
in some measure: that place of Zach 12.10. proves it; the Lord there promises
indefinitely, that he would power on the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of compassion. And verse 27.
of this Chapter, the Apostle puts it down indefinitely, that the Spirit makes
request for the Saints according to the will of God. The Spirit of God stirs up
the heart of every one that is a Saint, of every child of God, to make requests
and supplications to the Lord. And why?

The Spirit of adoption is one and the same in all Gods children, they are all
one body, There is one body and one Spirit, and that Spirit has one and the
same kind of working in them all, and brings forth the same effect in all and
every one of Gods children, even this particular effect of invocation, prayer,
and calling on the name of the Lord, though in different degrees.

And this I note in a word, Comfort to Gods children in regard of their weakness
in prayer.
as a ground of comfort to Gods children: it may comfort them in regard of
their weakness in prayer. Happily they are weak, they are notable so well to
pray for themselves, and they pray for others very weakly: it may be they are
under the hand of God in sickness, and they cannot so well pray for themselves
in regard of the strength of their present anguish and pain: well let them
then call to mind and remember, that the Spirit of adoption and grace is a
Spirit of prayer in other of Gods children; and he causes that effect of
invocation and prayer in other of the children of God.

But what is that to me, thou will say?

Abba, Father: where first we see, that their invocation, prayer, and calling
on the name of the Lord, caused by the Spirit of adoption and grace, was a
crying, it was earnest, and fervent: and hence follows this conclusion.

True prayer is earnest and fervent.
is earnest and fervent, it is sent out with feruencie of spirit, and with
earnestness of inward affection: and such as pray to God as they ought, they
pray with feruencie, and with inward intention of the heart. And hence it is
that prayer is compared to sacrifice, Psalm. 119.108. Psalm. 119.108.
O Lord I beseech thee accept the free offerings of my mouth: and to incense,
Psalm. 141.2. Psalm. 141.2.
Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense, and the lifting up of mine
hands as an evening sacrifice. To note to us, that true prayer ought to be
offered up as it were by fire, and ought to proceed from a fervent heart, from
the heat of the heart, that it may be a sweet savor in the nostrils of the
Lord. And therefore the prayers of the Saints are called sweet odours. Reave.
5.8. Apoc 5.8.
And hence it is that prayer is called a pouring out of the soul, 1. Sam.
1.15. 1. Sam. 1.15.
I have powered out my soul before the Lord: and a pouring out of the heart,
Psalm. 42.4. When I remembered these things, I powered out my very heart. And
this qualification of prayer is commended to us, Iam. 5.16. Iam. 5.16.17.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent: and further
confirmed by the example of Elias in the next verse, that Elias prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three
years and six months: and by the example of Christ, Heb. 5.7. Heb. 5.7.
where it is said, that in the days of his flesh he did offer up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save
him from death. And many other examples might be brought to this purpose.

Now the reasons of it, that true prayer is and ought to be fervent, and ought
to be sent out with earnestness of inward affection, are these.

First, true prayer is rather a travel of the heart then a labor Psalm. 143.6.
David says, My soul desires after thee as the thirsty land: Mar. 11.24.
and Mark. 11.24. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have
it, and it shall be done unto you.

And again, the Lord has enjoined us to fear, love, and the conclusion
stands firm on these grounds, that true prayer is and ought to be sent out
with feruencie of spirit, and with earnestness of inward affection; and that
such as pray to God as they ought, they pray with feruencie, and with inward
intention of heart. Wherein feruencie in pr^yer is to be expressed.
And before we come to the use of this, know we, that feruencie of spirit in
prayer is to be expressed by outward signs and gestures of the body, as by
shedding of tears, as Hannah did, 1. Sam. 1.10. and as Hezechiah did, 2. King.
20.3. 2. King. 20.3.
and by lowdnesse of voice, as Psalm. 77.1. Psalm. 77.1.
My voice came to God when I cried. And Jonah says, Ion. 2.2. he cried in his
affliction. And it is said of Stephen, Act. 7.60. Act. 7.60.
that he cried with a loud voice, and said, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge: and by bowing the head, and casting down of the body; by lifting up
the hands and eyes toward heaven. Yet so, as these signs and gestures be
void of hypocrisy: we are not to shed fained tears, and in using of them, we
are to take heed of a wrong persuasion of God, as to think that God cannot
hear unless we cry aloud, as Baals Priests did. 1. King. 18.28. 1. King.
18.28
And withal know, that those signs and gestures are not of absolute
necessity always necessary, as if prayer could not be fervent without them;
for the body may be exceedingly weak through age or extremity of sickness,
the senses decayed or the speech taken away, and yet even then there may be
fervent prayer offered up to God in the secret lifting up of the heart. Exodus
14.15.
Exodus 14. we read not of any word Moses spoke, his tongue was silent, and yet
without question he was earnest and fervent in prayer to God in the secret of
his heart: and therefore the Lord said to him, verse 15. Why cryest thou? And
therefore outward signs and gestures of the body are not always necessary:
yet out of the case of extreme weakness and sickness, or the like
hinderance, feruencie of spirit in prayer is to be expressed by outward signs
and gestures of the body.

Popish prayers in an unknown tongue, or numbered on beads, or the like, are no
true prayers.
in a language unknown, their numbered prayers on their beads, their prayers
mumbled over in their canonical hours, and such like, are no true prayers:
those prayers are only pattered over as a stinted and set task, they are not
uttered with any inward affection of heart, and so they came not from the
Spirit of adoption and grace; and they are but lip labor, and abominable in
the sight of God. I leave them, and for use to our selves.

Is it so that true prayer is and ought to be sent out with Heavy, drowsy,
sluggish, and cold prayers uttered only of form and fashion, are not such as
they ought to be.
and that such as pray as they ought, they pray with feruencie, and with inward
intention of heart? What may we then think of the prayers that are uttered by
many in the world, even the prayers that men and women utter heavily and
drowsily, sluggishly and coldly, only for form and fashion: prayers that are
said by many, for so themselves speak, they say their prayers morning and
evening, and ye may believe them, their mouths only say prayers, their hearts
pray not; they pray not with any due reverence of the great and glorious
Majesty of God, with any sound feeling of their own wants, or with any
fervent desire of their hearts: what may we think of such prayers? are such
prayers true prayets and pleasing to God? No, no, they are but lip labor,
and indeed lost labor; yea hateful and displeasing to God. Consider with thy
self, would thou make petition to a great man, or to a king, for any thing
thou would have him to grant thee, heavily, drowsily, and carelessely? Surely
no, if thou have any understanding thou would not. How then dare thou
offer to God the King of kings and mighty Lord of heaven and earth, an heavy,
sluggish, drowsy, and formal prayer? do thou think to obtain any good
thing at the hands of God by such a prayer? by a prayer uttered it may be in
thy bed half sleeping and half waking? do thou think to obtain any good
by such a prayer? No, no, assure thy self the Lord will return thy prayet so
uttered as doung on thine own face: it is abominable in his sight. As the
prayer of faith uttered with feruencie of spirit is of excellent use, and great
force to bring down many blessings from the Lord, Iam. 5.16. Iam. 5.16.
so certainly a cold, sluggish, and formal prayer, is highly displeasing to
the Lord, and a means to pull down the curse of God on the head and soul of
him that makes it. Therefore take heed that thou do not so perform this holy
service, labor thou to be fervent in prayer, and to put up thy suites and
supplications to the Lord with earnest intention of heart: and to that purpose
consider with thy self before whom thou do present thy self in prayer,
namely before the great and glorious majesty of the Lord, before whom the
Angels cover their faces, Isai. 6.2. Isai. 6.2.
and labor to have thine heart affected with the want of those good things
thou prayest for; and withal consider that thy prayer offered up coldly and
carelessly is turned to sin, and the Lord may justly repel it, and send it
back with a curse in steed of a blessing: and so labor to have thine heart
rowsed and quickened up to perform this duty with feruency of Spirit: and so
doing thou shall find prayer an excellent means of much good to thy soul,
and a means to bring down many blessings and good things from the Lord on
thee: and thou crying Abba, Father, the Lord will show himself a gracious and
loving Father unto thee in Christ.

Now before we leave this point, some doubts that may arise and may be
propounded on occasion of it, as first, it being so that true prayer is and
ought to be earnest and fervent, and sent out from the inward intention of the
heart; hereupon happily a doubt may arise in the heart of a child of God: whether
he do pray truly and as he ought to do, think on the great and glorious
majesty of the Lord, and endeavor to set thy self as before him, and as in
his sight and presence, with all due reverence of his greatness and glory?
And when thou art in the performance of that holy duty, finding deadnes and
dullness creeping on thee, and by-thoughts cast into thy mind, do thou then
strive against them, art thou displeased with them, are they a burden to thee,
and do thou sigh and groan under the burden of them, and labor and strive to
lift up thy heart and soul to the Lord? Comfort thy self, even thy poor and
weak prayers, so offered up to God, are true and hearty prayers, and they are
well pleasing to God, Isai. 38.14 Isai. 38.14.
Hezekiah says, that in his prayer He chattered like a crane or a swallow, he
mourned as a dove: he was so oppressed with grief, as that his prayer was like
the chattering of a crane or mourning of a dove, he was not able to utter a
perfect sentence, but as it were to stammer out a prayer, and yet the Lord was
pleased with it, and the Lord heard his p^ayer. And so doubtless though
deadness and dullness sometimes creep on thee in prayer, and by-thoughts be
cast into thy mind, yet if thou purpose and resolve against them, and strive
against them, and look for the perfection of thy prayers in Christ, assuredly
thy prayers are earnest and fervent, they are true and hearty, and the Lord
accepts of them as pleasing to him through Christ: and let that be thy comfort
in the first place.

Secondly, Whether the using of a set form of prayer be true prayer or no.
and sent out from the inward intention of the heart, a doubt and question may
further arise and be moved, namely this: whether a man may pray truly and as he
ought, in using a set form of prayer, in using a prayer composed and made by
others, or no? To this I answer, form of prayer, being agreeable to the word
of God, with feruency and with earnest intention of his heart: and so doing
doubtless he prays truly and as he ought to pray. As a child that has words
put into his mouth, and is taught how to ask good things at his fathers hands,
may as truly ask those good things, and be as earnest in craving and crying
for them, as he that calls and cries for the same good things out of his own
wit and invention: so certainly a child of God may in a set form of prayer as
truly pray, and as earnestly crave good things at the hands of God his heavenly
father, as in a conceived prayer, craving the same things, and using the same
words and petitions. Oh but say they, some set form of prayer is a stinting
and limiting of the Spirit. A Psalm or song for the Sabbath. Indeed such as
have the gift of prayer, are not bound at all times to use set forms of prayer
in public or private. And let not any one take liberty to use a set form of
prayer at all times, for that cannot at all times express his particular
wants. And if a man be suddenly pressed by any calamity, or by any sin
pressing the conscience, and be not able to conceive a prayer, let him then in
such a case rather go to the Lord with sighing and groaning, even with sighs
and groans that he cannot express in words as verse 26. then betake himself
to a set form of prayer, which it may be makes no mention of the special
grace he stands in need of.

In the next place observe we, the Apostle here says, invocation, and prayer,
and calling on the name of the Lord, caused in himself and in the believing
Romans by the Spirit of God, was a crying to God earnest and fervent, and it
was a crying, Abba, Father, it was with a childlike boldness and confidence,
it is a calling on God as a gracious and loving father in Christ. Now hence
follows this conclusion.

That true prayer is and ought to be with an holy boldness True prayer is and
ought to be with an holy boldness and confidence.
they pray with an holy boldness and confidence, joined with reverence and
fear, and they come to the Lord in prayer with assurance to be heard,
submitting their wills to Gods will, for the time and manner of granting their
requests. And this is commended to us, Mark. 11.24. Mar. 11.24.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you. Mat. 21.22. Mat. 21.22.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe ye shall receive it. Iam.
1.6. If any lack wisdom let him ask of God, James. 1.5.6.
but says he, let him ask in faith and waver not. Psalm. 55.22. Psalm 55.22.
says David Cast thy burden or gift upon the Lord, that is, that which thou
would that God should give to thee, cast it on the Lord, and rest on him in
confidence and assurance for the granting of it: for why, the reason and ground
of this truth is this.

Prayer is a special fruit of faith; and as one says well, The ground of
true boldness in prayer.
they pray with boldness and with assurance to be heard. And yet that we
mistake it not, know that true boldness and confidence in prayer must be
grounded not on any thing in our selves, or any creature in heaven or earth,
but only on the promise of God, and the mediation and intercession of Christ.
We must be bold and confident in prayer, resting only on the promise of God,
and believe that God will grant us the good things we pray for, according to
his promise, and as he has promised them to us, and resting also on the
mediation of Christ, and believe that Christ will be our mediator to God his
Father, that the good things we ask his Father in his name, he will give to
us, Ioh. 16.23. Ioh. 16.23.
Thus we are to pray with boldness and confidence, and with assurance to be
heard.

Psalm. 107.
David shows at large, that when men are in distress (though unbelievers) yet
they crying to God, he delivers them out of their distress; and gives many
particular instances to that purpose: and therefore faith in prayer seems not
to be necessary.

Mat. 5.45.
and also to stir up true believers to seek to him in the prayer of faith,
in that they see that even the prayers and tears of the wicked are not
fruitless and without effect. And so still it remains a truth, that true
prayer is and ought to be with an holy boldness and confidence; and such as
pray as they ought, they pray with an holy boldness

The prayers of vnbeleeuer^ and of ignorant and impenitent persons are not
pleasing to God.
And for use, first this discouers that the prayer of unbelievers, of ignorant
persons, and of impenitent persons, of such as go on in their sins without
repentance, they are no true prayers pleasing to God; they cannot go to the
Lord with any holy boldness and confidence, or with any assurance to be
heard: but I will not further stand on that.

delivered, all Gods children are to look to it, Every child of God must
labor to pray in faith.
that they go to the Lord in prayer with an holy boldness and confidence, and
with assurance to be heard. When thou that art a child of God go to the Lord
in prayer, and powrest out thine heart before the Lord for good things thou
stand in need of, labor to believe that thou shall have those good things
granted to thee, give the Lord that honor to trust him on his word, thou can
not give him greater honor then to trust him on his word and promise: and
therefore labor to bring thine heart in prayer to rest on the word and promise
of God, call to mind and remember the sweet promises the Lord has made to his
children, and that he is faithful and true in performing his word and promise:
he is able to perform it, and he is most willing to make it good to his
children; yea remember, that he sometimes hears the cries of unbelievers that
have no promise made to them, and will he then reject the cries and prayers of
his children, to whom he has promised mercy, their prayers being offered up
in faith and in the mediation of Christ? Doubtless he will not. Yea but thou will say, I am in trouble and distress, When I cry and shout, Lam. 3.8.
he shuts out my prayer: I fear the Lord is angry with me. Oh take heed of
this impatiencie, give the Lord this honor, Hab. 2.3.
The vision is for an appointed time, but at the last it shall speak and not
lie. And Isai 28.16. He that believes shall not make have. If we had hearts to
trust God in prayer to wait on him, oh what good should we find by it! prove
the Lord herein, as he says in another case, Malac. 3.10. Malac. 3.10.
and see if he will not power out blessings on thee without measure. It is a
certain truth, that the prayers of Gods children in time of trouble and
distress, offered up to God in faith and in the mediation of Christ, do more
good then all other means whatsoever. Therefore learn we to go to the Lord in
prayer with holy boldness and confidence, resting on the promise of God, and
on the mediation of Christ, and we shall find a plentiful blessing from the
Lord on our bodies and on our souls. There is yet further matter offered from
these words, Whereby we cry, Abba, Father: and it is further to be observed,
that the Apostle here says, the Spirit of adoption caused him and the
believing Romans to cry Abba, Father: even to call on him who was their Father
in Christ, and on him alone. And hence it is clear, I will but note it in a
word.

Gods Spirit directs us to pray to God alone, and to no other.
and to him alone, and to none other. The holy Spirit of God directs us to pray
to God alone, and to none other in heaven or earth: for why,

God alone is able to hear, to understand, and to help them that pray to him,
Act. 1.24.
Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men. Yea he alone knows whether the
heart pray or no. And prayer is sometimes suspirium cordis, but a sigh or
groan of the heart. 1. Sam. 1.13. 1. Sam. 1.13.
it is said, that Hannah spoke in her heart when she prayed. And Romans 10.14.
Romans 10.14.
it is the rule of the Apostle, that invocation and faith are ever to go
together, How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Now in God
alone must we believe, and therefore to him alone must we pray. And doubtless
Gods children are ever taught and stirred up by the holy Spirit of God to pray
to God alone, and to none other, according to his own commandment. Psalm.
50.15. Psalm. 50.15.
Call on me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Popish prayers to Angels and Saints departed, justly taxed.


This serves to check and reprove the prayers taught and practiced by the
Papists, to Angels and Saints departed. If Gods children be taught and stirred
up by the holy Spirit of God to pray to God alone and to none other, it must
needs be that prayers to Angels and Saints departed, is caused and comes from
another spirit, from a spirit of error, and a spirit contradicting the Spirit
of God, even from the spirit of Antichrist. And it is but a shift of the
Papists, by which they seek to elude and put off our argument from this place,
and that Matthew. 6.9. where Christ teaches us to pray, Our father: we reasoning
thus, we are taught to cry Abba, Father, and to call on God our Father only;
and therefore not on Angels and Saints departed.

Why say the Papists, this is no good argument, Father in the Scripture is
taken two ways, personally, and essentially. Personally, for the first person
in Trinity, when it stands in relation to Christ, as Coloss. 1.3. Colos. 1.3.
We give thanks to God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But when it
stands in relation to us, as when we are taught to say our Father, it is taken
essentially, and we are to understand by the word Father, the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, even the three persons subsisting in the same Godhead and
divine nature. And therefore our adversaries do but cavil, in seeking to put
off our argument from this and that other place, Matthew. 6.9. Mat. 9.6.
I leave them and proceed.

In that the Apostle here uses an Hebrew or Syriacke word, Abba, and that word
is kept and retained in our English translation, is no sufficient warrant that
the service of God may or ought to be in a strange tongue, as the Papists
falsely affirm: for the word Abba, and the word Amen, and such like, are
become common, and familiar, and easy to be understood. But touching these
words, (...), or Abba, Father, the one an Hebrew or Syriacke word, and the
other a Greek or English word: we may hence gather, which I will but note in a
word,

That God is the father both of the Jews and Gentiles, God is the father of
all true believers, Jews and Gentiles.
and are partakers of the grace of adoption: there is neither Jew not Grecian,
but all are one in Christ Jesus, Galat. 3.28.

Which may comfort us that are of the Gentiles; the time was when the Jews
were only accounted the Church and people of God, Comfort to believing
Gentiles.
and his chief treasure, Exodus 19.5. and to them onley did belong the
adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4. All other nations, and people were
passed by and refused, but the partition wall is taken down, and now all that
truly believe in Christ, of what nation or country soever they be, are
accounted the children of God, and may call God Father. I will not further
stand on that.

The doubling of the word, Abba, Father, as I showed, signifies vehemence, as
if the Apostle had said, The Spirit of adoption causes us to cry, Father,
Father, so that here we see Gods children are stirred up by the Spirit of
adoption to be instant and importunate with the Lord in prayer, and to cry to
him, Father, Father: the point hence is this.

Holy instancy and importunity, is needful in prayer.
with an holy instancy and with an holy importunity, we must not take the
denial at the first at the hands of our heavenly Father for the good things we
crave at his hands according to his will, but we must still solicit him, and
still go to him with I pray thee holy Father, good Father I beseech thee
gracious Father, and the like: we must pray for the same needful good things
we crave at the hands of God again and again, till the Lord answer us
graciously, hear our prayers, and have mercy, and grant our requests. And this
is that the Apostle calls striving in prayer. Romans 15.30. I beseech you for our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye would strive
with me by prayers to God for me. And this the Lord Jesus has taught us, by
the example of a man that comes to borrow bread of his friend at midnight,
Luke. 11.8. I say to you, though he would not arise and give him because he is
his friend, yet doubtless because of his importunity: and then be subioynes
verse. 9. I say to you, ask and it shall be given you, and not only ask but
seek, neither there rest, but knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And this
also he has taught us by the parable of the widow and the wicked Judge, who
feared not God, nor reverenced man, Luke 18.1. but the widow so troubled and
wearied him with her cries and importunity, as she wrested her suite from him.
And so ought we in an holy manner to be importunate with the Lord, in our
suites and supplications we put up to his holy Majesty. Thus did good Iaacob,
Genes. 32.26. he wrestled with the Lord in prayer, and he gave the Lord no rest
till he had given him a blessing. And thus we read of Daniel, Dan. 9.18.19. O
my God (says he) incline thine ear and hear: open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the city whereupon thy Name is called: for we do not present
our supplications before thee for our own righteousness, but for thy great
tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider, and do it:
defer not for thine own sake, O my God. See how instant and how importunate
he was with the Lord, he would as it were take no denial at the hands of God.
These examples are for our imitation; we are thus to be importunate suitors to
the Lord, and to seek to him in prayer, with an holy instancie and
importunity: for why,

We are in prayer to manifest and show forth our hearty

And again, we are in prayer to manifest our patient dependence in mercy, and
to grant our requests.

Reproof of such as take on them to prescribe the Lord when he shall hear
their prayers.
who take on them to prescribe the Lord when he shall hear their prayers and
grant their requests. And if the Lord defer to grant their petitions after
once or twice, or some few times calling on him, they will not still follow him
with their suites and supplications, but cease further to call on him, and
even secretly shrink from him, and say in their hearts as that wicked Prince
did, 2. King. 6.33. Should I attend on the Lord any longer? And that thus it is
with many, their practice shows it. Let them be under the hand of God in any
distress in their bodies, goods, or children, and what do they? It may be once
or twice call on the Lord themselves, and desire others to pray for them, but
if comfort or deliverance come not just in the hour they would have it, do
they still plie the Lord with their suites? are they importunate suitors? No,
no such matter, they leave off seeking to the Lord, and they fly to the
diuill, they seek to him by unlawful means, and they seek help from the
devils instruments, from witches and wizards: which course and dealing of
theirs is most wicked, devilish and abominable.

Gods children are to be importunate with the Lord in prayer in an holy manner.
all that have the Spirit of adoption, let us cry, Abba, Father: even Father,
father, let us double our requests: and if our lawful suites be not granted
after many times calling on the name of the Lord, yet let us still plie the
Lord with our suits and supplications, let us still be instant with the Lord in
prayer, with an holy instancie and importunity. And consider with thy self,
if the Lord defer to grant thy requests after many times calling on him, and
after thy crying while thy throat is dry, and thine eyes fail whiles thou
waitest for God, Psalm. 69.3. yet if the Lord give thee an heart still to seek
to him, and still in patience to sue to him, that is a more excellent gift, and
a greater mercy then the thing thou suest for.

And again, consider that the Lord many times deferres to grant the requests
of his children for special good reasons: as hereby to try their hope, and to
exercise their faith, Why God sometimes deferes to grant the requests of his
holy children.
to see whether they will still hope in him, and still depend on his goodness,
even when he seems to hide his face from them. Thus dealt the Lord Jesus with
the Canaanitish woman, Matthew. 15.22. she came to him and cried, saying, Have
mercy on me O Lord, the Son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with a
devil: he answered her not a word, he made as though he heard not: his
disciples came to him and they besought him that he would send her away, for
she cries after us: he cut them up with a short answer, and told them, He was
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: yet the woman would not
so leave off suing to him, but she came and worshipped him, and said, Lord
help me: he gave her yet another repulse, and that a bitter one, he called her
whelpe or dog, It is not good to take the childrens bread and to cast it to
whelps: yet for all this she would not be driven from him, but still followed
him and said, Truth Lord, yet indeed the whelps eat of the crummes which fall
from their masters table. And then says the text, he answered her, and said
to her, O woman, great is thy faith, be it to thee as thou desire.

Again, the Lord sometimes deferres to grant the lawful requests of his
children for the good things they crave at his hands, that when those good
things are given, they may be more welcome and more esteemed of, and not
regarded as things of course. And further, the Lord sometimes defers to grant
the requests of his children, to stir them up to be more earnest with him in
prayer. Thus he dealt with Moses, Exodus 32. his purpose was to spare his people
and not to destroy them, yet when Moses prayed to him for the sparing of them,
he said to him verse 10. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them,
for I will consume them: but I will make of thee a mighty people. This was to
stir up Moses to be more earnest with him in prayer for the safety of the
people, as he was verse 11. O Lord (says he) why does thy wrath wax hot
against thy people which thou have brought out of Egypt with power and with a
mighty hand? Therefore if our lawful requests be not granted after many times
calling on the Lord, let us remember it is either for the trial of our hope,
and dependence on the Lord, or the exercise of our faith, or to make good
things when they come more welcome; or to inflame our affections, and to make
us more earnest in prayer with him. And if the Lord give us hearts still to
persevere in prayer, and still in patience to sue to the Lord, it is a more
excellent gift then the thing we sue for. Let us still be instant and earnest
with the Lord, and still follow him, and plie him with our holy suites and
supplications, and doubtless in his appointed time he will hear us, and grant
our requests, and give us the good things we crave at his hands, or things
proportionable, even those things that shall be most for his glory and our
comfort.

VERSE 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God.


COme we now to Verse 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God. Our Apostle in the verse foregoing (as I have
told you) proves that which he put down verse 14. that such as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God: from the property of that Spirit
that is working in them, with particular instance, first in the believing
Romans, that the believing Romans had received the Spirit of adoption, the
Spirit of God working in them as a Spirit of adoption, and therefore they were
the children of God. And he further sets out the Spirit of adoption by the
effect of it, as that it cause in himself and in them, invocation, prayer, and
calling on the name of the Lord, that is, a crying, Abba, Father. And that
which in order of nature goes before it, as namely, the witness and testimony
of the Spirit of God with our spirit that we are the children of God. For
unless the holy Spirit of God witness Gods love to us in Christ, and that we
are reconciled to God in and through him, and that God is indeed our gracious
Father in Christ, and has made us his children, we dare not draw near to his
holy Majesty, nor crave any good thing at his hands. And this witness of the
Spirit of God, is the ground of confidence and holy boldness in prayer.

In this verse considered by it self, we have two general things laid down
before us. First certain witnesses. Secondly the thing witnessed. The
witnesses are two, the Spirit of God, and our spirit, both witnessing one and
the same thing, witnessing together: The same Spirit bears witness with our
spirit, says the Apostle. The thing witnessed is in the words following, That
we are the children of God. That is briefly the general matter of the verse.

Let us now examine the words of it touching the sense and meaning of them. The
same Spirit, that is, Interpretation.
that very Spirit we spoke of before, the holy Spirit of God, who is to us that
truly believe in Christ, a Spirit of adoption. Bears witness with our
spirit, or witnesses together with our Spirit, or, is as it were a fellow
witness with our Spirit. Now touching this witness and testimony of the
Spirit, that we may rightly conceive it, first know, that it is internal, it
is inward and not outward, it is not by any outward speech or voice, it is not
as God gave testimony to Christ to be his Son, Mat. 3.17. Mat. 3.17.
by an audible voice from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: the witness of the Spirit here spoken of, is not by any such voice,
but it is inward, even an inward witness and testimony. And again, this
witness and testimony of the Spirit, is not any extraordinary and special
revelation, appropriated and belonging to some excellent and special men, such
as Paul was, and the like, as the Papists do dream, but it is that testimony
of the Spirit of God which is common to all true believers in their measure.
Now some would have this witness and testimony of the Spirit, to be that cry
that is stird up in the hearts of true believers by the Spirit of God, whereby
they call God their Father with a childlike boldness and confidence spoken of
in the verse before, but indeed that cry is rather an effect and a fruit of
the testimony of the Spirit, then the testimony of the Spirit it self: for
the Spirit first inwardly persuades true believers that they are the children
of God, and then it makes them in theit hearts to cry Abba, Father. I take it
therefore that the witness and testimony of the Spirit here spoken of, is an
inward, secret, and unspeakable inspiration of the Spirit, the holy Spirit of
God inwardly, secretly, and after an unspeakable manner informing our hearts,
and inwardly persuading us that God is our Father, and pouring into our heart a
secret, wonderful, and unspeakable sweet sense and feeling of Gods love to us,
not of Gods ordinary or common love, but of his special and fatherly love;
that God loves us with such love as he bears to his only begotten son
Christ Jesus, in whom we are adopted to be his children, as the Lord Jesus
himself speaks in that excellent prayer of his, Ioh. 17.23. Ioh. 17.23.
that God loves us, we believing in Christ, as he has loved him. And to this
purpose the Apostle speaks plainly Romans 5.5. Romans 5.5.
The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given
unto us. The holy Spirit of God given to us does infuse and power into our
hearts a sense and feeling of Gods love to us in Christ. With our spirit, or
together with our spirit. The holy Spirit of God and our spirit being two
distinct witnesses: by our spirit, we are not hereby to understand our soul,
as it is a natural part of man, but our regenerate part, which the Apostle
calls our spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.25.
1 Thessalonians. 5.23. our heart and conscience, regenerate, renewed, and sanctified
by the Spirit of God, we being such as are regenerate, our hearts and
consciences sanctified by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and so quieted
and cleared: for our hearts and consciences sanctified and renewed by the
Spirit of God and sprinkled with the blood of Christ, are acquainted with the
good will of God toward us, as 1. Cor. 2.11. 1. Cor. 2.11.
The Spirit of man knows the things of a man, and they bear a sound and
infallible testimony of Gods love to us, even by peace of conscience, and
other graces of the Spirit in us, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1.12. This is
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and
not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation
in the world, and most of all to you wards. And of this testimony Saint John
speaks, 1. Ioh. 3.21. If our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness
toward God. That we are the children of God: that is, that we are now actually
and indeed the children of God, not by nature, but by grace and favor, and by
adoption, that now we are actually accounted the adopted sons and daughters
of God in and through Christ. Now then thus briefly conceive we the meaning of
the words of this verse, as if the Apostle had said.

That very same holy Spirit of God, who is to us that truly believe in Christ a
Spirit of adoption, does by his inward, secret, and unspeakable inspiration,
inform our hearts, and inwardly persuade us that God is our Father, and even
power into our hearts a secret, wonderful, and unspeakable sense and feeling
of Gods special and fatherly love to us: even of such love as he bears to his
only begotten Son Christ Jesus, in whom we are the adopted children of God;
and so does witness to us, together with our own hearts and consciences,
renewed and sanctified by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and so quieted
and cleared, they also soundly a^^ infallibly witnessing the same to us by the
peace of them, and by other graces of the Spirit in us; that we are now by
grace and favor actually accounted Gods children, even the adopted sons and
daughters of God in and through Christ.

Come we now to such things as are hence offered for our God does in time of
this life make known his eternal love to his elect, and assure them of it.
being thus conceived as one proposition, namely thus: That the Spirit of God
witnessing with them that are regenerate, that they are the children of God, we
are given to understand, that the Lord is pleased in the time of this life to
make known his eternal love to his elect, and to inform them of it, and to
assure them of it by the witness of his good Spirit, and by evidence of grace
in themselves. The Lord does not only love his elect from all eternity, but
he does also in time, yea in the time of this life, make known that love of
his to them, and witness to them by his good Spirit that he loves them, and
that they are right dear to him. It is said, Romans 5 5. Romans 5.5.
The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given
unto us. The Lord does in time as it were power into the hearts of his elect a
lively sense and feeling of his love to them: and the eternal love of God to
his chosen, is as a sweet ointment powered out in time of this life, that does
exceedingly refresh their hearts with a sense and feeling of it. 1. Cor. 2.10.
1. Cor. 2.10.
the Apostle speaking of himself and other true believers, says, God has
revealed to us by his Spirit, the deep and hidden things of God, Verse 9.
even the things that eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, nor ever
came into man's heart, that God has prepared for them that love him. We have
received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are given us of God. We have the mind of Christ: we
are acquainted with the heart, and mind, and good will of Christ toward us:
and thus it is with all Gods elect. The Lord does not keep his love that he
bears to them secret and close, and as it were in his own bosom, in his
eternal purpose and decree, but in time, yea in the time of this life, he
acquaints them with it, and he makes known his eternal love to them, and does
witness to them by his Spirit that he loves them, and that they are right
dear to him: for why,

his good Spirit, that he loves them, and that they are right dear and
precious to his holy Majesty.

Now for the use of this; on this ground we may take notice The comfortable
state of Gods chosen in this life, in that they are made acquainted with Gods
love to them, discovered.
that their state even in this life is most excellent, and full of sweet and
unspeakable comfort; they are not only beloved of God from all eternity,
whose love is better then life it self but they are in time, yea in the time
of this life made acquainted with Gods love toward them, and they come to know
Gods mind, and heart, and good will toward them, and to have it witnessed to
them by his own good Spirit, and therein doubtless is the depth of all true
comfort. Men commonly cheer up themselves, and solace themselves exceedingly,
in that they are loved and favored of some great and mighty Prince, and he
making his love known to them, they think themselves the happiest men alive:
Oh then what is it to be acquainted with Gods love, the King and Lord of heaven
and earth, and for a man to have it made known to him, that God has loved him
before the world was, and that he loving him, he loves him for ever? out of
question that must needs fill his heart with joy unspeakable and glorious, that
is the hidden Manna, and that is the new name that none knows but he that has
it, spoken of Revel. 2.17. In that Gods chosen are acquainted with Gods
special love unto them, it makes them rejoice in their greatest afflictions,
yea in the flames of fire to sing and rejoice. And therefore let the world
deem what it will of the state of Gods chosen; in this world without question
it is a state and condition most excellent, and full of sweet and heavenly
comfort.

And for a second use: Is it so that the Lord in time, yea in Comfort for poor
sanctified souls that are dejected because they feel not heavenly sweetness
and comfort.
makes known his eternal love to his chosen, and is he pleased to inform
them of it, and to assure them of it by his own good Spirit? Then here is
matter of comfort for poor sanctified souls, that are dejected and cast
down, in that they feel not heavenly sweetness and comfort, for so the case
may be, and is many times, a man or woman may feel the holy Spirit of God
working in them in special manner, and yet have not a sense and feeling of
Gods love to them: Well is the case so with thee whosoever thou art? Do thou
feel the holy Spirit of God working in special manner; and yet thou have not
a sense and feeling of Gods love to thee? Comfort thy self, the Lord will at
one time or other, even in the time of this life, acquaint thee with his own
heart and good will toward thee, and assure thee of it by his own good
Spirit, that he has loved thee from all eternity: and know this for a truth,
that the Lord reserueth his chiefest comfort for the fittest time. When Daniel
was in the Lions den, then was he comforted; when the three companions of
Daniel were in the hot fiery furnace, then did the Lord send comfort to them;
when Paul and Silas were in prison and made fast in the stocks, then found they
most comfort, Act. 16.25. And so doubtless when thou art plunged into the
deepest distress, and when thou art in the greatest trial, and think thou
shall sink and not be able to hold out, as when sickness comes, and death
draws near, and have most need of comfort, even of this comfort of assurance
of Gods love to thee, then assuredly thou shall have it, then will the Lord
even shed abroad his love into thine heart by his own good Spirit: think on
that to thy comfort.

In the next place, in that the Apostle says, the holy Spirit of God
witnesses with our Spirit that we are the children of God, that is, as I
showed, the holy Spirit of God does by an inward secret inspiration inform us,
and inwardly persuade us that God is our Father, and so witness together with
our own hearts, sanctified and renewed by grace, and sprinkled with the blood
of Christ, that we are by grace and favor the children of God: we may raise
this conclusion, this point of truth.

Gods children may in time of this life be infall^bly assured of Gods fatherly
love to them.
they may even whilst they live here in this world know it, and be certainly
assured of it, that God loves them in particular, and has loved them from all
eternity, and be assured that they in particular are in the state of grace and
salvation, and in the number of Gods chosen: for why,

The holy Spirit of God is the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 14.17. We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might
know (that is) that we might certainly know the things that are given us of
God, even the things that concern our eternal happiness and salvation, both
grace here, and glory hereafter. And 1. Ioh. 4.13. We know says Saint John,
that we dwell in God and God in us, and so are in the special favor of God,
because he has given us of his Spirit. And hence it is that the holy Spirit of
God is said to be to Gods chosen as a seal, and as an earnest of their
inheritance, as 2. Cor. 1.22. God has sealed us (says the Apostle) and has
given the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. And Ephesians. 1.13.14. says the
Apostle, Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance. And Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by whom
we are sealed unto the day of redemption.

And again, true sanctifying grace in the heart, and the We know we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. Any measure of
true love to God, to his children, to his word and holy ordinances, powered into
the heart by the holy Ghost, is a certain demonstration of it, that a man or
woman is translated by the mighty hand of the most High, from death to life,
and set into the state of grace and of salvation: and especially the grace of
true justifying faith, is a sure evidence of Gods special grace and favor to
those that have it. For as true justifying faith is a necessary fruit of Gods
eternal election, and of his preordination to eternal life, Acts 13.48. As
many as were ordained to eternal life believed; so is it an argument of
confirmation to the soul of him in whom it is, that he is elected and shall be
saved, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life. Hence one that finds tue faith in his own heart, may reason thus; Truth
it self has said, whosoever believes in the Son of God, shall not perish
but have life everlasting; mine own heart tells me, that I believe in the Son
of God, therefore I am sure I shall be saved. A Popish shift met withal.
It is but a shift of the Papists, to say, that a man cannot know whether he
have faith in himself or no: for if a man have true faith in his heart, he may
discern it, at least the power of it, and the fruits of it.

by faith (says the Apostle) we have access to this grace wherein we stand
and rejoice, under the hope of glory of the sons of God, which hope shall
never deceive us nor make us ashamed, Romans 5.25. Again, by justifying faith a
man may know that Christ is in him, and how then should he not know that he is
in the favor of God? Christ is not in the reprobate that are out of Gods
favor, but in Gods elect, in whom after they be called he dwells by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. And therefore doubtless on these grounds we may resolve on this
as a certain truth, that Gods chosen may in the time of this life be
infallibly assured of Gods special and fatherly love toward them, and may be
certainly assured by the witness and persuasion of Gods Spirit, and by the
evidence of grace, especially by justifying faith in their hearts, that they
The Papists confuted in that they hold that a man cannot come to infallible
assurance of his own salvation in this life.
and that they are such as shall be saved.

Now then for use, first this truth is directly contrary to that which is held
and taught by the Papists, it does directly cross their tenent, and their
doctrine they hold and teach, that a man cannot in the time of this life come
to be infallibly assured that he in particular is in the state of grace and of
salvation, and that he in particular shall be saved. They say a man may have a
good hope that he shall be saved, but he cannot be infallibly assured of it,
that they deny, and they call such special persuasion faithless, and a
damnable false illusion, and a mere presumption: and on this text they give
this annotation: Say they, the testimony of the Spirit here spoken of, is
nothing else but the inward good motions, comfort, and contentment which the
children of God do daily feel more and more in their hearts by serving him, by
which they have as it were an attestation of his favor toward them, whereby
the hope of their justification and salvation is much corroborated and
strengthened. See the false dealing of these subtle sophisters: the Apostle
says directly, the Spirit witnesses with our spirit, that we are the children
of God; they mince the matter, and say, Gods children have as it were an
attestation of Gods savor toward them. And again, they make the witness of
the holy Spirit of God to be good motions, comfort, and contentment in the
hearts of Gods children, arising from their serving of God, and from their own
good works, which is a mere corruption of the text: there is no such thing
either in the text, neither can any such thing be gathered from it by any good
consequent. And indeed the good motions, comfort, and contentment in the hearts
of Gods children, are rather fruits and effects of the testimony of the Spirit
of God, then the witness of the Spirit it self; for the holy Spirit of God
does first witness Gods love to his chosen, and then he stirs up good
motions in them, and then works comfort and contentment in their hearts. If
thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that
God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved: and every one that truly
believes is to take it to himself as if he were named. that is also most
ridiculous. John, or I Paul do believe, it only sets down faith, that I
believe, the particular act of faith whereby I believe is in my heart, and is
not believed but known by feeling: a child of God does not believe that he
believes, but he feels it. And therefore notwithstanding these cauils of the
Papists, it is still a truth, that Gods chosen may in the time of this life be
infallibly assured of Gods special love toward them, and may certainly be
assured by the witness and testimony of Gods Spirit, and the evidence of
grace, and especially of justifying faith, that they in particular are in the
state of grace, and of salvation.

Strong comfort to every child of God.
a child of God finding in himself the witness of Gods Spirit, and the
evidence of faith, and the fruits of grace, may be assured of it, and that
infallibly, that he is in the state of grace and of salvation, and that God
loves him, and has loved him from all eternity: yea he may be as sure of it
as Christ is in heaven, that he shall be saved.



Difference between the testimony of Gods Spirit and a Satanicall illusion or
carnal presumption, is in three things.
and a Satanicall illusion working in men a vain presumption, is in three
things.

First, the persuasion of Gods Spirit is grounded on the truth, power, and
mere mercy of God, and on the merits of Christ: but a Satanicall illusion is
grounded on outward blessings or common graces, and either in whole or part on
a man's own works and merits.

Abba, Father, in the heart of a child of God, as in comparison of that says
Luther, Luther.
the great and horrible roarings of the Law, of sin, of death, and of the
devil and hell, are nothing, neither can be heard: but the illusion of Satan
is hollow and deceitful, and does only stammer out a bare assertion, that a
man is the child of God, without any inward testimony of the sweetness of
Gods love, or any affiance in his mercy.

Thirdly, the testimony of the Spirit of God is much assaulted joy unspeakable
and glorious: and thereupon thou may conclude to the comfort of thine own
soul, that thou art sure to be saved, and the gates of hell shall never be
able to prevail against thee: and that is a ground of sweet and excellent
comfort.

Now before I leave this point, Another cavil of the Papists.
I hold it needful to answer another cavil of the Papists: they do further
cavil against the truth now stood on after this manner. Say they, though a man
may be assured that for the present he is in the state of grace; admit that he
be so, yet he cannot be sure of his salvation: for say they, he cannot be sure
that he shall continue and persevere in that state to the end, the witness and
testimony of Gods Spirit may be extinct and put out, justifying faith may be
lost, and the gifts of grace, the fruits of grace may wither, and may come to
nothing: how then can any man build on these grounds infallible assurance, and
never failing assurance of his own salvation, and that he shall certainly be
saved?

He that believes on the Son has everlasting life: On the power of God by
which they are kept through faith to salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. On the deeds of
Christ, together with whom they are quickened, and raised, and made to sit in
certain hope of an heavenly possession, Ephesians. 2.5.6. On the prayer of Christ
that could not be in vain, but was certainly heard of his heavenly Father.
Ioh. 17.20. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
in me through their word: On the eternal love of God from which nothing can
separate them, verse 39. of this Chapter: On the immutable decree of God which
stands fast for evermore, The foundation of God remains sure, and has this
seal, the Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19. Let then neither the Papists
or any enemy of Gods grace think that he is able to race this foundation of
comfort, the assurance of Gods chosen, that they are in the state of grace, and
of salvation, they shall never be able to do it, it stands on firm grounds,
even on such grounds as can never be shaken. Indeed the comfortable persuasion
of some of Gods chosen, that they are in the state of grace and of salvation,
may for a time be weakened through the neglect of the means, or by falling
into some grievous sin, or by a secret withdrawing of grace and comfort of
it, may be lost for a time, and the faith of Gods chosen may be wounded, and
the actions of it troubled, but it can never be wholly and finally lost. The
Lord has made a faithful promise, Ierem. 32.40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me: and Christ has made it known,
that his will is, that they whom his Father has given him be where he is, that
they may behold his glory which his Father had given him, Ioh. 17.24. He is
the author and finisher of their faith. Heb. 12.2.

Now further observe we, the Apostle here ioynes together the witness of the
Spirit of God and of our spirit, as we showed, of our regenerate part of the
heart and conscience sanctified, and renewed, and sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, and quieted and cleared. Hence then we are given to understand thus
much.

That the holy Spirit of God and the heart and conscience Gods holy Spirit does
persuade the^, and them only, of Gods eternal love toward the^ whose hearts
are sanctified and renewed by grace.
The holy Spirit of God does persuade them, and them alone, and none but them
whose hearts are sanctified and renewed by grace, and have the power of grace
in their hearts and lives, that God loves them, and has loved them from all
eternity, and that they are in the state of grace and of salvation. We read
Act. 15.8.9. Act. 15.8.9.
the Gentiles having heard the Gospel believed, and God gave them his Spirit,
yea he did by his good Spirit witness his fatherly love to them: their hearts
being purified by faith, that is, their hearts being sprinkled with the blood
of Christ apprehended by faith, and thereby freed from the guiltiness of
sin, and also purged from the filthiness of sin, and they being
sanctified, God which knows the hearts bare them witness in giving to them
the holy Ghost even as he did unto us, and he put no difference between us and
them, after that by faith he had purified their hearts, says the text. Galat.
3.14. the Apostle says, By faith we receive the Spirit of promise. His meaning
is, we believing in Christ, and being sanctified, we receive the Spirit of God
more fully and manifestly dwelling in us to our sanctification, and to our
assurance touching our redemption. 1. Ioh. 3.21. says Saint John, If our heart
condemn us not, if our conscience be sanctified, and cleared, and quieted, we
have boldness toward God, we have then God who knows all things, to witness
with us by his good Spirit, even to witness to us his grace, and favor, and
mercy, and we may appear before him with boldness. 1. Pet. 1.2. the Apostle
puts these two together, obedience and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ, and sanctification of the Spirit: Elect according to the foreknowledge
of God the Father, unto sanctification of the Spirit, through the obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And these testimonies may sufficiently
clear this to be a truth, that the holy Spirit of God does persuade them, and
them alone, and none but them, whose hearts are sanctified by grace, and have
the power of grace in their hearts and lives, that God loves them, and has
loved them from all eternity, and that they alone are in the state of grace
and salvation: and

The grounds of it are these.

created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2.10. And then he witnesses to
them that they are the children of God.

2. Again secondly, the holy Spirit of God is the Spirit of truth, he cannot
possibly witness an untruth, he cannot witness that a child of the devil (as
every one is that commits sin, 1. Ioh. 3.8.) is a child of God; he cannot,
neither will he testify any one to be a child of God whom he never sanctified.
And therefore on these grounds we may set down this for a certain truth, that
the holy Spirit of God does persuade them, and them alone, and none but them,
whose hearts are sanctified, and have the power of grace in their hearts and
lives, that God loves them, and has loved them from all eternity, and that
they, and none but they, are in the state of grace and of salvation.

that the persuasion of every one that persuades himself that his spiritual
state is good, and that he shall be saved, Every ones persuasion that his
spiritual state is good, is not the persuasion of the holy Spirit of God.
is not the persuasion of the holy Spirit of God. Who is it that has not a
good conceit of himself, and that will not say, he hopes to be saved? Even the
drunkard, the filthy person, the common blasphemer, and the like, will not
stick to say, they hope to be saved, and to go to heaven: and civil honest
persons, they are strongly persuaded that they are highly in the favor of God,
and that they are in the state of grace, yea that it is God himself that
persuades them so to think. Poor souls, they deceive themselves, the truth
now delivered shows, that their persuasion is but a mere groundless
presumption; a man cannot comfortably persuade himself that he is in the state
of grace and of salvation, if he have not Gods hand and seal to show for it,
even the seal of his good Spirit: and he has not that, unless he find the
stamp and image of that seal on his own heart and soul. The holy Spirit of
God persuades no man that he is a child of God, unless his own heart can
witness that he is borne of God, and begotten again of the immortal seed of
the word of God, and borne anew of the Spirit of God. If thou be a drunkard,
a Sabbath breaker, a common sweater, or the like, and say the Spirit
persuades thee that thy case is good, and thou shall be saved; thou art a liar
against the holy Ghost, it is not Gods Spirit, but a lying spirit, that so
persuades thee, thou bear not the image of the Spirit of God, but the image
of the devil: Gods Spirit witnesses indeed, but his witness to thee is
heavy and fearful, that thou and such Comfort to poor sanctified souls who
in regard of their own weakness are many times driven to doubt whether God
loves them or no.
thou living and dying in that state: and therefore take heed of so deceiving
thy self.

And for a second use: Is it so that the holy Spirit of God does persuade them,
and them alone, and none but them whose hearts are sanctified and renewed by
grace, and have the power of grace in their hearts, and do express it in their
lives, that they are the children of God, that God loves them, and has loved
them from all eternity, and that they are in the state of grace and of
salvation? Here is the^ a ground of comfort for poor sanctified souls, who
though they be truly sanctified, yet in regard of the weakness and
imperfection of their own inherent holiness and sanctification, are many
times driven to doubt whether God love them or no, and whether they be in the
state of grace and salvation or no. Such persons are to consider, they have not
only their own hearts to witness Gods love to them, which because of the
imperfect sanctification of them, might make them rather doubt of it then be
assured of it, but they have also the holy Spirit of God to witness with their
hearts and consciences, truly sanctified and renewed by grace, that they are
the children of God, and his witness is infallible and undeniable: the Lord
cannot refuse the witness of his own good Spirit, and this is a great mercy
of God vouchsafed to his children. A witness we know amongst men is called in
doubtful cases, that by his testimony he may clear the truth; so when the
conscience of a poor sanctified sinner, is wavering and doubting of Gods love,
in regard of the imperfection of holiness in it self, then the Lord
vouchsafes his own good Spirit to witness it to him, and his witness puts
the matter out of all doubt and question. If then thou feel thine own heart
and soul truly sanctified and renewed by grace, (and thou may know that
thine heart is truly sanctified by the inclinations, motions, and affections of
it,) if thou feel thine heart rightly affected with the mercies of God, the
comforts in Christ, and the comforts of the word of God, that thou do esteem
them and prize them above all things in the world, and thou have a true love to
God, to his word, and to his ordinances, to his children, because they are his
children, and thou have a true and sound hatred of sin in thy self, and in
all others, yea in thy nearest and dearest friends; though thy sanctification
be imperfect, and in regard of the imperfection of it, gives thee but a weak
testimony of Gods love, yet then the Lord will vouchsafe to thee the witness
of his own good Spirit, and his witness will be taken, it is infallible, and
strong, and the Lord cannot refuse it, his witness will bear thee out before
the judgment seat of the Lord Jesus.

Come we now to speak of the general thing laid before us in this verse:
namely, the thing witnessed in these words, That we are the children of God.
The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit, (says the Apostle) that we
are the children of God, that is, (as we showed) that we are now by grace and
favor actually accounted Gods children, even the adopted sons and daughters
of God, in and through Christ. Now here happily some may desire to have the point
of adoption a little further opened and cleared, they not so well understanding
it. To give them therefore satisfaction, I will labor to lay it forth a little
further; and to this purpose know, that a child of God, is either by nature or
by grace; the child of God by nature is Christ, as he is the eternal Son of
God, begotten of his Father from everlasting, and therefore called the only
begotten Son of God, Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son. A man is the child of God by grace three ways.
A child of God by grace is three ways: 1. Either by creation, as Adam was
before his fall, and as the good Angels now are. 2. Or by personal union, and
thus Christ as he is man is the child of God, his manhood being received into
unity of person with his Godhead. 3. Or by the grace of adoption, and thus all
true believers are the children of God. By nature they are the children of
wrath as well as others, but by the grace of adoption they are actually
accounted Gods children, in and through Christ. And the ground of their
adoption is their union with Christ, The ground of adoption of Gods children.
they being united and knit to Christ by the bond of faith, and by the bond of
his Spirit: and having fellowship with him who is the natural Son of God,
they come to be actually accounted Gods children by grace, in and through
Christ, and so their adoption follows their justification, and is annexed to
it. There is a Divine whom I will not name, who in a Treatise of his, makes
adoption to be in order of nature before justification, but I see no sufficient
ground for it: it is the received opinion of the best Divines, that it follows
justification, and is annexed to it, and there is good ground for it in the
Scripture. Galat. 3.26.27. the Apostle says: Ye are sons of God by faith;
for all ye that are baptized have put on Christ: as if he had said, ye are by
Baptism ingrafted into Christ, and made one with him by faith, and have
fellowship with him who is the natural Son of God, and therefore ye are the
sons of God. Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 1.12.
it is said, As many as received Christ, to the^ he gave power, or gave this
privilege, or this dignity to be the sons of God, even to them that believe
in his Name. Where we see, that believing in Christ, and receiving of Christ to
justification, is made the ground of adoption. Now in the grace of adoption we
must further know, 2. Acts of God in the grace of adoption.
there be two acts of God, one is acceptance, whereby the Lord is pleased to
accept men for his children by grace and favor; and the other is regeneration,
whereby they are borne of God, and whereby the Lord makes them new creatures,
and does restore in them his own image, in righteousness and true holiness,
which the Apostle Peter, 2. Pet. 1.4. 2. Pet. 1.4.
calls a participating of the divine nature. And herein lies a maine difference
between Gods adoption and man's adoption, Difference between Gods adoption and
man's.
man in adopting a child of another, may accept of him for his son, and may
give him the privileges of a son, but he cannot communicate his qualities
and nature to him: But God adopting us for his children, he does not only
accept of us for his sons, but he also imprints his own nature and his own
image on us by the grace of regeneration. Thus then we are to conceive the
point of adoption.

How the point of adoption is to be conceived.
That Gods children being by nature the children of wrath as well as others, are
by the grace of adoption, they being united and knit to Christ by the bond of
faith and by his Spirit, and having fellowship with Christ, who is the natural
Son of God, they are actually accounted Gods children, and the Lord is
pleased to accept them for his children by grace and favor in and through
Christ, and does also stamp his own nature and his own image on them by the
grace of regeneration.

Come we now to the thing the Apostle speaks of here, witnessed by the holy
Spirit of God, and by the sanctified heart, namely this, that himself and the
believing Romans were the children of God, that is, were by grace and favor
actually accounted Gods children, even his adopted sons and daughters in and
through Christ. Hence several things are offered.

As first this, that God loves his chosen, believing in God loves his chosen
now believing in Christ, with a fatherly love.
and having fellowship with Christ, with a fatherly love, and with a tender
affection, and they are most dear and precious to his holy Majesty, and he
accepts their persons, and accounts them as his own dear children. We find
that the Lord in many places of Scripture takes to himself the name and title
of a father, in relation to his chosen and faithful ones, and makes known
that he bears a fatherly love and affection to them. Malac. 3.17. I will spare
them says the Lord, as a man spares his son that serves him. Psalm. 103.13.
As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. Isai. 66.13. the Lord compares himself to a mother, and
his tender affection to his chosen and faithful ones, to the affection of a
mother: says he, As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and
you shall be comforted in Jerusalem. Zach. 2.8. the Prophet makes known, that
Gods chosen and faithful ones are as dear and precious to him as the apple of
his eye, and that he ten^ers them as the apple of his eye: He that touches
you, touches the apple of his eye. And that the Lord bears this love and
tender affection to his chosen, believing in Christ, and being justified by
Christ, the Apostle makes it plain, Ephesians. 1.5.6. when he says, Who has
predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to
the good pleasure of his will: to the praise and glory of his grace wherewith
he has made us accepted in his beloved, that is, in Christ.

For why, (to give you the reason The Son of his love: Coloss. 1.13. Coloss.
1.13.
and as they are in his Son in whom he is well pleased: (...).
as himself speaks, Mat. 3.17. and so he bears the same love to them that he
does to his own Son. And therefore doubtless God loves his chosen,
believing in Christ, and being by Christ justified, with a fatherly love and
with a tender affection, they are most dear and precious to his holy Majesty.

Ephesians. 2.4.
God which is rich in mercy, (...).
through his great love wherewith he loved us. Note.
Indeed Gods love in it self admits neither more nor less, but as it is
reached out to his chosen, there be different degrees of it.

Sweet comfort for all such as truly believe in Christ the God of Christ is
their God, and the father of Christ their father.
believing in Christ, and being justified by Christ, and having fellowship with
him, may yield matter of sweet and of excellent comfort to all that truly
believe in Christ, and are by him justified, and find that they have
fellowship with Christ. Art thou one truly believing in Christ, and by him
justified? do thou find that thou have fellowship with Christ? Surely then
the God of Christ is thy God, the Father of Christ is thy Father, Ioh. 20.17.
Ioh. 20.17.
Tell my brethren, I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, unto my God and
your God. And he loves thee with a fatherly love, yea with the same love he
bears to his own dear Son, to the Son of his love; and assure thy self
he will deal with thee as a most loving, gracious, and tender hearted father.
There is no earthly father, be he never so great, that can deal so well with
his child whom he loves most dearly, as the Lord thy heavenly Father is able
to deal with thee; and his love exceeds the love of the tenderest father in
the world, as far as God himself exceeds dust and earth, sin and
corruption; and out of his tender love to thee, he will suffer thee to want no
manner of thing that he knows to be good for thee, either in respect of soul
or body, and he will bear with thy infirmities and frailties in doing good
things, thine heart being set right to please him, yea he will tender thee as a
loving father, when thy body lies under sickness, under pains or griefs,
Psalm. 41.3. Psalm. 41.3.
The Lord may and does suffer his children to lie under affliction for a time,
for good causes best known to himself. As an earthly father perceiving cause
of further good, does sometimes suffer his child to bite on the bridle, to lie
in prison, to be in want, and as the saying is, he may see his child need, but
he cannot endure to see him bleed: so doubtless thy heavenly Father for much
good known to his holy Majesty, may suffer thee to lie under affliction, that
thou may be humbled, and schooled, and wained from the love of the world; but
to sink under thy affliction, and utterly to perish under it, he cannot endure
it, he will not suffer it, he will not see it, he will certainly put under his
hand; yea he loving thee with a fatherly love, he will not suffer any thing to
hurt thee, the harms, wrongs, and injuries that are done to thee, they pierce
as it were his gracious bowels, and he will not endure them.

And so for a second use, take notice of this whosoever God will not suffer his
children whom he loves most dearly to be wronged and abased, and not avenge it.
or wrong any one that truly believes in Christ: will an earthly father suffer
his child whom he loves dearly, to be buffeted and beaten, wronged and abused,
if he be able to help it? surely he will not: and will the Lord then who is
infinite in power, able to do whatsoever he will, suffer any of his children
whom he loves most dearly, being bought with the precious blood of his own
dear Son, to be wronged, and abused, and not avenge it? No, no, certainly he
will not: as he said to Abraham, Genes. 12.3. he will bless them that bless
his children, and he will curse those that curse them: his revenging hand will
be against all that harm or wrong the poorest of his children. Think on this,
thou that art a persecutor of Gods children, and thou that do harm or wrong
any one that truly believes in Christ, be it but a poor silly man in the
world; remember this that he has a Father that is able to right his cause, yea
a Father that loves him dearly: and if he make his moan to his Father, and
out of the bitterness of his soul complain to him, he will hear him: and if
he rise up for his defense, and his hand take hold on judgment, then woe to
thee. Thou may be as a whip or scourge on the back of a child of God for a
time, but when the Lord has done his own will and work by thee on his child
for his good, then will he cast thee as a rod into the fire of his everlasting
vengeance.

We are to esteem of Gods chosen now believing in Christ as of those that are
dear and precious to the Lord.
is it so that God loves his chosen, now believing in Christ, and being by him
justified, with a fatherly love, and with a tender affection? are they right
dear to his holy Majesty? Surely then we must learn to esteem of them; we
are to esteem of them as of Gods redeemed ones, and as of his dear ones, and
as of those that are of great price with the Lord, and of high account with his
holy Majesty. And to this purpose consider we, that Gods chosen, now believing
in Christ, and justified by him, are of such price with the Lord, and so
esteemed of him, as that for their sakes he does many times extend his bounty
to the wicked, and the wicked fare the better for their sakes, and for their
sakes the Lord bestows many temporary benefits on the wicked: yea the Lords
love to his chosen now believing in Christ, is so great, as that he makes more
account of one of them, then of ten thousand worldlings, yea ten of them shall
stand before him to turn him from anger to mercy, when he will not vouchsafe
to respect ten thousand such as the world honors for men or women of great
account. If ten of them had been found in Sodom, the whole City had been
spared for their sakes, and had escaped the fearful plague of fire and
brimstone, Genes. 18.32. Genes. 18.32.
And for Noah's sake was Cham preserved from the deluge: and Paul had the lives
of all given him that were in the same ship with him, Act. 27.24. Are these
then such as we cannot abide, and such as we hate and contemn? and are these
eye sores unto us, and such as harm the place where they are, and they must be
removed or else we shall not be well? Oh learn we to see their price with God,
and the good that comes to the place where they dwell, even for their sakes;
and learn we to esteem of Gods chosen believing in Christ, as we ought, even
as of Gods dear ones, and as of such as are of great price with the Lord; and
let them be dear to us, and let us make precious account of them. In loving
them we shall testify our love to God himself: for it is a sure rule, love me
and love my child, and if thou love not my child, thou love not me: and so
indeed if thou love not the children of God, thou love not God. Every one
that loves God which begat, loves him also which is begotten of him, 1. Ioh.
5.1. If thou love not the children of God, assuredly thou love not God
himself, say or pretend what thou will. As the world and men of the world are
ready to say, they love God with all their hearts, they would be sorry else,
and yet such as are the adopted sons and daughters of God they cannot abide,
those they hate and contemn. Do they love God? No, no, they lie, and deal not
truly with their own souls: thou love not God whosoever thou art, if thou
love not those that are beloved of God. Now in the next place, in that the
Apostle here says, the thing witnessed by the holy Spirit of God and by the
sanctified heart, was this, that himself and the believing Romans were the
children of God, were by grace in Christ actually accounted Gods children, even
the adopted sons and daughters of God in and through Christ; we are further to
take notice of the excellency, and of the honor, and dignity of Gods chosen
now believing in Christ are advanced to great excellency and dignity.
and having fellowship with Christ. And the point is this.

That Gods chosen, believing in Christ, and being by him justified, and having
fellowship with Christ, they are advanced to great excellency, they are highly
honored and dignified, they are accounted the sons and daughters of the most
High, even of the Lord of heaven and earth, and that is a great honor to them.
We read 1. Sam. 18.18. when David heard of matching with Saul's daughter, Alas
(says he) what am I, and what is my life, or the family of my father in
Israel, that I should be son in law to the king? And again, when Saul's
servants dealt with him to the same purpose, says he, verse 23. Seems it to
you a light thing to be a kings son in law? And so it may be truly said in
this case, is it a light or small thing to be the adopted son or daughter of
God, the great Lord and King of heaven and earth? Without question it is a
matter of wonderful excellency, and to have such a sonneship is more a
thousand times then to be the son of the most mighty Prince in the world.
Isai. 43.4. the Lord says of his people, Because thou wast precious in my
sight, and thou wast honorable and I loved thee: as if he had said, since I
have taken thee for mine own, and thou have been my peculiar people, thou have
been excellent and honorable above all the people in the world. And hence it
is that Gods chosen now believing in Christ, and by him justified, are said to
be kings and Priests to God, that Christ has made them kings and Priests to
God his Father, Revel. 1.6. And 1. Pet. 4.14. the Apostle says, The Spirit of
glory and of God rests on them: and therefore doubtless they are honorable
and glorious. Eccles. 10.7. the Preacher calls them Princes: speaking of the
confusion and disorder that he saw in the world, he says, I have seen
servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the ground. He means by
Princes, the chosen of God and his faithful ones. And indeed if we consider
the bottom of the base estate from which Gods chosen now believing in Christ
are brought, and the top of glory to which they are advanced, it will plainly
appear to us that they are exceedingly advanced to great excellency, and to
high honor and dignity they are by nature children of wrath, bondslaues of
sin and Satan, enemies to God, and rebels against his holy Majesty, liable
to all plagues and judgments, and in a miserable state and condition: and by
the grace of adoption they are advanced to be sons and daughters of the most
high Lord and King of heaven and earth, yea to be heirs, as verse the next,
Even fellow heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.
and to have right and title to all good things in this world, and to the
crown of glory in heaven. And so it must needs be acknowledged, that they now
believing in Christ, they are advanced to great excellency, and they are
highly honored and dignified.

And for the use of this, first this truth serves much for the Comfort to poor
despised ones in the world, they truly believing in Christ.
and being by him justified. Though they be poor and despised in the world,
and vilified, and abased, and held as the refuse and ofscouring of the world,
yet believing in Christ, they are not only dearly beloved of the Lord, but
they are also highly honored and dignified, they have this honor vouchsafed
to them, they are accounted the sons and daughters of the great Lord and King
of heaven and earth: and in that respect they are equal to the greatest that
believes in Christ. The believing shepherd, or the believing kitchen boy may
call God his Father as well as the believing king; such honor have all the
Saints of God, which may comfort them and cheer up their hearts. Indeed the
honor and glory of Gods chosen believing in Christ, does not appear to the
eye of the world, it lies hid from the world, either under affliction, or under
that excellent grace of humility, which the world accounts baseness, and as
Saint John (1. Ioh, 3.2.) says, we are now the sons of God: but yet it does
not appear what we shall be, but the time shall come when the world shall be
eyewitnesses of their honor and glory. When the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven in endless glory in his own person at the day of
judgment, he shall then come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
marvelous in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
At his appearance he shall not only be infinitely glorious in his own
person, but he shall also be glorious in his Saints, he glorifying them, and
they appearing with him in glory, and that to the admiration of all that shall
look on them, even to the amazement of men and Angels: and that is a matter of
sweet comfort to poor despised ones in the world that truly believe in Christ.

Gods chosen believing in Christ must carry themselves answerable to their
honor and dignity.
and being by him justified, and having fellowship with him, are advanced to so
great excellency, and so highly honored and dignified, as that they are
accounted the sons and daughters of the most high Lord of heaven and earth?
Surely then it concerns them, and it is their duty, to carry themselves
answerable to so great honor and dignity, as the Lord says by his Prophet,
Malac. 1.6. If I be a Father where is mine honor? And as the Apostle says, 1.
Pet. 1.17. If ye call him Father, which without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.
When David kept his fathers sheep, he behaved himself like a shepherd, but
when he was called from the sheepefold and advanced to be a King, he carried
himself accordingly; and so ought Gods children to do, being called from being
the children of the devil to be the children of God the great Lord and King of
heaven and earth, they are to carry themselves as the sons and daughters of
so great a King, and answerable to the honor vouchsafed to them. What a shame
were it for a Kings son to carry himself as a base peasant, and to behave
himself like a drudge? And is it for a child of God to carry himself as a
vassal and slave to sin and Satan, and to suffer himself to be a drudge to
the lusts of his own heart? Think on this, thou that do persuade thy self
that thou art a child of God, and know that the Lord looks for more honor,
and fear, and reverence, and duty, and service, and holy obedience from thee,
then he does from those that are not his children: If thou be proud, if thou be
vain and garish in thy attire, if thou be covetous and an earthworme, if thou
suffer thy self to be carried after the lewd customs and fashions of the
world, thy sins do more dishonor God then the sins of those that are not
Gods children, yea thy sins are more offensive to God, and more displeasing
to his holy Majesty, then the sins of the profane and reprobate, because
thy sins are not bare transgressions of his Law, but they are committed
against his mercy, against his bounty and goodness, and against his loving
favor vouchsafed to thee, and thy sins have unthankfulness joined with
them, and assuredly the Lord will not suffer thy sins to escape his hand, as
he says by his Prophet Amos 3.1, 2. Hear this word that the Lord pronounces
against you O children of Israel, even against the whole family which I
brought up from the land of Egypt, saying: You only have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore I will visit you for all your iniquities: I
will not suffer you to escape my hand for your sins. Think on this, thou
that do persuade thy self thou art a child of God; though the Lord suffer
others to run on in their sins, and reserues them till the day of
vengeance, yet he will whip thee for thy sins, because he loves thee. And the
greater honor the Lord has vouchsafed to thee, the more excellent condition
he has advanced thee unto, the more does he challenge from thee all such care
and duty, as may declare thee not unworthy of so great favor.

VERSE 17. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also
be glorified with him.


Our Apostle having begun to speak of the excellency and dignity of Gods
chosen, believing in Christ, and by him justified, goes on from one degree of
excellency to another, and having said in the verse before, that the holy
Spirit of God does witness with their sanctified souls, that they are the
children of God, he here adds a further degree of their excellency, by way of
consequent or consectarie: he here infers, that being children, they are also
heirs, still insisting in himself, and in the believing Romans. Though the
text original and the new translation do not express the persons, yet
doubtless the Apostle means it of himself and of the believing Romans: the
persons may well be supplied, as we find in the Geneua translation, If we be
children, we are also heirs. And the Apostle here concludes his argument, by
which he proves that which he put down verse 13. That true believers
mortifying the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, shall live, his argument being
this; They are the sons of God, and therefore they shall live: which argument
he amplifies verse 15.16. that they have the Spirit of God working in them as a
Spirit of adoption, and witnessing to them that they were the children of God.
Here he shuts up that argument, showing the necessity of it, that the children
of God must needs live, because they are heirs; and their inheritance is life
eternal, and therefore it cannot be but that they shall live: that is the
respect that this verse has to the foregoing matter. In this verse considered
by it self, there be two things laid before us.

First, an excellent dignity put on Gods children, that they are heirs: the
Apostle affirms this of them, as a thing properly belonging to them, that they
are heirs: If we be children, we are also heirs, and he does not barely
affirm this of Gods children, but he further sets out that dignity by the
person with whom they are heirs, and that is with Christ, and heirs annexed
with Christ: wherein the Apostle preuents an objection; for some might say, Are
Gods children Gods heirs? Christ is Gods heir. This he preuents and says,
they are joint heirs or coheires with Christ.

Then the second thing laid before us in this verse, is the condition of such
as are heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, namely this, that they
must suffer with Christ. We are heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ,
conditionally that we suffer with Christ: If so be that we suffer with him,
says the Apostle. And that is further amplified by the end of suffering, in
the last words of the verse, and that is, that we may be glorified with Christ.
If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. And
therein the Apostle includes the argument and matter of comfort to strengthen
the believing Romans, and all other true believers, against the bitterness of
the cross, and to persuade them to a patient and constant bearing of the
cross, and so he falls on the second general part of this Chapter, which
continues to verse 31. I will lay forth his argument when I come to the
handling of these words: If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him. Now then the sum and substance of this verse is thus
much, it contains in it an excellent dignity belonging to Gods children, that
they are heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, yet with
this condition, that they must suffer with Christ, that so they may be
glorified with him. I will now labor to unfold the sense and meaning of the
first part of this verse, and not meddle with the second part of it till we
come to the handling of it: because it is the beginning of the second part of
the Chapter. If we be the children of God, that is, Interpretation.
if you and I be by grace and favor actually accounted Gods children, if we be
the adopted sons and daughters of God in and through Christ, we are also
heirs; the meaning is, we have then right and title to an inheritance, for by
the law of nature inheritance belongs to children: and howsoever amongst men
all children be not heirs, but sons only if there be sons, and not all
the sons, but the eldest son alone, yet the case is otherwise with Gods
children, be they sons or be they daughters, they are all and every one
heirs without exception, because with God there is neither male nor female,
but all are one in Christ, Galat. 3.28. and all that are the children of God by
faith in Christ are Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise, as the Apostle there
subioynes verse 29. of Galat. 3. even heirs of God. Some would have the word
heirs to be here taken passiuely, as if the Apostles meaning were, even Gods
inheritance, or Gods possession, but that peruerts the intent of this text: for
the purpose of this text is not to set forth what right and title God has to
his children, but what right and title they have to the good things of God, and
therefore the word is to be taken actiuely, and the meaning is, even such as
have right and title to the good things of God, even to all good things, as 1.
Cor. 3.21. All things are yours, and to the joys and glory of heaven, and to
that inheritance that is immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven, 1. Pet. 1.4. And heirs annexed, or joint heirs, coheires,
or fellow heirs with Christ: that is, such as have right and title to all the
good things of God, and to the heavenly inheritance together with Christ, he
being the natural heir of his Fathers kingdom, being his Son by nature,
and his only begotten Son; and we being heirs of the same kingdom by
adoption and grace in and through him, we are admitted to be heirs with Christ.

Now then thus conceive we the meaning of the first part of this verse.

If we be by grace actually accounted Gods children, even the adopted sons
and daughters of God, we have then also all and every one of us right and title
to an inheritance, yea we are such as have right and title to all the good
things of God, and to the joys and glory of heaven, to an inheritance that is
immortal, and undefiled, and fades not, reserved in heaven for us: yea we
have right and title to that heavenly inheritance together with Christ, he
being heir of his Fathers kingdom as the natural and only begotten Son of
his Father, and we as heirs to the same kingdom by adoption and grace in and
through him, and so admitted to be joint heirs or fellow heirs with him.

Come we now to such things as are here offered for our further instruction,
and first in that the Apostle says: If we be children we are heirs, we see
this conclusion plainly laid before us.

Gods children are heirs, and have right and title to all good things, and to
heaven it self.
To be the child of God, is no empty title, by it we obtain this dignity, to
be heirs, even to have right and title to all the good things, and to heaven
it self, and to happiness and glory in heaven as heirs. And to add some
further evidence to this, we find in many places of Scripture, that Gods
children are said to be heirs, as Heb. 1.14. they are called heirs of
salvation. Tit. 3.7. the Apostle says, Being justified by grace they are made
heirs according to the hope of eternal life. James 2.5. they are called
heirs of the kingdom. And Galat. 4.7. the Apostle puts down the very
conclusion, If thou be a son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.
Colos. 1.12. the Apostle gives thanks to God that he had made the believing
Colossians meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Yea
the Lord Jesus shall say to Gods children at the day of judgment, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, Math. 25.34. take possession of the kingdom of heaven
as your inheritance. The Scripture is plentiful in this, that Gods children
are heirs, and have right and title to all good things, and to heaven it
self, and to happiness and glory in heaven as heirs.

For why, to the praise and glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. And therefore
doubtless they have right and title to all good things, and to heaven it
self, and to happiness and glory in heaven, as heirs, and as to a free
inheritance.

Now then for the use: first this truth discouers that Gods The Popish doctrine
touching good works meriting eternal life, confuted.
much less heaven, and happiness, and glory in heaven, on any merit or
desert of their own. It is the doctrine of the Papists, that eternal life is
given for the merit of good works: No, no, Gods children have right and title
to good things, and to happiness and glory in heaven, as heirs, and as to an
inheritance. Now (as we know) an inheritance is freely given by the father to
the child, and not deserved by any merit or weldoing: yea sometimes amongst men
an inheritance is given to the child who is so far from doing any thing to
deserve it, as that it is yet an infant, and lies crying in the cradle, and can
do nothing to that purpose. An inheritance is given by the father out of his
mere love, and so Gods children having right and title to the good things of
this life, and to happiness and glory in heaven, as heirs, and as to an
inheritance, they cannot challenge them on any merit or desert of their own.
Indeed Gods children may comfortably enjoy good things, even the good things of
this life, they have right and title to them as heirs, but they cannot
challenge the least bit of bread on any merit and desert of their own, much
less heaven and happiness, and glory in heaven: even the least good thing of
this life, is given to Gods children out of the mere love of their heavenly
Father, as part of their inheritance. God, says he, is not unrighteous, that
he should forget your work and labor of love, which ye showed toward his
name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and yet minister.

We must renounce all merit in our selves to the least good thing of this life,
and much more to heaven, and to the happiness and glory in heaven.
and to happiness and glory in heaven, as heirs, and as to their
inheritance? Then we must look that we lay no claim to the least good thing
of this life, much less to heaven, and happiness and glory in heaven, for
any merit or desert of our own. It is a corruption deeply rooted in us by
nature, to think that we are worthy of good things, yea that we deserve the
best good things, even in heaven it self, for some thing in our selves: it is
the common saying of blind ignorant people, and thus they speak: I know I must
love God above all, and my neighbor as my self, and if I do my good will so
to do, God will be merciful unto me, and I shall go to heaven. Oh we must
labor to root out this conceit, and learn to renounce all merit in our
selves of the least good thing, and learn to lay claim to the least good
thing of this life only as we are the children of God, and so heirs, and have
right and title to it as part of our inheritance, freely given to us, out of
the mere love of our heavenly Father; and so learn to be thankful to God for
every bit of bread we have to put into our mouths, acknowledging it to be the
free gift of God, freely bestowed on us out of his mere love and mercy. And
much more are we to be thankful to him for making us heirs of heaven, and
freely giving to us right and title to happiness and glory in heaven, for that
is such a gift as we cannot prize sufficiently; and in bestowing that gift on
us, we cannot comprehend the greatness of Gods love unto us: and therefore we
are to labor to be thankful to God for that above all things, and to
endeavor to express our thankfulness to him in all holy obedience. That is
our duty.

Now before I leave this point, I will add one other short Gods children must
live in this world as heirs that are yet in their minority.
have they right and title to the good things of this life, and to heaven, and
to happiness, and glory in heaven, as heirs, and as to their proper
inheritance? Surely then they must learn to live here in the world as heirs,
even as heirs that are yet in their nonage and in their minority, as the
Apostle says, Galat. 4.1. The heir as long as he is a child, differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all: So though the children of God
be heirs of heaven, and of happiness and glory in heaven, yet they are here
in this world as young heirs in their minority, and they must here live as
heirs that are in their minority, they must be content to live at the
allowance of their heavenly Father, and be content with that he gives them
here, expecting their full inheritance hereafter. If their heavenly Father here
keep them short, and put them to some hardship, if here he give them but a
small pittance and portion of the good things of this life, they must be
content with it, remembering this, that they are heirs to a kingdom which in
due time shall be given to them: they must here live as Abraham did, who though
he was heir of the land of promise, yet was content to abide intents as a
stranger, and in no City, looking for a City whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 11.9.10. And if their heavenly Father do here allow them but a small part
and portion of heavenly joy, and of heavenly comfort, they must take heed they
murmr not against their Father, and complain of it, that their brethren have
more spiritual joy, and more heavenly comfort then they. No, they must be
content with that measure of spiritual joy their heavenly Father is pleased to
impart to them, and look for fullness of spiritual joy, and fullness of
heavenly comfort hereafter in heaven; their heavenly Father is wise, he knows
best what measure of spiritual joy and heavenly comfort is fit for them. And
as he will make them meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, as the Apostle speaks, Colos. 1.12. as he will make them meet and fit
for heaven, and then give heaven to them, and put them into possession of it;
so he will here in this world make them meet and fit for spiritual joy, and
fit for heavenly comfort, Note.
and then in his wisdom give it to them. And Gods children are rather to pray
to God, and to desire the Lord to make them fit for spiritual joy, and fit for
heavenly comfort, then that he would give it to them. Gods children must here
in this world do as travelers use to do. When travelers set out in a dark
foggie mistie morning, yet they comfort themselves with this, that in time the
mist will break up, and the Sun will break forth, and shine forth clearly
on them: So do thou that art a child of God, though it be so that now the
bright shining of Gods loving countenance be yet held from thee, there is a
mist, and there is a fogge, and a cloud between thee and it, and thou have not
that spiritual joy, and that heavenly comfort that others have, yet cheer up
thy self, in time the bright shining face of God, even his most loving
countenance will break forth, the clouds and mists that are now between thee
and it shall be dispelled, and it will shine forth clearly on thee, if not
here in this world, assuredly in heaven, most brightly, and most gloriously,
and in a measure unspeakable and inconceivable. And let that be thy stay, and
let that be thy comfort, and so I pass from that point to further matter.

Observe in the next place: the Apostle here speaks indefinitely: If children,
also heirs, if we be children, we are heirs. Hence note in a word.

That all Gods children are heirs, all and every one of All Gods children are
heirs.
have right and title to all the good things of this life, and to heaven, and
to happiness, and glory in heaven, as heirs.

For why, the promise of the good things of this life, and of Mat. 11.28.
and are all invited to partake of the benefit of Christ: and the covenant of
grace and mercy is made to all and every one of them, Isai. 55.1. Isai. 55.1.
Hoe, every one that thirsts, says the Lord by his Prophet, come ye to the
waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buy and eat: come I say, buy wine
and milk, without silver and without money. And then he subioynes verse 3.
Verse 3.
Incline your ears and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with you; even the sure mercies of David.

Again, God is able to make all his children heirs, and without diminishing
the inheritance of any one of them, the inheritance of one shall not prejudice
or lessen the inheritance of another. The Lord is able, and will possess all
his children of joys, and of glory in heaven equally, for the substance of
joy and glory And hence it is that Christ says, Ioh. 14.2. In my Fathers
house are many dwelling places. In heaven there is room enough for all to
inherit, and for all Gods children to be heirs. The consideration of their
poor, base, and mean estate in this world, ought to be no trouble to Gods
children
And what then (for the use of this) do thou troubling and vexing thy self,
whosoever thou art, with the consideration of thy poor, base, and mean estate
here in this world? Art thou a child of God? then be of good comfort; be thou
never so poor, or never so mean in the world, thou art an heir, thou have
right and title to all good things, yea to heaven it self, and to happiness
and glory in heaven, as well as any other child of God, be he never so highly
advanced, or be his estate never so great in this world: if thou be borne of
God, and be an adopted son or daughter of God, thou art not one borne to
nothing: no, thou art heir to a kingdom, yea to such a kingdom as has
neither measure of glory, nor end of continuance. And though thou be here in
this world straightened, and thou art here in poor and mean estate, yet thou
have right and title to heaven, and thou shall one day be possessed of it, and
there is room enough, wealth enough, and there is joy and glory enough, to
give thy soul full contentment: think on that to thy comfort. Come we to the
amplification of that excellent dignity bestowed on Gods children, that they
are heirs. And first, that they are Gods heirs, Even heirs of God, says the
Apostle: that is, as I showed such as have right and title to the good things
of God, to all good things of this life, and to an heavenly inheritance as Gods
heirs.

Now in that the Apostle says, that Gods children are Gods heirs: we are
hence given to understand in the first

Gods children have just title to all good things.
That Gods children have just title to all good things, to the good things of
this life, and to heaven, and to happiness and glory in heaven. The Lord
vouchsafing to make his children his heirs, it must needs be that they have
lawful and just title to all the good things of this life and of the life to
come. 1. Corinthians. 3.22. 1. Cor. 3.22.
the Apostle speaks plainly to this purpose, Whether they be things present,
or things to come, all are yours: you are the right owners and lawful
possessors of all things.

And the grounds of this truth are these: First God is the Melchizedecke said,
Genesis 14.19. Genesis 14.19.
He is the most high possessor of heaven and earth. And as Moses said, Deuteronomy.
10.14. Deuteronomy. 10.14.
Heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lords thy God, and the earth with all
that therein is. And therefore it must needs be, that such as are his heirs,
and have right and title of inheritance from him as Gods children have, they
have just title to all good things of God, even to the good things of this life
and of the life to come: they have title to them from him who is able to make
them a good title, and to estate them in good things, without any crack or
flawe, and none can disprove their title.

Again, Gods children are one with Christ, he is their heir of all things, as
we have it, Hebr. 1.2. Hebr. 1.2.
and therefore doubtless in and through him they have just title to all good
things, even the right that they lost in Adam to good things is restored to
them in Christ, and in and through him they have just title to all good things
of this life, and to heaven, and to happiness and glory in heaven.

Now then this truth serves to discover, Only Gods children have a true and
comfortable use of Gods good creatures.
that only Gods children have a true and comfortable use of the good creatures
of God, and of the good things of this life the Lord does bestow on them, and
is pleased to vouchsafe to them, and they only may comfortably hold, and
enjoy, and use the good things of this life which the Lord does cast on them by
his providence. Indeed they may not on this ground enter on the goods of
others, because they have just title to all good things, therefore take on them
to be their own caruers. Although Gods children have right to all good things,
yet not in all good things of this life; the Lord in wisdom has severed the
good things of this life in respect of civil right and propriety; and such as
are not Gods children have a civil right and propriety to the good things of
this world that are cast on them by Gods providence, and Gods children may not
enter on it, but they are to content themselves with that portion of the good
things of this life the Lord gives to them: and be it more or be it less they
may comfortably hold it, and enjoy it, and use it; yea they only may
comfortably hold, enjoy, and use the good things of this life the Lord bestows
on them. Such as are not Gods children, having only a civil right and a
civil propriety to the good things of this life, they shall one day answer
for the use of them, they shall one day answer for every bit of bread they
have to put into their mouths; for they having no spiritual right to the good
things of this life, they do but usurp the good creatures of God, and they
keep the good things of this life from the right heirs. And though the Lord
suffer them to have a plentiful portion, and to enjoy abundance of the good
things of this life, yet they are but given to them to leave them without
excuse, and to increase their judgment and condemnation, they shall one day
double their torment on them. And though here they have goodly houses to dwell
in, yet they are never in their own place till they be in hell, as it is said
of Judas, Act. 1.25. Act. 1.25.
when he hanged himself he went astray to go to his own place. It is a
certain truth, if thou be not a child of God, thou art no heir of God, and so
thou have no just title to any good of this life in regard of spiritual right,
and thou shall one day answer for every crumme of bread thou have to put into
thy mouth. Only Gods children are Gods heirs, and they only are estated in
the good things of this life by him and from him who is able to ma^e them a
good title, and they only are in Christ who is the heir of all things: and
therefore they only may comfortably have, hold, enjoy, and use the good things
of this li e.

In the nex^ place, in that Gods children are Gods heirs, we may further
gather and conclude thus much.

That Gods children have not only just title to all the The inheritance of
Gods children is most sure and certain.
and of the life to come, but their title to them is sure and certain: the
Lord vouchsafing to make his children his heirs, they cannot possibly miss or
come short of their inheritance; they cannot lose it, neither can any defeat
them or disappoint them of it; their inheritance is most sure and certain,
Gods children are sure of all good things, they shall certainly have all good
things of this life their h^auenly Father sees fit and good for them, and they
shall also in time be fully possessed of their heavenly inheritance, even of
fullness of joy, and happiness and glory in heaven, as if they were now in
heaven. They are Gods heirs, and the Lord in his eternal purpose has
appointed them an everlasting inheritance, and has prepared it for them before
the foundations of the world were laid, as we have it Mat. 25.34. Mat. 25.34.
and it is his will and pleasure in time to give it to them, and to bring them
into possession of it, as Christ says, Luke 12.32. Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom. Yea it is the will of Christ himself, that those who are given him
of his Father, should in time be where he is, as himself prayed Ioh. 17.24.
Ioh. 17.24.
And what shall frustrate the Lords eternal purpose, or put by his
appointment? and what shall hinder him from effecting his will and pleasure?
Not all the power in heaven, in earth, or in hell: he is able to bring his
children into the possession of heaven which he has provided and appointed for
them, according to his own good will and preasure; and all the power of hell
is not able to stand against his purpose, and against his will and pleasure,
neither Satan, nor all the devils in hell can cousin or deceive Gods children of
their inheritance, nor keep it from them by violence; they are Gods heirs,
who is stronger then all, and so their inheritance is most sure and certain.
And hence it is said to be reserved for them in heaven in a place of safety,
1. Pet. 1.4. 1. Pet. 1.4.
To an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in heaven for you. Yea the Apostle says, Coloss. 3.3. Coloss. 3.3.
that it is hid with Christ in God: it is laid up in the gracious and powerful
hand of God, and nothing is able to wrest or wring it out of his hand. Christ
says, Ioh. 10.28. Ioh. 10.28.
that he gives to his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. We may therefore resolve on
this as an undoubted truth, that Gods children being Gods heirs, they cannot
possibly miss or come short of their inheritance, they cannot lose it, neither
can any defeat them or disappoint them of it. Many times heirs amongst men
are either cosined of their inheritance, or they are violently kept from it,
but it cannot be so with Gods heirs, their inheritance is most sure and
certain, and they cannot by any means be disappointed of it.

Comfort for Gods children in time of their outward troubles, crosses, and
losses.
and in the time of crosses and losses that befall them in this world. For what
though it be so, that thou who art a child of God do lose all that ever thou
have in the world, thou art stripped of all thy wealth, and of all outward good
things, yet comfort thy self, thine inheritance remains firm and sure to
thee, and thou can not be deprived of that. And though the devil and his
instruments seek by vexations and troubles to make thee miserable, yet they
cannot do it: thou art happy, and shall be happy in despite of them all. And
though the Lord suffer them to strippe thee of land and living, and to thrust
thee out of house and home, and to deprive thee of liberty, to shut thee up in
prison, and such like, yet they cannot touch thy inheritance, that is out of
their reach, and they cannot possibly thrust thee from that, nor disappoint
thee of it. No, no, thine everlasting inheritance is laid up in a sure hand,
even in the hand of God, whom they neither can nor dare assault. And though the
Lord suffer the instruments of Satan to take away thy life, yet still thine
inheritance remains sure to thee, and thou art but thereby put into present
possession of it. It is neither the fraud nor the force of the world, or of the
devil without, no, nor yet thine own flesh within, that can deprive thee of
thine everlasting inheritance. Thou art not trusted with it; if thou were, thou
would soon lose it as Adam did in Paradise, but God keeps it for thee in
his own hand, and so nothing can disappoint thee of it. And therefore cheer
up thy self, in time of thy outward troubles, and thy outward crosses and
losses: and though thou be stripped as naked as Job was, all thy goods are taken
from thee, yet take heed thou cry not out as men commonly do in that case, I
am undone: thou art not undone, thou art Gods heir, and thou can not be
undone; thy heavenly Father still keeps thine inheritance firm and sure to
thee, and all the devils in hell cannot defeat thee of it, nor keep thee from
it. The devil knows it well, that he cannot possibly disappoint thee of thine
everlasting inheritance, and that makes him trouble thee what he can other
ways: and it is commonly seen that the devil troubles Gods children more
then others in respect of outward things, and he many times (God suffering him
so to do) by his instruments strips them of wealth, and of liberty, and of all
outward good things, yea he seeks what he can to trouble them in their minds
and consciences: Note.
And it falls out that many times Gods children are more troubled in their minds
in time of sickness, then others that are not the children of God. And why so?
Surely because the devil knows their salvation and their everlasting
inheritance is out of his reach, he knows that is sealed up to Gods children,
and they have it made sure to them under Gods own hand and seal, yea that it
is kept for them in the gracious and powerful hand of God. Oh then let the
consideration of this comfort thee that art a child of God, in time of any
trouble, cross, or loss, that befalls thee in this world.

One thing note we further, in that Gods children are Gods Gods children are
the greatest heirs in the world.
they are heirs apparent to the great Lord and King of heaven and earth, and
their inheritance is an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that fades not,
1. Pet. 1.4. And they are heirs to a crown, and that a crown of
righteousness, as the Apostle calls it, 2. Tim. 4.6. yea to an incorruptible
crown of glory, as we have it 1. Pet. 5.4. and to the crown of life, as
Christ calls it, Revel. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee the crown of life. Yea Gods children have God himself their portion, as
David says, Psalm. 119.57. yea the Lord is the portion of their inheritance, as
he says, Psalm. 16.5. And having God their portion, they have not only life,
wisdom, power, succor, safety, peace, joy, security, and all good things,
but they also enjoy him who is the sountaine of all good things: and having God
their portion, it is more then if they had a thousand worlds. And therefore we
may truly say with David, Psalm. 16.6. The lives are fallen to Gods children in
pleasant places: they are great heirs, and they have a fair heritage.

Now then for the use How Gods children ought to be affected in respect of
their everlasting inheritance.
and to affect it according to the worth, and excellency, and greatness of
it; they are even to trample under foot the riches, pomp, and glory of the
world, and to account them dross and dung in comparison of their rich and
glorious inheritance: yea their minds, hearts, and affections are ever to be
running on their fair and goodly heritage, and they are to long after it, and
to wish within themselves, oh when shall I come to be fully possessed of the
joys and glory of heaven, and fully to enjoy God himself the fountain of
life, and joy, and happiness, and of all good things. Thus ought Gods children
to be affected in respect of the excellency and greatness of their rich and
glorious inheritance. But alas, where is this affection to be found? Do not the
minds and hearts of many that would be accounted Gods children, rather run
on the world, on the wealth, the honors, and the pleasures of the world, then
on the rich and glorious inheritance in heaven? As it was said to Peter, Mark.
14.70. Surely thou art one of them, for thy speech is like: so it may be justly
said to many, they are of the world, their speech is like. They can speak
much and to purpose of the things of this world, but when they come to speak
of the joys and glory in heaven, alas their tongues cleave to the roof of
their mouths. It may be thou have a good liking of heaven (as who has not)
and thou have some taste of the powers of the world to come, as it is Hebr. 6.5.
and therein thou do content thy self; deceive not thy self, that liking and
that taste may be in one that shall never come to heaven, thou must have more
then a taste, even a true, sound, and feeling affection to the joys and glory
of heaven, or else thine heart is not rightly affected with the great and
glorious inheritance in heaven, and thou must be able to speak of it
feelingly. One that is heir to great land and living amongst men, being now
come to some years and discretion, and able to speak with understanding, how
feelingly and with what delight will he speak of the fair houses, and goodly
woods and fields that he in time (if he live) shall come to enjoy? So it must
be with thee in respect of thine heavenly inheritance: thou must be able to
speak of it feelingly, and have thy soul even ravished with delight in
speaking of it, and have a feeling apprehension of the joys and glory of
heaven.

Thou will say,

I answer.

First, if thy affection to them be seconded with a careful use of all good
means by which it may be continued and increased, thou do carefully hear
the word, A true feeling affection to the joys and glory in heaven, may be
discerned by two things.
and read it and other good books, thou do meditate and confer of holy
things, that so thine affection to heaven and heavenly things may be more
enflamed; and thou art never so well as when thou art in the company of Gods
children, and conferring

And secondly, if thy affection to the joys and glory of of God, and bear
Gods image in special manner: if it be thus with thee, then doubtless thou
have a true, sound, and feeling affection of the joys and glory of heaven, and
that is the thing thou must find in thy self.

Come we now to the second amplification of the dignity belonging to Gods
children, that they are heirs, namely this, that they are heirs annexed with
Christ, for so the Apostle further sets out that dignity, that they are joint
heirs or fellow heirs with Christ.

And first in that Gods children are joint heirs, coheires, or fellow heirs
with Christ, we are to take notice of the great honor and dignity Gods
children are advanced to. And that I will briefly note hence in the first
place, is this.

The high advancement and honor of Gods children, in that they are joint
heirs with Christ.
even to make them his heirs, yea joint heirs with his own natural Son,
with his only begotten Son, with his own dear Son, the Son of his
love, as the Apostle calls him, Colos. 1.13. It is a great honor that the Lord
vouchsafes to make his chosen, servants, it was as much as the prodigal durst
desire, Luke 15.19. I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired servants. The Lord has no need of the service of men, he has thousands,
and ten thousands of his glorious and holy Angels round about his throne to
minister to him, Dan. 7.10. But that the Lord is pleased to make his chosen,
not only his servants, but his adopted sons, yea his heirs, yea fellow
heirs with his own Son, and not only to give them life, and to place them
with his Angels, but with his own dear Son, even to share with him in life,
and glory, and in his kingdom, oh that is a favor of God wonderful and
unspeakable; and that is an advancement exceeding great and marvelous. And
indeed the favor of God therein is greater, in that the Lord has passed by
the evil Angels, that are plunged into the depth of inconceivable misery, he
has left them in that misery, and has only advanced his chosen amongst men
to such height of honor and dignity. And the consideration of this (to be
brief in it) is of use, both in respect of others, and also of Gods children
themselves.

As first on this ground, be thou warned whosoever thou A dangerous thing to
think or deal basely with any child of God.
to think or deal basely with any child of God, be he never so poor, or of
never so mean place in the world. Has the Lord bestowed such honor and
dignity on his child, as to make him his heir, yea joint heir, and fellow
heir with his own dear Son? and dare thou deal basely with him, yea
dare thou give way to thy wicked heart to think basely of him? Dare thou
think in thine heart, that a child of God is base, and that he is but a
precise fool? The Lord sees thy heart, and has the Lord made it known in
his eternal truth, that his child is his heir, yea joint heir, and fellow
heir with his own Son, of life and glory in heaven, and dare thou in thy
very thought contradict the truth of God, and think in thine heart that the
child of God is base, and silly, and simple, and but a fool? And dare thou
open thy mouth, to call a child of God fool, or base slave or schismaticke, or
the like? Will the Lord take it at thy hands, that thou do either thus
think, or thus deal with any child of his? Will a King take it well if he
know that any man does either despise his favorite, or deal basely with one
whom he has highly honored, and has a purpose further to honor? When Haman
knew it was the Kings mind to honor Mordecai, though he hated him in his
heart, yet he durst not show the least dislike of him, but was forced sore
against his will, to clothe him in royal robes, and to cause him to ride
through the City on the Kings horse, and to proclaim: Thus shall it be done
unto the man whom the King will honor, Hest. 6.11. Hest. 6.11.
And will then the King of heaven and earth take it at thy hands, if thou
either think or deal basely with any child of his, who^ he has made his
heir, yea joint heir with his own dear Son the Lord Jesus? No, no, be
thou sure of it, the Lord will not suffer thy base esteem of his child, or thy
base dealing with any of his, to escape his punishing hand, but unless thou be
humbled for it, he will assuredly return it on thy soul, to thine eternal
woe and confusion.

The world cannot obscure or blemish the honor of Gods children.
thou that art a child of God; the Lord out of his exceeding love to thee, has
highly honored thee, he has advanced thee to be his heir, yea to be joint
heir with his own Son. And though the world think basely of thee, and men
of the world deal basely with thee, and seek to disgrace thee, yet they
cannot do it, they cannot take thine honor from thee: though wicked wretches
of the world rail on thee, and load thee with foul terms, care not for it,
they are but as dogs that bark against the Moon, they cannot obscure or
blemish thine honor. No, no, honor is given to thee by him who is able to
maintain it, and he will maintain it, and one day make it manifest to all the
world, to men and Angels. Think on that to thy comfort, and so I pass on to a
second thing.

In the next place, in that Gods children are joint heirs, coheires, or fellow
heirs with Christ, we are given to understand thus much.

Gods children shall one day partake with Christ in his everlasting inheritance.
and shall one day be possessed with the same rich and glorious inheritance in
heaven that the Lord Jesus is now possessed of, and they shall one day partake
with him, and share with him in his everlasting inheritance. And that this
point may be rightly conceived, know that the everlasting inheritance of Christ
is twofold, Christ his everlasting inheritance is twofold.
it is the inheritance of life and glory, and of dominion and power. Christ
now lives in heaven in his body and soul, most blessedly and gloriously, being
wholly freed from all infirmities and temptations, and being filled with all
joy and glorious brightness, and he is also in his humane nature exalted above
all Principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also that that is to come. Ephesians. 1.21. he
reigns in heaven most gloriously and most triumphantly. Now Gods children
shall one day be partakers with Christ of this double inheritance, they shall
one day live with Christ in endless glory, and they shall also reign with
Christ, they shall one day share with Christ both in life and glory, and in his
kingdom, though not in equal degree: the glory and power of Christ shall
exceed the glory and power of all Gods children. And that Gods children shall
thus partake with Christ in his double inheritance, the Scripture is plain.
Colos. 3.4. the Apostle tells the believing Colossians, that when Christ their
life shall appear, then should they appear with him in glory: then shall
they also be seen with him shining in unspeakable glory. Philip. 3.21. the
Apostle says, that Christ shall change the bodies of true believers, and make
them like his own glorious body: and they shall one day be glorious in their
measure, according to his image who is the God of glory. 1. Ioh. 3.2. says
Saint John, We are now the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we
shall be, and we know that when we shall appear we shall like him. Revel.
3.21. says Christ, To him that ouercometh will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I overcame and sit with my Father in his throne. Christ has
overcome, and reigns in glory, and they that overcome shall reign with him,
though not in equal glory; they shall one day partake with him in life and
glory, and in his kingdom, though not in equal degree.

For why, Gods children are one with Christ, glorified in his Saints: and
therefore doubtless Gods children have right and title to one and the same
inheritance with the Lord Jesus, and shall one day be possessed of the same
rich and glorious inheritance in heaven, that he is now possessed of, they
shall one day share with him in his everlasting inheritance, and in his
kingdom, though in different degree.

Now then for the use of this: first, what an excellent comfort A ground of
sweet comfort to Gods children.
And to them alone that are Gods children belongs the comfort, and to none
other. Art thou a child of God? art thou sure of it, thou have part in Christ?
Then know to thy comfort, thou art a fellow heir with the Lord Jesus, and thou
have right and title to one and the same inheritance with him, and thou shall
one day be possessed of the same rich inheritance in heaven that he is now
possessed of, and thou shall one day share with him in life and glory in
heaven, and in his eternal kingdom; and what a sweet comfort is that to a
child of God? The consideration of this, is enough to fill the hearts of Gods
children with joy unspeakable and glorious: yea the consideration of this ought
to stir them up to long for the appearing of the Lord Jesus; knowing this,
that when he shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory, and come to
partake with him in that endless life and glory that he is now possessed of
in heaven. Do thou that art a child of God believe this to be true, and do
thou not long to see the truth of it? Do thou believe that at the coming of
Christ thou shall come to possess that life and glory in heaven that Christ
is now possessed of, and do thou not long for his coming? Surely then thy
heart is not right in thee: and if thy desire this way be weak and feeble,
seek to be quickened, labor thou to have a lively hope to partake with Christ
in his glory in heaven, and thine heart will then be filled with abundance of
comfort, on the consideration of the truth now delivered, and thou shall then
long for the appearing of the Lord Jesus.

The duty of Gods children, in that they are joint heirs with Christ.
and shall they one day be possessed with the same rich inheritance that Christ
is now possessed of? How then I beseech you are Gods children bound to magnify
the Lords goodness and mercy toward them, who has provided for them such a
rich portion, as to share with his own Son in life and glory in heaven, and
to partake with him in his kingdom? Oh this ought to stir up Gods children
to endeavor to answer so great a mercy, and to carry themselves as those
that shall one day be fellow heirs with the Lord Jesus, and partake with him
in life and glory in heaven. And consider it, thou that do persuade thy
self thou art a child of God: it is a foul shame for thee that do persuade
thy self thou art a child of God, and so Gods heir, and joint heir with the
Lord Jesus, and shall one day have thy portion, not only among the Saints, but
with the only begotten Son of God, to carry thy self as those that shall
have their part and portion with the devils and damned in hell. Do thou
suffer thy self to be a drudge to the lusts of thine own heart, to be proud,
vain, covetous, or the like? It is a shame for thee, meditate and think
seriously of the goodness and mercy of God toward thee, in that he has made
thee his child, yea his heir, yea joint heir with his own Son, and that
thou shall one day share with him in life and glory, and in his eternal
kingdom; and thou shall find, thou can not be sufficiently thankful to God
for so great a mercy. The due consideration of this, that the Lord should
advance thee from a child of the devil and of wrath, to be his child, yea his
heir, yea joint heir with his own dear and only begotten Son, even to
share with him in eternal life and glory, and in his eternal kingdom, will
set thee a work to an endeavor to show thy self thankful, and to labor to
express thy thankfulness for so great a mercy, in all holy obedience.

Come we now to the second general thing laid before us in this verse, the
condition of such as are heirs of God, and joint heirs, or fellow heirs with
Christ: namely this, that they must suffer with Christ, amplified by the end of
their suffering, that they may be glorified with Christ. If so be that we
suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. In these words the
Apostle falls on the second general part of this Chapter, which he continues
to verse 31. The second general part of this Chapter.
And having in the former part of the Chapter hitherto, delivered matter of
sweet and excellent comfort to the believing Romans, and to all other true
believers, against the relickes and remainders of sin and corruption still
abiding in them, he now comes to cheer them up, and to arm and strengthen
them against the bitterness of the cross, and to encourage them patiently and
constantly to bear the afflictions they should meet withal, and that by
diverse arguments: we will lay forth his arguments as we come to them. In these
words he lays down the first ground of comfort, which he continues and
amplifies to the 26. verse. But to keep within the compass of this verse,
these words: If so be that we suffer with Christ, that we may also be glorified
with Christ, as they have respect to the foregoing matter, are a prevention of
a secret objection. For some might say to the Apostle, you tell us of great
honor and dignity the Lord is pleased to bestow on us; we being his children,
that we are his heirs, and joint heirs, and fellow heirs with Christ,
wherein is matter of great comfort: but alas how can this be, seeing our
present state is so hard, and our life so full of troubles? Some afflicted
person might say: I an heir of God, and thus poor, and thus afflicted, and
under such grievous afflictions as I am? Now this the Apostle preuents, by
making known the condition that belongs to such as are the children of God,
and so heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; that indeed we being the
children of God, are heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ: yet this is
our condition, that we must first suffer with Christ before we can come to be
glorified with him, and to partake with him in his everlasting inheritance. So
the Apostle brings in these words: If so be that we suffer with him, that we
may also be glorified with him.

Now in these words considered by themselves (as we said) the Apostle lays
down the ground of comfort against the cross, and matter of encouragement to
a patient and constant bearing of affliction. And here we have two arguments to
that purpose.

If so be that we suffer with him, says the Apostle.

glory, and to reign with him in endless glory; that we may also be
glorified with him.

I will now as briefly as I can lay forth the sense and meaning of these words,
and then proceed to matter of observation and doctrine. If so be that ye suffer
with him. Interpretation.
The Papists render the words, yet if we suffer with him: and they would have
the Apostle here to intend the cause of heavenly glory, that our sufferings in
this life should be the cause of our glory hereafter in heaven, but the very
next verse ouerturneth this conceit, where the Apostle affirms, that the
afflictions of this life present, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed unto us. And indeed the words are not to be taken causually but
conditionally, that our suffering with Christ (we being true believers) is but
a condition necessary to be undergone by us, and a way wherein we must walk
to life and glory in heaven. We suffer with him: that is, with Christ. This
phrase and form of speech of suffering with Christ, is not here to be taken
for sympathizing with Christ, or condoling with Christ, for being touched with
sorrow and grief for the sufferings of Christ, as the phrase is used, 1. Cor.
12.26. If one member suffer, all suffer with it: but for suffering as Christ
has suffered, both in respect of the cause and manner of suffering, and for
having fellowship and communion with Christ in his afflictions, as the Apostle
speaks, Philip. ^.10. And the meaning is, If we suffer as Christ has
suffered, both in respect of the cause and manner of suffering, namely, for a
good cause, and for righteousness sake. And we suffer as Christ suffered in
regard of the manner of our suffering: we imitate and follow him in bearing the
cross, and that measure of affliction that is laid on us, as himself speaks,
Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me. If we bear the cross, and suffer the
afflictions the Lord lays on us, as we have Christ for our example, and as he
has borne it before us, willingly and chearefully taking it up, and bearing it
with patience, and in obedience, and with a quiet submission of our wills to the
good will and pleasure of the Lord, even to the shedding of our blood for the
keeping of faith and a good conscience, and so as our sufferings may be said to
be Christ his sufferings, as the Apostle calls them, 1. Pet. 4.13. We being
therein conformable to Christ our head, and Christ accounting our sufferings as
his own, and suffering in us, as he said Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? then we suffer with Christ: and that is here meant by the Apostle,
when he says, If so be that we suffer with him. That we may also be glorified
with him: that is, to this end, that we may also in our souls and bodies
partake with Christ in eternal life and glory in heaven, and in his eternal
kingdom; not in equal degree, but according to our proportion, as the Apostle
says, 2. Tim. 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. So then the
meaning of these words, If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him, is briefly this, as if the Apostle had said.

We being the children of God, are heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ, yet so, as we undergo the necessary condition that we must undergo;
and walk in the way wherein we must walk to life and glory in heaven; if so
be that we suffer with Christ (that is) as Christ has suffered, both in
respect of the cause and manner of our suffering: and have fellowship with
Christ in his afflictions, and be therein conformable to Christ our head; and
Christ accounting our sufferings as his own, and suffering in us, to this end,
that we may also in our souls and bodies partake with Christ in eternal life
and glory, and in his eternal kingdom; though not in equal degree, but
according to our measure and proportion.

Now first we are to call to mind, that these words, If so be that we suffer
with him, that we may also be glorified with him: are (as I told you) a
prevention of a secret objection, that some afflicted might make against the
Apostles foregoing speech. For some afflicted person, even a child of God,
might thus object, and would be ready thus to object, What, I an heir of God,
and joint heir and fellow heir with Christ, that am thus poor, and thus
persecuted, and thus miserable, and the like? This the Apostle preuents, by
making known that the condition of such as are heirs of life and salvation,
and of such as shall be glorified with Christ, is this, that they must first
suffer with him before they come to be glorified with him. Whence I might stand
to show, that in the holy truth of God revealed in his word, there is answer to
be found to any needful doubt or question that the heart of man can make or
propound: but I pass from that, and the thing I will hence note is this.

That many times Gods children being under afflictions, Gods children sometimes
question their state, being under some grievous affliction.
and to question their estate whether they be the children of God or no,
because they are afflicted; especially if they be under some grievous
affliction, then they are ready to say, What, I a child of God, that am thus
grievously afflicted? or was there ever any child of God as I am? did you ever
know any child of God in the like affliction that I am now in? These and the
like doubts many times arise in the minds of Gods children in the time of their
sufferings and afflictions; and the world is ready to gather and conclude from
the afflictions of Gods children, that God loves them not, and thereupon to
charge it on them that they are none of Gods children. It was Jobs case, his
friends judged him to be but an hypocrite, because of his great afflictions, as
we may read in the book of Job in many places of it. Yea Satan is ready to
take advantage of the afflictions of Gods children, and thereupon to cast
doubts into their minds of Gods love toward them, and whether they be the
children of God or no. He set on Christ himself, and would have persuaded him
that he had not been the Son of God, because of his hunger in the
wilderness, Matthew. 4.3. Mat. 4.3.
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread: as if he
had said, Art thou the Son of God? would God suffer his Son to be here in
the wilderness, and to starve for want of bread? no, no if thou were the Son
of God thou should have bread to sustain thee in this thy need, though it
were made miraculously of stones. Psalm. 73. David looking on the prosperity of
the wicked, and considering that together with his own afflicted estate, broke
out verse 13.14. and said, Psalm. 73.13.14.
Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence: for daily have I been punished, and chastened every morning. Judge.
6.13. says Gideon in the time of a public calamity and distress, If the
Lord be with us, why then is all this come upon us? As if he had said, if the
Lord were with us and did favor us, why then are we under this great
affliction? Thus Gods children many times doubt of Gods love to them, and
question their estate whether they be Gods children or no, because they be
afflicted, and especially if they be grievously afflicted.

And the reason

And for use, this must teach us, in time of our afflictions to labor to
strengthen our faith in the mercy of God, Strength of faith in Gods mercy
needful in time of affliction. Note.
and to labor to cleave to him, and to trust in him. And to that end we are to
consider, that though the Lord take away health, or take away wealth, or any
other good thing from us, and lay affliction on us, yet he takes not away his
love from us, but he loves us as dearly in our deepest distress as in our
greatest prosperity. We being once within the covenant, it cannot be broken on
Gods part, and the bond of love on Gods part cannot be dissolved: we being once
within the compass of his special love, he loves us for ever: and even in
death we are within the covenant, and we sleep in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
Though a man be haled and pulled, buffeted and beaten extremely, yet so long as
he has the shape of a man and the use of reason, he is a man still: so though
a child of God be persecuted, tossed and tumbled up and down, and made as the
of-scouring of all things, yet he still retaining the image of God and the
power of grace in his soul, he is still a chil^ of God, and he is so to hold
himself.

affliction to the afflicted, Affliction is not to be added to affliction.
and that we urge them not to despair of Gods mercy, by telling them God has
forsaken them, and that they be but hypocrites, and now God has found them
out: that is the devils office and his course, and so doing, we shall show our
selves his instruments.

In the next place, as these words do express a condi^^^n that such as are
Gods heirs, and joint heirs, and fellow heirs with Christ, must undergo,
that they may come to partake with Christ in life and glory, and in his
eternal kingdom: we are given to understand thus much.

That the heirs of life and salvation must first suffer and The cross must
first be borne, before the crown of glory be worn.
and must here in this world first bear the cross, before they come to enjoy
and wear the crown of life and glory in heaven. And the way in which they
must walk to heaven, is by the cross and through afflictions: every heir of
heaven must suffer and must bear that measure of affliction the Lord is
pleased to lay on him before he come to be glorified in heaven. And to this
purpose besides this text we have further evidence of Scripture, Mark. 10.39.
Christ tells the sons of Zebedeus, James and John, they should drink of the cup
that he should drink of, and be baptized with his baptism that he should be
baptized withal, before they could come to glory in heaven. Matthew. 16.24.25.
the Lord Jesus says, If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and
take up his cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose
it, and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it. Act. 14.22.
Paul and Barnabas exhorted the disciples to continue, affirming that through
many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God: before we come to
glory in heaven we must pass through afflictions. Hebr. 12.8. the holy Ghost
says, all Gods children are partakers of afflictions, If ye be without
correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. It
is the condition that all Gods children must undergo. Iam. 1.12. says the
Apostle, Blessed is the man that endures tentation, for when he is tried he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him: as if he had said, after his trial, and not before, he shall receive
the crown of victory. And to these we might add many other testimonies
clearing and confirming the point in hand, that the heirs of life and
salvation must here in this world first suffer and bear the cross before they
come to enjoy the crown of life and glory in heaven, and the way in which
they must walk to heaven is by the cross: and the reasons of it are these.

Moses and the Prophets: Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? and the members of Christ are to be conformable to
Christ their head.



Gods children must make account and that certainly to meet with the cross
and with afflictions in their way to heaven.
to make reckoning of the cross, and to make account of afflictions aforehand,
even to reckon on it, and to recount with themselves that they shall certainly
meet with the cross, and meet with afflictions as they are going on in the
way toward heaven; and that they must go by weeping cross to the crown of
life and glory in heaven. We may not look to go to heaven (as the saying is)
in a feather bed, to go to heaven with ease, and to walk on in an even,
smooth, and pleasant way to life and glory in heaven: no, the way in which we
must walk to heaven is by the cross and through afflictions. Indeed the flesh
loves ease, and cannot endure to think of this condition, and it grieves the
flesh that God and Mammon are no better friends: yea every one could be
content to be Dives whilst he lives here in this world, so that he might be
Lazarus when he is dead, and every one would willingly go to heaven, but he
would walk in a convenient broad way, as one says well, in a way wherein he
might drive a sumpter horse before him. Every one would gladly have comfort in
Christ, but every one is not willing to bear the cross with Christ. Some
shun the cross by all means, by all shifts and devices that possibly they can
they put it off, they will not suffer the rebukes of Christ, as they are
called, Hebr. 11.26. they will not bear disgrace, they will not undergo the
note and odious name of Puritanes: no they will rather do as the most do, and
serve the time though it be with making shipwreck of a good conscience, that
they may live quietly and safely, and sleep in a whole skin: and yet they
think they may go to heaven well enough. Alas, they deceive themselves, the
way to heaven is by the cross: and think not whosoever thou art, that thou
shall come to heaven, and yet escape the cross, and meet with no afflictions
by the way; as the worldling by temporal glory goes to eternal shame, so
must thou by temporal troubles go on to eternal glory. It is the way in
which Christ himself has gone before thee, and all the Saints and servants of
God that are now in heaven have walked on in the same path; and thou may not
think to make a shorter cut, or to find an easier and a plainer way to heaven
then they have found. And therefore thou that art a child of God, or do
persuade thy self that thou art so, prepare thy soul for afflictions, and
make full reckening and full account to meet with afflictions in the way to
heaven. It is the the advice of Christ himself, Luke 14.28. that with what
deliberation mighty men of the world build their castles, or one great king
goes to war with another, with the same deliberation should we undertake the
profession of Christianity: we must cast our account aforehand, what it will
cost us, and what we shall meet withal in that holy profession, and whether
we be able to go through stitch with it or no. And thus do thou whosoever thou
art, that do persuade thy self that thou art a child of God, and do take
on thee the name of Christ, and profession of the Gospel: consider with thy
self what troubles and crosses thou shall meet withal in that holy
profession, and resolve to bear them whatsoever they be: say not with thy
self out of thine own weakness, what shall I do, I shall be made a byword,
I shall be pointed at, or the like? Put on courage and resolution to bear
whatsoever shall attend on thy holy profession; and resolve with thy self to
go through thick and thin, to go through good report and ill report, to
bear reproaches, nicknames, mockings, scoffings, raylings, reuilings, and all
manner of spiteful dealing, even to the shedding of thy blood if thou be
called to it, for keeping of faith and a good conscience; and think not strange
the fiery trial if thou be brought to it, as 1. Pet. 4.12. and remember the
words of the Lord Jesus, Luke 14.26.27. If thou hate not father, mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and thine own life also,
thou can not be Christ's disciple. And if thou bear not the cross and come
not after Christ, thou can not be his disciple. If thou look to be glorified
with Christ, make full account to suffer with him in one kind or other, and in
thy measure.

Comfort to Gods children in regard of the afflictions they meet withal.
and is the way in which they must walk to heaven, by the cross and through
afflictions? Then here is matter of comfort for thee that art a child of God,
and do meet with troubles and trials, and manifold afflictions, the Lord
giving thee a sanctified use of them, and giving thee an heart to bear them in
some measure as they ought to be borne, thou may thereupon conclude to the
comfort of thine own soul, that thou art in the way that leads to life and
glory in heaven. Indeed thou art not to think thou shall go to heaven because
thou art afflicted, but being afflicted, and the Lord vouchsafing a sanctified
use of thy affliction, thou may thereupon gather that thou art in the way to
life and salvation, and that thou shall be saved. The world commonly impugnes
thine adoption from thine affliction, and concludes that thou art none of God
children because thou art afflicted, but thou may thence conclude that thou
art a child of God; and the Lord giving thee a sanctified use of thy
affliction, thou may thereupon persuade thy self to thy comfort, that thou
art in such a state and condition as God has allotted his own dear children,
whom he purposes to glorify in heaven everlastingly, and that thou art in the
right way to heaven. If a traveler be told, that in the way he is to go
whither he intends, he shall come to a rough and vety uneven way, and that he
must pass over an high, steep, and craggie mountain, and the like, and he
goes on and finds all smooth, and even, and pleasant, he may well fear he is
out of the way; but if he find the way to be as was told him, though it be
tedious and painful to him, yet he goes on cheerfully, because he persuades
himself he is in the right way: so thou being told that the way to heaven is
by the cross and through afflictions, and thou go on and meetest with no
cross nor afflictions, but find the way in which thou walk easy and
delightsome, thou have just cause to doubt thou art out of the way that leads
to heaven; but if thou meet with the cross and with affliction, and the Lord
gives thee a sanctified use of them, though the way be tedious and troublesome,
(as there is no affliction but it is grievous to the flesh) yet thou may
comfort thy self in this, that thou art in the right way to heaven.

But happily some will say, alas I suffer nothing, not suffered that which other
of Gods children have suffered, and therefore I doubt whether I be in the way
to heaven or no.

To this I answer, Abels cross, if thy life have not been sought, and thou
have not been persecuted to death; yet doubtless thou being one truly fearing
God, and laboring to keep faith and a good conscience in all things, and
walking with an even foot in the way of holiness, either thou have not
escaped, or thou shall not escape Isaacks cross, the smiting of the tongue,
the mocking and scoffing of a wicked Ismael: the wicked and profane of the
world will mock, and scoff, and deride thee, and that is persecution, so the
Apostle calls it, Galat. 4.29. And know further, that if thou be prepared and
ready to bear any other cross that shall be laid on thee, even to the
shedding of thy blood for the keeping of faith and a good conscience, though
the Lord never call thee so to do, yet in Gods account it is all one as if thou
had already laid down thy life and shed thy blood. Note.
And thou having the mind and affection of a Martyr, thou shall assuredly one
day have the reward of a Martyr, and thou being ready to suffer with Christ as
the Lord shall call thee to it in any kind, thou shall not lose thy reward, but
shall one day be sure to receive the crown of a sufferer, and be undoubtedly
glorified with Christ. If a soldier have passed through the pikes, and gone
through many dangerous battles, and yet by the providence of God has escaped
without wound or hurt; he is not to be accounted either a coward or less
valorous then one that has lost his life in the battle, because his
resolution was to stand to it, and lose his life as well as the other if God
should so dispose of him. So if thou be resolved to lay down thy life for
Christ, and for the profession of the Gospel, though God never call thee to
it, yet he accounts of it as if thou should shed thy blood, and will
accordingly reward thee: and think on that to thy comfort.

The next thing here to be observed is, that the Apostle says not in general
terms, and at large: If we suffer, we shall be glorified, but he limits his
speech, and says, If we suffer with him, If we suffer with Christ. Hence two
things that be of use are further to be gathered, I will touch them briefly and
in order.

First this, that suffering in general whatsoever it be, is not Only
suffering with Christ is truly comfortable.
every one that suffers has not just cause and ground of comfort, because he
suffers, but only such as suffer with Christ; only sufferers with Christ,
that is, such as suffer as Christ has suffered, both for the cause and for the
manner of suffering, such as suffer for a good cause, and for righteousness
sake, such as bear the crosses and afflictions the Lord lays on them, with
patience, and in obedience, and silence, and with submission of their wills to
the good will and pleasure of the Lord, though it be to the loss of their
lives, they only have cause of true comfort, and of sound in their rejoicing
in their suffering. 1. Pet. 2.19, 20, 21. says the Apostle, This is
thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. For what praise is it, says he, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye take it patiently? but and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and
take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. For hereunto ye are called: for
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ensample that we should follow his
steps. As if he had said, the sufferi^g for conscience toward God, for
righteousness sake, and suffering as we have Christ for an ensample, that is
the suffering that is thank-worthy and pleasing to God, and the suffering
wherein there is true comfort to be found. And in the same Epistle, Chap. 4.15.
says the Apostle, Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or an
evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters: there is no comfort in
that suffering: and then he subioynes, verse 16. But if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this behalf. He
has cause in that respect to praise God and rejoice. Math. 5.11.12. says the
Lord Jesus, Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you, for my sake, falsely; Rejoice and be glad, for
great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you. We must then look to the cause of our suffering, and to the manner
of it, that the things which we suffer for at the hands of men, be for
righteousness sake, and that we suffer both those things by men, and the
afflictions that come to us from the immediate hand of God, with patience, and
with obedience, and submission of our wills to the good will of our heavenly
Father, if we would find comfort in our sufferings.

Popish voluntary sufferings, and the needless sufferings of others, justly
reproved.
going barefoote, and by whipping themselves, but alas all those things are but
will worship, and no better then the practice of Baals Priests, who cut
themselves as their manner was, with knives and lances, till the blood gushed
out upon them, 1. Kings 18.28. And there be amongst us, who bring troubles and
sufferings on themselves, and they are punished for their demerits and
misdeeds: and there be that will endure much in the world on vain glory.
These and the like can have no true comfort in their sufferings. As there is a
worldly sorrow that causes death, 2. Cor. 7.10. so there is a worldly
suffering, a suffering with the world, either for ill doing, or vain glory,
and the like, and that is so far from being comfortable, as that it may be,
and is to many, but a beginning of endless woe, and of eternal suffering.

Look then that the cause of thy suffering be good, for it is a true saying,
that it is not the punishment but the cause that makes the Martyr; and that thy
suffering in any kind whatsoever be in patience, and with submission of thy
will to the good will of God, and so a suffering with Christ: and that is the
suffering that will indeed yield thee matter of true comfort and of sound
rejoicing: and so I pass from that.

Now the second thing hence offered, in that the Apostle says, If we suffer
with Christ, (I will be brief in it) the point is this.

That Gods children suffering and bearing the cross laid Gods children
suffering with Christ, have Christ their partener and companion in suffering.
as Christ has suffered and borne the cross, they suffer not alone, but they
suffer with Christ, and Christ with them; they have Christ as it were a
partener and a companion with them in their sufferings. And to this purpose we
find that the sufferings of the godly, and of true believers, are expressly said
to be the sufferings of Christ, as Coloss. 1.24. I fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, says the Apostle: and 1. Pet. 4.13. the
Apostle bids the Saints and servants of God rejoice, In as much as they are
partakers of Christ's sufferings. Yea we find in Acts 9.4. that Christ
pronounces from heaven, that he suffers in his members, and that he accounts
all the cruelty that is done to them, as done to himself, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And hence it is that the Apostle Paul calls his afflictions
and persecutions a bearing about in his body the dying of the Lord Jesus. 2.
Cor. 4.10. And Galat. 6.17. he says, He bare in his body the marks of the
Lord Jesus.

And why are the sufferings of Gods children said to be the sufferings of
Christ? Surely,

But for the use Whence true ground of comfort comes to Gods children in time
of afflictions.
may minister matter of sweet comfort to Gods children in time of their
afflictions and sufferings. The heathen man could say, Solamen miseris socios
habuisse doloris: It is comfortable to have companions in misery and trouble.
Now Gods children suffering as Christ has suffered, in some measure, they
suffer not alone, but Christ suffers with them, and they have him as it were a
companion with them in their sufferings, and without question they cannot have
a better companion. Note.
It is better to suffer with Christ, and with him to be under the cross, then
without him to be in the greatest prosperity. Oh then remember this to thy
comfort, thou that art a child of God, thou being under any affliction, and
thou bearing affliction in some measure as it ought to be borne, thou have
Christ a fellow sufferer with thee, and Christ bears up one end of the cross
with thee, and he is able to help and succor thee, and support thee in thy
greatest afflictions. Yea know to thy comfort, that he suffers with thee, who
has already suffered for thee; thou being a member of Christ, his suffering
has removed from thee the bitterness of the cross, namely, the wrath of God
and the curse, he has borne that in his own body and soul; yea he alone, as
Isai. 63.3. I have trodden the winepresse alone: and he has removed that from
thee, and by his suffering he has sweetened thy cross and thy afflictions: yet
in that affliction thou lie under, so sweetened to thee, is he pleased to
bear a part, and as it were to put under his shoulder, and to suffer with
thee: and what an excellent comfort is that, if it be duly considered? Let
every child of God think on it to his comfort in time of his affliction, and
so much also of that.

The Apostle adds a ground of further comfort against the bitterness of the
cross, that we suffering with Christ, our suffering shall end in glory with
Christ. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him. The point hence offered, wherein I will likewise be brief, is

That the sufferings and afflictions of Gods children shall have a comfortable
end, The sufferings and afflictions of Gods children shall end most happily and
most comfortably.
they shall end in happiness and glory everlasting with Christ in heaven, yea
the sufferings of Gods children shall end in correspondent and answerable
glory. The more Gods children suffer here in this world (suffering as they
ought to do) the more and greater shall be their glory in heaven. Psalm. 126.5.
David compares the afflictions of Gods children to sowing in tears, and he
says, the harvest that shall come on that sowing shall be sweet and
comfortable, even a reaping in joy: they that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
Mat. 19.29. Christ says, Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, he shall lose nothing by it, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and
shall inherit everlasting life: his loss shall turn to his exceeding gain,
it shall fall into endless happiness and glory. Iam. 1.12. says the
Apostle, Blessed is the man that endures tentation: for when he is tried, he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him: his trial shall end in victory, and in the fruition of the crown
of life. To these we might add many other testimonies, manifesting this, that
the sufferings and afflictions of Gods children shall end happily and
comfortably, they shall end in happiness and glory with Christ in heaven.

The ground of this is, It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble his children, and to his children that are
troubled rest and refreshing. And to this purpose Christ brings in Abraham
speaking in the parable, Luke 16.25. Son, remember that in thy life time thou
receiuedst thy pleasures, or good things, and Lazarus pains, now therefore is
he comforted and thou art tormented. As if he had said, now it is just and
equal, that he should be comforted and thou tormented.

Come we to make use of this truth: It serves as a special A special ground
of comfort to Gods children in their greatest afflictions.
the due consideration of it will be a special means to cheer them up, and
to keep them from fainting in their greatest afflictions and sufferings: for
as the saying is, that is well that ends well; and certainly it shall be
exceeding well, yea unspeakably, and vnconceiueably well with Gods children
concerning the end of their afflictions: though the bearing and suffering of
them be very painful and grievous to the flesh and for the time, yet the end
of them will be most glorious, happy, and comfortable, they shall certainly
end in happiness and glory with Christ in heaven. And doubtless the
consideration of this, made the holy Martyrs go with rejoicing and singing
through the flames of fire, and with cheerfulness to endure most exquisite
torments. Some of them have said when they were going to be put to death,
Though their breakefast should be sower, yet their supper should be most sweet.
It is recorded of Ignatius, that when he was cast to the wild beasts to be
devoured, he said: Because I am the Lords wheat, I shall be ground in the teeth
of the beasts, that I may be made fit bread for the Lords table. A speech full
of constant boldness and heavenly comfort. And we read of Moses, Heb. 11.26.
that he esteemed the rebukes of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt. And why? he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, he had an eye
to the end of his sufferings, and knew that the end would be most sweet. And
thus do thou that art a child of God, in the time of thy afflictions, thy
sickness, thy poverty, or the like, suffer not thy mind to beat too much
upon the bitterness of thy affliction, but have thine eye, the eye of thy
mind, on the end of thy affliction, and consider with thy self the end will be
most sweet and comfortable, and that will be a notable means to cheer thee
up, and to hold up thy fainting heart. And though thou be much troubled and
molested, thou art slandered, reproched, and persecuted, and many ways hardly
dealt withal for thy profession of the Gospel, and for thy laboring to walk
with an even foot according to the truth of the Gospel in the way of
holiness: Rejoice in it, that thou art counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the
name of Christ, as the Apostle did, Acts 5.41. and remember that the end will
be comfortable; thy sufferings shall end in happiness and glory with Christ
in heaven, and that will make thee do as Christ did, Heb. 12.2. Endure the
cross and despise the shame. And remember that the more thou suffer for the
name of Christ, and for the keeping of faith and a good conscience, the more
and greater shall be thy glory in heaven, and thou shall thereby add weight
to the crown of glory that shall be given to thee.

VERSE 18. For I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.


COme we now to verse 18. For I count that the afflictions of this present
time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. In this verse
our Apostle adds further matter of comfort against the bitterness of the
cross, and of encouragement to a patient and constant bearing of the cross,
and that by an argument from the weight of that glory that he spoke of verse
before, and that such as suffer with Christ shall be partakers of; as namely,
that the glory they shall partake of, shall be exceeding weighty and
marvelous great. And this the Apostle does not simply affirm, but he
propounds his argument under a comparison of things unequal, comparing the
afflictions of this life with the glory of the life to come, as the less with
the greater, as that the glory of the life to come does far surmount and
exceed all the afflictions and sufferings of this life, and that the
afflictions of this life cannot hold weight with the glory of the life to
come; and if they should be weighed together, as in a balance, the one would
be found but light in respect of the other: The afflictions of this present
time, says the Apostle, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed
unto us, they are not comparable unto it. And herein also the Apostle preuents
a secret objection; for some might say to him, You tell us that we suffering
with Christ we shall be glorified with him, but in the mean time we lie under
grievous troubles, and very sore afflictions, our trials and sufferings here
in this world are intolerable, and who is able to endure the troubles that do
befall us? This the Apostle meets withal, in saying, That the afflictions of
this present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us,
that shall be revealed unto us. As if he had said, though your afflictions and
sufferings in this present life be great, and grievous, and sore, and hard to
be borne and endured, yet bear them with as much patience as possibly you can,
and know to your comfort, that the glory which is to follow on your
afflictions is far greater and more lasting then be your afflictions, there
is no comparison between them. And this the Apostle affirms as a truth
whereof he was resolved, as a certain truth, in his judgment, in his account
and estimation. For I count (says he) that the afflictions of this present
time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. And so we see
the general drift and purpose of the Apostle in this verse, and the general
matter of it: I will now lay forth the sense and meaning of the words.

(...). Interpretation.
For I count. The word here used signifies thus much, I collect and gather, and
that firmly, as on just reckoning, or after debating and reasoning the matter,
I do certainly conclude. We find the same word used Romans 3.28. and it is there
rendered, and that rightly, (...), therefore we conclude: therefore we set
down this as a certain truth and certain conclusion, that a man is justified
by faith without the works of the Law: and so indeed the word (...) is here to
be taken, I collect and gather, and that firmly, and I conclude this, and I
resolve on it as a certain truth, That the afflictions of this present time,
or the passions and sufferings of this present time for so the word (...)
signifies: Of this present time, or of the time which is now, (...). The
Apostle hereby means not only the afflictions and sufferings of this present
time wherein he lived, and the afflictions that Gods children did then undergo,
but all the afflictions of this present life, even all such tribulations and
crosses as they do bear during the time of this life, and whilst they are
here on the face of the earth, are not worthy, or of equal weight. For the
word here used, signifies the equality or like weight of things weighed in a
balance together: and so the meaning is, are not of equal weight, or are not
proportionable to the glory that shall be showed unto us. Of the glory: that
is, of the glory that Gods children shall be invested withal in heaven, which
shall be showed or revealed, or which we shall have at the appearing of the
Lord Jesus, as Coloss. 3.4. When Christ which is our life shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in glory. Unto us, or in us: that is, to our
bodies and souls, or wherewith our bodies and souls shall be clothed. Thus
then conceive we the meaning of the words of this verse, as if the Apostle had
said.

For I collect and gather, and that firmly, I conclude and resolve on this as
a certain truth, that the passions and sufferings of this life, even all
troubles, trials, and crosses that we or any of Gods children do bear during
the time of this life, and whilst we live here on the face of the earth, are
not of equal weight, are not in any respect proportionable to the heavenly
glory wherewith our bodies and souls shall be invested, and that shall be put
on them at the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ; there is no comparison
between them.

Now we see the Apostle here delivers not this truth, that the afflictions of
this present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us,
as an uncertain opinion, but as a certain truth, and a truth whereof he was
fully resolved. And thus are the Ministers of the word to deliver to the people
of God truths that are of special use, and needful to be known, not as their
opinions, but as certain truths. How Gods Ministers are to deliver needful
holy truths.
Indeed the Ministers of the word are seriously to weigh and consider what they
deliver before they do deliver it: but that which they have seriously thought
on, studied for, and earnestly sought at the hands of God by prayer, and the
Lord has vouchsafed to reveal to them by his Spirit, being a truth needful
to be known, and agreeable to the written word of God, and to the analogy and
proportion of faith, they are to deliver confidently, and to avouch as a
certain truth of God; yea to auerre it to be such a truth as they are ready
to seal with their blood if they be called to it. I will not stand on that,
let it suffice to have pointed at it.

Again, in that the Apostle does here thus enlarge himself, in setting down
this, that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed unto us, setting it down as a certain truth, as a truth
whereof he was fully resolved, thereby to comfort the believing Romans and
other true believers against the bitterness of the cross, I might stand to
show, that the way to comfort and to cheer up such as are under affliction and
in distress, is not by conjectures, or by witty conceits, but by that which a
man is able to auerre to be a certain truth of God, and to resolve the
conscience of it, that it is the holy truth of God: but I pass from that also,
and come to the matter and thing here auerred by the Apostle, and resolved on
as a certain truth, and that is this: That the afflictions of this present
time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us: and hence this
conclusion is offered.

The suffe^^ng^ ^ this life, be they never so great and grievous, are not
comparable to the glory of heaven.
Whatsoever Gods children either do or can suffer in this world in any kind,
whether from the hands of men, or laid on them by the immediate hand of God,
on their bodies, or souls, or howsoever, it is not proportionable or of equal
weight to the glory that shall be put on them in heaven. And to this purpose
that is a clear text, 2. Corinthians. 4.17. where the Apostle says, Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, causes to us a far more excellent and
an eternal weight of glory. I he Apostle there comparing the afflictions of
this life with the glory of heaven, he calls the one light and momentanie, and
the other eternal and weighty; yea he gives to the glory of heaven a most
excellent and eternal weight. And from those words of the Apostle we may
gather reasons and grounds of this truth, that the suffering of Gods children
in this world are not comparable or proportionable to the glory that shall be
put on them in heaven. As

First, the afflictions of this life are but momentanie and Peter compares them
together, 1. Pet. 5.10. The God of grace which has called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that we have suffered a little.

Again, the afflictions of this life are for their measure Things that eye
has not seen, neither ear heard, neither came into man's heart, are, which
God has prepared for them which love him. 2. Corinthians. 12.4. the Apostle says,
he being rapt up into Paradise, he heard words unutterable, and not possible
for man to utter. And we read that Peter being present at the transfiguration
of Christ, and having but a glimse of heavenly glory, he was so overwhelmed
with it, as that he spoke he knew not what, says the text, Matthew. 9.6. And
therefore doubtless on these grounds this stands as a firm and certain
truth, that all the afflictions Gods children do or can suffer in this world,
are not comparable to the glory of heaven; that glory does every way
surmount them, and there is no comparison between them.

And for the use, first this truth ouerturnes that conceit of the Papists, that
the sufferings of Gods children in this world The Popish opinion that the
sufferings of Gods children merit heavenly glory, confuted.
that cannot possibly be, because there is no proportion between them and
heavenly glory: and between merit and reward given to merit, there must be a
proportion. The recompense of merit is an act of justice, and justice is a
kind of equality; and therefore there being no equality between the
sufferings of this life and the glory of the life to come, they cannot truly
and properly merit or deserve it.

What ought to be the meditation of Gods children in time of their great
afflictions, that they may be comsorted.
are not comparable to the glory of heaven? Is there no proportion between
their suffering in this world, and the glory that shall be put on them in
heaven? Then let Gods children meditate and think on this to their comfort in
the time of their greatest afflictions and sufferings: doubtless the Lord
would not have put it down as an argument of comfort in the time of trouble,
if it were not his will that we should exercise our minds in meditating and
thinking on it. And therefore thou that art a child of God, meditate and think
on this; if thou lie under some grievous affliction, remember that thy
sufferings here in this world be they never so great, are not comparable to the
glory of heaven; and it will be a notable means to cheer thee up, and to
comfort thee. Happily thou complainest of thy long lingering sickness and pain,
thy body being under sickness and pain: and take a man in a burning fever,
and you shall hear him utter such words, and so protest of his pain as if it
were insufferable: but what is that pain to eternity of joy and glory in
heaven? it is not worthy to be named with it: compare them together, and thou
shall find it will mitigate thy pain, and it will yield thee comfort in thy
greatest pangs. A diseased man or woman we know will endure cutting, and
searing, and the like, in consideration of ease afterward: and comparing that
pain with the ease he hopes will follow, he endures cutting and seating with
patience: so do thou compare the pain of thy suffering with the joy and glory
in heaven, and it will certainly swallow up thy pain, and yield thee much
comfort. If we were as apprehensiue of the greatness of the glory of heaven
abiding for us, as we are apprehensiue of the pain of our present sufferings,
without question it would make us bear them exceeding patiently.

I answer thee. Keep thy faith in exercise, Faith is the evidence of things
which are not seen: and that feeling of the glory of heaven though yet to
come, will ouerwhelme a world of misery and pain though it be present. The
holy Martyrs endured extreme tortures with patience and comfort: and why? they
were exules a corpore, in their souls they mounted up to heaven. Labor
therefore thus to keep thy faith in exercise in the time of thy great
afflictions.

Now in the next place, observe how the Apostle limits the afflictions of Gods
children, he calls the^ the afflictions of this present time, or of the time
that is now: I count that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed unto us. And hence we are given to
understand thus

That the afflictions of Gods children are but of short continuance, Though the
afflictions of Gods children be bitter and sharp, yet they are but of short
continuance.
and they last but a while. Though the afflictions of Gods children be bitter
and sharp, yet they are but momentanie and short, and they endure but for the
time of this present life, they determine and end in death, and death puts an
end to them all, and so they are but short and momentanie. And thus the Apostle
speaks of them expressly in the place before cited, 2. Corinthians. 4.17. he there
says, the afflictions that he and other true believers endured, were but light
and momentany, but for a mement, Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory.
And so also speaks the Apostle Peter of the afflictions of Gods children, 1.
Pet. 5.10. After that ye have suffered a little, says he, after your suffering
which is but short, and for a little time. And on this ground does the Author
to the Hebrews cheer up the believing Hebrews, and encourage them to a
patient bearing of their great afflictions. Hebr. 10.37. he tells them, their
afflictions should last but for a very little while, and the Lord Jesus would
shortly come and put an end to them, Yet a very little while (says he) and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Hence is the time of the
afflictions of Gods children called in Scripture sometimes the hour of
tentation, and sometimes the day of affliction, as Eccles. 7.16. In the day of
wealth be of good comfort, and in the day of affliction consider: to note the
shortness of that time, that it is but as an hour, or as a day. And it is
worth our marking to this purpose that we find, Isai. 54.8. Isai. 54.8.
the Lord there speaking by his Prophet of the 70. years captivity of his
people, he calls it but a moment, and a little season, For a moment (says he)
in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.
And indeed if a child of God should lie under the afflicting hand of God from
his birth to his death, admit he live the full age of a man, yet it is but for
a while, and for a short time; for the days of our life here are but few, our
time in this world is but short: our life is compared to a vapor, to a shadow,
to a bubble, to a blast of wind, to a watch in the night, and to many other
things of short continuance: it is said to be but as an hand breadth, or as a
span long, Psalm. 39.5. And therefore the afflictions of Gods children lasting
no longer then the time of this present life, and death putting an end to them,
as indeed it does, the holy Ghost says, Revel. 14.13. When death comes, they
rest from their labors, and from all their pains, miseries, and sufferings:
it must needs be that they are but short and momentanie, and they last but a
while.

Now for the use, first this truth discouers a difference between A difference
between the sufferings of Gods children and the sufferings of the wicked,
discovered.
The sufferings of Gods children are but short and momentanie, they last no
longer then the time of this life, death puts an end to them: but the
sufferings of the wicked and reprobate are of longer continuance, they are not
only sufferings of this present life, and such as are cut off and determined
by death, no, no, the wicked and reprobate do by death enter into endless woe
and everlasting sufferings, their sufferings are but here begun, and they shall
last for ever. And therefore thou that art a wicked and profane wretch, when
the hand of God is heavy on thee, and thou art under some grievous pain and
torment, think not that death shall put an end to thy torment, as many times
wicked and profane miscreants do: they lying under grievous torments, they
wish they might dye, and say, oh that I were dead and out of this world, then I
should be out of my pain. Poor souls, they are deceived, death to them is
but an entrance into endless torments. And know it whosoever thou art, that
art a graceless and profane wretch, thou being under some grievous torment
and pain, and having a feeling of thy torment and pain, and yet having no
feeling of thy vileness and sin to be humbled for it, the Lord has but
begun to sit in judgment against thee, and thy present torment and pain (thou
still continuing in thy vileness and sin) is but a pledge of more fearful
torments, pains, and sufferings yet to come, and it is but a beginning of
sorrow, Mat. 24.8. It is but a beginning of thine eternal woe and everlasting
suffering.

Again, for a second use, is it so that the afflictions of Gods What Gods
children are to consider to their comfort in time of their bitter and sharp
afflictions.
and they last no longer then this present life, and death puts an end to them?
Here is then ground and matter of comfort for thee that art a child of God in
the time of thy greatest afflictions and sufferings: though thy afflictions be
bitter and sharp, yet consider this to thy comfort, they are but short, and
they shall last but for a while. And the heathen man could say: that short
evils though they be great and bitter, yet they are more tolerable because
they are short. And therefore thou that art a child of God, think on this to
thy comfort when thou lie under some grievous affliction; yea consider with
thy self, thy affliction is never so grievous but the Lord vouchsafes thee
some intermission, he gives thee some breathing, and some refreshing in it, as
he says, Isai. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wrath, for the spirit should fail before me, and I have made the breath. Yea
consider that thy affliction is measured out to thee by the good hand of thy
heavenly Father, who will be sure to keep a measure, as the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 10.13. And though it be so that thou art under some great affliction all
thy life long, yet cheer up thy self with this, thy life is not long, and so
thy affliction cannot long endure: when death shall come and cut off the thread
of thy life, it shall also put an end to all thy afflictions. And be it so that
thou art under the hand of bloody persecutors and cruel tormentors, yet
consider that either thy persecutors and tormentors may die, their breath may
fail them, or the instruments and means of thy trouble and torment may be
interrupted, and broken, and fail, the rod that is on thy back may be wasted:
and the Lord has said, Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on
the lot of the righteous: or thy self may die, and be taken out of their hands
by death, and they can then put thee to no further pain nor torment. And
therefore as Christ says, Math. 10.28. Fear not them that can kill the body,
that can only torment thy body, and that only during the time of this life,
and when this life is ended, can go no further. Consider that as thou do
suffer daily, so thou art dying daily, and that which thy persecutors do
afflict, is but thy body, and thy body is drawing to corruption and death,
and death shall exempt thee and set thee free from all their tyranny. Thus
make thy advantage of thy mortality, thou that art a child of God, and
remember when thou lie under any great and sore affliction, thy affliction
shall last no longer then the time of this life, death shall put an end to it,
and it is but as one says of Iulians persecution, Nubecula cito transitura, as
a storm that shall soon be ouerblowne, and then will follow an everlasting
calm, even an everlasting freedom and rest from all sorrows, and griefs,
and pains, and sufferings: and think on that to thy comfort.

There is yet one thing to be further noted in this reason, I will but touch it
in a word. The Apostle here speaking of the glory that shall be put on Gods
children in heaven, he says, the glory that shall be showed, or that shall be
revealed to us.

The point hence is this. That the time shall come when Gods children shall one
day be glorious in the sight, both of men and Angels.
And to this purpose speaks the Apostle, Colos. 3.4. When Christ which is our
life shall appear, when he shall appear to judge the world, and come in his
glory, as it is Math. 25.31. Then shall we also appear with him in glory,
even clothed with unspeakable glory, in our souls, and in our bodies. 1. Ioh.
3.2. says Saint John, Dearly beloved, we are now the sons of God, yet it
does not appear what we shall be, and we know that when we shall appear we
shall be like him. We shall then be like the Lord Jesus in glory, and then the
glory that is reserved for us in heaven, shall be put on us, and shall then
openly appear: and not to add further testimony.

The reason She is all glorious within, and that is not discerned with carnal
eyes: and so the world looking on Gods children here, they see not their
beauty and glory, but only see their afflictions and troubles, and thereupon
they judge them to be wretched and miserable; and therefore there must be a
time when the glory that belongs to them shall be openly revealed, and set
before the eyes of all the world, that even the most wicked may look on it,
and be forced to justify Gods goodness and mercy toward his children, and
his gracious dealing with them.

Now this for use A ground of great comfort to Gods children.
for what though it be so that their beauty and glory be here in this world
ouershadowed and hid from the eye of the world, and of such as look on them
with carnal eyes, yet let them wait in patience for a time, and the time
shall come when their glory shall manifestly appear, and be open to the view
of the whole world; yea the time shall come when men and Angels shall see it,
and acknowledge it with admiration; yea the time shall come when those who have
here turned their glory into shame, as David speaks, Psalm. 4.2. that is, have
here reproched them for their holy and religious course (which indeed is their
glory,) and laid that on them as a reproach, and loaded them with odious and
soul names in respect of that, shall see that which now they account their
shame crowned with glory, and shall be forced to change their note, and to
cry out and say: Ah, we fools thought the life of these men or women base,
and full of dishonor, and now behold their unspeakable brightness and glory,
now it appears to the view of all the world. Let this be thought on as a
ground of sweet comfort to all Gods children. Come we now to verse 19. and so
read to the 24. verse.

VERSE 19.20.21.22.23. For the fervent desire of the creature waits when the
sons of God shall be revealed.

Because the creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by reason
of him, which has subdued it under hope.

Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauelleth in pain
together unto this present.

And not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our body.


IN these verses the Apostle further proves, that the glory that shall be put
on Gods children in heaven, shall be exceeding great and weighty. For having
said verse before, that the heavenly glory that shall be showed or revealed to
Gods children, does far exceed their present sufferings, he here confirms
that proposition, and he here further proves, that the glory where with Gods
children shall be invested in heaven, is both exceeding great, and also most
sure and certain, that it shall be both great glory, and also certain
glory, and to that purpose he brings two arguments. The first is from the
expectation of the creature, that the creature does expect and look for it,
that the creature does wait for the manifestation of that glory. And the
second is from the expectation of such as have the first fruits of the Spirit,
that they also expect and look for it, and wait for it: and that which both
the creature by secret instinct of nature, and also the godly by the instinct
of grace, and the motion of Gods Spirit, do expect, and look for, and wait
for, must needs be both great and excellent, and also most sure and certain.

Now the first argument of the Apostle is laid down verse 19. and that not
barely, but with amplification, from the manner how the creature waits for the
revelation of the sons of God, as namely, that it is with earnest and fervent
desire after it. Verse 19.
The fervent desire of the creature, says the Apostle, waits when the sons
of God shall be revealed.

Then in the two verses following he brings two reasons why the creature does
with earnest and fervent desire wait for the revelation of the sons of God,
as first in verse 20. Verse 20.
he brings a reason from the present state and hard condition of the creature,
that the creature is now for the present subject to vanity, and therefore
waits when the sons of God shall be revealed. Which subjection is further
set forth, the Apostle explaning how the creature is subject to vanity, that
is, not of it own will, but from another cause, by reason of him which has
subdued it. Whereunto the Apostle adioynes hope of deliverance, and says, By
reason of him which has subdued it under hope: and so he falls on the second
reason, why the creature does with fervent desire wait for the revelation of
the sons of God, verse 21. Verse 21.
which is taken from the future better estate of the creature, as that the
creature shall be delivered from the present hard condition to a better state,
because the creature also shall be delivered (the Apostle expressing from what,
namely, from bondage) from the bondage of corruption. And whereunto it shall be
restored: Into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. And then verse 22.
Verse 22.
the Apostle concludes his argument, by setting down the greatness of the
bondage the creature is subject to; that it is so great, as it does (as it were
an heavy burden) press down the creature, and make it groan under the
weight of it, and as it were travel in pain under it for deliverance. Yea the
Apostle says, Every creature is under this great bondage, and groans, and
travels in pain, together one with another, and that to this hour: that is,
to this present: and further sets out that as a thing commonly known, We
know, says he, that every creature groneth with us also, and trauelleth in
pain together unto this present.

The second argument that the Apostle brings to prove that the glory that
shall be revealed on Gods children in heaven, is both great and sure, from the
expectation of such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, is laid down
verse 23. Verse 23.
I will lay forth that argument when I come to the handling of that verse.

Come we now to stand on these verses as they lie in order. Verse 19. For the
fervent desire of the creature waits when the sons of God shall be
revealed. Interpretation.
I will first open the sense and meaning of the words of the 19. verse. For the
fervent desire of the creature. What is here meant by the creature, does much
trouble interpreters, I will labor to give you that sense of it that is most
agreeable to the context and to other places of Scripture. And by the creature,
here we are not to understand reasonable creatures, men or Angels, good or bad:
for the good Angels they are not subject to vanity, and under the bondage of
corruption as the creature is the Apostle here speaks of. And as for bad
Angels and wicked men, they long not for the time when the sons of God shall
be revealed. And of good men the Apostle speaks verse 23. expressly
distinguishing them from the creature whereof he speaks: Not only the
creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the Spirit, says he: But
by the creature, here is meant the whole frame of the world, consisting of the
celestial and elementarie region, as reverend Beza expounds it, that is,
the visible heavens with all their goodly furniture, of stars, and of
celestial bodies, and the earth with her ornaments, and the other elements.
And this exposition agrees with that the Apostle subioynes, verse 21. That the
creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God: Meaning by the creature the whole frame of
heaven and earth, according to that the Lord promises by his Prophet: That
there shall be a restoration of the heavens and of the earth, Isai. 65.17. and
66.23. The fervent desire of the creature. The Apostle here speaks
figuratively, he puts on the creature the person of one who earnestly and
with a longing desire, looks for some person, or some thing: and the text
runs thus, The expectation or earnest desire of the creature expects or
waits: The original word (...) is very significant, it signifies the
looking for of some person, or of some thing, with lifting up of the head, or
stretching out of the neck, or putting forth the head, and setting out of the
eyes, with earnest intention and observation, to see when that person or that
thing should appear; as a man looks for the coming of a special friend,
whose company he much desires and looks for: having a promise of his coming,
he gets him up to the top of the house, or some turret or high place, and he
puts forth his head, and he looks this way, and he looks that way, and
he sets his eyes on the way that his friend is to come, to see if he can
epsy him coming, wishing and desiring his appearance; that is the weight of
the word here used by the Apostle, as if he had said: The creature does
earnestly and continually, as it were with stretching out of the neck, or
thrusting forth of the head, expect and wait when the sons of God shall be
revealed. Now this expectation here ascribed to the creature, is nothing else
but the secret instinct which God has put into the creatures, whereby it does
after a manner unknown to us, as it were long and desire that perfect estate
in which it was first made and created: even to attain that perfection from
which it is fallen, and from which it is withheld through the sin of man: the
creature tends to that perfection by a natural instinct and propension, as
heavy things by natural propension move downwards, and light thing move
upwards. And that is the desire and expectation of the creature the Apostle
here means when he says, The fervent desire of the creature waits on or
expects, not that the creature knows when the sons of God should be
revealed, but because when the sons of God shall be revealed, that is, when
both the persons of Gods children, and also the glory that belongs to them,
shall be put on them, shall be made manifest. Thus then conceive we the meaning
of the Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said:

For the whole frame of the world, even the visible heavens, with all their
goodly furniture, the stars and celestial bodies, the body of the earth
with her ornaments, and other elements do, by a secret instinct which God has
put into them, after a manner unknown to us, as it were long for and desire
that the original perfection, in which they were first made and created, from
which they are fallen and withheld through the sin of man, which shall be
restored to them when the sons of God shall be revealed: and so they do
continually and earnestly, as it were with stretched out necks, and thrusting
forth of their heads, expect and wait when both the persons of Gods children,
and also their glory, even the glory that belongs to them, and shall be put
on them, shall be made manifest, and shall appear.

Now (as I showed) these words, The fervent desire of the creature waits when
the sons of God shall be revealed, are brought by the Apostle as an argument
to prove both the greatness and the certainty of the glory that shall be put
on Gods children in heaven, that it shall be both great glory, and also most
sure and certain glory, because the creature, the whole frame of the world,
does expect and wait for the manifestation of it. So reasons the Apostle: I
count, says he, that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of
the glory which shall be showed unto us: and then he subioynes as a proof and
confirmation of that: For the fervent desire of the creature waits when the
sons of God shall be revealed. We see then, which is the point I will stand
on,

That the holy Spirit of God is pleased to inform us of an The holy Spirit of
God informs us of excellent truths from the creatures.
as namely, that the glory that shall be put on Gods children in heaven, shall
be both great, and also most sure and certain. And he seeks to confirm us in
the acknowledgement of this truth from the creature, that the creature by a
natural instinct waits for the manifestation of it, and therefore it is both
great, and also most sure and certain. And thus deals the holy Spirit of God
in many places of Scripture: he sends us to learn some duty, or some truth,
and some good thing of the creatures, as of the heavens, of the earth, of
trees, of beasts, of fowls of the air, and the like: Prou. 6.6, 7, 8. Solomon
sends the sluggard to learn wisdom of the Pismire, who by her Summer
labor provides against an hard and stormy winter, Go to the Pismire, o
sluggard, behold her ways, and bewise: For she having no guide, governor, nor
ruler, prepareeh her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in the
harvest. And Prou. 30.24.25.26.27.28. he teaches us wisdom from the poor
creatures, from the pismire, the conies, the grasshopper, and the spider, as
there you may read. Math. 10.16. Christ would have his Apostles learn
wisdom and providence of the serpent, and innocence of the dove, Be wise as
serpents, and innocent as doves: yea Math. 6.26.28. he sends his followers to
learn to cast their confidence on God from the fowls of the heaven, and from
the Lillies of the field, Behold the fowls of the heaven, Math. 6.26.
for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into their barnes: yet your
heavenly Father feeds them. And learn how the lillies of the field do grow,
they labor not, neither spinne, yet Solomon in all his glory was not clothed
like one of these. And the book of Job is full of arguments from things
natural, to make known the infinite wisdom and power of God. And so in many
other places of Scripture the holy Spirit of God sends us to learn some
duties, or some truth, and is pleased to inform us of some good things, from
the creature.

The invisible things of God, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the
creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they
should be without excuse.

Reproof of such as learn no good thing from any creature.
To insist in the particular here intended; does the holy Spirit of God inform
us, and seek to confirm us in this truth, that the glory that shall be put
on Gods children in heaven, shall be both great, and also most sure and
certain, from the very instinct of the creature; that the creature by a
secret instinct waits for the manifestation of it, and therefore it is both
great, and sure, and certain? Then this discouers, that those vile miscreants
and monsters, those Atheists, who mock at the glory of heaven, and think
there is no such matter, and think there is neither God nor devil, heaven nor
hell; they have not yet learned so much as the holy Spirit of God is pleased to
inform us of from the very dumb and senseless creatures. And to apply this a
little nearer, consider with thy self, thou that art a graceless person, a
drunkard, a blasphemer, a Sabbath breaker, thou that wilt do the works of thy
calling on the Sabbath day, or run to thy pleasures; though thou do not
openly deny God with thy mouth, yet thou deniest him by thy works: so says
the Apostle, Tit. 1.16. Yea by thy practice thou deniest heaven, the day of
judgment, and the glory of the life to come; and thou have not yet learned so
much as the holy Spirit of God is pleased to inform thee of by the very
instinct of the dumb and senseless creatures: and assure thy self, thou going
on in thy Atheism and profaneness, the dumb and senseless creatures shall
one day rise in judgment against thee and condemn thee; remember it when thou
runnest after thy sports and pastimes on the Sabbath day, the very air thou
breathest in, and the heavens over thine head, the ground thou treadest on, and
the dust under thy seete, shall one day be witnesses against thee, and shall
condemn thee. They in their kind acknowledge a judgment day, and that there
is an heaven prepared for Gods children, and an hell for the wicked: and by
their waiting for the manifestation of the glory that shall be put on Gods
children, do teach thee so much if thou would learn it: and thou by thy
practice deniest it, and therefore thy case is fearful, think on it, and if
hell have not full possession of thy soul, learn to reform thy self.

For a second use, we that profess our selves to be Gods children, must learn
on this ground that the holy Spirit of God is pleased to teach us some good
thing from the creatures, how to carry our selves amidst the creatures that we
see and are about us in the world, namely thus, to walk in earthly things with
heavenly minds, and to make our use of every creature of God, We are to walk
in ea^thly things with heavenly minds, and to make use of every creature we
see in the world.
and from every creature to learn some duty, and some good thing, as from
the food of our bodies to learn and see the necessity of the food of our
souls; from the flowers of our gardens and grass of the fields, flourishing
for a time, and then cut down, withered, and dried, to learn that such is our
life: yea learn we from the very instinct of the creature, waiting for the
manifestation of the glory of Gods children, to strengthen our faith touching
the truth and certainty of the glory of the life to come: that howsoever
Atheists either directly or by their practice deny it, yet let us learn not
only from the holy word of God, but also from the instinct of the creature,
waiting for the manifestation of that glory, to be strengthened in our
persuasion of it, and to be fully persuaded that there is glory laid up for
Gods children; and that doubtless there is a reward for the righteous, and
that light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Psalm
97.11. and though it be as seed hid under the earth for a time, yet it shall
certainly at length appear. The very dumb and senseless creatures by the
instinct of nature which the Lord has put into them, wait for the
manifestation of it: and therefore learn we this lesson the holy Spirit of God
would inform us of by the instinct of the creature, that there is certainly
great glory laid up for Gods children.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle does not here barely affirm,
that the creature waits when the sons of God shall be revealed, but he sets
it forth with this amplification, that it waits with a fervent and with an
earnest desire, that the creature (as we showed) does as it were with
stretching out of the neck, and thrusting out the head, even earnestly and
continually wait and expect when the sons of God shall be revealed. Now what
may this teach us? Surely thus much: hereby the Spirit of God makes known unto
us thus much.

That the very dumb creature has that good in it in a The dumb creature
has that good in it in a great measure, which many men and women have not in
them in any measure.
The very heavens, and the very dumb and dead earth does as it were stretch
out the neck, and thrust out the head, continually looking for the revelation
of the sons of God, and for the manifestation of their glory. But many men
and women in the world, being wicked and ungodly persons, they shrink in and
draw in their heads at the remembrance of that day when the sons of God shall
be revealed, and when they shall appear clothed with heavenly glory; they
have no desire in them at all to see that day: no, wicked persons wish in their
hearts that that day might never come, it troubles them to think of that day,
or to hear of it, the hearing of it torments them before the time, as the
devils said to Christ, Matthew. 8.29. and they put it far away from them in
their apprehension, as the Prophet says of the wicked of his time, Amos 6.3.
They put far away the evil day, (for so they count the day when the sons
of God shall be revealed) and it shall so prove to them, they going on in their
sins without repentance, and they approach to the seat of iniquity. And
hence we find it said, that the day of Christ his coming to judgment when the
children of God shall appear with him in glory, shall come on the wicked and
ungodly suddenly, and unexpected, and when they look not for it, as Christ
says, Matthew. 24.50. Mat. 24.50.
The evil servants master will come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not ware of. And the Apostle says, 1. Thessal. 5.2.
that the day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in the night: meaning on
the wicked, for so he explanes it in the verses following; which indeed is a
plain evidence, that the wicked and ungodly have not in them any the least
expectation, or any the least desire or longing after the day when the sons
of God shall be revealed, which is in the dumb and senseless creatures by the
instinct of nature in a great measure: and the reafon is



The base and vile condition of wicked persons discovered.
even inferior to the dumb and liuelesse earth, they have not in them any
measure of that longing after the glory to come, that is in the dumb and dead
earth in a great measure, and they are in that respect worse and more base then
the earth they tread on. Wicked and ungodly men and women commonly pride
themselves in their outward excellencies, in their beauty, and strength,
comely proportion, and the like, and they lift up their heads, and they look
big on those that are far better then themselves, and they walk with
stretched out necks, as the Prophet says of the proud dames of his time,
Isai. 3.16. And it is true of the proud and scornful dames of our time: but
alas in that respect in which the poor, dumb, dull, and senseless earth lifts
up her head, and stretches out her neck, namely, in regard of the glory of
heaven that in time shall be manifested, base wretches, they dare not (as it
were) show their faces in that respect, they hang down their heads, and they
shrink and pull in their necks, and therein they are more base and more vile
then the dust of the earth, or the very dung in the streets. And howsoever
wicked persons do think it harsh, and that they are hardly dealt withal, when
they are compared to brute creatures, to horses, to mules, to dogs, to
swine, and the like: yet indeed, as you see, in some respect they are inferior
to the dull and dead earth, they have not that good in them in any measure,
which is in the dumb and dead earth in a great measure. And take notice of it,
thou that art a wicked and graceless person, consider how far thy sin does
abase thee, even beneath the dumb and senseless earth thou treadest on; the
earth under thy feet lifts up her head, and stretches out her neck, longing
for the day when the sons of God shall be revealed, and thou through the
guiltiness of sin tremblest to think on that day: Oh consider the abasement
thou art brought to by thy wicked course of life, and let it stir thee up to
bethink thy self of a speedy reformation: and so much of that point.

Come we to consider that which the creature waits for with earnest desire,
and that is the revelation of the sons of God, When the sons of God shall be
revealed: that is, (as we showed) when both the persons of Gods children, and
also their glory shall be made manifest and shall appear. Now hence in the
first place we may take up this conclusion, this point of truth.

That the time shall come, when the persons of Gods children It shall be made
manifest in time to men and Angels, who be Gods children. Romans 8.16.
It is true, that the Lord knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. and he makes his
chosen themselves to know that they are his, by their effectual calling, and
by giving them his Spirit, witnessing with their spirit that they are the
sons of God, as the Apostle says verse 16. Yet Gods children are not so
revealed here in this world, as that others, though they be Gods children, do
know them certainly and infallibly so to be, and they are not known to the
world, as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.1. For this cause the world knows you
not, because it knows not God their Father, but the time shall come when the
persons of Gods children shall be openly revealed, and shall be made known to
the whole world, and that shall be at the day of judgment, Christ will then
separate the sheep from the goats, the good from the bad, and set the one on
his right hand and the other on his left, as he says Matthew. 25.32.33.
Howsoever the goats and sheep be very like, and feed in one pasture, and lie
in one sold here in this world, yet Christ can and will sever them, and put
them asunder at the last day; and when the tares shall be gathered into bundels
and cast into the fire and burned, Matthew. 13.40. then shall just men shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of their Father: as says the Lord Jesus. Matthew.
13.43. They shall then appear as clear as the Sun in his brightness, and
shall be openly revealed, and it shall then be made manifest and known to men
and Angels, who they be that are indeed Gods children. For why, the reason
between him that serves God and him that serves him not, as the Lord speaks
by his Prophet, Mal. 3.18. When the Lord shall make up his jewels, then shall
men discene the^ that serve the Lord, and them that serve him not. And
therefore doubtless the time shall come when the persons of Gods children
shall be openly revealed, and when it shall be made known to all men and
Angels who they be that are indeed Gods children.

judging and condemning of others, a thing too common in the world. We may not
after the manner of the world presently judge a man or a woman to be but an
hypocrite and a dissembler, because happily we discern some weakness in that
man or woman, and some particular failing: Men or women are not presently to be
judged hypocrites and dissemblers, because of some weakness, and some
particular failing.
the time shall come when that man or woman shall be discovered; and we are not
to prevent that time by our untimely censure. It is a fault in some Christians,
that they are ready to question the estate of others, and to doubt of their
state, whether it be good or no, because they iumpe not with them in some
things, they are not of their mind in every particular. But what know
thou, whosoever thou art, whether one that differs from thee in judgment in
some particular, being not of such weight, be a dear child of God or no? If he
be an hypocrite, he shall one day be laid open; and if he be a child of God,
thou art rash in thy judgment, he shall one day be revealed and made known so
to be, to thee and to all the world, and tarry thou the time of discovery.

Again, for a second use: is it so that the time shall come Comfort to such as
are upright and sound hearted in Gods sight though all the world condemn them
as hypocrites.
and when it shall be made manifest to all men and Angels, who they be that are
indeed Gods children? Then cheer up thy self thou that art a child of God,
here is ground of comfort, though all the world speak against thee, and call
thee hypocrite and dissembler. Art thou able to approve thine heart to the Lord
in regard of the uprightness, truth, and sincerity of it? art thou able in
truth to say as Job did, Job 27.5.6. I will never take away mine innocence
from my self. I will keep my righteousness and will not forsake it: though
all men in the world speak against me, I am able to approve my heart to God,
not in regard of any perfection of grace, I see and feel mine own great wants
and sinful infirmities, but in regard of the uprightness, and soundness, and
sincerity of mine heart? Then comfort thy felfe, and wait in patience but a
time, the time shall come when the Lord will clear thee of that the world does
now unjustly charge on thee, yea the time shall come when all the world shall
acknowledge thee to be a dear child of God, and precious in his sight, and one
of his jewels; yea the time shall come when those who now call thee hypocrite
and dissembler, shall be forced to contradict themselves, and to acknowledge
the truth of grace in thine heart, and shall be forced to change their note,
and to say, certainly this man or this woman is a right holy man or woman, and
a dear child of God, now it appears, and now it is manifest to all the world,
and we cannot deny it: think on that to thy comfort.

Whether the Saints shall know one another in heaven.
Now here a question may be moved, it being so that the time shall come when the
persons of Gods children shall be openly revealed, and be made manifest to all
the world: some may demand, whether the Saints shall know one another in heaven
or no? as whether the parents shall know the children, the husband the wife,
the wife the husband, and whether one brother shall know another, and one
friend another, or no?

To this I answer. So far as shall make for the increase of their heavenly joy
and comfort, they shall.
That so far as shall make for the increase of the heavenly joy and
spiritual comfort one of another, the Saints shall know one another in heaven.
It is true indeed that the natural and carnal delight the father now takes in
his child and the child in the father, the husband in the wife and the wife in
the husband, and one friend takes in another, shall cease, yet heavenly joy
and comfort one in another shall continue; and the heavenly joy that shall
arise to the Saints on the sight of the glorification one of another, leads us
to think that they shall know one another. For howsoever the principal joy of
the Saints in heaven shall be on the sight of God, yet doubtless there shall
be also joy in the sight one of another; the Minister shall joy in the sight of
his people glorified in heaven, and the people shall joy in the sight of their
Minister glorified in heaven, as the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. that the
Thessalonians whom he had converted and brought to believe in Christ by his
preaching the Gospel, should be his crown of rejoicing, and that in the
presence of the Lord Jesus at his coming; as the damned in hell shall have
their torment much increased at the sight of their companions and such as they
have drawn to sin, and therefore the rich man, Luke 16.28. desires that his
brethren might not come into that place of torment where he was, not out of
love to them, (for there is no charity in hell) but out of love to himself,
because he would not have his own torment increased. So doublesse the Saints
in heaven shall rejoice in the society one of another, and in the sight one of
another, in seeing the glorification one of another: and therefore they shall
so far as may increase their heavenly joy and spiritual comfort, know one
another.

Come we now to the 20. verse. There is indeed a second thing offered from
these words verse 19. When the sons of God shall be revealed: namely this,
that the time shall come when the glory that belongs to Gods children, and
shall be put on them in heaven, shall be openly revealed: but of that we spoke
verse 18. and therefore I pass by it, and come to the 20. verse.

VERSE 20. Because the creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but
by reason of him, which has subdued it under hope.


IN this verse, as I have showed, the Apostle yields a reason why the creature
waits with fervent desire for the revelation of the children of God, taken
from the present hard condition of the creature, in that it is subject to
vanity, and therefore it waits. The Apostle further setting forth how the
creature is subject to vanity, namely, not of it own will, but from another
cause, from the will of him who has subdued it under hope, thereunto adjoining
hope of deliverance: Not of it own will, but by reason of him, which has
subdued it under hope. We did before thus analise and resolve this verse, I will
now labor to open the sense and meaning of it. Because the creature is subject
to vanity. Interpretation.
By creature we are to understand, as we did verse before, the whole frame of
the visible world, the visible heavens with all their goodly furniture of
stars and celestial bodies, and the earth with all her ornaments and other
elements, Is subject, or is brought under, or put under (vanity.) The word
vanity has diverse exceptions in Scripture, but to give that which is
agreeable to this place, it is here used in opposition to that original,
perfect, and excellent state and condition in which the creature was first made
and created, and the creature is fallen from that excellent and perfect state
and condition, and it is now brought under vanity, and therefore it is said to
wait for the revelation of the sons of God, and as it were to desire and
long after that original and perfect state and condition, to be restored to it
again. So then under the word vanity, two things are signified. First, that
the creature is now fallen from that original, constant, and durable state it
had in the first creation, and is now under a fleeting, frail, and vanishing
state and condition, and now subject to corruption, as the Apostle says in the
next verse. Now the heavens, the earth, and the elements are subject to
mutabilitie, to alteration and change, and to be dissolved. Psalm. 102.26. the
Psalmist says, The heavens shall perish, and they shall wax old as does a
garment, and the Lord shall change them as a vesture, and they shall be
changed. And 2. Pet. 3.11. the Apostle says, That all these things must be
dissolved.

Secondly, under the word vanity is signified, that the creature is now fallen
from that constant course it held before the fall of man, in attaining the end
for which it was created, namely, to serve for the good of man, and that in the
good use of it, the goodness of God might by man be acknowledged and
magnified, and is now under weakness, and subject to fail in attaining that
end. The earth is now under the curse of the Lord laid on it for the sin of
man. Genes. 3.17, 18. Cursed is the earth for thy sake, thorns and thistles
shall it bring forth to thee: Yea the heavens are now subject to have their
light obscured, and their sweet influence restrained, as the Sun and Moon to
be eclipsed, the sky to be ouercast with clouds, the stars with their
influence to infect the air, the air to become unwholesome and pestiferous,
and to infect the bodies of men and beasts. Yea the creature is now so far
from holding on a constant course in attaining the end for which it was made,
as it is now subject to be perverted, and to be abused, as to serve the wicked
and ungodly, the Sun to give his light, and the earth her fruit, to them who
have neither hearts nor mouths open to praise God for the same. Yea the
creature is now subject oftentimes to serve the wicked lusts and sinful
desires of the ungodly, as the Lord often complains by his Prophets. Ezech.
16.17, 18, 19. the Lord says, His people had taken their fair jewels made of
his gold and his silver which he had given them, and made to themselves images
of men, and had committed whoredom with them; and took their broidered
garments and covered them, and had set his oil and his perfume before them:
and his meat, flower, oil, and honey, wherewith he had fed them, they set it
before them for a sweet savor. They had thus perverted and abused the good
creatures of God, and made them serve their own vile lusts. And so is the
creature subject to vanity, both in regard of the frail, fleeting, and
vanishing state and condition it lies under, and also in regard of the
weakness it is subject to, it being now subject to fail in attaining the end
for which it was created and made, in serving for the good of man, and
consequently for the praise and glory of God. Not of it own will The Apostle
speaks here figuratively, ascribing a will to the dumb and senseless
creature; and his meaning is not of the natural instinct and propension put
into the creature in the first creation, for every thing has in it a natural
propensitie to preserve it self, and by nature it shunneth the corruption and
destruction of it self. But by reason of him, that is, by reason of the will
and power of God the Creator, who so subdued it for the sin of man. Under
hope: Here likewise the Apostle ascribes hope to the dumb and senseless
creature figuratively: and his meaning is, under expectation of a better state
and condition, and so as it does as it were expect and wait for a better state
and condition hereafter. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the words of this
verse, as if the Apostle had said:

Because the creature we spoke of, namely, the whole frame of the visible
world, the visible heavens with all their goodly furniture, and the earth with
all her ornaments, are now under a fleeting, frail, and vanishing state and
condition, are now subject to mutabilitie, alteration, change, and dissolution,
and are now also under weakness, and subject to fail in attaining the end
for which they were first created, namely, to serve for the good of man, and
that in the good use of them Gods goodness might by man be acknowledged and
manifested, and are now subject to serve the wicked and ungodly, and by them to
be perverted and abused to serve their wicked lusts, not of any natural
instinct and propension put into them in the first creation, but by reason of
the will and power of God the Creator, who has so subdued them for the sin
of man, yet so as they do as it were expect and wait for a better state and
condition hereafter.

Now in that the Apostle yields this as a reason, why the dumb and senseless
creature waits with fervent desire when the sons of God shall be revealed,
because it is subject to vanity, I might stand to show that the vanity and
corruption the creature lies under, makes it (as it were) desire and long
after freedom and deliverance, but of that we shall speak more fully
afterward.

And first the Apostle affirming this by the creature, that it is subject to
vanity, he gives us to understand thus much: in the first place we are to
take notice of this.

The whole frame of this visible world is under a fleeting, frail and
vanishing state and condition.
are subject to vanity, they lie under mutabilitie, alteration and change, and
are liable to corruption and dissolution: the whole frame of this visible
world, and all the visible creatures in it, are under a fleeting, frail, and
vanishing state and condition. And to this purpose, besides this text, we have
further evidence and testimony of Scripture, 1. Cor. 7.31. The fashion of this
world goes away, or hasteneth to an end, the word (...), (...).
used by the Apostle is very emphaticall, it signifies the habit, vesture, or
clothing of the world: giving us to understand, that this world is as it were
clothed with a vesture and with a garment, and that is wasting, wearing, and
consuming away, and the form and fashion of it lasts but for a time, it is
alterable and changeable, and the world is as it were ready every hour to put
on a new fashion. We read in the book of the Preacher, that Solomon speaking
out of his own experience, he pronounces of all things in this world, that
they are but vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities,
says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. And Chap. 2. he says,
having given himself to take pleasure in pleasant things, having made great
works, built goodly houses, planted vineyards, gardens, and orchyards, and
planted in them trees of all fruit, and having gathered silver and gold, and
the chief treasures of kings, and provinces: and so he goes on, and concludes
verse 11. He looked on all his works that his hands had wrought, and the
travel that he had labored to do, and he found all was but vanity, and
vexation of spirit. And in the Psalm before cited, Psalm. 102. the Psalmist
says expressly, that the visible heavens shall perish, and shall wax old as
does a garment, and they shall be changed: The very heavens are liable to
corruption and dissolution, and much more the earth and other things under the
heavens: and common experience teaches the truth of this. We see with our
eyes, there be continual alterations and changes in the face of the sky, in
the air, in the waters, and in the earth, and the best and most solid
creatures are subject to rottenness and putrefaction. Yea those creatures that
we do account most excellent, and most durable, gold, silver, pearls, and the
like, experience shows, they are subject to be broken and dissolved, and they
are subject to be cankered, and to be eaten with rust, riches to be corrupted,
and garments to be moath-eaten, and the like, as the Apostle says to wicked
rich men, Iam. 5.2.3. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are
moth-eaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: and all this
is for the sin of man. That is the reason and vanishing state and condition,
as I showed in opening the words.

John has put down, We must learn not to love the world, nor the things in
the world.
1. Ioh. 2.15. Not to love the world, neither the things that are in the world,
nor to suffer our hearts to cleave to the best creatures here in the world, and
to think to find happiness in them. Indeed we are not to despise the
creatures that are in the world, and wilfully to cast them from us, as Popish
votaries do, for they be the workmanship of God; so we shall show our selves
unthankful to God: but we must take heed we rest not on them, nor trust in
them, and that we think not to find true happiness in them. It is the manner
of men and women that want grace, to place happiness in the abundance of the
good things of this life. If they be poor and want grace, when they speak of
a wealthy man, they commonly say he is a happy man, he cannot do amiss, he
has the world at will. And if they be rich in outward things, and want grace,
they commonly bless themselves in their wealth, and they make gold their hope,
and the wedge of gold their confidence, as Job speaks, Job 31.24. Yea they
think they have a perpetuity in their goods, and as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
49.11. They think their houses shall continue for ever, and they call their
lands after their own names. Thus foolish men that want grace, and have
nothing in them but nature; yea such as have grace, and are the children of
God, have their hearts many times too much entangled with the things of this
world, and they suffer their hearts too much to cleave to them, and too much to
rest on them: they give themselves greedily to hunt after the things of this
world. Are there not some who would be thought to be the children of God, that
are tainted with the damnable sin of usury? Oh what a madness is it to
suffer our hearts to rest on that which is fleeting and vanishing away, and is
subject to mutabilitie, alteration and change? If we should duly consider it,
would any man well in his wits, think that he could find happiness in vanity?
Remember this when thou look on thy gold, thy plate, thy jewels; it is but
an heap of vanishing transitory things, And be not thou vain: as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase set not thine heart on them.
No, no, thou professing thy self a child of God, follow thou the counsel of
the holy Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 7.31. Use this world as though thou use it
not, for the fashion of this world goes away. The things of this world are
vanishing and transitory, and they can yield thee no true comfort nor sound
contentment: and consider that thy soul, thou being a child of God, is more
worth then all the riches and treasures in the world, it being redeemed with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ: and why then should thou so abase it, as
to set it on so base an object as the vanishing things of this world? Therefore
use thou the things of this world, as helps and furtherances to thee in thy
travel toward heaven, but set not thine heart on them, let them not steal
away thine heart from better things, but set thine heart on better things, on
righteousness, the peace of a good conscience, the favor of God in Christ,
and the comforts in Christ, and on the joys of the life to come, and those are
durable things, and shall last for ever: and thou professing thy self a child
of God, thou art to count all things of this world but dross and dung, in
comparison of those excellent treasures.

In the next place, in that the Apostle affirms that the creature is subject
to vanity, that is, as we showed, not only to mutabilitie, alteration and
change, and to corruption, and dissolution, but also to weakness, and to
fail in attaining the end for which it was made, in serving for the good of
man, that in the good use of it, Gods goodness might by man be acknowledged.
Hence in the second place note we thus much.

That it is the curse of God upon the visible creatures, That the visible
creatures under the highest heavens serve not for the good of man, it is the
curse of God upon them.
that be under the highest heavens, that they are weak and unable to attain
the end for which they were created, that they now serve not for the good of
man, that in the good use of them the goodness of God might by man be
acknowledged, as that the heavens are now sometimes as brass, and the earth
becomes as iron, as the Lord threatens, Deuteronomy. 28.23. That the earth is now
sometimes as a wast wilderness, and smitten with barrenness, yea it is a
vanity and a curse of God the poor creatures lie under, that they now do
their service to the wicked who dishonor God, as that now the Sun, Moon,
and stars, give their light to the wicked, that the clouds drop down their
rain on them, that the earth yields forth her increase to the ungodly and to
abominable sinners, (as indeed they do) as Christ says, Math. 5.45. Our
heavenly Father makes his Sun to arise on the evil and good, and sends
rain on the just and unjust. This is a curse of God, and a vanity that the
poor creatures now lie under since the fall and sin of man. For (indeed) if
man had stood in his innocence, and in his integrity, the creatures also had
continued in their original integrity, and in their perfect state and
condition; but by the fall of man they are now brought under this vanity, even
to fail in attaining the good for which they were created yea to be subject to
this vanity, to serve ye wicked and ungodly, yea many times to serve the vile
lusts and sinful desires of wicked persons: this is the curse of God on the
poor creatures since the fall of man; When wicked persons use the good
creatures of God, they execute Gods curse on them.
and howsoever they solace and delight themselves in the color, the beauty,
and sweetness, and good that is to be found in the good creatures of God, as
in the light and comfort of the Sun, in the sweetness of the air, in the
heat of the fire, in the pleasant and comfortable taste of meats and drinks,
yet indeed in using of them, even sometimes for their necessity, they are but
instruments of executing Gods curse on the poor creatures: and much more in
their abusing the good creatures of God, when the wicked abuse the good
creatures of God to satisfy their vile lusts and sinful desires, as when they
abuse their meat to surfeiting, their drink to drunkenness, their apparel
to serve their proud humors, and to set out the vanity of their minds, their
money and their wealth to serves their maliciousness and reuengefull minds, in
wringing and wronging others. What do they? Surely but as cursed instruments,
even execute the heavy curse God has laid on the poor creatures: and if
they had eyes to see it, and hearts to consider it, what comfort can they find
in so doing? If the drunkard when he is in the midst of his pots and pot
companions quaffing and carowsing, had but an heart to consider and to think
with himself, what am I now doing? I am now executing the curse of God on
these poor creatures, and that in a fearful manner, making them serve mine
own vile lusts, it would make his wine and his strong drink bitter to him, as
the Lord threatens, Isai. 24.9. If the proud person, man or woman, when they
are tricking and trimming themselves in their vain and garish attire, could
but thus think with themselves: I am now even a cursed instrument of executing
Gods curse on these poor creatures, that I thus abuse to set out the pride and
vanity of my mind; it would make them take little comfort in their gay and
garish attire. And so if those who abuse their money and their wealth to serve
their malice and their reuengefull minds, could but think thus with
themselves, we are now cursed instruments of executing Gods curse on our silver
and on our gold, and such like, it would make them take little pleasure in
bearing down poor men in their right and good causes; and so in other
particulars. If wicked persons had but eyes to see, and hearts to consider what
they do, when they abuse the good creatures of God, and make them serve their
vile lusts and their sinful desires, it would make their hearts ache within
them, in that they do then even execute the curse of God on the poor
creatures, and are then but executioners of that heavy curse the Lord has
laid on the poor creatures for the sin of man, and that in a fearful
manner: for therein they are like the devil himself, who is the grand
executioner of Gods curse: and as they are like to him in their practice, so
without repentance they shall one day be like to him in his punishment. And
indeed wicked and ungodly persons are then most cursed instruments of executing
Gods curse on the poor creatures, when they abuse them for the hurt of Gods
children; as when they abuse their gold and silver to trouble and vex the
poor Saints and servants of God, when they abuse the fire to burn them, the
water to drown them, and such like, and they are then in an high degree cursed
instruments of executing the curse of God on the poor creatures, and they are
then in an high degree like the devil, and if God give them not repentance,
they shall one day in a fearful degree be like him in eternal punishment. It
were good for them to think on it: and so I pass from that point.

Observe we further, the Apostle setting forth how the creature is subject to
vanity, he says, Not of it own will, but by reason of him which has subdued
it under hope: that is, not of any inclination put into it by creation, but by
reason of the will and power of God the Creator, who has so subdued them for
the sin of man: whence note we.

The visible creatures in the world are perverted to wrong ends, and do many
times serve the wicked, not of their natural inclination, but are forced
thereunto by the mighty hand of God.
and all visible creatures in it, they now lie under vanity, under
mutabilitie, alteration and change, and are subject to corruption and
dissolution, and they are now under weakness, subject to fail in attaining
the end for which they were created: not willingly and of their own natural
inclination, but by the powerful will of God. The poor creatures in this
world are now many times perverted to wrong ends, and do many times serve the
wicked, yea the vile lusts and sinful desires of the wicked, not by their
natural inclination, but they are forced so to do by the mighty hand of God,
and by his powerful will and command^ment. The poor creatures would not serve
the wicked, especially the vile lusts and sinful desires of the wicked, not by
their natural instinct, they would be revenged on the wicked for their sins,
for their defacing of Gods image: we may easily conceive it so to be, in that
the Lord sometimes giving the creatures liberty, they presently break out to
the punishment and to the destruction of the wicked Numb. 16.31.32. The earth
opened her mouth and swallowed them up with their families, and all the men
that were with Korah, and all their goods. Exodus 14.28. the waters overwhelmed
the Egyptians and host of Pharaoh. And so indeed would the sea soon run over
all the wicked in the world, were it not kept in by the mighty hand of God,
and established by his commandment, as we have it Job 38.10.11. And so the
fire would suddenly break out and devour the wicked, if the Lord did not
restrain it, as it did those that brought Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to
the ^ot fiery furnace, Dan. 3.22. And al other creatures, if the Lord should
give them liberty, would soon break out to the punishment of the wicked. Yea
we may easily conceive, that the poor creatures would not serve the wicked,
but that they are forced so to do by the mighty hand of God, and by his
powerful will, in that after the day of judgment they shall yield them no
comfort at all; the Sun shall then shine no more on them, the earth shall
then bear them no longer, the waters shall not then yield them one drop to
refresh them, as we may gather from that parable Luke 16.24. the rich man in
hell is denied one drop of water to cool his tongue.

Now this for use: in the first place it serves to discover, that Wicked
persons are beholden to God in that any creature serves for their use.
There is no creature in the world would do them any the least service or in
any sort serve for their good, were it not thereunto forced by the mighty hand
and powerful will of God. And let wicked and profane persons know, that the
Lord who makes his poor creatures serve for their use for a time, can at his
own good pleasure make the same creatures serve for their punishment, and for
their destruction; if he but say the word, and if he command his creatures,
they are ready armed against the wicked, and are ready to fly on them, to
plague them, to punish them, and to destroy them.

And for a second use: is it so that the poor creatures are We are to take
notice of Gods mighty and ouerruling hand over all creatures.
alteration and change, even under the curse of God, not willingly and of their
own natural inclination, but by the powerful will of God, and as they are
thereunto forced by his powerful will and commandment? Then hereby take we
notice of the mighty and ouerruling hand and power of God over all creatures,
he is able to make the poor creatures lie under vanity, and to lie under an
heavy curse, whether they will or no, and as it were sore against their wills.
And take notice of it thou that art a wicked rebellious wretch, and go on
wilfully in thy rebellion and sin, in thy drunkenness, and the like, the
Lord can, if thou still go on in thy rebellion and sin, make thee whether thou will or no, lie under the curse he has threatened against such as thou art. And
thou that wilt not now yield to the voice of God in the ministry of his word
calling thee from thy sins, shall one day be forced whether thou will or no,
to yield to that voice of his, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. and then to lie under the
curse of God everlastingly. And therefore if hell have not sull possession of
thy soul, think on it, and learn to reform thy self.

Now in that the Apostle says, the creature is subject to vanity, not of it
own will, but by reason of him which has subdued it under hope: that is, not
of any natural inclination put into the creature in the first creation, but by
reason of the power and will of God, who has so subdued it for the sin of
man: we are hence further given to understand thus much.

The visible creatures in this world are under vanity, and under a state of
mutabilitie, alteration and change, by reason of man's sin.
The sin of man has inwrapped the poor creatures in this world under
vanity, and has brought them under the curse, and that vanity and curse the
poor creatures now lie under, is daily and continually increased by sin, the
daily increase of sin makes a daily increase of the curse the poor creatures
lie under: that is the point. And for further confirmation of this truth, we
have plentiful evidence and testimony of Scripture. Genes. 3.17. Genesis 3.17.
the Lord says to Adam after his fall, after he had sinned, Cursed is the
earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life.
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and in the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread. Genes. 4.12. Genesis 4.12.
the Lord says the like to Adams ungracious son Cain, after he had murdered
his brother Abel, When thou shall till the ground, it shall not henceforth
yield unto thee her strength. Leuit. 20.19.20. Leuit. 20.19.20.
we find that the Lord thus threatens, if his people should despise his
ordinances, and abhor his laws, and break his covenant, he would thus
plague them, he would make the heavens as iron, and the earth as brass, and
their strength and labor should be spent in vain, their land should not give
her increase, neither should the trees of their land give their fruit. And the
like threatening we find Deuteronomy. 28.29. And again, verse 38.39.40. Deuteronomy.
28.29.38.39.40.
the Lord threatens that for their sins they should carry out much seed into
the field, and should gather but little in, for the grasshoppers should destroy
it. They should plant vineyards and dress them, but should not drink of the
wine nor gather the grapes, for the worms should eat them. They should have
Olive trees in all their coasts, but they should not anoint themselves with the
oil, for their Olives should fall or shake off before they were ripe. And the
like threatenings we find denounced in many places of the Prophets. Read Mica.
6.15. Hag. 1.6. Mica. 6.15. Hag. 1.6.
But to this purpose is that of the Prophet Isay most plain and most pregnant,
Isai. 24.4.5.6.7. Isai. 24.4.5.6.7.
The earth (says the Prophet) lamenteth and fades away, the world is feeble
and decayed: the earth also deceives, because of the inhabitants thereof, for
they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broke the
everlasting covenant. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth, and the
inhabitants thereof are desolate: wherefore the inhabitants of the land are
burned up, and few men are left. The wine fails, the vine has no might, all
that were of merry heart do mourn. A plain text clearing and confirming this
truth, that the sin of man has infolded the poor creatures in the world
under vanity, and has brought them under the curse; and that vanity and
curse the poor creatures are now under, is daily and continually increased by
the daily increase of sin.

And the reason and ground of this truth is, on man's person, on his body and
soul, but also on all things appertaining and belonging to him, even on all
things serving for his use, and for his comfort, that his blessings should be
turned to curses to him, as the Lord threats the Priests, Malac. 2.2. I will
curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them already. And on this ground we
may answer that question which happily some may move,

The heinousness of sin discovered, in that it brings Gods punishing hand
not only on man but on other creatures also.
Now for the use of this truth: first, this being so that the poor creatures
now lie under vanity and under the curse for the sin of man, and that
vanity and curse is daily and continually increased by the daily increase of
sin, we are hereupon to take notice of the heinousness and odiousness of
sin; as that sin is so odious and so heinous, that it prouokes the Lord to
anger exceedingly, even to reach out his punishing hand, not only to the
person of man who has sinned, but on all other things that should serve for
the good of man. We read of the leprosy among the Jews, that the contagion
of that did not only infect the whole man, but his garments also, yea
sometimes the walls of his house: but the leprosy of sin is far worse, that
does not only infect the person of the sinner, and his garments, and things
about him and near to him, but even the high heavens that are many thousand
miles distant from him, are stained with the contagion of it, and are thereby
brought under vanity, and made subject to corruption and dissolution. Oh then
learn we to take notice of the guiltiness and heinousness of sin, yea of
every sin: and think not thou whosoever thou art, that any sin is light,
and trifling, and of small moment. It is the manner indeed of graceless
persons, to account some sins light and trifling. What (say they) a little
swearing by faith and troth, a little idle talking, a little walking abroad on
the Sabbath day, a little working on that day, are these such great matters? I
pray God (say they) we never do worse, and then we hope we shall do well
enough. Poor soul, whosoever thou art, that thus either think or speak,
do thou think thou shall do well enough in doing that which prouokes the Lord
to anger, not only against thine own soul and body, but against every
other thing in the world that should serve for thy good? This thou do in
sinning against God, be the sin in thine account never so small, the least
sin thou committest, in it self and in it own nature, is so odious and so
hateful to God, as it prouokes him not only to plague thee in thine own
person, but also in every thing that belongs to thee, and in every thing thou
set thine hand to do, yea to curse the very air thou breathest in, the
ground thou treadest on, the bed thou lie on, the table thou eatest thy meat
on, the stool or seat thou sit on, the dish thy meat lies in, yea thy
meat, thy drink, thy clothing, and every thing that goes through thine
hands; and is that a matter trifling and of small moment, that thus prouokes
the Lord to anger, and prouokes him thus to reach out his punishing hand to the
very dumb and liuelesse creatures? Oh learn thou to think otherwise of
sin, and labor thou to see the odiousness and heinousness of sin in it
own nature, and so learn to make conscience to avoid every sin, seem it
never so small in thine account.

And for a second use: is it so that the poor creatures now We are to lay the
fault on our selves, and on our own sins, when we are crossed by any
creature.
and under weakness, by reason of sin, and is that vanity and that curse
daily increased by the daily increase of sin? Then learn we on this ground
this lesson, when we are crossed by any creature, learn we to lay the fault
where it ought to lie, let us not then break out into bitter terms and
murmr against God, let us not then lay the fault on chance or fortune, and
say, what luck had I? or what hard fortune had I? nor yet blame the poor
creature, but let us lay the fault where it ought to be, even on our selves,
and on our own sins. Does the air infect thee? does heat or cold annoy
thee? does the earth after much pains, and travel, and cost bestowed on it,
by digging, plowing, and the like, yield thee little or no fruit? does thy
beast fail thee, happily thine horse in bearing, or drawing, or carrying thine
own body stumbleth or falls? Oh do not thou as many wicked and graceless
persons do, break out into cursing and banning of the poor creature, and as
Balaam did, who laid the fault on his ass, when indeed the fault was his
own: so do not thou lay the fault on the poor creature, but lay it where it
ought to lie, even on thy self, and on thine own sin. No marvel though the
creature fail thee, and be not so serviceable to thee, seeing thou have broken
covenant with God, and failest in yielding him honor, and service, and duty,
and obedience. The Papists they use holy water and the like to drive the devil
and ill spirits out of the creatures; but alas the devil is in themselves, and
the ill spirits are their own sins, that make the creatures weak and unable
to yield them comfort.

Last of all, is it so that the creature is under the curse for the sin of
man? Surely then we must learn to be merciful to the poor creature standing
in need of our mercy, Prou. 12.10. A good man, a righteous man regards the
life of his

We are to be merciful to the poor creatures that stand in need of our mercy.
One thing yet remains to be noted in this verse. The Apostle adds, under
hope. The creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by reason of
him which has subdued it under hope: that is, so as it does expect and look
for a better state hereafter. We see then that the creature, even the visible
creatures in this world, they are in a far better case then the The visible
creatures in this world are i^ a better case then the reprobate men or Angels.
they have hope of deliverance from under the curse that is now on them, and
they expect freedom from under the bondage of corruption, even to be delivered
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, as verse next: But the
reprobate, men and Angels, have no hope at all to be freed from the curse of
God. Jude says in his Epistle, verse 6. Jude Epist. verse 6.
The reprobate Angels are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness to
the judgment of the great day: they are bound over to everlasting torments.
And 2. Pet. 2.9. the Apostle says, The Lord reserues the wicked and reprobate
men to the day of judgment to be punished, and they have no hope to escape
everlasting punishment. Oh then the miserable and fearful estate of the
reprobate, it had been bettter for a reprobate man or woman to have been made a
clod of earth, then a man or woman, the lump or clod of earth has hope of
deliverance from under vanity and the curse it lies under, but a reprobate
man or woman has no hope at all to be freed from the everlasting curse of God.
The miserable state of the reprobate discovered.
Though I will not determine of thy final state and condition, and say
definitiuely, thou art a reprobate and shall be damned, yet thou going on
obstinately in sin, notwithstanding the means vouchsafed to thee to call
thee out of thy sin, and thou going on wilfully in thy wicked course, it is a
fearful sign, thou art not only a child of wrath as all are by nature, but
a child of perdition, and that thou art going on apace toward hell, and art in
the stat^ of reprobation; and being so, woe to thee, it had been good for thee
thou had never been borne, the earth and the dumb creatures are in better
case then thou art, they have hope to be freed from the curse they now lie
under, but thou have no hope at all to be freed from the curse of God, that
abides thee for ever. Think on this thou that go on in a course of evil
and sin wilfully, that if thou belong to Gods election, thou may come out
of thy fearful state and condition, and may come to repentance, that thy
soul may be saved. Come we now to the 21. verse.

VERSE 21. Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.


IN this verse our Apostle yields a second reason, why the creature waits
with fervent desire for the revelation of the sons of God, and his reason
here is taken from the future better state of the creature, as that the
creature shall one day be delivered from the hard condition it now lies under,
to a better state. Because the creature shall also be delivered: the Apostle
expresses from what, namely, From the bondage of corruption: and whereunto it
shall be restored, and that is into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
That is the general matter of this verse, we have formerly resolved it; I will
now endeavor to open the sense and meaning of this verse.

Interpretation.
Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. By the creature, here we are
to understand, as we did in the two verses foregoing, the whole frame of this
visible world, consisting of the celestial and elementarie region, the visible
heavens with all their glorious furniture, and the earth with all her goodly
ornaments, and the other elements, the fire, air, and such like, shall be
delivered, or set free, or quit and exempted, for so the word (...) (...).
^^gnifieth. From the bondage of corruption, that is, from the state of
corruption. The creature now being under a state of mutabilitie, alteration and
change, and being now subject to corruption and dissolution, it shall be set
free from that state, as from an heavy servitude, bondage and thraldom; that
is meant by the bondage of corruption. Into the glorious liberty of the
children of God: for by the sons of God, by a Synechdoche is meant the
children of God, whether men or women; and by their glorious liberty, we are
to understand in particular, the liberty and freedom of their bodies from
corruption and mortality, which at the day of judgment shall be accompanied
with unspeakable glory. The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15.42. that the bodies of
the children of God shall then be raised up in incorruption. And verse 53. he
says, Their corporal bodies shall then put on incorruption, and their mortal
bodies shall then put on immortality. And in that part of their glory shall
the creature partake with them, namely, in incorruption and immortality: the
creature shall then be freed from the state of corruption, and shall then
partake with the children of God in some degree of their glory: namely, in
incorruption and immortality: the creature shall then be changed and restored
into that original integrity and excellency in which it was first made and
created. Acts 3.21. Peter speaks of the restoring, not of men only, but of
all other things. But happily some may say, the heavens shall perish, and Math.
24.35. Heaven and earth shall pass away: and 2. Pet. 3.16. that the heavens
shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the
earth with her works that are therein shall be burnt up. And verse 12.13. The
Apostle says, that the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
elements shall melt with heat, and we look for a new heaven and a new earth,
according to his promise wherein dwells righteousness.

How can these Scriptures agree with this text of the Apostle, and the
exposition now given of it, That the whole frame of this visible world shall be
freed from corruption, and shall partake with the children of God in
incorruption, and in immortality? To this I answer. heavens and new earth for
their matter and substance, but in regard of qualities, they shall be purged
from vanity, corruption and weakness they now lie under, and they shall have
incorruption and immortality put on them, and they shall be renewed and
restored to their original integrity and excellency in which they were first
made and created.

Now here I hold it needful for further clearing of this text, to answer a
question that is commonly propounded, namely this. for the second, the day of
judgment shall not be a day of creation, but a day of restoration, and a day
of restoring of all things, as it is called Act. 3.21. If any ask,

Because the whole frame of this visible world, the visible heavens with all
their furniture, the earth with all her ornaments, and other elements, yea some
singulars of all the kinds of fowls, beasts, and fishes, shall at the day of
judgment be freed from the state of corruption, which is as a heavy servitude
and bondage to them, and shall then partake with the children of God in some
degree of their glory, namely, in incorruption and in immortality, and shall
then be changed and restored into that original integrity and excellency in
which they were first made and created.

Now first we may hence gather the wonderful benefit that comes to Gods
children by Christ touching the creatures, they have not only in and through
him right and title to the good creatures of God here in this world, and may
comfortably use them, but they have also this benefit through the obedience of
Christ imputed to them, that after the day of judgment the creatures shall be
restored to their original integrity and excellency for their sakes. Because
as the first Adams defection and fall, deserved to be punished both in his
person and in all things appertaining to him: so it was meet that the second
Adams obedience should not only restore man, but the creatures also which
might be any way a fit appurtenance to him in the state of glory: but I pass
from that.

Observe we here, the Apostle says the creature shall be delivered and set
free from the bondage of corruption, and then it shall partake of the glorious
liberty of Gods children, it shall then share with them in incorruption and
immortality. As the creatur^ must first be ^^eed from the state of corruption,
before it partake with Gods children in any degree of their glorious liberty,
so must men and women be freed from the corru^tion of sin before they can
partake in the glorious liberty of ^ods chi^dren in fullness.
before it can come to partake with Gods children in any degree of their
glorious liberty. And doubtless much more must men and women be freed from
their filth and corruption of sin, before they can come to share with Gods
children in their glorious liberty in fullness. Must the poor creature which
is not sinful first pass through the fire, and be purged from that vanity
and corruption that cleaues to it, before it partake with Gods children in the
least degree of their glory? Surely much more must men and women be purged
from the dross of corruption that cleaves to their souls, which indeed is
sinful, by the fire of Gods Spirit, before they enjoy with Gods children the
fullness of glory in heaven. They that are not first freed from the
filthiness of sin here on earth, Revel. 21.27. the holy Ghost speaks
plainly, that no unclean thing shall enter into the holy City new Jerusalem.
And the Apostle beats on it, that no unclean person shall enter into the
kingdom of glory. Ephesians. 5.5. This ye know (says he) that no whoremonger,
neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is an idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived,
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers,
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And that is a known place, Heb. 12.14. that
without holiness none shall see God to his comfort. For why,

fit for it, as Colos. 1.12. Men and women must be made meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light, before they can come to enjoy it:
and therefore men and women must first be purged from the dross and
filthiness of their sins, by the fire of Gods Spirit, before they come to
enjoy fullness of glory in heaven, they are not otherwise fit for it. And
therefore for the use of this, Such as are in the dregs and filth of nature do
vainly think that they shall enjoy life and glory in heaven.
and yet thou art one that art still in the dregs of nature, and thou art
soyled with many foul and filthy gross evils and sins that cleave to thy
soul, and thou art one that wilt not be cleansed from thy filthiness. If thou
think thou shall go to heaven as well as the best, the devil deludes thee,
and thine own heart deceives thee, thou being yet in the dregs of nature, and
soyled with many foul sins, and so living, and so dying, thou art not fit
for the glory in heau^n. Consider it but in reason, art thou being a drunkard,
a filthy person, or the like, fit to be a companion with the holy Majesty of
God, who is infinite in holiness and purity, and of pure eyes, and cannot
behold iniquity, with any allowance of it, and in whose sight the heavens are
not clean, as Eliphas says, Job 15.15? Art thou fit to be joined to the holy
Angels, to the Saints in heaven, even to the spirits of just and perfect men,
as it is Heb. 12.23? And art thou fit to inhabit the new heavens, and the new
earth, wherein dwells nothing but holiness and righteousness? No, no, if
thou so think thou deceiuest thy self. Remember this, the very heauen's,
those glorious creatures must be purged from the corruption that cleaves to
them, and be made new heavens, before they can partake with Gods children in
the least degree of their glory: and much more must thou be purged from the
filth and corruption of sin, both in soul and body, and be made a new
creature in Christ, before thou can partake with Gods children in fullness of
glory in heaven, and therefore deceive not thy self.

In the next place, in that the Apostle says, the creature shall be delivered
from the bondage, and shall partake with Gods children in their glorious
liberty, that is, shall share with them in incorruption and immortality; note
we thus much.

The time shall come when the visible heavens and other visible creatures shall
be as free from corruption and change as the Saints in heaven.
The poor creatures, especially the sub-lunarie creatures, that be under the
Moon, are now subject to continual alteration and change, and to corruption,
and dissolution: yea Satan (the Lord suffering him) does now sometimes exercise
his power on the poor creatures, he troubles the air, he raises up storms
and tempests, and he sometimes defaceth some of the creatures; yea he out of
his deadly hatred against man, and his envy to the good of man, sometimes
brings destruction on some of the poor creatures. Math. 8.32. the Lord Jesus
suffering him, he carried the heard of swine with violence into the sea and
drowned them, and the Lord giving him leave, he raised up a mighty wind, and
smote the four corners of the house where Jobs children were eating and
drinking, and brought the house down on their heads and slew them, Job 1.19.
It is said, Psalm. 78.49. that the Lord cast on the Egyptians the fierceness of
his anger, indignation and wrath, and vexation, by sending of evil Angels. But
the time shall come when the creatures shall be freed both from alteration and
change, and from corruption, and from the power of Satan, and Satan shall have
no more power against them then against the glorious Saints in heaven, and that
shall be none at all.

The alterations and changes that be amongst the creatures ought not to trouble
us too much.
Though (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 46.2.3.) the earth be moved, and the
mountains fall into the midst of the sea: Though the waters thereof rage and
be troubled, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same: yet let not us
be troubled or fear too much. Indeed we are not carelessly to pass over the
alterations and changes that be in the world and amongst the creatures,
especially those creatures that be near to us or belong to us, we are to take
notice of them, and to make use of them: but let us not be troubled and fear
too much, nor break out into any impatiencie, that is the thing the devil
aims at in defacing the poor creatures, and in bringing destruction on them;
he therein drives to bring man to impatiencie, and to provoke him to blaspheme
the Lord, and to break out into bitter terms against the Lord. It was his
maine drift in hurting Jobs goods, and in bringing the house on the heads of
his children, as appears Job 1.11. Stretch out now thine hand and touch all
that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. And therefore
let us not suffer Satan to effect his will and purpose in us, in consideration
of the alterations and changes that be in the world, and amongst the creatures,
and especially those good creatures that be near unto us, and belong to us;
let us remember, though now the poor creatures be subject to alteration and
change, and be many times defaced, and sometimes destroyed, yet the time will
come when the Lord will bring all things into better form, and the time will
come when the poor creatures shall be as free from alteration and change, and
as free from the power of Satan, as the glorious Saints in heaven. Yea remember
we, that the Lord has a disposing hand in all the alterations and changes that
be in the world, and amongst the creatures, and he will be sure so to dispose
of them, as shall be for his own glory and the good of his children: I will
not further prosecute that point. And not to say any thing of the servitude and
bondage the creature lies under, being now in the state of corruption, of that
we shall speak more fitly in the next verse.

Observe we further, the Apostle here limits glorious liberty to the sons of
God, to the children of God: he says not, the creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of men and women, but into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God, of the children of God,
appropriating glorious liberty to them alone: and the point hence is this.

That a glorious liberty shall be proper to the children of Only Gods
children shall be made partakers of a glorious liberty at the day of judgment.
and they only shall be made partakers of a glorious liberty at the day of
judgment. Indeed the wicked and reprobate shall at that day be made immortal
and incorruptible in their bodies, their bodies shall then be loosed and
exempted from corruption and mortality, but their liberty shall not be a
glorious liberty; they shall be made able to abide and to endure for ever, yet
under bondage of eternal woe and misery, and under everlasting shame and
ignominy, and perpetual torments. Only the liberty of Gods children shall
then be a glorious liberty, they shall then be freed from corruption and
mortality in their bodies, yea from all miseries, pains and travels, from all
evils both of crime and pain; and all tears shall then be wiped away from
their eyes, Reuela. 21.4. and that liberty of theirs shall be accompanied with
unspeakable and inconceivable glory. 1. Corinthians. 15.43. the Apostle says in
express terms, that the bodies of Gods children shall be raised up in glory:
yea he says, Philip. 3.21. they shall be fashioned like to the glorious body
of the Lord Jesus: they shall be glorious in their measure according to his
image who is the God of glory. Mat. 13.43. the Lord Jesus says, that the just
in that day shall shine as the Sun in the firmament: they shall be endued
with perfection of beauty and brightness. The Apostle is feign to express it
in general terms, 2. Cor. 4.17. and to call it a most excellent and eternal
weight of glory. The glory of Gods children at the day of judgment shall be
in show most beautiful, in sense most wonderful, and in weight and measure
without bounds and limits.

Lord of glory, 1. Cor. 2.8.

glory of the Lord but in a mirror, 2. Cor. 3.18. but then they shall see it
so, as they shall be fully transformed into the similitude of it. And therefore
doubtless the liberty of Gods children at the day of judgment shall be a
glorious liberty, and shall then be accompanied with unspeakable and
inconceivable glory; and they only shall then be partakers of a glorious
liberty: and therefore for the use.

This discouers, that howsoever the wicked and ungodly The liberty of the
wicked at the day of judgment shall be a miserable bondage.
they follow the liberty of the flesh, and think it their happiness that
they may so do, which indeed rightly considered is a miserable bondage, yet at
the day of judgment they shall not partake with Gods children in their
liberty, they shall indeed, as we said, be freed in their bodies from
mortality and corruption, but their liberty then shall be far worse then
the Prophet speaks of, Iere. 34.17. Ier. 34.17.
A liberty to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. It shall be a
liberty to endless woe and misery, and it shall be accompanied with
everlasting misery and torments: they shall not have any share in the glorious
liberty of Gods children.

Again for a second use: is it so that Gods children, and Comfort to Gods
children in that their liberty at the day of judgment shall be wonderfully
enlarged.
shall be partakers of a glorious liberty at the day of judgment? Here is
then matter and ground of sweet and of excellent comfort for all that find
themselves in that number. Have thou good evidence of it that thou art a child
of God, that thou art an adopted son or daughter of God? then know to thy
comfort, thou have not only here in this world liberty of grace, and liberty
and freedom from an evil conscience, which thou would not part withal for
all the riches and glory of the world, but thou shall at the day of judgment
have thy liberty wonderfully enlarged, thou shall then have liberty of
eternal glory, even such a glorious liberty, as no wicked man or woman,
though here in this world their outward pomp and glory be never so great,
shall be partakers of. Happily here in this world thou art under some outward
servitude and bondage, thou art under poverty, and it may be thou art
inthralled in fetters and chains, thou art in prison, and restrained from
outward liberty, yet thou being a child of God, thou have the liberty of
grace in thy soul, and the liberty of a quiet and good conscience, which is
better then all the riches and glory in the world; and at the day of judgment
thy liberty shall be unspeakable and glorious; then shall thou be freed from
all manner of evils both in soul and body, from the evil of sin, and from
the evil of pain and suffering; and thy liberty then shall be accompanied
with unspeakable and inconceivable glory: when as the wicked and ungodly,
who happily in this world have had many outward liberties and great outward
glory, shall enter into bondage of endless woe and misery. And this may be
matter of great comfort to thee, yea consider this to thy comfort, thy liberty
of grace here in this world is imperfect, and thy liberty and peace of a good
conscience is here mingled with some doubting and fear, but at the day of
judgment and in heauen-libertie of grace shall be perfect, and the liberty
and peace of a good conscience shall be free from all doubting and fear. And
if the peace of a good conscience, though mingled with doubting and fear, be
here so sweet and comfortable, that Solomon says, It is a continual feast,
Prou. 15.15. what shall be the sweetness and comfort of it in heaven, where it
shall be free from all mixture of doubting and fear? And if the Lord be so
good to thee whilst thou art yet in the way, and only seeking of him and his
face and favor, what will he be to thee when thou have found him, and shall
see his glorious face, and as it were take him by the hand, and have immediate
fellowship with him, and shall enjoy his comfortable presence in glory for
ever? Oh then thy joy, comfort, and glory shall be inconceivable, the heart
of man is not able to conceive it, nor tongues of men and Angels able to
express it. Think on this to thy comfort, thou that art a child of God, and
let none but such as are the children of God take hold of it; it belongs not to
them. Come we now to the 22. verse.

VERSE 22. For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauelleth
in pain together unto this present.


IN this Verse our Apostle concludes and shuts up his first argument, by which
he proves, that the glory wherewith Gods children shall be invested in
heaven, shall be both exceeding great, and also most sure and certain, taken
from the expectation of the creature, that the creature waits with fervent
desire for the manifestation of that glory; and therefore it shall be both
exceeding great, and also most sure and certain. I say the Apostle here shuts
up that argument, as before we showed, by setting down the greatness of the
bondage the creature is subject to, that it is so great, as it does press the
creature as it were an heavy burden lying on it, and make the creature groan
under the weight of it, and as it were travel in pain under it for
deliverance. Yea the Apostle says, Every creature, or the whole creation, as
we have it in the New translation, is under this great bondage, and groans and
travels in pain together one with another, and that to this hour, to this
present: and further sets out that as a thing commonly known, We know (says
he) that every creature groneth together also with us.

I will stand a while to open the sense and meaning of the words of this verse.
We know. That is, Interpretation.
it is a thing well known to us, we certainly know it so to be, partly by
sense we see it so to be, and partly by the word of God revealing and making
known to us the cause of it, and the end of it. That every creature, or the
whole creation. Some think the Apostle here intends more by the word creature,
then he did in the 3. verses foregoing, because he says, every creature: yea
some would have the good Angels here included, which cannot be, for they groan
not under the bondage of corruption: but by creature, we are still to
understand as before, the whole frame of this visible world, consisting of
celestial and heavenly bodies, the visible heavens with all their goodly
furniture, the earth and all her ornaments. And the Apostle here says, Every
creature, or the whole creation: thereby signifying, that all and every
creature in this visible world, do agree in this, that all and every one of
them do groan and travel in pain for deliverance from the bondage of
corruption. Howsoever every particular foul, beast, or fish (as before I
showed) shall not at the day of judgment be restored, and have that particular
being as now they have, or have had, and that an everlasting being, and therein
partake with the children of God, but only some particulars of every sort and
kind; yet every particular shall then cease to be miserable, even those
particulars which shall not be restored, shall yet be resolved into the
elements out of which they were taken, and there rest, and so cease to be any
more under the bondage of corruption: the elements being now restored to their
original integrity and excellency in which they were created. And so though
every creature shall not be delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons
of God, yet every creature groans and travels in pain for deliverance. These
words, Groneth and trauelleth in pain, are metaphorical and borrowed terms.
The first from one that is laden with an heavy burden, under which it pants
and groans, and longs to be eased of it: and the other from a woman in her
pains of childbearing and of bringing forth her child, who earnestly desires
deliverance. And so the meaning is this, that as a man laden with an heavy
burden, under which he pants and groans, and longs to be eased of it, and as a
woman in travel of child, and in her pains of bringing forth her child,
earnestly desires to be delivered, so earnestly and so vehemently does every
creature in this world long and desire to be eased and to be delivered from
that vanity and that bondage of corruption it lies under. Together, groans
together. That is, as it were with one heart, and with one consent. Unto this
present: or to this moment of time, or as yet, and still, so the word
signifies. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the words of this verse, as if
the Apostle had said.

For we certainly know, partly by sense, and partly by the word of God
revealing it to us, that the whole creation, even all and every creature in
the frame of this visible world, do as it were groan and travel in pain, as a
woman in pains of childbearing, even earnestly and vehemently long and desire
to be eased and to be delivered from that vanity and that bondage of
corruption they now lie under: yea all creatures jointly together, as it were
with one heart and with one consent, do thus groan and travel in pain,
desiring deliverance, and that to this present, to this moment of time.

Now to take things in order, obsere we, the Apostle here affirms this, that
every creature groans and travels for deliverance from under the bondage of
vanity and corruption, as a thing certainly known to himself and to the
believing Romans. We know (says he) that every creature groneth with us also.
Whence note briefly.

That we are not to be ignorant of this, that the poor We are to conceive of
the creatures lying under the burden of vanity and corruption, as we are
taught to conceive of it by the holy word of God.
longing for ease and deliverance from it: we must be able to say with the
Apostle, we know this, yea we must be able to say, we certainly know this, not
only by sense and by experience, but that we know it from the holy word of
God; and that we are come to the understanding of it by the word of God, the
word of God revealing it to us, that the earth is cursed for the sin of man,
as we read Genes. 3.17. and that all and every creature in the world lies
under the curse for man's sin.

How far from this are many men and women in the world, Reproof of such as do
not thus conceive of it.
their own eyes and senses may teach them thus much. But alas, this they
conceive not as they are taught to conceive of it by the holy word of God, The
fruit of their misconceit of it.
as that the poor creatures lie under this as under the curse of God; this
they are not acquainted withal, and that makes them many times ascribe the
alterations and changes that befall the creatures, and the weakness of the
creatures to do them service and to yield them comfort, to chance or fortune,
or to secondarie causes, Well, we must be able to say, we know that every
creature groans and travels in pain under the burden of vanity and
corruption, not only by sense and experience, but from the holy word of God,
that we are come to the understanding of this by the word of God, and that
indeed we understand it as the holy word of God makes it known unto us, that
the poor creatures lie under this burden as under the curse of God. And so
much be spoken briefly of that.

In the next place observe we, the Apostle here puts on the creatures as it
were a person, he brings them in groaning and traveling in pain under the
burden of vanity and corruption, and longing after and desiring ease and
deliverance from it. He makes the poor, dumb, and liuelesse creatures as it
were sensible of their misery, of that vanity and corruption they lie under,
yea so sensible of it, as that in their kind they groan under the burden of it,
and as earnestly desire to be eased of it and delivered from it, as a woman in
travel of child, that is full of pain, desires to be delivered of her child.
And what may this teach us? surely thus much.

That we to whom God has given reason and understanding, The corruption of
sin that cleaues to our souls and bodies, ought to be felt as an heavy
burden, with an earnest desire to be eased of it
and especially of that corruption of sin that cleaues to our souls and
bodies, and of our fearful misery in regard of that, we are much more to
groan under the burden of sin pressing our souls, and most earnestly to
desire to be eased of that burden, and to be delivered from it. Chap. 7. of
this Epistle verse 24. the Apostle cries out, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? He was sensible of the very
remainder of sin still abiding in him, and he groned under that burden, and
desired deliverance from it, and that most earnestly. Philip. 1.23. he says,
He desired to be loosed: that his soul might be loosed from his body: indeed
chiefly (as there he speaks) that he might be with Christ: that he might have
immediate fellowship with Christ, and enjoy fullness of joy and glory with him
in heaven: yet no doubt one cause of his desire was, that he might be freed
from the burden of sin still abiding in him. And thus doubtless it is with
all Gods children, they are sensible of that corruption of sin that still
cleaues to them, and of their fearful misery and thraldom, and bondage in
regard of that, and they groan under the burden of the remainder of sin
still abiding in them, and earnestly desire to be delivered from it. And it
ought to be thus with every one of us, we are to be sensible of the corruption
of sin cleaving to our souls and bodies, and of our misery in regard of
that, and earnestly to desire to be eased of that burden, and to be delivered
from it: and there is reason

But alas where is almost the man or woman, The wonderful dullness and dead
heartedness of many in regard of sin, discovered and justly reproved.
and thus groan under the burden of their own sins, and travel in pain to
be delivered from them? Indeed such as have true grace in their hearts, do sigh
and groan under the burden of the relickes of sin still abiding in them, and
under their sinful infirmities, and with the woman Luke 7.44. they wash the
feet of Christ with tears, but as for others, they go lightly under the
burden of many fearful and gross sins, they are drunkards, and filthy
persons, and yet they can laugh and sing, and be exceeding iocond and pleasant:
and this argues the wonderful hardness of heart, that through the custom of
sin they are become senseless of sin. Consider it thou that art a drunkard,
a blasphemer, or the like; does the dumb and dead earth groan under the
vanity and corruption it lies under, and do not thou groan under thy
corruptions and sins that cleave to thy soul and body? Yea does the earth
groan under thee, and is it weary in bearing of thee, and would it feign open
her mouth and swallow thee up, because of thy vile and gross sins? and do
thou go lightly under the burden which makes the earth groan under thee? Thou
art then more dull and dead hearted then the very earth thou treadest on, and
thou going on in that hardness and deadness of heart, and vnfeelingnesse in
regard of sin, the dumb and dead earth shall one day rise up in judgment
against thee: think on it, and learn thou to be sensible of sin, yea let
every one of us learn by the example of the creatures, to be sensible of our
corruptions and sins, and of our fearful misery, thraldom and bondage in
regard of them, and to groan under the weight and burden of them, and to
travel in pain to be delivered from them, as earnestly as a woman in pains
of childbearing desires to be delivered of her child: and to that end learn
we to apprehend sin, and to take notice of it, in the true nature of it, and
as indeed it is in it self, namely: That it is odious in the sight of God, and
displeasing to the Lord, and in it self and of it self, Note.
makes us liable to the wrath of God, and the curse of God, which no other
thing in the world does. Not any misery whatsoever we endure, whether
poverty, sickness, imprisonment, or such like, makes us miserable and liable
to the curse of God, in it self, and of it self, but only our sins. And if
this be rightly apprehended and duly considered, it will make us weary of our
sins, and make us groan under the burden of them, and earnestly desire to be
delivered from them, and to use all good means, that we may be freed and
delivered from the burden of them.

Now in that the Apostle says, every creature in this visible world groans and
travels in pain under the burden of vanity and the bondage of corruption,
even all and every one without exception of any, I might note the extent of
Gods anger and wrath against the sin of man, and that the curse of God for
man's sin has a long extent, and reaches far, but that was partly touched
before, and therefore I pass by it.

We are to mark further, that the Apostle here brings in the creatures,
groaning and traveling in pain, and that jointly together, as it were with one
heart, and with one consent. He makes the dumb and senseless creatures, not
only after a sort sensible of their misery, of that vanity and corruption
they lie under, but as it were to condole and bemone one another, and to have
as it were a fellow feeling of one another misery, and so to groan together,
and to travel in pain together one with another, longing for ease and for
deliverance. We find that the Lord by his Prophet brings in the dumb
creatures, as it were hearing the complaint one of another. Hosea 2.21.22.
says he, I will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and
the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall
hear Izreel. Now what is our lesson from hence? Surely this.

That men and women to whom God has given sense, yea A fellow feeling of one
another misery, and a groaning together under the burden one of another,
especially under the burden of sin pressing the conscience, is required of us
and the misery they lie under in respect of their sins. Romans 12.15. the
Apostle says in express terms, that we are to weep with them that weep,
and we are to groan with them that groan. And Heb. 13.3. says the Author of
that Epistle, Remember them that are in bonds, as though ye were bound with
them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the
body: have a fellow feeling of their bonds, and of their afflictions, as if
your selves were pressed with them, and did lie under them. And this was Paul's
practice, as himself says, 2. Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not, and I
bear not part with him in his weakness? Who is offended and I burn not? It
is the exhortation of the Apostle, Colos. 3.12. that we put on tender bowels,
or bowels of mercy. The words there used are very significant, (...), (...).
they carry this sense, that we are to have our hearts possessed with a true
touch and feeling of ye miseries one of another, yea with a lively sense of
them, as if we our selves were in the same case with our brethren that are in
any distress: we are to groan with them, when they groan under the burden of
any misery, especially under the burden of sin pressing their souls, and
lying heavy on their consciences, and for the miseries they lie under in
respect of their sins: for why, the reason

All men and women in the world, are of one and the same mould and matter, they
all partake of the same substance, they are all of one flesh, Isai. 58.7. And
the Lord has made of one blood all mankind, Acts 17.26. And such men and women
as are true believers, are members of one and the same body; and the Lord has
laid it as a law on the members, that if one suffer all suffer with it, 1. Cor.
12.26. And therefore men and women are to have a fellow feeling of one another
misery, and to groan together under the burden one of another, and especially
under the burden of sin pressing the souls of one another, and lying hard
on the conscience: and therefore for the use.

It is most barbarous and brutish, to add affliction to affliction, by
insulting over such as are in misery, or by dealing hardly with them.
and so to add affliction to affliction, and one misery to another, that is
most barbarous and brutish, and after the manner of dogs, to fall on him that
is down in the streets, and it argues exceeding hardness of heart: for the
miseries of others are as visible Sermons, moving to pity and to a fellow
feeling; and things seen, make a deeper impression then things only heard of.
We then seeing others groaning under the burden of any misery, to be so far
from being sensible of their misery, and from groaning with them, as that we
insult over them, and thereupon take advantage to deal hardly with them,
surely it is an argument of extreme hardness of heart, and especially if we
deal thus with such as groan under the burden of sin, as it is the manner
of wicked and profane persons, when they see a man or a woman groaning under
the burden of sin, troubled in mind and conscience for sin, they make but
a mock and a jest of it, and they commonly say, such persons are but
melancholicke fools, or mad men or women. This argues extreme and monstrous
hardness of heart, and this is to persecute those whom the Lord has smitten,
and to add to the sorrow of them whom he has wounded, Psalm. 69.26. and that
in an high degree. And this provoke the Lord to anger exceedingly, as he
says by his Prophet Zach. 1.15. Zach. 1.15.
I am greatly angry against the careless heathen, for I was angry but a
little, and they helped forward the affliction. And they that thus do, shall be
sure at one time or other to find the heavy hand of God on their own souls.

And so for a second use, learn we the duty now made A necessary duty to be
learned.
even to have a fellow feeling of one another misery, and after the example
of the poor dumb creatures, to groan together under the burden one of
another, and especially under the burden of sin, pressing the souls of our
brethren, and lying heavy on their consciences. When we see a man or a woman
groaning under the burden of sin, and troubled in mind and conscience, we are
to groan with them, to mourn with them, to pray for them, to comfort them, and
to help them what we may: yea we are to groan for the sins of those who groan
not for themselves, being hardened in their hearts, and having no sense nor
feeling of them. Thus did good Lot, as the Apostle witnesses of him, 2. Pet.
2.7. he was vexed and grieved with the unclean conversation of the filthy
Sodomites: he fetched many a sigh and sob, and many a groan for their
filthiness, who as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.19. Being past feeling, gave
themselves to work all uncleanness, even with greediness. And we have the
example of the Lord Jesus, Mark 3.5. the text says, He looked about on the
people angerly, and mourning also for the hardness of their hearts. They had
hard hearts and groned not for themselves, they groned not for their own
sins, but the Lord Jesus he mourned and groned in his heart for them, and
thus are we to do; we are to groan with them who feel the weight of their
sins lying heavy on their souls, and do groan under the burden of them.
Note.
Yea we are to groan for their sins who have hard hearts, and neither do nor
can groan for themselves; and our eyes are to pour out floods of tears for
them who keep not Gods Law, as David says and did, Psalm. 119.136. And if we
do so, surely it is an argument that the Lord has given us soft and melting
hearts, yea it is an evidence to us to our comfort, that we truly feel the
burden of sin on our own souls, when we can groan with others in respect
of sin pressing their souls: let it be thought on and remembered.

One thing yet remains to be noted in this verse, I will but touch it in a
word. The Apostle says, Every creature groneth together with us, and to this
present, to this very moment and minute of time. Thus spoke the Apostle in the
time when he writ this Epistle, and thus may we still say, that every creature
groans with us to this very moment, it is still so: and so the point hence is
this.

The visible creatures in this world shall lie under vanity and corruption
till the end of the world.
till the day of judgment.

For why, sin still abides in the world, which is the cause of that vanity
and corruption that cleaues to the creatures, and till sin be taken out of
the world, which shall not be till the day of judgment,

In using the creatures we are to entreat God to remove from them the curse
that cleaves to them.
The poor creatures are still subject to mutabilitie, to corruption, to
alteration and change, and they still to this present lie under weakness,
they are not able to do us good unless the Lord remove the curse from them,
and bless them to us, and by his blessing make them good and comfortable to
us: it comes from the blessing of God that our meat does feed us, and that our
clothes keep us warm. If the Lord say the word, his creatures do us good,
Math. 4.4. If he deny a blessing to them, they can do us no good at all: we see
it in experience, some pine away in the midst of plenty, and having
abundance of gold and silver. And therefore we must remember in using the
creatures, to entreat the Lord to remove from them the curse that cleaues to
them, and that he would bless them to us, that they may be for our good and
comfort.

And for a second use, it being so that the curse of God still How men do add
to the curse that cleaues to the creatures discovered.
we must take heed we add not to that curse. How is that, may some say? Surely
by our desiring of the good creatures of God, gold, silver, and the like
insatiably, and by seeking of them by unlawful means, by usury, by deceit,
and the like; we so desiring the good creatures of God, and so seeking of them,
we may happily come to have abundance of them, but withal we have the curse of
God attending on that abundance, and that abundance is given to us in Gods
wrath, and not in his mercy. Solomon says, Prou. 10.22. The blessing of God
it makes rich, and he adds no sorrows with it. There be riches with sorrow,
and with a mischief, and with the curse of God attending on them; yea riches
desired insatiably, and sought after by unlawful means, and so obtained,
bring the curse of God on the souls of them who so get them. And this ought to
abate the edge of our affections from the things of this world, and to make us
not to love them, and desire them, and to seek after them so eagerly as
commonly we do. Come we now to the 23. verse.

VERSE 23. And not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits
of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even
the redemption of our body.


IN this verse our Apostle falls on his second argument, whereby he proves
that the glory wherewith Gods children shall be invested in heaven, shall be
both great glory, and also sure and certain glory: and his argument here to
that purpose, is from the expectation of the godly, and of true believers, that
they also expect and look for that glory, and wait for it, and therefore it
must needs be both great glory, and also sure and certain glory, Not only
the creature, but we also (says the Apostle) which have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even
the redemption of our body. And that is the dependence of this verse on
foregoing matter, and the general drift of the Apostle in it. In this verse
considered by it self, we have laid before us.

We which have the first fruits of the Spirit, wherein is also implied the
cause of their expecting and looking for fullness of glory in heaven, and
their waiting for it, because here they have the first fruits, as it were a
taste and a beginning of it.

sigh or groan* and secondly, that they wait. Their sighing or groaning is
further set forth by the manner or measure of it, that it is in themselves, We
do sigh in our selves: and their waiting is further amplified by the thing they
wait for, and that is here said to be adoption, and that again further
explaned to be the redemption of the body. Waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our body.

I will now stand awhile to open the sense and meaning of the words of this
verse. And not only the creature. Interpretation.
The word signifying creature, is not in the original, but it is of necessity
to be supplied, and may well be added to make up the sense answerable to the
former verse: Every creature groneth with us also; and not only the creature
or the whole creation, But we also which have the first fruits of the Spirit.
Some would have the Apostles only here to be meant, when the Apostle says we,
because they received the excellent and miraculous gifts of the Spirit: but the
word we, is rather to be taken as signifying all true believers, the Apostle
neither in the foregoing nor in the verses following speaking of himself as an
Apostle, but as a true believer, together with the true believing Romans. And
in the next verse he says, We are saved by grace: which is not proper to the
Apostles only, but to all; and therefore the word we, is meant I and you, and
all true believers. Having the first fruits of the Spirit. The Apostle herein
alludes to the manner of the Church in the old Testament; the manner of the
Jews in the time of the Law was to offer their first fruits to God, as the
Lord had commanded them, partly to show their thankfulness to God for bringing
them into the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 26. from the beginning to the 12. verse:
and partly to sanctify the rest of their crop, as we find Leuit.
23.10.11.12.13. etc. And to this the Apostle alludes here on this manner: that
as by offering the first fruits by the Jews, the rest of their crop was
sanctified, and thereby they had certain hope of a good harvest, and that they
should enjoy the rest of their crop in due season: so the portion of saving and
spiritual grace that Gods children have here, and the special gifts of the
Spirit peculiar to Gods elect here bestowed on them, as calling, faith,
justification, sanctification, peace of conscience, spiritual joy, hope, love,
repentance, and the like, are as it were first fruits to them, even pawnes and
pledges to them that they shall hereafter have the perfection and the
accomplishment of them, and the fullness of joy, and the whole mass of glory
promised to them. And so the meaning of the Apostle is, we which have the
beginnings of saving grace, and the special gifts of the Spirit peculiar to
Gods elect, as pledges of perfection, and the accomplishment of them hereafter,
and of the fullness of joy and glory promised to us: even we sigh in our
selves. We sigh or groan: that is, we feeling the weight and burden of our
corruption and misery, do sigh and groan under it. In our selves: that is, in
truth, and from our very heart root, not fainedly in show only. Waiting for,
and constantly, and patiently expecting and looking for the adoption. By
adoption, we are not here to understand that which follows on the
justification of true believers, and is annexed to it, but the consummation of
adoption, the manifestation of it, when Gods children shall be put in full
possession of their Fathers inheritance, which the Apostle expounding himself,
calls the redemption of the body. Now touching these words, know that there is
a double redemption, Redemption of Gods children twofold.
one which Gods children have by faith, spoken of Ephesians. 1.7. and Coloss. 1.14.
and the other which they shall Look up and lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws near. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in
the words of this verse, as if he had said.

And not only the creature we spoke of before, but I, and you, and all true
believers, who have the beginnings of saving grace, and the special gifts of
the Spirit of God, gifts that are peculiar to Gods elect, as pawnes, and
pledges of perfection, and accomplishment of them hereafter; and of the
fullness of joy and glory promised to us, in time to be given to us, even we
feeling the weight and burden of our corruption and misery, do sigh and groan
under it, and that truly from our very hearts desiring ease and deliverance,
constantly and patiently expecting and looking for the consummation of our
adoption, and the manifestation of it, even a full deliverance from all
corruption and misery, and that in our bodies which shall be last of all freed
and delivered, and for consummation and fullness of glory which we shall have
at the day of judgment, at the coming of Christ to judgment.

Now first observe we, that the Apostle here puts down Gods children as a
distinct member from the creature; he says, Not only the creature, but we
also: thereby giving us to understand, that though Gods children be his
creatures as other things be, yet they are more then so. And the point hence is
this.

That Gods children are the creatures of God as other Gods children are much
more the^ that they are by creation.
Gods children are not only partakers of that common benefit common to them
with the earth, and elements, and brute beasts, to be the work of the Lords
hands, but they are also partakers of a further benefit, they are created anew,
and they are made new creatures, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Corinthians, 5.15. If
any man be in Christ, (...), Let him be a new creature, or he is a new
creature. And Galat. 6.15. the Apostle says, Neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature: a new creation. And this new
creature is vouchsafed to all Gods children, they are framed anew in their
minds, wills, affections, in all the powers of their souls, and in all the
parts and members of their bodies, not in the substance of them, but in regard
of holiness and righteousness, according to the image of God in which man was
first created. And the ground of this is.

The promise of God we read of, Ezech. 36.26. A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you. The Lord has promised to make his
chosen anew, to frame in them new minds, and throughout to renew them; and he
will be as good as his word, he will make them new creatures.

And for use, with euerieone of us, that we be not only the creatures of God
as other things in the world be, but that we be framed anew, and made new
creatures in Jesus Christ. We must look that we be made new creatures in Jesus
Christ.
Many poor ignorant souls think they have matter of comfort enough in this,
that they are Gods creatures, and they say, they are the poor creatures of
God, and he has made them, and they hope he will be good to them and save
them, they hope God made them not to damn them. But alas, if men or women have
no better ground of comfort then this, that they are Gods creatures, they are
in a poor and miserable case, the ox or the ass is in that respect as near
heaven as they, for they are also Gods creatures. Yea know, whosoever thou art,
if thou content thy self in this, that thou art Gods creature, and never
labor for further ground of comfort, but so live and so dye, thou art in a
far worse case then the brute creatures, then the very toade or venomous
serpent: for the death of the brute creature is to it an end of all misery,
but thy death to thee is a beginning of endless woe without ease or remedy.
And therefore rest not on this, that thou art the creature of God, but labor
thou to be made a new creature in Jesus Christ, and never rest till thou be
framed anew in thy mind, will, and affections, according to the image of God,
in true holiness and righteousness, and that indeed will yield How precious
Gods children are to God in regard of their new creation.
it is matter of great comfort to Gods children, that they are created anew,
and made new creatures in Jesus Christ, and that they have the image of God
stamped on them; for doubtless the Lord does more esteem of them then he does
of all other creatures in the world, then he does of the most goodly and
glorious creatures, the Sun, Moon, and stars, yea then he does of other
men that are reasonable creatures as well as they, be they never so rich or
great in the world. As a father who has in him the true affection of a father,
makes more reckoning and account of his child begotten of his own body, and
that bears his image and is most like to him, then he does of his gold or
silver though he have abundance; and so the Lord esteems more of one of his
children whom he has begotten by the immortal seed of his word, and by the
work of his Spirit, and framed anew in his beloved the Lord Jesus the Son of
his love, then he does of all other creatures in the world. And for his
childrens sake he reprooues kings, alters the course of nature, and many times
turns vpside down the estate of things in the world. Yea on their being
depends the continuance of this world: Note.
when Gods children shall be all sealed and sanctified, and their number fully
accomplished, then shall heaven and earth go together, and this world shall
have an end, so dear and precious are Gods children to him. And this is to be
thought on to the comfort of all that find themselves created anew, and made
new creatures in Jesus Christ.

In the next place, the description of the godly and true believers here given
by the Apostle, comes to be considered and stood on: the Apostle thus
describing the godly and true believers, that they are such as have the first
fruits of the Spirit: that is, as we showed, such as have the beginnings of
true saving grace, and the special gifts of the Spirit peculiar to Gods elect,
as pawnes and pledges to them of the perfection of them hereafter, and of
fullness of joy and glory in heaven, which the Lord has promised to them in
time to be given The beginnings of true saving grace in Gods children, and
special gifts of the Spirit, are as sufficient pawnes and pledges of
perfection of grace, and of fullness of joy and glory hereafter to be given to
them in heaven.


That the beginnings of true saving grace in Gods children, and the special
gifts of the Spirit, and gifts peculiar to Gods elect bestowed on them, are as
sufficient pawnes and pledges to assure them, that hereafter they shall have
full perfection of grace, and fullness of joy and glory in heaven. As the
Israelites by offering their first fruits had good hope of a good harvest, and
that they in time should reap the rest of their crop: so Gods children by the
beginnings of true saving grace, and by the special gifts of the Spirit of God
here bestowed on them, may conceive certain hope and assurance both of
perfection of grace, and of fullness of joy and glory hereafter to be given to
them in heaven. 1. Corinthians. 1.22. 1. Cor. 1.22.
the Apostle speaking of himself and of other true believers, says, God has
sealed us, and has given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. He compares
the Spirit of God given to his children to an earnest penny, that as men do
assure others that they will pay the^ the whole sum due for this or that, by
giving them an earnest penny; so the Lord does give his children here in this
world the special gifts of his Spirit, as it were part of payment, and as an
earnest penny, the better to assure them that in due time they shall receive
fullness both of grace and glory. And to the same purpose speaks the Apostle.
Ephess. 1.13.14. Ephe. 1.13.14
says he, Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance: that is, as an earnest given us of God, does confirm to us
our heavenly inheritance, and assure us that in time we shall receive the
fullness of grace and glory. Ephesians. 4.30.
And in the 4. Chap. of that Epistle verse 30. says the Apostle, Grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of ^edemption: as if
he had said, By whom ye are confirmed in assurance of a full redemption, even
of a full deliverance from all corruption and misery, and of a full
accomplishment and perfection both of grace and glory in time to be given to
you. These places do sufficiently clear and confirm the truth of the point in
hand, that the beginnings of true saving grace, and the special gifts of the
Spirit of God, peculiar to Gods elect, bestowed on Gods children, are as
sufficient pawnes and pledges to assure them that hereafter they shall have
perfection of grace, and fullness of joy and glory in heaven.

And the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.



will certainly accomplish and perfect his own good work in them; he is able
to do it, none can hinder him, and he is most willing to do it: yea the Apostle
says, 1. Corinthians. 1.8.9. that he will confirm his children to the end,
because he is faithful. He reasons from the nature of God, he is most
faithful and true in his word and promises, and therefore he will confirm his
children, Who shall (says he) confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: and then he subioynes as the
ground of that, God is faithful by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And Philip. 1.6. the Apostle says expressly,
that the Lord who has begun the good work in his children, will perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ: he will certainly accomplish it. And therefore
on these grounds we may resolve on this as a certain truth, that the
beginnings of true saving grace, and the special gifts of the Spirit of God,
the gifts peculiar to Gods elect bestowed on Gods children, are as sufficient
pawnes and pledges to assure them that hereafter they shall have both
perfection of grace, and also fullness of joy and glory in heaven.

Now then for the use, first on this ground of truth we are The wonderful and
unspeakable goodness of God toward his ch^ldren manifested, in that he makes
known to them that he has provided fullness of joy and glory for them in
heaven.
The Lord has not only provided and laid up fullness of joy and glory for
his children in heaven, but he is pleased out of the abundance of his love and
riches of his mercy, to make it known to them that he has so provided for
them, yea to give them here in this world pawnes and pledges of it, even
sufficient to assure them that they shall in time be put in full possession of
it. The Lord knows our unbelieving mould, that we are full of doubting, and
full of unbelief, and he is pleased to provide against it in his children, and
to give to them the beginnings of true saving grace, and the special gifts of
his Spirit, as pawnes and pledges of his love to them, and the better to
ascertaine them touching his gracious purpose of bringing them to their
heavenly inheritance, and that in time they shall have fullness of joy and
glory in heaven. And in this respect Gods children cannot sufficiently
magnify Gods goodness and mercy toward them.

Excellent comfort to such as find in themselves the beginnings of true saving
grace, and the special gifts of Gods Spirit.
Again for a second use: is it so that the beginnings of true saving grace, and
the special gifts of Gods Spirit, the gifts peculiar to Gods elect bestowed on
them, are as pawnes and pledges sufficient to assure them that hereafter they
shall have both perfection of grace, and also fullness of joy and glory in
heaven? Then here is a ground of excellent comfort to all that find in
themselves the beginnings of true saving grace, and the special gifts of Gods
Spirit, the gifts peculiar to Gods elect: they may thereupon certainly conclude
to the comfort of their own souls, that they shall in time be possessed of
fullness of joy and glory in heaven, and they are to be fully persuaded of it.
Though we will not sometimes trust a man on his word, or on his bill, or bond,
yet on a sufficient pawn we dare trust any man, and shall we not then trust
the Lord on so good and sufficient a pawn lying with us, as the beginnings of
true saving grace, and the special gifts of the Spirit of God, the gifts
peculiar to Gods elect? Oh we are thereupon to be fully persuaded, that the
Lord will one day bring us into the possession of the heavenly inheritance, and
that we shall assuredly in time come to enjoy the fullness of joy and glory in
heaven. I know it is a point of controversy between us and the Papists, and
they say, that none can in this life be assured that they shall hereafter enjoy
life and glory in heaven. I will not enter the controversy, but consider we
thus much; can a man or a woman have the first fruits of the Spirit, and then
be disappointed of the joy and glory in heaven? Has the Lord begun a good
work in his children, and will not he perfect it? Why surely the saving grace
that Gods children here have, is a beginning of that glorious being they shall
receive in heaven, it is the same for substance, differing only in degree. And
therefore doubtless, such as have the beginnings of true saving grace, and the
special gifts of the Spirit of God, the gifts peculiar to Gods elect, may
thereupon certainly persuade themselves, that they shall in time come to have
perfection of grace, and fullness of joy and glory in heaven, and that may be
a ground of sweet comfort to them. Yea, will some say, it is indeed matter of
great comfort to such as have the beginnings of true saving grace, and the
special gifts of the Spirit of God, and the gifts peculiar to Gods elect: but
how shall I know, They may be enlightened, and taste of the heavenly gift, they
may be partakers of the gifts of the Spirit, they may taste of the heavenly
gift, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6.4.5. how then shall I know
that the grace I have is true grace, and the gifts of the Spirit of God
bestowed on me, are the special gifts of the Spirit of God peculiar to his
elect, and so pawnes and pledges sufficient to assure me that in time to come I
shall have perfection of grace, and fullness of joy and glory in heaven?

I answer: By three things a man may know that the grace that is in him is true
saving grace.
and by the special working of it, as:

First, by the root of it, if the grace that is in thee come from Christ as
the root: for Christ is not only the author of spiritual life, as the Father
and the holy Ghost, but he is also the cause of it, and he has it in himself,
that he may convey it to all that truly believe in him: he is an appointed head
to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. He is the Lord of life, Act. 3.15. He is a
quickening Spirit, 1. Cor. 15.45. And if the grace that is in thee come from
Christ as the root of it, and Christ lives in thee as the root of a tree
lives in the branches of it, and thou art able to say with the Apostle, Galat.
2.20. Galat. 2.20.
Christ lives in me, and I have in me in some measure the mind of Christ, the
disposition of Christ, and the affection of Christ, I mind the will of God to
do it, it is meat and drink to me to do it, I mind the glory of God, I seek
it unfeignedly; then is the grace that is in thee true grace.

Secondly, by the extent of it, if the grace that is in thee do extend and
reach it self to all the powers of thy soul, and to all the parts of thy
body, thou art wrought on throughout, and there is a proportionable measure of
grace in all the powers of thy soul, and in all the parts and members of thy
body, and the grace that is in thee, does reach also to all the parts of thy
life, for true grace spreads it self over the whole man. And hence is
renouation called a new birth, and a new creation, and a putting off of the old
man, and a putting on of the new man: And true grace holds out and
increases, though indeed sometimes it may be interrupted by some strong
temptation, or some grievous affliction, yet it gets strength again
afterward, and it grows stronger daily.

David says, Psalm. 119.6. Thou have respect to all the commandments of God,
and thou have now a single care to please and to glorify God in all things,
and a willingness in thee to obey the will of God in every particular thing
made known to thee out of his word that concerns thee within the compass of
thy place and calling, and that freely, as if there were no law to compel
thee, no heaven to reward thee, nor hell to punish evil doers; yea to obey the
will of God in every thing, though it be against thy profit, thy pleasure, thy
credit, thy liberty, thine ease, or the liking of carnal friends, and such
like. And now thou do not content thy self in the good things thou have
done, either in leaving sin, or in drawing near to God, but thou do still
go forward, and every day get ground of sin, and break off some corruption,
and every day draw nearer to God, as the Apostle says, Philip. 3.13.14. Thou
forgettest that which is behind, and do endeavor thy self to do that which
is before, and press forward toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. And now thou love good men, because they are
good, be they never so poor, or of never so mean condition, and thou love
good things in others as well as in thy self, thou do not now envy or
despise the good gifts thou see in others, though they be thine enemies; but
thou do like and approve of them, and bless God for them, and give him
glory for them, and thou seek to profit by them, and thereuppon take
advantage to labor for the same gifts in thy self. If it be thus with thee,
if the grace that is in thee thus come from a right root, namely, from Christ
Jesus, and be thus extended, and does thus reach it self over all the powers
and faculties of thy soul, and over all the parts and members of thy body,
and to all the parts of thy life, and have this special working in thee,
working in thee uprightness of heart, loving all good things because they are
good, and hating all sins because they are sins and displeasing to God,
then is the grace that is in thee true saving grace, and the gifts of the
Spirit of God bestowed on thee are special gifts, proper to Gods children, and
thou art now gone beyond an hypocrite, and thou may thereupon conclude, to
the comfort of thine own soul, thou art in the state of grace, and that thou
shall in time have perfection of grace, and fullness of joy, and glory given
thee in heaven: and hereby let every one try himself.

Come we now to the second thing offered to us from this description of the
godly and true believers, that they are such as have the first fruits of the
Spirit. I said that from this description

Now the second is this, that in this life Gods children have not fullness and
perfection of saving grace bestowed on them, but only some part and portion of
it, even so much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for them. Gods
children have not fullness and perfection of grace in them in this life, but
only so much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for them.
They have here only the first fruits of saving grace, not a full harvest of
it. And as the first fruits among the Jews were but an handful in comparison
of their whole crop and full harvest: so the saving graces and gifts of God
proper to Gods chosen, here in this life bestowed on Gods children, are but as
an handful, even a small measure in comparison of that fullness and perfection
of them that shall be given to them in heaven. And to this purpose also sits
that comparison of an earnest, the special gifts and graces of the Spirit of
God being compared to an earnest in the places before cited. And as an earnest
is but a little in comparison of the whole sum, happily a shilling, or ten
shillings, given in earnest for the payment of an hundred pounds or more: so
are the special gifts and graces of God, here given to Gods children, but a
small thing in comparison of that fullness of grace they shall hereafter
receive in the kingdom of heaven. 1. Cor. 13.9. 1. Cor. 13.9.
the Apostle says, We know but in part. The most regenerate in this life, they
know but in part, and their love and other graces that are in them are
proportionable, they have here in this world the saving gifts and graces of
Gods Spirit but in a mean and small measure. Colos. 1.19. Colos. 1.19.
the Apostle confines all fullness to the person of Christ, and that by the
eternal decree of God his Father, and (says he) It pleased the Father that in
him (that is Christ) both the fullness of the Godhead, as we have it Colos.
2.9. Colos. 2.9.
and also the fullness both of grace and merit should dwell: and of his
fullness of grace do true believers receive, as Ioh. 1.16. Ioh. 1.16.
Of his fullness have all we received. Christ was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows as we read Heb. 1.9. Heb. 1.9.
cited out of Psalm. 45.7. Psalm. 45.7.
He received not the Spirit by measure. Ioh. 3.34. Ioh. 3.34.
but in fullness, and that oil of grace that was powered on his head, it
descends down to his members, but yet they receive it but in measure. And so
true believers, Gods children, have not here in this life fullness and
perfection of saving grace bestowed on them, but only some part and portion of
it: even so much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for them. And
indeed to give you some reasons of this truth.

or other matter put into them: so through the infirmities of nature Gods
children are not able to receive the fullness of grace, they are not capable of
it in the time of this life.

And again, secondly, the Lord in his wise dispensation will have his children
in the time of this life, not only to have joy in believing, and in the
apprehension of his love and favor toward them in Christ, but he will have
them to have also matter of humiliation, in respect of their imperfections and
wants, for the beating down of their pride, lest they should be too much lift
up in themselves, and altogether rest in themselves for the ground of their
comfort. On these grounds it is that Gods children have not here in this life
fullness and perfection of saving grace bestowed on them, but only some part
and portion, even so much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for
them.

But happily here some will say, Christ says, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of
the water that he gives him shall never thirst, but the water that he gives him
shall be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life. Now the water
that he gives, is not only his merit, but his Spirit also, and the saving
gifts and graces of his Spirit, as appears, Ioh. 7.38.39. He that believes in
me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water of
life. This spoke he, says the text, of the Spirit which they that believe in
him should receive, and therefore it seems that true believers have in the
time of this life fullness of saving grace bestowed on them, even such a
fullness as they need not to thirst after more.

To this I answer. As a well or fountain of water in him, ever springing up to
everlasting life. And so it still remains a truth, that Gods children have not
here in this life fullness and perfection of saving grace bestowed on them, but
only some part and portion of it, even so much as the Lord in his wisdom
sees meet and fit for them, the first fruits of the Spirit, and a small
measure in comparison of that harvest and fullness they shall hereafter have in
heaven.

Comfort to Gods children who have in them the beginnings of true saving grace,
and yet complain of their own spiritual weaknesses and wants. Note.
and are many times much dejected and cast down on the sight and on the sense
and feeling of their own spiritual wants; they are to consider, that here in
this life they cannot come to fullness and perfection of saving grace, but
only to some part and portion of it, to the first fruits of the Spirit, and
to such a measure of grace, as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for
them. It is a dangerous subtlety of Satan, that he many times goes about to
persuade poor weak Christians, they have no faith, no sanctification, nor the
Spirit of God at all, because they have not all faith, and perfect
sanctification, and the fullness of the Spirit: and he would have them try
themselves by the rule of perfection, when as indeed they are here but in the
state of progression. We are to take heed of this dangerous sleight of our
subtle enemy, and that we may be armed against it, remembering the truth now
delivered, that Gods children have not here in this life fullness and
perfection of saving grace, but only some part and portion of it, even so much
as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for them. And therefore be not
thou whosoever thou art, utterly dismayed, because thy faith is but little, and
the saving grace that is in thee is but weak and imperfect: thou know the
imperfect life of an infant is life, as truly as that life which is in a man
that is come to his full growth; and so the saving grace that is in thee, being
but weak, is as truly grace, as the grace that is in the strongest Christians.
from it: And know, that thou shall never in this life feel grace as thou
feel corruption and sin, if thou have the first fruits of the Spirit, the
beginnings of true saving grace. And thou may know thou have so, by the
grounds I have given, especially by the working of grace, if it work in thee
uprightness of heart, so that now thou do hate all sin as well as one,
because it is sin, and now thou art willing to obey the will of God in all
things, and thou do now raise up a daily combat with thy self, and a
continual striving against thy most secret corruptions, even against such
corruptions as none knows but God and thine own soul; thou have the
beginnings of true saving grace, and bless God for it: be humbled (indeed) for
thy wants, but yet bless God for the grace thou have received. And herein by
the way many good Christians are wanting, they complain of their wants, but
they forget to bless God for the good he has wrought in them; therefore do
thou bless God for his mercy to thee, for the grace thou have received, and
comfort thy self in it, and wait thou for fullness and perfection of grace to
be given thee hereafter in heaven: yet in the mean time labor thou to
increase the grace that is in thee, and daily to add one measure of grace to
another. And so to fall on a second use.

We must take heed we abuse not this truth, that Gods children Reproof of such
as abuse this truth, that Gods children have not fullness and perfection of
grace in them in this life.
even so much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet and fit for them, the first
fruits of the Spirit and a small measure of saving grace. We may not hereupon
take occasion to content our selves with a literal knowledge of the will of
God, and with a formal and powerless profession, as many do on this ground.
Why? say they, the best have but a small measure of grace in this life: and
therefore they think they may rest in a literal knowledge and in a formal
profession; yea they think their gross sins are handsomely put off by this:
The best (say they) that live in the world are sinners, and the best have their
wants, and have here but a small measure of grace bestowed on them. We must
take heed of this, and it being so that here in this life we have not fullness
and perfection of grace bestowed on us, but only some part and portion of it,
we must be daily adding one measure of grace to another, we are in this life to
be continually hungring and thirsting after grace. Christ pronounces them
blessed, who hunger and thirst after righteousness, Math. 5.6. We are to find
such an emptiness and such a want in that grace that is truly wrought in us,
as does require a further supply and filling up, and we are to find in our
selves such an hungring after a further measure of grace, as makes us ready
and willing to break through any difficulty or danger to attain to it, as we
say, hunger will break the stone walls; such an impatient and such an holy
feeling must we have of the want of the full measure of grace that is already
wrought in us, and such and hungring desire to be further filled with it, as
that we are stirred up to sighing and groaning, watching, fasting, and praying,
for a greater measure, and are careful and conscionable in using all good
means of further increase of it, as hearing, reading, conferring, continual
meditating in the word of God, and prayer, and frequenting the company of
those that are spiritual, who are able to quicken us up in this kind.

We are now to come to the second general thing here put down by the Apostle,
and that is the practice of the godly, and of such as have the first fruits of
the Spirit; namely, their sighing or groaning, and their waiting. And first of
their sighing or groaning, the Apostle says, We sigh in our selves, even we who
have the first fruits of the Spirit, do sigh in our selves, that is, as we
have showed, we who have the first fruits of the Spirit, feeling the weight of
our corruption and misery, even we do sigh and groan under it, and that truly
from the very root and ground of our hearts, desiring ease and deliverance.

Now here in the first place we are to take notice of this practice of the
godly, of their sighing and groaning: and the

The best of Gods children do in this world sigh and groan under the burden of
corruption and misery.
That the godly, and such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, do sigh and
groan under the burden of corruption that here in this world cleaues to them,
and under the burden of misery that here they lie under; even the best of
Gods children, and such as have the greatest measure of saving grace bestowed
on them, do still sigh and groan under the burden of corruption and misery;
and their life here, so long as they live in this world, is a life of sighing
and groaning, and they are here in a continual practice of sighing and groaning.
Psalm. 6.6. David says, he caused his bed every night to swim, and he
watered his couch with tears. And Job 3.24. Job affirms, that his sighing
came before his eating: My sighing (says he) comes before I eat. Psalm. 84.6.
the godly are said here in this world to go through the vale of Baca, through
the vale of drought, or through the vale of weeping and tears; their life here
is a life of sighing and groaning, and of weeping and mourning, and they are
here in a continual practice of sighing and groaning: for why,

The godly and such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, says, 2. Corinthians.
5.2. Therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from
heaven. These and many other just causes of sighing and groaning which I might
add, as the dishonor of God, the blaspheming of his name, Gods children, and
such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, see and discern, and they are
apprehensiue of them. And hence it is that their life here in this world is a
life of sighing and groaning, and they are here in a continual practice of
sighing and groaning. Happily some will say,

It is an idle conceit, that Gods children may come to such a measure of
comfort in this life, as they need not any more sigh, or groan, or mourn for
their sins.
do still sigh and groan under the burden of corruption and misery, and their
life here, so long as they live in the body, is a life of sighing and groaning,
and they are here in a continual practice of sighing and groaning? Surely then
it cannot be true which some idle brains have imagined or do conceit, that
Gods children may come to such a perfection of grace, and to such a measure of
comfort here in this life, as that they need not sigh or groan any more, and
that they need not any more mourn for their sins: they are deceived that so
think, the truth now delivered shows plainly that their opinion is but a
fancy. I leave them: and for a second use.

the world are far from the practice of Gods children, and of such as have
the first fruits of the Spirit: for why, most men and women in the world are so
far from the continual practice of sighing and groaning, Reproof of such men
and women as are far from continual sighing and groaning.
as indeed they put sighing and groaning far away from them, yea they esteem
it to be a womanish affection, and there is nothing to be found amongst them
but mirth and iolitie, eating and drinking, quaffing and carowsing, laughing
and singing, and a continual following of their sports and pleasures, and
their sensual delights; and they are mirth-mongers, they study and devise how
they may spend their time in mirth and merriment: yea many times they take
pains that they may enjoy a little carnal and sensual pleasure. As at this
time we now celebrate the birth of Christ, have not many amongst us labored
hard, risen early, sit up late, and taken great pains the week before this
time, that they might have some spending money at this time, some money to
spend in carding, dicing, quaffing, and drinking, and do they not now so spend
it, and spend their time in all manner of riot and disorder, and think this
time gives them liberty so to do? Surely herein they show themselves to be
far from the practice of Gods children, and of such as have the first fruits
of the Spirit; yea herein they show themselves to be such as are under the
curse of God, and liable to that woe denounced by him who knew what he said,
and cannot lie, even by the Lord Jesus, Luke 6.25. Woe to you that are full,
for ye shall hunger. Woe to you that now laugh, for ye shall wail and weep.
Woe to you that are now merry and frolike, and pass your time in sports and
merriment, and sensual delights, you shall one day weep and wail. Consider
it thou that art a drunkard, a gamester, or the like, that day may be nearer to
thee then thou art aware of, thou art every moment subject to the stroke of
Gods hand, the Lord may suddenly strike thy body dead, yea whilst the cards,
dice, or pot is in thine hand, and send thy soul to hell: there is but a
step between thee and hell, and can thou laugh and be merry? If thou
can, and if thou so do, thy case is fearful, thou art hardened in thy
sin, and thou art far from the practice of a child of God, and consequently
far from the comfort of a child of God: and thou going on in thy mirth and
iolitie, thou shall assuredly one day be as far from Gods children as hell is
from heaven. Think on it, and let every one of us remember this, that if we
go on in a Iouiall course, if we be mirth mongers, bown-companions, good
fellows, as the world calls them, we are then far from the practice of Gods
children; and we are then far from the comfort of Gods children. Gods
children may rejoice in using the good creatures of God, observing 3 caueats.
But, will some say, may not Gods children rejoice in using the good creatures
of God, as meat, drink and such like? I answer. Doubtless they may, and they
only may rejoice, and they only may keep a merry Christmas, so as they
remember three caueats.

First, that their joy and delight in outward things be a fruit



Job knew it well, ^s he says, Job 1.5. therefore he sent and sanctified his
children when they feasted together: thus may Gods children do in using the
good creatures of God.

The Apostle says, We sigh in our selves: that is, from the very root and
ground of our hearts. Hence note we.

That the sighing of Gods children, and of such as have the first fruits of the
Spirit, Note. Gods children sigh and groan heartily when they sigh and groan
for sin. So do not hypocrites and carnal persons.
is hearty and sound, it is not hypocritical and formal, but from the very
heart root. Gods children sigh and groan heartily when they sigh and groan for
sin that cleaues to their souls. It is not so with hypocrites, with carnal
persons, when they sigh, though it be for sin, yet it is not heartily and
soundly. And this difference may appear thus: when Gods children sigh for some
actual sin whereof they are guilty, they rest not in sighing for that, but
they go down to the root of that and all their other sins, the corruption
of their nature, and they fetch their sighs from under that corruption that
cleaues to their hearts, in which they were conceived and borne, and which is
the root and mother of all their sins, and they groan under the burden of
that. Thus did David, Pfal. 51. he rested not in the acknowledgement of his
adultery and murder, and in sighing and groaning for those actual sins, but
he went down to the root of those and of all his other sins, the sin of
his conception and birth, verse 5. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in
sin has my mother conceived me. But hypocrites and carnal persons, they
rest in this, that they sigh and groan for some actual sin; their
consciences being awakened, and now they seeing and feeling some actual sin
pressing and lying heavy upon their consciences, happily thereupon they send out
a natural sigh or sob, in regard of some outward thing, in regard of shame and
punishment due to them for that sin, or in regard of the hand of God on them
by sickness, pain, or the like; as Pharaoh did when the hand of God was on
him, then he cried, I have sinned, and take away this plague: but he never
cried, take away the hardness of heart, and cursednesse of my nature. And thus
it is with hypocrites and carnal persons, they groan only as the brute beast
does that is pressed with some heavy burden, but they never go down to the
root of sin and groan under that as an heavy burden, and fetch their
sighs from under that; and so they groan not with their hearts soundly when
they sigh for their sins. And of this the Lord complains, Hoze. 7.14. They
have not cried unto me with their hearts (says he) when they how led upon
their beds. If then thou would have true comfort in thy sighing and groaning
for sin, look thou go down to the root of all sins in thy self, and
sigh in thy self, even from under that corruption that cleaues to thy soul
inwardly, and then doubtless thy sighing is a sound sighing, and a sighing of
a child of God, and it is then pleasing to God, and will yield comfort to thine
own soul.

Come we now to the second thing the Apostle here puts down, as the practice
of the godly and of such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, and that is
their waiting. Waiting (says he) for the adoption, even the redemption of our
body: that is, (as we showed) patiently and constantly expecting and looking
for the consummation of our adoption, and full manifestation of it, even a full
deliverance from all corruption and misery, and that in our bodies, which
shall last of all be freed and delivered; and so the consummation and fullness
of the glory which we shall baue at the day of judgment, at the coming of
Christ to judgment. Now here in the first place note we, that the Apostle
ioynes sighing and waiting together, in such as have the first fruits of the
Spirit: says he, We which have the first fruits of the Spirit, we sighing and
waiting, we sigh under the burden of corruption and misery, we wait for
deliverance and freedom from it. Whence take we notice of thus much.

A child of God so groans under the burden of misery that he lies under, as
that he waits for deliverance out of it with patience.
as the Prophet says, Isai. 28.16. He that believes makes not have. A true
believer, one that has the first fruits of the Spirit, true saving grace in
him, such an one groaning under any trouble or distress, though he do carefully
use all good means that may procure him ease and deliverance, yet he waits in
patience for ease and deliverance to be given him in the Lords good time, as
the Church says, Isai. 26.8. We have waited for thee in the way of thy
judgments, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee.

using the means, waits on God for a blessing on them, and for ease, comfort,
refreshing, and deliverance to be given him in that time which the Lord in his
wisdom sees meet for him.

If then for use of this, thou whosoever thou art, How dangerous a thing it is
to make have to be delivered out of distress, and to be impatient of delay.
and thou will not wait on the Lords leisure, yea thou breakest out, or at
least in thine heart thou say as that wicked king of Israel said, 2. King.
6.33. Should I attend on the Lord any longer? Thou will no longer wait on the
Lord, but thou runnest from God to the devil, even to the using of unlawful
means to help thy self by; yea to the accursed instruments of Satan, to
witches and wizards, and thou will have help and deliverance in all have.
Assuredly thou art far from the spirit, and disposition, and practice of a
child of God, yea thou have in thee the spirit and disposition of a child of
the devil; and it is a fearful presumption that God has given thee up to
the power of Satan, that he may seal thee up to thine eternal damnation.
Remember this, that in a child of God sighing and waiting are joined together,
and if thou would approve thy self to have the Spirit of a child of God,
even the first fruits of the Spirit, thou must not only be sensible of thy
trouble and distress, and sigh and groan under it, but thou must also with
faith in the promises of God, both in respect of the matter of them, and also
of the circumstances of his promises, wait for ease, for comfort, and for
deliverance with patience, and look to find ease, comfort, refreshing and
deliverance in the Lords good time, in the time that he in his wisdom sees
meet and fit for thee.

Come we now to consider the practice of the godly, and of such as have the
first fruits of the Spirit here further expressed, namely, their waiting for
the adoption, even the redemption of their body: and the point hence in the
next place is this.

That the godly and such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, The godly
constantly look and long for the day of full deliverance, and live in
continual expectation of that day.
of their adoption, and for a full deliverance from all corruption and misery
both in their souls and bodies. Gods children and such as have the beginnings
of true saving grace bestowed on them, they constantly look and long for the
day of full deliverance, yea the day when they shall be fully freed from all
corruption and misery both in their souls and bodies, and they live in a
continual expectatation of that day. 1. Corinthians. 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.7.
the Apostle says, the believing Corinthians were not destitute of any gift,
the Lord had bestowed on them a great measure of saving grace; and then be
subioynes, Waiting for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Philip. 3.20.
says the Apostle, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we expect
and look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Tim. 4.8. we find
that the Apostle makes it a note of all those that shall receive the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord shall give at that day of his appearing, that
they are such as love the appearance of the Lord Jesus. Hebr. 9.28. the Author
of that Epistle says, Christ shall appear the second time without sin, to
the salvation of those that look for him. Revel. 22.20. Christ Jesus
testifying this of himself and saying, Surely I come quickly: the true
believing soul answers, Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus. To these we might add
many other testimonies clearing and confirming this truth, that Gods children
and such as have the beginnings of grace, they live in continual expectation
of a day wherein they shall be fully freed from all corruption and misery,
both in their souls and in their bodies, and they long for that day of fu^l
deliverance.



And secondly, Gods children earnestly desire to enjoy the comfortable presence
of the Lord Jesus, and to be where he is, and to behold his glory, as he has
prayed, Ioh. 17.24. and they desire immediate fellowship with Christ, yea they
would not go to heaven if they should not find Christ there: and they desire
that their faith and their hope may be changed into the sight and full fruition
of good things they eye by faith, and that now they hope for. On these grounds
without question it is, that Gods children and such as have the first fruits
of the Spirit, live in continual expectation of the day wherein they shall be
fully freed from all corruption and misery, both in their souls and bodies,
and they long for that day exceedingly. No apprentcie more earnestly longs for
the day of his freedom, nor any woman being in pains of childbearing, more
heartily longs to be delivered of her child, then Gods children do long for the
day of their full deliverance from all corruption and misery both in their
souls and bodies: and so they long for the coming of Christ to them, either by
death, as the Apostle did, Philip. 1.23. I desire to be loosed and to be with
Christ, or by the general judgment. Happily some may say: May a child of God
long for death, wealth, according to the place and measure of grace given them.

A difference between the godly and the wicked in regard of their expectation
and desire of death.
it serves to make known a difference between the godly and the wicked. The
wicked may happily be weary of the world, as Cain was of his punishment, they
may and do sometimes, out of their sense and feeling of pain and misery, wish
themselves out of the world, and the hand of God being heavy on them, they do
sometimes cry out: Oh would I were out of the world, having a foolish and
blind conceit that death will put an end to all their pain and misery, so
sottish and so ignorant are they. But alas, the wicked and ungodly live not in
continual expectation of full deliverance from all corruption and misery,
they are not ever wishing and longing for the day of death, and to be out of
this world, now being in health, and strength, and in prosperity: they put
death and the day of judgment far out of their minds, and they would not
willingly entertain a thought of death, or of the coming of Christ to
judgment, such thoughts are unpleasing, and make them melancholicke; and they
are so besotted with the vanities, pleasures, and the outward good things of
this life, as they could be content to abide here for ever, and to set up their
rest in this world, and to go no further: which indeed is one part of their
misery, as one says, Quae tanta est infoelicitas vt de ipsa miseria
gaudeamus, etc. Now it is far otherwise (as we have heard) with the godly,
and such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, they live in a continual
expectation of the day of full deliverance from all corruption and misery,
both in their souls and bodies, they wait for that day, and they long for
that day exceedingly. And if thou whosoever thou art, would have good
evidence to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou have the first fruits
of the Spirit, the beginnings of true saving grace in thee, thou must find it
thus with thee, that thou live in a continual expectation of the day of full
redemption, the day of full deliverance from all corruption and misery, both
in thy soul and body, and that thou do wait and long for the day of Christ
his coming to judgment. Indeed I grant, Note.
that a child of God does not at all times alike long for the day of full
deliverance from all corruption and misery, and so for the coming of Christ to
judgment: in the time of grievous temptation, or some heavy affliction,
especially his mind and conscience being afflicted, as sometimes it is, he does
not then so earnestly long for the day of full deliverance from all corruption
and misery: but being freed from that temptation, and being delivered out of
that affliction, he then recouers his measure of longing, and he lives in a
continual expectation of the day of full deliverance from all corruption and
misery both of soul and body. And thus it must be with thee, if thou would
make it good to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou have the first
fruits of the Spirit, and the beginnings of true saving grace, thou must have
in thee in some measure, a continual expectation of the day of full
deliverance from all corruption and misery both of soul and body, and so a
continual longing for the day of Christ his coming to judgment, and thou must
be able to desire, that the Lord Jesus would now break the heavens and come to
judgment, and to say with comfort with the Church, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. And to that end never rest till thou find thine own corruption and
sins to be an heavy burden unto thee, and the temptations of Satan to be
irksome and tedious to thee, and that thou art weary of sinning against thy
good God, who has been rich and abundant in mercy and loving kindness
toward thee, and that thou have a lively hope to partake in the joys and
glory of heaven, and to partake of the good things prepared of God for all
those that love the appearance of the Lord Jesus. And then doubtless thou will
rejoice, and take much comfort in thinking on the day of full redemption, the
day of full deliverance from all corruption and misery, both in thy soul and
body; and thou will then be able heartily to wish and long for the coming of
Christ to judgment.

The Apostle here further sets forth the waiting of the godly by the object
of it, Adoption, and that again explaned to be the redemption of our body.
Waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body. Now in that the
Apostle says, that the godly and such as have the first fruits of the Spirit,
do wait for the adoption, that is, the consummation of their adoption and full
manifestation of it, we may see the truth of the point we formerly delivered
when we stood on the description of the godly, that they are such as have the
first The beginnings of true saving grace are sufficient pawnes and pledges to
assure men that hereafter they shall have perfection of grace and glory in
heaven.
and the special gifts of the Spirit of God, gifts peculiar to Gods elect
bestowed on man, are as pawnes and pledges sufficient to assure them that
hereafter they shall have both perfection of grace, and also fullness of joy
and glory in heaven.

For why, those beginnings of saving grace, do put them into certain hope and
expectation of the accomplishment and consummation of their adoption, that in
time it shall be complete and perfect, and that one day they shall certainly be
put into the full possession of their Fathers inheritance; yea they are put
into such certain hope of it, The holy Spirit of promise is to them the
earnest of their everlasting inheritance, until the redemption of the
possession purchased, even till their full redemption; I will not stand on the
point having formerly handled it. Only it may be, that some may move this
question,

Now the Apostle here affirming, that the godly and such as have the first
fruits of the Spirit, do wait for the adoption and further explaning that to
be the redemption of our body, even a full deliverance of their bodies from
all corruption and misery, he gives us to understand thus much.

That the bodies of Gods children, and such as have the The bodies of Gods
children shall one day be fully freed from all corruption and misery.
shall one day be fully freed from all corruption and misery. Though the
bodies of Gods children be here in this world subject to manifold infirmities,
pains, and miseries, and as the Preacher says, Eccles. 9.2. All outward
things do come alike to all, to the just and to the wicked, to the good and to
the bad: and the bodies of Gods children are here subject to death and to
corruption, yea the bodies of the Saints of God, whose souls are glorified in
heaven, do now lie rotting in their graves, or they are some way or other under
corruption, and they have not their full consummation of glory both in soul
and body yet, the time and day of full redemption shall come, even the day
wherein the bodies of Gods children shall be fully delivered and set free from
all corruption and misery, and as we have it, Reave. 21.4. Revel. 21.4.
All tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain. 1. Cor. 15.53. the Apostle
making known how it shall be with the bodies of true believers at the day of
judgment, at the day of the general resurrection, he speaks as it were by
way of demonstration, and as it were pointing at his own body, he says, This
corruptible must put on incorruption: as if he had said, even this corruptible
body of mine, that I now bear about, shall at that day be freed from
corruption, and shall put on incorruption. Phil. 3.21. the Apostle says, that
Christ at his appearance and coming from heaven to judge the world, Shall
change the vile, and base, and corruptible bodies of true believers, and shall
fashion and form them like to his own most glorious body: and the bodies of
true believers shall then be as free from corruption and misery, as the
blessed and glorious body of the Lord Jesus: and then as the Apostle says, 2.
Cor. 5.4. Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and corruption of
incorruption. These places do sufficiently clear and confirm the truth of the
point in hand, that the day of full redemption shall come, even the day of the
redemption of our body, and the bodies of Gods children shall one day be fully
freed from all corruption and misery. And the grounds of this truth are these.



members of Christ, and temples of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.15.19. 1. Cor.
6.15.19.
and being instruments of doing good, and of glorifying God in their measure,
as well as their souls. And the Lord Jesus has abolished death, and brought
life and immortality to light, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Tim. 1.10. and so he
has not only by his blood redeemed the souls of true believers from sin,
hell, death, and damnation, but he will also at his second coming redeem their
bodies from all corruption and misery. On these grounds we may resolve on this
as a certain truth: that the day of full redemption shall come, even the day
wherein the bodies of Gods children, and such as have the first fruits of the
Spirit, shall be fully freed from all corruption and misery. Now then for the
use.

A day of general judgment must needs be, in respect of Gods children.
For howsoever the godly and true believers being departed this life, have
received their particular judgment, and are now altogether freed from sin
and corruption, and glorified in their souls, yet they have not received the
consummation of their adoption, and their full redemption; their bodies still
lie under rottenness and corruption, and they look for a day of full
redemption, even a day wherein their bodies must be fully freed from all
corruption and misery, and be glorified together with their souls: and
therefore there must of necessity be a day of general judgment, even in
respect of Gods children.

Again, for a second use, is it so that the day of full redemption A ground of
comfort to Gods children, and of patience in time of their miseries pressing
their bodies in this world.
even the day wherein the bodies of Gods children, and of such as have the
first fruits of the Spirit, shall be fully freed from all corruption and
misery? Here is then matter and ground of sweet comfort to all Gods children,
to as many as have the first fruits of the Spirit: and the due and serious
consideration of the truth now delivered, may cheer up the hearts of Gods
children, and comfort them, and may serve to encourage them patiently and
contentedly to bear evils and miseries that do press their bodies here in
this world. And consider it seriously thou that art a child of God, and have
the first fruits of the Spirit, thy body is now weak, and frail, and subject
to aches, pains, sicknesses and diseases, and to death it self, yea it may be
thy body now lies under sore and grievous diseases, under the gout, stone,
strangurie, or the like painful and grinding diseases, and thy body is full of
aches and pains, thou know not which way to turn thy self, nor where to
rest, thou endurest painful nights, and measuring the evening, thou art full
with tossing to and from unto the dawning of the day, as Job speaks of
himself, Job 7.3.4. Yea it may be thy body is tumbled up and down, and
tossed from place to place, from prison to prison, or thou suffer in thy
body extreme tortures and torments from the hands of cruel persecutors, and
the like. Well, labor to possess thy soul in patience, and as a special
ground of patience and comfort, remember and think on this truth: that the day
of full redemption will come, even the day wherein thy body which now lies
under such extreme misery, shall be fully freed from all aches and pains, and
from all manner of corruption and misery, yea the day will come when thy body
shall feel unspeakable joy and delight, and most sweet ease and contentment in
every part and member of it; and that may be matter of great comfort to thee.
Yea the consideration of this, that the day of full redemption will come, even
the day wherein thy body shall be fully freed from all corruption and misery,
may arm and strengthen thee against the fear of death, and against the horror
of the grave, and the ugliness and lothsomenesse of it. For what though thy
body be raked up in the dust, and there turned to rottenness and corruption,
and be clothed with worms and filthiness, as Job speaks, Job 7.5. and thy
body be full of cralling worms, let not the thought of that trouble thee, but
remember this: that the day of full redemption will come, even the day wherein
that body of thine shall be fully freed from all rottenness and corruption,
and shall be clothed with immortality and glory. And let that be thy comfort,
and herein cheer up thy self, thou being a child of God, and one that have
the first fruits of the Spirit; for to thee and to such as thou art belongs
this comfort. And we are to know that only such as have part in the first
redemption, shall have part in the second resurrection, and none but such. If
thou be a wicked and a graceless person, a drunkard and common blasphemer, or
the like, and if thou be so far from having the first fruits of the Spirit
of God, as thou have the fruits of the spirit of Satan, and thou do scoff
at the Spirit, at purity and at holiness, and thou art full of darkness in
the midst of teaching and of the clear light of the word, and thou art
hardened in thine heart, and filled with scorn and hatred against those that
are more conscionable then thy self, thou have no part in this comfort. And if
thou look one day to be freed from all miseries, and from all aches and pains
that happily now do press thy body, and that now thou lie under, thou
deceiuest thy self, and thy present miseries and pains are but pledges of
further and more fearful plagues and pains to come on thee hereafter, and
they are to thee but the beginnings of sorrows, as Christ speaks, Mat. 24.8.
When thy body shall be raised out of the dust, nothing abides thee but weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth, and a fearful expectation of all hellish
torments, to be endured both in thy soul and in thy body for ever. Thou must
be one that have the first fruits of the Spirit of God, if thou would with
patience and true comfort waite^ for the day of full redemption, even for the
day wherein thy body shall be fully freed from all corruption and misery.
Come we now to the 24. and 25. verses.

VERSE 24.25. For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that which he sees?

But if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it.


Our Apostle has now finished his confirmation of that proposition of his,
that the glory wherewith Gods children shall be invested in heaven, is both
exceeding great glory, and also most certain and sure glory; having
confirmed it both by the expectation of the creature, and also by the
expectation of such as have the first fruits of the Spirit.

Now in this 24. verse, in the first words of it the Apostle preuents an
objection. For some might say to him, You tell us that such as have the first
fruits of the Spirit wait for the adoption, even the redemption of our body:
why, are not we being true believers, and having the first fruits of the
Spirit, the adopted sons and daughters of God? are not we already redeemed?
This the Apostle preuents, by making known that though we being true
believers, and having the first fruits of the Spirit, and be the adopted sons
and daughters of God, and be redeemed, yet we have not the consummation of our
adoption, and the accomplishment of our redemption, but we still wait for it.
For why, our salvation is by hope: For (says he) we are saved by hope: and
therefore our redemption is not yet complete, it is not yet fully perfected.
Now the necessity of this consequence, we are saved by hope, and therefore
have not the consummation of our adoption, and the accomplishment of our
redemption, is further confirmed from the object of hope, that hope has for
the object of it things that are not seen, and things that are not present;
which the Apostle propounds by denying the object of hope to be things seen.
But hope (says he) that is seen is not hope: or the thing hoped for is not a
thing seen. Proving that from common sense, that it were very absurd and
ridiculous for a man to hope for that which he sees and has in present
possession, in the last words of 24. verse: For how can a man hope for that
which he sees? Then verse 25. the Apostle makes known the true object of hope
to be things not seen; and withal concludes his argument with this
hypotheticall proposition, that if we hope for that we see not, for that which
is not present, but absent from us, we do with patience abide and wait for it:
therein enfolding an exhortation; and he drives to this general purpose,
namely, to persuade the believing Romans and other true believers, patiently to
bear the cross, and other afflictions that here in this world they meet
withal, and to wait for a full deliverance from them, and for their full
redemption hereafter. And thus we see the drift and purpose of the Apostle in
these two verses, and the sum and substance of them.

And here we have these things in general laid before us, first a
proposition, We are saved by hope. Secondly hope, described by the object of
it, that the thing hoped for is not present, but a thing absent and not seen.

And thirdly, that hope has a patient waiting adjoined to it. Interpretation.
I will now lay forth the sense and meaning of these two verses. For we are
saved by hope. By the persons here under the word we, the Apostle means
himself and the true believing Romans, and all other true believers. Are
saved. Salvation is sometimes in the Scripture taken for the beginning of
salvation, consisting in new birth, and in the remission of sins, and
reconciliation with God in Christ, as Tit. 3.5. says the Apostle, Not by the
works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.
But here it signifies the fullness and perfection in heaven, namely, the
glorification and happy estate both of the soul and body in the kingdom of
heaven: and so the meaning is, we have full and perfect salvation, even the
glorification and happiness both of our souls and bodies in heaven. By hope,
or in hope: that is, not in present possession, but so as we do expect and
look for it hereafter; for the word hope here signifies the grace of hope in
the heart and soul, whereby every true believer does certainly expect and
look to enjoy salvation promised. But hope that is seen. The word hope is
here in the first place by a metonymie put for the thing hoped for, and so the
word hope is used, Coloss. 1.5. For the hopes sake which is laid up for you in
heaven: that is, for the eternal happiness, life, and glories sake laid up
for you in heaven. But in the second place, the word hope is put for the grace
of hope in the heart: and so the meaning is, when the thing hoped for is seen,
that is, present, and is possessed, it is not the object of hope, and it
ceasseth to be hoped for. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? as as
if he had said, for hope is an expectation of good things to come; and things
present, or things possessed, cannot be the object of hope. But if we hope:
that is, if we expect and look for that good thing which is not present, and
before our eyes, and possessed: we do with patience abide for it: that is, we
do wait till the time come that we be possessed of it, and do enjoy it,
patiently and constantly bearing the evils, crosses, and afflictions we meet
withal in the mean time. Now then thus conceive we the meaning of the words
of these two verses, as if the Apostle had said.

For I and you, and all true believers, have full and perfect salvation, even
the glorification and full happiness both of our souls and bodies in heaven,
not in present possession, but so as we do expect and look for it hereafter,
or we have and hold it now in hope. Now when the thing hoped for is present,
and is possessed, it ceasseth to be hoped for: for hope is an expectation of
good things to come, and a man cannot hope for things present, or for things
that are by him already possessed; but if we do expect and look for the good
thing which is not present, or possessed, we do wait till the time come that
we be possessed of it, and do enjoy it, patiently and constantly bearing evils,
crosses, and afflictions that we meet withal in the mean time: and so indeed
we expecting and looking for full and perfect salvation, even perfect
happiness both of our bodies and souls in heaven, we do with a patient
bearing of all things that befall us in the mean time, wait till the time
come that we be possessed of it, and do enjoy it.

Come we now to stand on these two verses more particularly as they lie in
order; and first to free the Apostles proposition in the first words of the 24.
verse, We are saved by hope, from that which the Papists do falsely fasten on
it, and would thence gather. In that the Apostle says, We are saved by hope,
the Papists do note and conclude, that therefore we are not saved by faith
only, but that hope is also the cause of our salvation. This cavil may easily
be removed, if we remember how this proposition has been expounded, namely,
that true believers here in this world have full and perfect salvation in
heaven, not in present possession, but so as they do expect and look for it
hereafter; they have it by hope, or rather in hope, and their salvation is a
thing not presently seen and possessed, but it lies in hope, or it is a thing
hoped for: will it thereupon follow, that therefore hope is the cause of their
salvation? Is hope and expectation of a good thing promised, the cause of
enjoying of it when it is had? A man has a piece of land or money promised him,
and he hopes and looks to have it and to enjoy it in time, is his hope and
expectation of it the cause of his enjoying it? nothing less. So true
believers expecting and looking for promised salvation, is their hope and
expectation the cause of their salvation? no such matter. And therefore it is a
false conclusion the Papists hence gather, that we are saved by hope, and
therefore hope is the cause of salvation. I leave this, and to point at one
thing briefly that may be of use: This proposition, we are saved by hope, or in
hope, being understood as we have expounded it, it gives us to understand thus
much, it plainly teaches us.

Gods children have their full and perfect salvation in this life, not in
present possession, but only in hope and expectation.
it lies under hope, and it is a thing that they have not in present
possession, but only in hope and in expectation. Though the Lord give his
children here in this world some beginnings of eternal happiness and
salvation, in their regeneration, in the first fruits of his Spirit, in peace
of their consciences, and their joy in the holy Ghost; yet their full and
perfect salvation is not otherwise had and held of them in this life, but only
in hope and in expectation. And to this purpose speaks S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
that though we be now sons of God, yet it does not appear what we shall be:
no, it appears not to our selves how happy and glorious we shall be. And as
the Apostle says, Col. 3.3. Our life, that is, our happy and glorious life,
begun in this world to be made perfect in the life to come, is hid with Christ
in God. It is hid, not only from the eyes of the world, but also from our own
eyes, in respect of the fullness and perfection of it: and therefore the
Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.7. We (here in this world) walk by faith and not by
sight: we here live in hope and expectation of full and perfect salvation, we
have it not in present possession. For why,

This world is not a place of full and perfect happiness and salvation, If our
earthly house of this tabernacle were destroyed, we have a building given of
God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: for therefore
we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven. And
therefore the full and perfect salvation of Gods children, and of true
believers, it lies in their hope, and it is a thing they have not in present
possession, but only in hope and in expectation.

And therefore for the use, it concerns every one of us on We must labor to
make our hope of heaven and salvation as sure as possibly we can.
We know that men will pry into all their hopes and possibilities touching the
matters of this world, and if it be a thing in reuersion that may happily do good
to some of their children, they are careful to take it into their hope, and to
make their hope of it as sure as they can: Oh much more ought we to look into
our hope of heaven and of salvation, and to labor to look that it be as sure
as possibly we can. Our full and perfect salvation it lies in our hope, and it
is a thing in reuersion and in expectation; then labor we to have a lively
hope of it, as the Apostle calls it. 1. Pet. 1.3. Every one of years will say,
he hopes to be saved, and he hopes to go to heaven, though he have no ground
for it but his own strong conceit, being an ignorant person, or living in
known sins, and so deceiving his own soul. But let us (as we tender our
everlasting happiness and good) labor to have hope of full and perfect
salvation on a good ground, and never rest till we have such an hope of heaven
as will not deceive us, nor make us ashamed, as the Apostle speaks of hope.
purges himself even as he is pure. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Whosoever has a sound and
good hope of heaven, he is thereby stirred up to a daily repentance and
reformation of his life: and that is the thing that every one of us must find
in our selves, if we would have sound and good hope of eternal

We must look to the keeping of our sound and lively hope, and to the
preserving of it.
One other use is to be made of this point: is it so that full and perfect
salvation of Gods children and of true believers is laid up in hope? Is it a
thing that they have not in present possession, but only in hope and
expectation? Surely then it concerns every one of us (as I have said) to
look to our hope of heaven, and not only to look that our hope of heaven be
sound and good, and such as will not deceive us nor make us ashamed, but we
being such as have a lively hope, a sound and good hope of heaven, we must
look to the keeping of that hope, and to the maintaining and preserving of it
as a most precious jewel, and as a thing of special use and consequence,
whereon depends our eternal good, even the eternal good both of our souls
and bodies: our full happiness and salvation is laid up in our hope, and we
hold salvation by hope, or in hope; and if our hope fail us, our comfort is
gone: and therefore it concerns us carefully to look to the keeping and
maintaining of our hope of heaven. And know we that Satan has a special spite
against the sound and saving hope of Gods children, his own state being
hopeless and desperate, and so knowing Gods children have hope of eternal
happiness, he enuies it, and he bends all his force, and he sets himself by
all the means he can to drive them from their hope, and to wrest their hope of
heaven from them if possibly he can; yea he knows he cannot make a child of
God more dishonor God, then by bringing him to some measure of doubting, or to
some despair of his own everlasting happiness and salvation. Note.
Despair being a maine and foul herifie, it denies God to be a Father, Jesus
Christ to be a Savior, and the holy Ghost to be a comforter, yea it denies the
love, the truth, and the power of God. It concerns therefore every one of us,
we having sound and good hope of happiness and glory in heaven, to labor to
maintain and to preserve our hope, and to fortify and strengthen that hope of
ours by all good means, and ever to be underpropping of our hope, and that by
a due and serious consideration of Gods free love to us in Jesus Christ, of the
certain and infallible truth of his word and promises, of his infinite power,
and of his unspeakable wisdom. We are to meditate and to think on it
seriously, that the Lord has freely loved us in his beloved the Lord Jesus,
not for any goodness or worth in our selves, and has freely justified us, and
sanctified us, and will freely save us, and that he is most true in his word
and in all his promises, and is of infinite power, able to perform them and to
make them good to us, even against all the power of hell, and against our own
vileness and sins, and that he is also most wise in disposing of all things,
and of our state in particular; and will in the time that he in his wisdom
sees fit bring us to life and glory in heaven. These things are to be thought
on, and being duly considered, they will be a notable means to strengthen and
to uphold our hope of heaven, and to make us to continue steadfast in our hope
in the greatest battery and assault that Satan can lay against us to drive us
from our hope. And to these we must add earnest prayer to God, and a careful
use of his holy ordinances, and often to use the Sacraments, praying with
David, Psalm. 119.116.117. Stablish me Lord in the time of assault, and
dissappoint me not of mine hope. Stay thou me and I shall be safe: for if the
Lord stay us we shall be sure to stand fast in our hope, and not to be driven
from it by the strongest assault that Satan can bring against us.

I proceed, and come to the description of the hope here laid before us. The
Apostle here describes hope by the object of it: first, by denying the object
of hope to be things present, or things seen: Hope that is seen (says he) is
not hope, for how can a man hope for that which he sees? And then by the
proper object of it, and that proper object of hope, is that which is not
present, or that which is not seen, verse 25. If we hope for that we see not,
we do with patience abide for it. Now hence in the first place we may easily
conclude and gather what true Christian hope is, in respect of the object of
it: and

That true Christian hope, and true saving hope, the hope of Gods children, is
an expectation of good things to come, True Christian saving hope is an
expectation of good things to come.
and neither good things past, nor good things present, but only good things
absent, and as yet to come, are the things that true Christian hope, the hope
of true believers does exspect and look after: and to this purpose we find,
that eternal life, happiness, and salvation, which are things absent, and
laid up in the highest heavens, are usually put down in the Scripture, as the
most proper object of saving hope. And hence is true saving hope called the
hope of salvation. 1. These. 5.8. Putting on the hope of salvation for an
helmet, and the hope of glory, Romans 5.2. and the hope of eternal life, Tit.
3.7. And to this agrees that comparison the holy Ghost uses, Heb. 6.19.
comparing true saving hope to an anchor, and calling it the anchor of the soul
both sure and steadfast: and it is fitly so compared, for as the anchor of a ship
is let down into the waters, and goes down to the bottom, and is fastened
to the earth that is not seen but lies hid under the waters, so true saving
hope is fixed to good things that are not seen: and as the holy Ghost here
says, It enters into that which is within the veil, even within the veil of
heaven. I might make it further manifest by instance in diverse particulars,
that true saving hope does expect and look after good things absent, good
things that are yet to come. And indeed hope has the very being of it from
good things hoped for, not simply as they be good things, but as they be good
things absent, and as yet to come. Good things that are promised in the word of
God, and are believed by faith, being absent and as yet to come, they give
matter and being to Christian hope. And therefore doubtless the true saving
hope of Gods children is an expectation of good things to come, and neither
good things past nor good things present, but only good things absent, and as
yet to come, are things that true Christian hope, the hope of true believers,
does expect and look after. Happily some will say, the holy Spirit of God: and
therefore though the hope of Gods children be of things absent, and as yet to
come, yet it is not of things doubtful and uncertain.

A difference between saving faith and saving hope discovered.
Saving faith is of good things past, of the death and resurrection of Christ,
and present: but saving hope is only of good things to come. And howsoever it
may be said, we believe eternal life which is yet to come, Faith is the
evidence of things which are not seen. And thus it is said of Abraham, Ioh
8.56. That he saw the day of Christ, he believed it, and his faith made it
present to his soul.

Whence it is that the men of the world think so basely of Gods children and
of their their hopes.
is an expectation of good things to come? This then further discouers whence
it is, that profane persons, men of the world, think so basely of Gods
children and of their hopes, they are ever deriding them and their profession,
and insulting over their mean and miserable condition, as they think of it,
and sometimes they break out and stick not to say, Gods children are fools,
in that they let slip the present profits, pleasures, and honors of the world,
and feed themselves with a vain hope (as they conceive of it.) But alas poor
souls, they are deceived; and here is one cause of it that they are so
deceived, the hope of Gods children is of good things absent, and as yet to
come, and the men of the world they cannot discern the happiness of true
believers in regard of their hope of good things to come. The Manna that Gods
children feed on is hidden, as we have it, Revel. 2.17. Men of the world are
strangers to it, and not acquainted with it, and therefore they think basely
of the hopes of Gods children, and say, they are men of no hopes, and men of no
fortunes (as they use to speak:) but they are deceived, and a child of God
would not give his hope of good things to come, and that he hopes for, for the
present possession of the greatest kingdom in the world: as namely, his hope
of case, comfort, and refreshing, and support, and assistance, in the time of
any trouble and affliction that shall be laid on him, of deliverance out of it
in the Lords good time, and of eternal happiness and glory in heaven
hereafter. For these are the good things to come that a child of God hopes for:
and the assured hope of these things, especially of happiness and glory in
heaven, in the heart of a child of God, is so sweet and comfortable to him, as
he would not part with it for the present possession of all the kingdoms in
the world. And if the hope of heaven, on good grounds in the heart of a child
of God, be so sweet and comfortable, what will be the sweetness and comfort of
the fruition and full possession of it? without question unspeakable and
inconceivable. Let then the world and the men of the world scoff and scorn
Gods children, and say, they are men of no hopes, let not Gods children regard
it: they are deceived, the hopes of Gods children are blessed hopes, Tit. 2.13.
and the world, and the men of the world, are not acquainted with them, and
therefore they despise them: and let not their scoffs and scorns trouble or
disquiet any child of God.

In the next place, whereas the Apostle says, Hope that is seen, that is, as
we have showed, the thing hoped for being seen and present, it ceasseth to be
the object of hope, and it is no longer a thing hoped for; we may easily gather.

That true saving hope, the hope of Gods children, shall after True saving hope
shall be abolished and cease to be after this life.
for then Gods children shall be fully possessed of the thing they hope for,
even of full happiness and salvation, there shall be no more use of their
saving hope. And this may help us in the right understanding of that place, 1.
Cor. 13.13.
where the Apostle says, Now abides faith, hope, and love, even these three,
How we are to understand
but the chiefest of these is love. Love is not there simply preferred before
faith and hope, as if it were every way a more excellent grace or virtue, but
only in respect of the continuance of it; that though now in this present
life, faith, hope, and love, do all three abide and continue, and are of
special use, yet in the life to come, only love shall abide and continue, and
faith and hope shall cease, and shall be of no use at all, the thing believed
and hoped for being then fully possessed. That is the Apostles meaning, when he
says the chiefest of these three is love. And it is but a sophisme and a mere
cavil of the Papists, A cavil of the Papists answered.
in that they conclude, that faith only does not save and justify, but love
also, because love is there preferred before faith, as a more excellent grace:
for love is there preferred before faith and hope, only in respect of
durablenesse and the continuance of it. And admit that love were every way a
more excellent grace and virtue then faith, (which indeed it is not) faith
being the mother grace and ground of all true holiness in man, yet will it not
thereupon follow, that love does justify in the sight of God. How faith does
justify in the sight of God.
For faith it self does not justify, as it is an excellent grace, or virtue,
or work, or in regard of any dignity in it self, but only as it is an
instrument and hand taking hold of that which is the matter of justification,
and the mercy of God promised in Christ, and the merit of Christ his death and
obedience. It is enough to have touched this in a word.

Hope that is seen, is not hope. To this the Apostle subioynes as a proof of
it: How can a man hope for that which he sees? As if he had said, It were very
absurd and ridiculous, and a thing against common sense and reason, for a man
to hope for that he sees and is present to him. We see then that sometimes a
divine and heavenly truth may be confirmed by an argument taken from common
sense and reason. A Preacher may sometimes lawfully say, An argument from
common sense, may sometimes be lawfully used by a Preacher
even sense and reason does confirm this or that heavenly truth. 1. Cor.
11.14. the Apostle himself sends us to the teaching of nature: Does not
nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto
him? And therefore doubtless an argument from sense and reason, and from
nature, may sometimes be used as a means to strengthen us in the knowledge of
some heavenly truth, and may lawfully be used to that purpose. I will no
further stand on that.

Come we to the third general thing laid before us in this context, namely
this: That true saving hope has patient waiting annexed to it: If we hope for
that we see not, we do (says the Apostle) with patience abide for it, verse
25. Now that which is hence offered is easily gathered: it is this.

That true saving hope, the hope of Gods children, being an True saving hope
must be accompanied with patient waiting for the good things hoped for.
Such as have true saving hope in them, hope of good things promised in the
word of God, whether good things temporal or eternal, they must patiently
wait till the time come that they be possessed of those good things, not
fainting nor shrinking from their hope of them, by reason of evils, crosses,
and afflictions they meet withal in the mean time. Read 1. These. 1.3. we
there find, that the Apostle attributes and gives patience to hope as a proper
title belonging to it, and says, he made mention of the Thessalonians in his
prayers, and remembered among their other graces their hope, and he gives
patience to it, and calls it, The patience of their hope: thereby signifying,
that their hope was accompanied with a patient waiting for the good things they
hoped for. Isai. 30.15. the Lord ioynes quietness and confidence together,
even confidence and hope in the Lord, and a quiet resting on him, and waiting
on him for good things, and says, In rest and quietness shall ye be saved:
and in quietness and confidence shall be your strength. And we find that the
Saints and servants of God make it known, that they had not only trust and
confidence in the Lord, and hope in him, but that their hope in him was
accompanied with a patient waiting on him for the accomplishment of his
gracious promises, and for the enjoying of good things they hoped for. As Psalm.
40.1. the Psalmist says, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto
me, and heard my cry: in time of my trouble I waited with patience for help
and comfort. Psalm. 119.147. David says, He prevented the morning light, and
cried, and withal he waited on the word of the Lord: he patiently waited for
the accomplishment of the promise, Genes. 49.18. O Lord, says old Jacob, I
have waited for thy salvation. These examples and many other do make plain and
confirm the truth of the point in hand: That true saving hope, the hope of
Gods children, being an expectation of good things absent, and of good things
yet to come, must be accompanied with a patient waiting for those good things
being absent and as yet to come, and they must not only hope for good things
promised in the word of God, whether good things temporal or good things
eternal, but they must also patiently wait till the time come that they be
possessed of those good things, and not shrink from their hope by reason of
the evils, crosses, and afflictions they meet withal in the mean time: and
there be special reasons for it, as first this.



They have need of patience, that after they have done and suffered the will of
God, they may inherit the promise. On these grounds it follows necessarily,
that the hope of Gods children being an expectation of good things absent, and
of good things yet to come, must be accompanied with a patient waiting for of
those good things being absent, and as yet to come: they must not only hope
for good things the Lord has promised, of what kind soever, but they must also
tarry the Lords leisure, and patiently wait till the time come that they be
possessed of them, not shrinking from their hope by reason of the evils,
crosses, and afflictions they meet withal in the world.

Now then to apply this: we see our duty, and what concerns Reproof of such
of Gods children as take on them to prescribe to the Lord in what time he shall
accomplish his promises to them.
and such as have in us saving hope. And from this that has been said we may
easily see, that they are blameworthy whosoever they be, that profess
themselves to be Gods children, and to have saving hope in them, and yet take
on them to prescribe to the Lord in what space and time he shall fulfill and
make good his promises to them. And I must tell you, that even the dearest of
Gods children are sometimes herein overtaken, and they do herein sometimes
discover their weakness: yea the dear Saints of God are sometimes through
their own weakness brought to think that God forgets them, and remembers not
his promises made to them; as when the time is long before the promise of good
they hope for be accomplished, or when the Lord brings them into straights, or
they lie under some grievous affliction, and the Lord seems to hide his face
from them: Oh then they are impatient of delay, and they think the Lord has
forgotten them, and the Lord regards them not, and they sometimes break out
and say with David, Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever?
How long will thou hide thy face from me? Now then that we being the children
of God, and having in us saving hope, may be strengthened against our own
weakness, and may have our hope and expectation of good things absent, and as
yet to come, accompanied with a patient waiting for those good things being
absent, and as yet to come, and may not shrink from our hope and patient
waiting for them in the time of our greatest trials and afflictions; let us
consider: first, as faith breeds hope, so saving hope breeds patience, and
true saving hope is accompanied with some measure of patient waiting for of
good things hoped for. The holy Martyrs patiently endured extreme tortures: and
why? they had an assured hope of a comfortable issue, and our hope is not
sound, if it be not accompanied with some measure of patient waiting.

How Gods children may strengthen their hope when they call on God in time of
their great affliction, and God seems not to hear them.
and we call on God for ease, comfort, and deliverance, and we hope for ease,
comfort, refreshing, and deliverance, and we expect and look for it, grounding
our selves on that promise of God, 1. Cor. 10.13. and yet the Lord deferres to
hear us, and answer us, and seems to turn a deaf ear toward us, and
seems to hide his face from us; in this case we are to consider what good the
Lord has formerly done for us, and to call to mind, and to think on the
former and forepassed mercies of God toward us, as David says he did, Psalm.
143.4.5. When my spirit was in perplexity in me, and mine heart within me was
amazed, I remember the time past, I meditate in all thy works, yea I do
meditate in the works of thine hands. If we so do, it will be a notable means
to strengthen us, and to make us still wait on the Lord for ease, comfort, and
deliverance. And we are further to consider, that our hopes (we being Gods
children) are not like earthly hopes, which the men of the world sometimes
look after till their eyes fall out and never enjoy them; such were Absoloms
hopes, and Adoniahs hopes. And if the men of the world do enjoy their hopes,
yet they are but perishing hopes; death makes a divorce between them and
their hopes, when they die their hopes are in the dust, but our hopes are sure
and certain, and we are sure in time to enjoy them, as Solomon says, Prou.
10.28. The patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness, it is sure to
be gladness and comfort, we cannot be disappointed of our hopes, they are laid
up in sure and certain causes, in the truth, the power, the mercy and
goodness of God: and when we do enjoy our hopes, they are most sweet and
comfortable, and they are lasting and durable, and all the devils in hell
cannot take them from us. Now then, if the men of the world, as the husbandman,
as James speaks, Iam. 5.7. has long patience for the precious fruit of the
earth, and waits for the former and later rain: and if the Merchant in hope
of gold or some rich commodity, and the soldier in hope of victory, and to
get the name of a valiant soldier, and the like, do endure much, and take
great pains, and devour many troubles with patience, waiting for the enjoying
of their hopes, and yet happily never come to them; and when they do enjoy them,
they are but vanishing hopes. Oh then let not us who are the children of God,
and have hope of spiritual and heavenly good things, and of the joys and
glory of heaven, which we are sure in time to be possessed of, shrink from
our hope of those good things by reason of evils, crosses and troubles we meet
withal: but let our hope and expectation of good things absent and yet to
come, be accompanied with a patient waiting for those good things till the time
come that we be possessed of them: this is our duty. Come we now to verse 26.
and 27.

VERSE 26.27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not
what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us with
sighs which cannot be expressed.

But he that searches the hearts knows what is the meaning of the spirit:
for he makes request for the Saints according to the will of God.


Our Apostle from the middle of verse 17. hitherto, has brought several
arguments to arm and strengthen the believing Romans against the bitterness
of the cross, and to persuade them patiently to bear afflictions they should
meet withal, as namely, that they suffering with Christ, they should be
glorified with him: and that the afflictions of this life are not comparable to
the glory that shall be showed unto us in heaven: setting forth the greatness
and certainty of that glory from the expectation of the creature, and from
the expectation of such as have the first fruits of the Spirit, and thereunto
adding an argument from their saving hope, which ought to be accompanied with
patience under the cross and with a patient waiting for the accomplishment of
all Gods promises. Now in the 26. verse the Apostle brings a new argument
tending to the same purpose, and that is from the present help of the Spirit:
that they ought not to shrink or faint under the cross, because the Spirit is
ready to help and to support them; which he propounds with respect to
foregoing matter, as that they had not only saving hope to sustain them in
the time of affliction, but the Spirit also. Likewise the Spirit also (says
the Apostle) helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed. But he that searches the hearts knows what is the meaning of the
Spirit, for he makes request for the Saints according to the will of God. In
these two verses 26. and 27. we have in general offered, first this
proposition as a ground of comfort in the time of affliction, that the Spirit
helps our infirmities. Secondly, a declaration how the Spirit helps our
infirmities, that is, by the grace of prayer, by teaching and enabling us to
pray, which is not barely propounded, but amplified: first, by our ignorance
and inabilitie to pray, For we know not what to pray as we ought, says the
Apostle. Secondly, from whence it is that we are able to pray, and that is from
the Spirit, But the Spirit it self makes request for us: which is further
enlarged by the means how, namely, With sighs which cannot be expressed. And
then the third general thing is the fruit and success of those prayers and
sighs sent forth by the help of the Spirit, laid down verse 27. that those
prayers and sighs are known and accepted of the Lord. The Apostle describing
the Lord by his special property, that he is a searcher of the heart: But he
that searches the heart (says the Apostle) knows what is the meaning of the
Spirit. Then he further proves, that those prayers and sighs are known and
accepted of the Lord, because they are the prayers of the Saints, who are dear
to the Lord, and they are framed according to the will of God, in the last
words of verse 27. For he makes request for the Saints according to the will
of God. So we see the general things laid before us in these two verses.

Come we to the opening of the words. Interpretation.
Likewise the Spirit also. As if he had said, we being true believers, and the
children of God, we have not only saving hope to sustain us in time of our
afflictions, but in like manner, the Spirit also. By Spirit, we are not here to
understand either spiritual grace, or love, or the good Angel, as some do,
but the holy Spirit of God, the third person in the Trinity, as the word is
taken in many verses of this Chapter. Helps, or helps together. For so the
word signifies: it is metaphorical or borrowed from one who is to take up
some heavy burden, or to lift up some great weight which he is not able to
take up, or to lift alone without help of another, and another then ioynes
hands with him, or stands over against him at one end of the burden, and
helps him to lift or take up the burden or weight: and so the meaning is,
that the holy Spirit of God does as it were join hands with us in bearing the
cross, too heavy for us to bear alone, and does as it were stand at one end
of the cross and help us in bearing of it. Our infirmities: or weaknesses,
or us being infirm and weak, and not able to bear the burden of the cross
alone and of our selves: for (as I take it) the word infirmities is not here to
be understood generally of all infirmities that are in Gods children, but only
with relation to the cross, and of their infirmities and weaknesses in
undergoing and bearing afflictions that are laid on them. For we know not what
to pray as we ought: that is, even we that are true believers, and the children
of God, being in afflictions, are ignorant and know not what is fit for us to
ask in prayer at the hands of God, or in what manner to pray for it, as
Hezechiah said, Isai. 38.14. in the time of his sickness, he chattered like a
crane or a swallow, and mourned as a dove. But the Spirit it self: that is,
the holy Ghost himself makes request for us. This is not to be understood in
that sense that Christ is said to make request for us, verse 34. For Christ
makes request or intercession for the Saints by virtue of his merit; but the
Spirit is said to make request for us by causing and stirring us up to make
request for our selves, as the holy Spirit is said to cry Abba, Father, with
sighs which cannot be expressed: that is, with such sighs and groans in our
hearts as we are not able to utter by speech, such as we know not how to
express in words. Now then not to meddle with opening the verse following till
we come to the handling of it, thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in
this 26. verse, as if he had said.

And we who are true believers and the children of God, have not only saving
hope to sustain us in the time of our afflictions; but in like manner the holy
Spirit of God, even the third person in Trinity, he does as it were join
hands with us in bearing the cross: and we being infirm and weak, and not
able to bear the burden of the cross alone and of our selves, the holy
Spirit of God is pleased as it were to stand at one end of the cross, and to
help us in the bearing of it, for we are then ignorant and know not what is
fit for us to ask in prayer at the hands of God, and in what manner to pray
for it, but the holy Spirit of God himself does then cause us to pray, and
stirs us up to make request for our selves, even with such sighs and groans in
our hearts as we are not able to utter by speech, and such as we kniw not how
to express by words.

Now first from this proposition, The Spirit helps our infirmities: that is,
we being infirm and weak, and not able to bear the burden of the cross
alone and of our selves, though we be true believers and Gods children, the
holy Spirit of God is pleased as it were to lend us his helping hand, and as it
were to stand at one end of the cross, and to help us in the bearing of it:
we may gather and conclude thus much.

The best of Gods children are not able to stand by their own strength with
out shrinking and fainting in time of their trial and affliction.
are too weak and unable of themselves to bear the cross and afflictions
they meet withal: even the dearest and chiefest of Gods children, such as
have the greatest measure of faith and grace, are not able to stand by their
own strength, and of themselves to hold out without shrinking and fainting in
the time of trial, and in the time of trouble and affliction that is laid on
them. And for the further confirming of this, we find that the best of Gods
children being under the hand of God in some affliction, the Lord withdrawing
his hand from them but a little, and they being left in some sort to
themselves, they have discovered their own corruption and weakness, and they
have sometimes broken out into very bitter complaints, as Psalm. 77.7.8.9.
says the Psalmist, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no
more favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender
mercies in displeasure? The Church likewise Isai. 59.11. says in the time of
her affliction, We roar all like Bears, and mourn like doves. And thus it
was with David, he says, in the time of his grievous affliction, He roared all
the day, Psalm. 32.3. And so Psalm. 38.8. says he, I roar for the very grief
of mine heart. And how was holy Job ouercarried with passion and perturbation
in the time of his great affliction, the Lord withdrawing his hand a little
from him, he discovered his weakness exceedingly, he cursed his day, Job
3.1.2.3.4. etc: he brake out into marvelous unbeseeming terms. To these we
might add the example of Eliah, 1. King. 19.4. he desired death in the time of
his affliction, Take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. And of
Jonah, he was exceeding impatient when he saw that the Lord spared the
Nineuites, Chapter 4.3. he said, It was better for him to die then to live: and
verse 9. he uttered a very dangerous speech to the Lord, saying to him, Do
thou well to be angry for the gourd? Yea (says he) I do well to be angry
unto the death. Thus have the dear Saints of God being under the hand of God
in affliction, discovered their corruption and weakness. And we may see it in
daily experience, how pettish, how wayward and froward, and how impatient
sometimes are the dear Saints and servants of God in the time of their
affliction: and that confirms the truth of the point in hand, that the best of
Gods children, and such as have the greatest measure of grace in them, are too
weak, and unable of themselves to bear the crosses and afflictions they meet
withal. And why,

The cross of it self is an heavy burden, grievous to the flesh, Hebr.
12.11. And though the cross be sanctified to Gods children in the blood of
Christ, yet in it self it is part of Gods curse, and so it is intolerable,
and no child of God is able to bear it, unless the Lord put under his helping
hand; and howsoever the Apostle calls it light, 2. Corinthians. 4.17. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment: he speaks there comparatively, that in
comparison of the weight of the glory in heaven it is light, yet in it self
it is heavy and indeed intolerable. And therefore no marvel though the best
of Gods children, and such as have the greatest measure of grace, be too weak
and unable of themselves to bear the cross and afflictions they meet
withal, and that they are not able to stand by their own strength, and of
themselves to hold out without shrinking and fainting in the time of trial,
and in the time of trouble and affliction that is laid on them.

We must take heed we cast not our selves into any trouble or affliction
needlessly, and that we presume not of our own strength for the bearing of the
least affliction or trial.
ought to teach every one of us to take heed that we neither needlessly and
without cause cast our selves into any trouble, affliction, or trial, when we
may by good means avoid the same; nor yet that we presume on our own strength
for the bearing of the least affliction or trial. If we cast our selves into
trouble and affliction needlessly we cannot comfort our selves in this, that the
Lord will help, strengthen, and assist us; we sin against him in so doing,
and being left to our selves, alas we must needs sink under the burden. And
if we presume on our own strength for the bearing of the least affliction or
trial, we leave to a broken staff, and we rest on that which will deceive us.
Though we have a great measure of grace, yet we are weak and unable of our
selves to wrestle with the least affliction or trial, and to stand under it
without fainting. Peter was too confident in himself, Mat. 26.35. he said,
Though all should deny Christ, he would never do it, no, he would dye at his
foot: yet we know, the voice of a silly maid daunted him, and made him deny
his master. And therefore presume not on any strength of thy self for the
bearing of the least affliction or trial, but when thou art in any affliction
or trouble, seek for help and strength from him who is able to yield thee
help and strength, even from the Lord. And as a man under an heavy burden
feeling his strength to fail him, and that he begins to sink under it, cries
for help, and puts forth his hand to such as are about him and near to him,
and cries, oh help, or I pray you lend me your hand, or the like: so do thou
in time of thy affliction, thou art not able to stand under it by thine own
strength, and of thy self to bear it, and therefore seek to the Lord; cry
to him, and stretch out thine hands toward heaven, and be earnest with the
Lord for help and strength.

And for a second use: is it so that the best of Gods children, Rash censuring
of such as discover much weakness and much distemper in time of their
afflictions, to be avoided.
are too weak and unable of themselves to bear the cross and afflictions they
meet withal, and are not able to stand by their own strength, and to hold
out of themselves without fainting in the time of trial, and trouble, and
affliction that is laid on them? Then learn we to take heed of rash censuring
of them in whom we discern much weakness and much distemper in the time of
their afflictions: if we condemn them as hypocrites, we may happily condemn the
generation of Gods children, as David speaks, Psalm. 73.15. Say not thou when
thou see one who has given good testimony of true grace in his heart, being
under the hand of God in some great affliction, when, I say, thou see such an
one discover much weakness and much impatiencie, say not thou, if I had been
in his case I would never have done so or so. Oh remember the best of Gods
children are too weak and unable of themselves to bear the least cross or
affliction: yea think with thy self, when thou see a child of God
distempered in the time of some affliction he lies under, that either his
pains are exceeding great, or if thou were in his case, and did endure what
he endures, thou should be much more impatient, unless the Lord should
wonderfully strengthen thee.

And for use of comfort, the truth now delivered may minister Comfort to such
as are troubled because of their distempers and misdemeanors in time of their
grievous afflictions.
Indeed they are to be humbled for their miscarriage, and for their impatiencie
then discovered, but they are not thereupon to be altogether discouraged, they
are to remember to their comfort, it has been no otherwise with them then it
has been with the dearest of the Saints of God in the like case.

In the next place from this proposition, being understood as we have opened
it, we may easily see whence it is that Gods children are able to stand and to
hold out without shrinking or fainting in the time of their afflictions,
namely, from the help of the holy Spirit of God: and the next point hence
offered is this.

Gods children do with patience and comfort bear their afflictions, only by
the help and assistance of the holy Spirit of God.
And to this purpose is that of the Apostle, 2. Corinthians. 4.8.9. 2. Cor. 4.8.9.
says he, speaking of himself and of other true believers, We are afflicted
on every side, yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of
poverty: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but we perish not: 2. Cor.
4.
and then he subioynes verse 13. verse 13.
Because we have the same Spirit of faith. As if he had said, It is by the
help of the Spirit that we are able thus to stand, and thus to hold out
without fainting in the time of our great afflictions. And Philip. 4.12.13.
Philip. 4.12.13.
the Apostle says, he could be abased, he could endure hunger and want, yea he
was able to do all things, not by any strength in himself, but through the
help of Christ which strengthened him. And thus David says it was with him,
Psalm. 3. Psalm. 3.1.2.
he complains in the beginning of the Psalm, that his adversaries were
increased, and that many did rise up against him: and he was in so great
distress, as that many said there was no help for him in God: his ease seemed
to be helpelesse and hopeless, yet then he says verse the 5. He laid himself
down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained him: the Lord by
his power and strength from above vpheld him. And it were easy to show it by
instance in many other examples, that the holy Spirit of God does help Gods
children in the time of their troubles and afflictions, and that by his help
and powerful assistance alone, it is that they do stand, and do hold out
without shrinking and fainting in the time of their trials, and in the time of
their troubles and afflictions, and that they bear them with patience and with
comfort. For why,

The holy Spirit of God is not only strong and powerful, To be their
comforter, and to abide with them for ever as their comforter Ioh. 14.16. Ioh.
14.16.
and he will not be wanting to do his office. And howsoever it may be said,
that God the Father is the God of patience and consolation, Romans 15.5. Romans
15.5.
And as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1.3.4. 2. Cor. 1.3.4.
He is the God of all comfort, who comfort Gods children in all their
tribulations; and so not the proper office of the holy Spirit of God, God the
Father does does help and comfort his children in their afflictions, Christ
also does help and comfort them, and the holy Ghost likewise does help and
comfort them: and the help and comfort in their afflictions is a work of the
whole Trinity, for all external works of the Trinity are undivided: yet we
must know, that for the order and manner of that help and comfort that comes
from God to his children in their afflictions, thus it is: God the Father is
the fountain of that help and comfort, and that help and comfort is
vouchsafed to Gods children in and through Christ, and in him is the
dispensation of that help and comfort, and that by the virtue and power of the
holy Ghost: and so it is the proper office of the holy Spirit of God, by his
virtue, power and efficacy of working, to help and to comfort Gods children
in their afflictions.



A foolish conceit of the Papists met withal.
who think that in the time of trouble they are made able to stand and to hold
out without fainting by the help of Saints departed, as by the help of the
virgin Marie, of Saint Peter, and such like: an idle and a fillie conceit; the
naming of it is a sufficient confutation of it.

We are not to be too diffident and too distrustful of our standing in time of
affliction.
we are not to cast needless doubts aforehand, and to say, alas I find my
self weak and unable to wrestle with the least affliction, and how then shall
I be able to hold out if the Lord should bring me into some great trial, the
fiery trial, or the like? Reason not thus with thy self, but consider yt
though thou art weak and unable of thy self to bear the least affliction and
trial, yet thou being a child of God, thou shall have the holy Spirit of God
helping thee to bear the burden in the time of thy affliction, and he is a
strong helper, his power is infinite, and it is not the strength of any
affliction being but finite, that can match his power, he is able to make thee
stand and to hold out in the greatest brunt; and therefore fasten not thine eye
so much on thine own weakness as on the mighty power of the holy Spirit of
God, and consider not what thou in thy self, or of thy self can suffer or
endure, but what the holy Spirit of God is able to make thee to suffer and to
endure: and thereupon thou may say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 12.10. When I
am weak, then am I strong, though in my self I be weak, and unable to bear
the least trial or affliction, yet I am able to bear the greatest trial the
Lord shall bring me to, through the power of the holy Spirit of God
strengthening me. Indeed thou being a child of God, thou must look for trials,
yea the more dear thou art to the Lord, Note.
and the greater measure of grace thou have received, the greater trials must
thou look for: and therefore take thou heed thou grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, by whom thou art to be helped in the time of trial. If thou by any sin
of thine cause the holy Spirit of God to withdraw himself, and to depart from
thee, then in the time of trial thou shall be as weak as other men, as
Sampson said of himself, Judge. 16.17. and as he found it by woeful experience,
though he were a dear Saint and servant of God. Therefore labor thou to keep
the holy Spirit of God with thee, provoke him not by any known sin of thine,
but give him good entertainment, by cherishing his good motions in thine heart,
by holy thoughts, and holy meditations, by gracious speeches, by exercising thy
self carefully in the word of God, and in all good duties; and then
doubtless, though thou art weak and unable of thy self to bear the least
trial or affliction, yet the holy Spirit of God will help thee in the time of
thy trouble and affliction, and by his help and powerful assistance alone,
thou shall be able to stand, and to hold out without fainting in the time of
thy greatest trials and troubles, and to bear them with patience and much
comfort.

Again, for further use: Is it so that the holy Spirit of God To Gods Spirit
alone belongs the praise of that ease comfort refreshing and strength, which
we find in time of affliction.
and afflictions, and that by his help and powerful assistance alone, it is
that they do stand and do hold out without fainting in the time of their trials
and afflictions? Then learn we, if so be we find ease, comfort, and refreshing
in the time of affliction, and strength to bear it with patience and with
comfort, to give the praise of that ease, comfort, and strength where it ought
to be given; even to the help and powerful assistance of the holy Spirit of
God alone, and bless him for it. Say not thou when thou find ease, comfort,
and strength in the time of affliction or deliverance out of it, I rubd out, I
plucked up a good heart, or the like. No, no, give the praise of that ease,
comfort, and strength, and deliverance, to whom it belongs, even to the holy
Spirit of God, and let him have all the glory for it. And when thou see any
child of God marvelous patient, and exceeding comfortable under some great and
grievous affliction, acknowledge therein the special work and power of the
holy Spirit of God: for indeed it is not vouchsafed to all the Saints and
servants of God to be so patient and so cheerful under afflictions, the Lord
sometimes for good causes, best known to his holy Majesty, withdrawes his
helping hand a little from his dearest children in the time of their
afflictions, and therefore when we see any child of God exceeding patient and
comfortable under affliction, we are herein to acknowledge the good hand of
God, and the special work of his holy Spirit, and to give him the glory for
the same.

Note we further, the Apostle says, Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities: as if he had said, we that are true believers, have not only
saving hope to sustain us in the time of our afflictions, but, in like sort or
in like manner, the holy Spirit of God to help us: whence we may gather.

The patience of Gods children is true, sound and comfortable patience.
For why,

True patience is a fruit of saving faith, and of saving hope: the Apostle
ioynes them together, 2. These. 1.4. We rejoice because of your patience, and
says in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye suffer. And true
patience is the gift of God, and the work of his holy Spirit, Philip. 1.29. To
you it is given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his
sake. Now Gods children have both saving hope to sustain them in their
afflictions, and they have also the holy Spirit of God to help them in bearing
the cross: and therefore doubtless they being patient under the cross, their
patience is true, sound, and comfortable patience.

And this puts a manifest difference between Gods children and the wicked in
the time of distress. Difference between the patience of Gods children and
the patience which wicked men seem to have.
Though the wicked may sometimes seem to be patient in the time of distress,
yet indeed in them it is no true patience, but only a miserable hardness and
stupiditie in them, and they are like blocks or stones, as it is said of Nabal,
1. Sam. 25.37. when his wife Abigail told him what was like to have come to him
from David, His heart died within him, and he was like a stone. So indeed it is
with the wicked, when the hand of God is heavy on them (as one says well)
they are then either like barking dogs or as senseless stones: they cannot
bear the pains and pangs of death patiently: stoutly they may, and may seem
to be vnapalled being hardened in their hearts, which is an heavy judgment of
God on them, being then insensible of Gods hand when they should be most
sensible of it, and be humbled under it, and so they bear not the hand of God
patiently, and indeed they cannot. And therefore if thou whosoever thou art,
would have true patience in the time of affliction, never rest till thou
find that thou have saving hope in thee, and then doubtless thou shall not
only have that saving hope to sustain thee in the time of thy affliction, but
thou shall have the holy Spirit of God in like sort to help thee to bear the
cross: and then thou being patient, thy patience will be true, sound, and
comfortable patience.

Come we now to the second general thing laid before us in this 26. verse, and
that is (as I told you) a declaration how the Spirit helps our infirmities,
namely, by the grace of prayer, by teaching and enabling us to pray; which the
Apostle amplifieth, first by our ignorance and inabilitie to pray, that we know
not how to pray as we ought.

Secondly, by making known to us that the Spirit does help our infirmities by
the grace of prayer, in that he makes request for us, and that with sighs
which cannot be expressed. Now from the general here laid before us, that the
Spirit helps our infirmities by the grace of prayer, by teaching and enabling
us to pray, we are given to understand thus much.

The grace of prayer is a special means whereby Gods Spirit enableth Gods
children to hold out without fainting in time of their trials and afflictions.
The holy Spirit of God does help and powerfully assist Gods children, and
makes them able to stand and to hold out without shrinking and without fainting
in the time of their trials and afflictions, by enabling them to pray, even by
making them able to send up the prayer of faith to God, as a special means of
strength, and of support, and of comfort to them. And hence it is that the
Apostle, Iam. 5.13. he sends the afflicted to prayer, as to a special refuge.
Is any man among you (says he) afflicted, let him pray: as if he had said, I
can advise him no better then to betake himself to prayer. And if any that is
afflicted be enabled by the Spirit of God, to send up to God the prayer of
faith, doubtless he shall find that a special means of strength, and of
support, and of comfort to him. We find that the holy Spirit of God has from
time to time stirred up the Saints and servants of God in the time of their
troubles and afflictions, to seek to God by prayer, and has thereby as by a
special means helped and supported them, and made them able to stand, and to
hold out without shrinking, and without fainting. Thus it was with Moses when
he was in great distress at the red sea, Exodus 14. Exodus 14.11.12.
The people murmured against him, and reproched him very wickedly, verse 11.12.
and no doubt the good man was much perplexed, yet then the holy Spirit of God
enabled him, both to cheer up the people, and also to be earnest with God in
prayer, as it appears verse 15. The Lord says to him, Wherefore cryest thou
unto me? And thereby was he strengthened, and supported, and made able to
stand, and to hold out without shrinking, and without fainting under his great
affliction. And thus when good king Ezekiah was in great trouble and distress,
Saneherib sending a great host against him, and sending a railing and
blaspheming letter to him, the holy Spirit of God then made him able to send up
the prayer of faith to the Lord, and that was a special means of strength,
and of support and comfort to him, 2. King. 19.14.15. etc. And so it was with
good King Iehosaphat, 2. Chron. 20. A great multitude of enemies coming against
him, yea so great a multitude as he says verse 12. That he and his people knew
not what to do, or which way to turn themselves; yet in that amazement did the
holy Spirit of God make him able to send up an excellent prayer to God, as we
may read verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and thereby was he wonderfully
strengthened and supported. We might add to these many other examples, all
clearing and confirming this truth, that the grace of prayer is a special
means by which the holy Spirit of God helps Gods children, and makes them
able to stand, and to hold out without shrinking, and without fainting in the
time of their troubles and afflictions. And the reasons of it are these.

First, prayer as a means, not as a meritorious cause, or by sanctified to
them by the word and prayer. 1. Tim. 4.5.

Secondly, prayer gives strength to faith, to hope, and to

And for the use: stand to show the excellency of the grace of prayer, Great
comfort to ^uch as fi^d themselves made able to pray as they ought to time of
trouble and ^ffliction.
as that the holy Spirit of God is pleased to use it as his hand reached out to
Gods children to help them, and to support them in the time of their
afflictions and troubles: but I pass by that, and for the use of it. Is it so
that the grace of prayer is a special means, and as the hand of the holy
Spirit of God by which he helps Gods children in the time of their troubles
and afflictions? Surely then there is matter of great comfort for thee
whosoever thou art, that find thy self stirred up, and made able by the
holy Spirit of God, to pray, and to send up to God the prayer of faith in the
time of thy trouble, and in the time of thy affliction; thou may thereby
assure thy self, that the holy Spirit of God is reaching out his helping hand
to thee, and as it were, putting under his shoulder, and joining hands with
thee in bearing the burden of that cross, and of that affliction whatsoever
it be, that lies on thee, and that thou shall not shrink under that burden.
If then thou find that it is not with thee after the manner of the wicked, who
being under the hand of God in some distress, either seek to help themselves
by shifts, and by unlawful means, or are stirred up by that spirit that is in
them, to seek help and ease by carnal means, by play, by merry company,
by going to tauernes, and such like, as Saul did by music when the Spirit of
the Lord was departed from him, and an evil spirit possessed him, 1. Sam.
16.17. I say, if thou find that it is not thus with thee, but thou being under
the hand of God in some affliction, howsoever thou art careful to use all
outward lawful means of ease, of help, and of comfort, yet thou art most
careful to seek to God by prayer, and thou art stirred up in a special sort,
to send up to God the prayer of faith: comfort thy self, thou have then the
helping hand of the Spirit of God reached out to thee, and joining with thee in
bearing the burden, and assuredly thou shall not shrink under it. Note.
And as one says in the case of temptation to sin, when thou art tempted to
any sin, pray against that sin, and sin if thou can: so I dare boldly
say to thee, send up to God the prayer of faith in the time of thy affliction,
and then sink and utterly fail under it if thou can. Thou will say, I feel
my self in the time of affliction so oppressed and so overwhelmed, as I cannot
pray, I cannot lift up my soul to God in prayer. Do thou desire it? can
thou mourn? can thou draw near to God in sighing and groaning? Cheer up thy
self, even therein thou have the strength and the powerful hand of the holy
Spirit of God joining with thee, and helping thee to bear the burden; for so
it follows in this verse. And howsoever it shall please the Lord to deal with
thee, assure thy self thou shall not be altogether overcome of that
affliction, nor utterly faint under it, thou have the mighty hand of the holy
Spirit of God to uphold thee: think on that to thy comfort.

Come we now to stand on the Apostles declaration, how the Spirit of God
helps our infirmities, more particularly: and first of his amplification of
it, by our ignorance and inabilitie to pray, For we know not what to pray as we
ought, says the Apostle: that is, (as we showed) we being under the hand of
God in affliction, are many times as it were at our wits end, and we know not
what is fit for us to ask in prayer at the hands of God, and in what manner to
pray for it.

Now the point hence offered is this: That the best of The best of Gods
children are many times to seek, and of themselves know not how to pray as
they ought in time of their great afflictions.
their afflictions being great and grievous, are many times to seek, and of
themselves they know not how to go to God in prayer as they ought, and they are
ignorant what is good for them to ask in prayer at the hands of God, in
respect of their present state and condition. See the truth of this in one or
two examples. Job 6.8.9. we find that holy Job being under the hand of God in
great affliction, he was so far to seek touching prayer, and what was good
for him to ask in prayer at the hands of God, as he brake out into a strange
petition, Oh (says he) that I might have my desire, and that God would grant
me the thing that I long for! that is, That God would destroy me, that he would
let his hand go and cut me off! The good king Hezechiah says it was so with
him in the time of his sickness, that he chattered like a crane or a swallow,
Isai. 38.14. he uttered broken petitions, and he was to seek how to pray to
God as he ought. And thus it has been with many other Saints of God, and is
many times with the dearest of Gods children, in their afflictions being great
and grievous: and why.



Paul thought the remouall of the prick in the flesh had been good for him,
and he prayed for the remouall of it, 2. Corinthians. 12.8. but the Lord answered
verse 9. My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is made perfect through
weakness: he made it known it was not good for him at that time to have it
removed. And therefore doubtless the best of Gods children, in their
afflictions, being great, are many times to seek, and of themselves they know
not how to go to God in prayer as they ought, and they are ignorant what is
good for them to ask in prayer at the hands of God, in respect of their
present state and condition.

The folly of men discovered, who live in the continual practice of sin,
and yet think to find it easy for them to go to God in prayer in their great
distresses.
who think though now they go on in a wicked and damnable course of sin,
adding sin to sin, they are drunkards, they are most vicious and vile
persons, and they go on with an high hand in the practice of sin; yet when
sickness comes, and they draw near to their death, then they will go to God
by prayer, then they will call on God, and cry to God for mercy, and all
shall be well. Poor souls, they are wonderfully besotted and blinded by the
devil. Are the best of Gods children, being under the hand of God in some
great affliction, many times to seek how to go to God in prayer, and do thou
that art a wicked and graceless wretch, and have no acquaintance with the
grace of prayer in the time of thy health and strength, do thou think that
when thou shall come to lie on thy sick bed, and the hand of God shall be
heavy on thee, that then thou shall find it an easy matter for thee to go to
God by prayer, and an easy thing for thee then to call and cry to God for
mercy? Poor soul, if thou so think, the devil blinds thee exceedingly: and
consider with thy self, thou may be cut off suddenly in thy sin, as we see
sometimes in woeful experience, that wicked persons are overtaken by the hand
of God, and cut off in the very act of their sin; or if thou come to lie on
thy sick bed, yet the Lord may take away thy understanding, thy memory, and
may deprive thee of thy senses; or if thou have thy understanding, memory, and
senses continued to thee, yet the Lord may justly strike thee with such horror
of conscience, and with such a fearful expectation of his wrath deserved by
thy sins, as thou shall not be able to lift up thy face, nor once dare to open
thy mouth in prayer to God; and therefore do not so deceive thine own poor
soul.

Again, the ground of truth now delivered, may cheer Comfort to Gods poor
children who find themselves unable to pray in time of their great afflictions,
and complain of it.
who finds himself in the time of his great affliction to seek, and that he
knows not how to go to God in prayer as he ought, and he complains of it, and
says, Oh I cannot pray as I was wont. Well consider, does thy present pain or
grieuance so oppress thee, as thou can not lift up thine heart nor open thy
mouth to God in prayer? consider this to thy comfort, it is no otherwise with
thee then it has been, and is many times, with the dearest of Gods children:
and thou having had the grace and gift of prayer in the time of thy health and
strength, and now being weak and unable to perform that duty, yet willing
and desirous to perform it, the Lord will accept thy will for the deed. And
know further to thy comfort, that thou have the help and benefit of many
thousands of the Saints and servants of God, thou have part in the prayers of
all the Saints that live on the face of the earth; thou have prayed for others
in the time of thy health and strength, and now others pray for thee, and thou
have the benefit and comfort of their prayers: and that may be matter of great
comfort to thee.

Come we now to the second amplification of the Apostles declaration: how the
Spirit helps our infirmities, in these words, But the Spirit it self makes
request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed. Where the Apostle makes
known, that the Spirit helps our infirmities in making request for us, with
the manner how, namely, with sighs which cannot be expressed. The words we
have formerly opened, and showed the meaning of them to be this, That the holy
Spirit of God himself does cause us and make us able to make request to God
for our selves, with such sighs and groans in our hearts as we are not able to
utter by speech, and to make known by words. Now in that the Apostle says, We
know not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for
us with sighs which cannot be expressed: I might stand to show, that ability
to pray is not of our selves, but only from the help of the holy Spirit of
God, but that is too general. To keep to the purpose of the Apostle, which is
to show how it is with Gods children in the case of affliction, the point hence
offered in the first place is rather

That when Gods children are plonged into such deep distress, and under the
hand of God in such great affliction, as of themselves they are to seek how to
go to God in prayer, and they cannot open their mouths to utter words of
prayer to God, yet even then does the holy Spirit of God make them able in some
sort to seek to the Lord, and then does the holy Spirit of God enable them at
least to sigh and to groan to God. When Gods children are in such deep
distress as of themselves they are to seek how to go to God in prayer, then
does the holy Spirit of God enable them at the least to sigh and groan to God.
We find that thus it was with the people of God being in the bondage of Egypt,
the text says, Exodus 2.23. they sighed for the bondage, and cried, and their
sighing and crying was to the Lord; for so it follows, Their cry for the
bondage came unto God, and God heard their moan, and remembered his covenant
with Abraham, Izhak, and Iaacob. Yea the Lord says, Exodus 3.7. I have surely
seen the trouble of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry,
because of their task-maisters, and I know their sorrows. And this is again
remembered by Stephen, Act. 7.34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of
my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning: implying thereby,
that when they were able to do no more, yet the holy Spirit of God made them
able to sigh and to groan to God.

And indeed the holy Spirit of God once vouchsafed to Gods children, he never
altogether forsakes them,

And this for use, A difference between Gods children and carnal persons in
time of great distress, discovered.
Though Gods children be in so great distress as they are to seek how to go
to God in prayer, and they cannot open their mouths to God in the words of
prayer; yet then they are not altogether destitute of help, they have then the
holy Spirit of God by his secret work enabling them to sigh and to groan to
the Lord: but it is not so, neither can it be so with carnal persons.
Howsoever a carnal person may and does sometimes under some great distress
sigh and groan, and weep and howl, yet his sighing and groaning comes not from
the secret work of the holy Spirit of God enabling him so to do, he is
altogether void of the Spirit of God, and his sighing and groaning is only a
work of nature. A brute beast many times groans under the burden that lies
on it, out of a sense and feeling of the weight of it: and so is it with
carnal persons, their sighing and their groaning in the time of great
distress, it comes only from the work of nature, and not from the secret
work of the holy Spirit of God, as it does in Gods children.





Two things by which we may know that our sighing and groaning in time of great
distress comes from the root of Gods Spirit.
First, if so be thy sighing and thy groaning come not only out of thy present
pain and grieuance, but also out of a true sense and feeling of thy sins,
and out of a true sorrow for thy sins.

And again, secondly, if so be thou find that in thy sighing and thy groaning
thou drawest near to God, desiring from him pardon of thy sins, and from him
ease, comfort, and refreshing. By these two things try thy sighing and thy
groaning in the time of thy great distress: and if thou find that then thy
sighing and thy groaning is not only a work of nature coming out of thy
present pain and grieuance, but also out of a true sense and feeling of thy
sins, and out of a true sorrow for thy sins, and that in thy sighing and
thy groaning thou drawest near to God, comfort thy self, that sighing and that
groaning of thine is from the secret work of the holy Spirit of God in thee,
and there is matter of great comfort in it.

Now further, in that the Apostle says, The Spirit it self makes request for
us: that is, he enableth us to make request to God for our selves, and then
subioynes, with sighs which cannot be expressed: that is, with such sighs and
groans as we

That the very sighs and groans of the hearts of Gods children in the time of
their great troubles and distresses, are effectual prayers to God. The very
sighs and groans of Gods children in their great afflictions are effectual
prayers to God.
When the spirits of Gods children are so daunted and so overwhelmed in the
time of their afflictions and trials, as they are not able to utter a word to
God in prayer, then are the very sighs, and sobs, and groans of their hearts,
loud and strong cries in the ears of the Lord. And thus speaks the Lord
expressly, Exodus 14.15. Wherefore cryest thou, says the Lord to Moses, when
Moses spoke never a word, but only prayed to the Lord in his heart, and the
secret lifting up of his heart and inward groans of it were loud cries in the
ears of the Lord. 1. Sam. 1.13. it is said, that Hannah spoke in her heart,
her lips did move only, but her voice was not heard: and yet she says verse
15. that she had powered out her soul before the Lord: she made a very
effectual prayer to the Lord. Isai. 38.14. Hezechiah says, that in the time
of his great sickness his prayer was like the mourning of a dove: and yet was
that prayer of his very effectual and prevailed with the Lord. And we read
Psalm. 10.17. that the Lord hears the desire of the poor. And again, Psalm.
145.19. that he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will
hear their cry, and will save them. Even the very desires, and the very
sighs and groans of the hearts of the poor Saints and servants of God in
their afflictions, they being not able to open their mouths to God, are
effectual prayers to God, and are accepted of the Lord: for why,

True prayer pleasing to God, is not lip-labor,

And this for the use, A sweet comfort to Gods children in time of their
greatest afflictions.
What though it be so that a child of God be in the hands of cruel persecutors
and tyrants, and they deal most hardly with him, and lay load of torments and
tortures on him, yea so press him down as he is not able to utter a word, yet
they cannot hinder him from having access to the Lord, he can sigh and groan
to the Lord: yea the more weight of torments they lay on him, the more does his
sighs and groans increase so long as there is life in his body. And suppose
they cut his tongue out of his head, yet his heart can still sigh and groan to
the Lord, and his sighs and groans are loud and strong cries in the ears of
the Lord. And be it so that a child of God lies on his bed of sickness, and is
so weak as his speech fails him, or is so full of pain as that the
bitterness of his pains does swallow up his words, and he is not able to
utter a word in prayer to God, yet let him consider, that if he do but sigh and
groan to the Lord, his very sighs and groans are effectual prayers and loud
cries in the ears of the Lord, and do move the Lord to much pity and
compassion toward him. Yea know to thy comfort, thou that art a child of God,
thou being under the hand of God in sickness, and so weakened in thy body, or
so oppressed with pain, as thou art not able to utter a word in prayer to God,
yet thou sighing and groaning to the Lord, thy sighs and groans do make as it
were the holy bowels of the Lord to earne within him, as the Lord himself
speaks, Ier. 31.20. and the Lord has then a most tender and fatherly respect
to thee. We know that a tender hearted father looking on his sick child, his
child being an infant not able to tell where the pain lies, nor to ask the
things that it would have and wants, but lies panting and groaning, and looking
on the father with waterie eyes, oh it makes the fathers bowels earne within
him exceedingly, and it doubles his pity and compassion toward his child.
Much more is it so with the Lord, he is the Father of mercy, and the God of
all pity and compassion; and he looking on his poor child so weakened in
body, or so oppressed with pain, as he is not able to express and to make
known by words, but lies sighing and groaning under the burden, doubtless his
holy bowels are then much more enlarged toward his child, and he is then much
more moved with pity and compassion toward his child, then any earthly
father, though he be of most tender bowels, can be toward his child. And that
may yield matter of sweet comfort to every poor child of God, when he is under
the hand of God in so great affliction as he is not able to speak, but his
tongue cleaues to the roof of his mouth, and his words are swallowed up; yet
he sighing and groaning to the Lord, his very sighs and groans are loud and
strong cries in the ears of the Lord: and the consideration of that may
minister matter of singular comfort to him. A necessary caveat.
Yet let none abuse this ground of comfort, to make him sluggish, and to make
him rest only in the wishes and desires of his heart, and to think that a
mental prayer is sufficient at all times, and to plead as some graceless
persons do, that though he open not his mouth to God, but goes to his meat and
to his bed like a beast, yet he prays to God in his heart, and he can pray to
God in his bed half awake and half asleep. If any so gather from this ground
of comfort, he savors it not to his comfort and salvation, but to his hurt and
damnation. Remember we this, that then are the desires of the heart and the
sighs and groans of a child of God, effectual prayers to God and accepted of
the Lord, when through the greatness of the affliction, and the bitterness of
the pain, his mouth is not able to utter a word in prayer to God: then are the
sighs, and sobs, and gronings of the heart of a child of God, loud cries in
the ears of the Lord. That is to be thought on for the comfort of every poor
child of God, only then when he is under the hand of God in some grievous
affliction, and cannot open his mouth to utter the words of prayer to the Lord.
Come we now to the 27. verse.

VERSE 27. But he that searches the hearts knows what is the meaning of the
spirit: for he makes request for the Saints according to the will of God.


IN this verse (as heretofore I have showed) is laid before us the fruit and
success of those prayers and sighs that are sent forth by the help of the
Spirit, as namely: That they are known and accepted of the Lord, whom the
Apostle describes by his special property, that he is the searcher of
hearts: But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the
Spirit. Then he further proves, that those prayers and sighs are known and
accepted of the Lord, because they are the prayers of the Saints, who are dear
to the Lord, and because also they are framed according to God, or according to
the will of God: For he makes request for the Saints according to the will of
God. And thus we have formerly laid forth the general matter of this verse;
let us now examine the words of it, touching the sense and meaning of them.
Interpretation.
But he that searches the hearts. These words are a description of God, that
he is the searcher of the hearts, and they contain the cause of that which
follows, that he knows the meaning of the Spirit, because he searches the
hearts. Now God is said to search the hearts by way of similitude, spoken after
the manner of men, who use to search out things which they desire to know
exactly and perfectly: and so God is said to search the hearts, not that he
need to search them that he may know them, for he knows them most perfectly;
and because he knows them most perfectly, even as exactly and perfectly, yea
more exactly and perfectly then men do things they have searched out most
diligently and most narrowly, he is said to be the searcher of the hearts: and
by the word hearts, we are here to understand the souls of men, and whatsoever
is in their souls, even the most secret thoughts, imaginations, purposes, and
intents of their minds, and all the inward motions of their wills, their desires
and affections. Knows, that is, takes notice of, and also approves of them;
for so the word given to God sometimes signifies, as Psalm. 1.6. The Lord
knows the way of the righteous, that is, he approves and allows the way of
the righteous. What is the meaning of the Spirit. Some do expound these words
thus, what are the prayers and sighs that come from the inspiration of his
Spirit: but (as I take it) that is not agreeable to the context, for the
Apostle says verse before, We know not what to pray as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes request for us. The holy Spirit of God himself causes
us, and stirs us up, and makes us able to make request to God for our selves,
with such sighs and groans as we are not able to express or utter by words,
and so none can know the meaning of them: and then he subioynes in this verse,
But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning, that is, what is
the mind, and meaning, and will, and desire of his own good Spirit, in those
sighs and groans stirred up by him in the hearts of his children, and thus we
expounded the word, verse 6. Romans 8.6.
of this Chapter (...). For he makes request, that is, the same holy Spirit of
God, causes and stirs up, and enableth such as are cleansed by the blood of
Christ, and sanctified by his grace, and renewed according to the image of God
in a measure of holiness, and are Gods children, to make request to God for
themselves according to God, so the words are, (...); and the meaning is,
according to the will of God, and according to the rule of his word, both for
matter and manner; and so after an holy manner pleasing to God, as 1. Ioh.
5.14. This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us. Thus then we are to conceive the Apostles
meaning in the words of this verse, as if he had said:

But God who most exactly and most perfectly knows the secret thoughts,
imaginations, purposes and intents of the minds of men, and all inward motions
of their wills, even their desires and affections, as it were by narrow
searching into them, yea who knows them more perfectly the^ men do things they
have sought out by most diligent and most narrow search: he knows what is the
mind, meaning, and will, and desire of his own good Spirit in those sighs and
groans stird up by him in the hearts of his children, and he approues of them:
for that good Spirit of his causes and stirs up, and enableth such as are
cleansed by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by his grace, and are the
Saints and children of God, to make request to God for themselves, and that
according to the will of God, even according to the rule of his word, both for
matter and manner, and so after an holy manner and pleasing to God.

First the description of God here given by the Apostle comes to be considered,
that he searches the hearts of men: and the point hence is that which is
hereby meant and intended by the Apostle, namely.

God perfectly knows the secret thoughts, purposes and intents of men's minds,
and all the inward motions of their hearts
purposes and intents of the minds of men, and all the inward motions of their
hearts: the Lord does certainly and perfectly know, what men think, and what
they affect, and he alone is the searcher of the hearts of men, and he alone
knows what is in the minds and hearts of men, and he alone is privy to
whatsoever they think or affect. And this truth has not only ground in this
text, but in many other places of Scripture. 1. Sam. 16.7. it is said, The Lord
beholds the heart. 1. King. 8.39. Solomon in his prayer says to the Lord,
Thou only know the hearts of all the children of men. Job 42.2. says Job,
There is no thought hid from thee. And David speaking of the Lord, Psalm. 44.21.
says, He knows the secrets of the heart. Ierem. 17.10. I the Lord search the
heart, and try the reins. Prou. 15.11. Hell and destruction are before the
Lord: how much more the hearts of the sons of men? Acts 1.24. the Apostles in
their prayer say, Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men. And many other
places testify thus much, that the Lord perfectly knows the secret thoughts,
imaginations, purposes and intents of the minds of men, and all the inward
motions of their hearts, and that he alone is acquainted with whatsoever men
think or affect, and none but he. And the reasons of it are these.

First, Gods knowledge is infinite, and he knows the nature, All things are
naked and open unto his eyes, or as the word (...) signifies, anatomized before
him.

Secondly, the Lord made the heart of man, and therefore He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? or he that formed the eye, shall he not see? he that
teaches man knowledge, shall he not know? And then he subioynes, verse 11. The
Lord knows the thoughts of man.

And thirdly, the Lord at the day of judgment will lighten God will then bring
every secret thing to judgment: and therefore out of question he knows every
secret thing, and he is privy to the most secret thoughts and motions of the
minds and hearts of men, and he perfectly knows them, and he alone is
acquainted with whatsoever men think or affect, and none but he. If any say,

I answer: Satan being a subtle spirit, David says, Psalm. 139.2. He knows
them afar off, in the very conception of them, before they be uttered, and he
alone perfectly knows all the thoughts of

Now then to make use of this, it is a point of large and of excellent use. And
first the consideration of this truth may serve as a bridle to keep men back
from judging the hearts of others, and from taking on them to judge their
hearts to be naught whose lives they see to be holy and good, Reproof of such
as judge their hearts to be naught, whose lives they see to be holy and good.
and they see no apparent evil from them. Indeed I grant that a man may
lawfully judge one that is openly vile and profane, to be as he is, and as he
sees him, to be a ruffian, to be a drunkard, and such like. Though profane
persons would feign hide themselves under this covert, that forsooth you must
not judge: and do you know my heart? yet such an one may lawfully be so judged
of as he is; and we have ground for it, Psalm. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person
is contemned. But it is a common practice of wicked and graceless persons, to
take on them to judge such as are holy and religious, and unreprovable, even
to judge of their inwards, of their very hearts, and to censure them to be
hypocrites and dissemblers. Well, consider it whosoever thou art, see thou
one holy and religious, and one endeavoring to keep a good conscience in all
things, and do thou take on thee to sit in judgment on such an ones heart
and conscience, and to judge such an one to be an hypocrite? thou take on
thee the place and office of God himself, and thou inchrochest on his right.
It is proper to God alone to know the inwards and secrets of men's hearts, and
thou taking on thee to seat thy self in his chair, and in his seat of
judgment, thou take a wrong course, yea a course that will bring down
vengeance from God on thine own soul; the Lord cannot endure it, that thou
should incroach on his right, and on his peculiar: and thou so doing he is
stronger then thou, and he will iustle thee down to the bottom of hell; and
therefore take heed of it: Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? he
stands or falls to It is not enough to avoid open gross sins, and to
retain foul bosom sins.
Romans 14.4.

Again, this truth, that God perfectly knows the secret thoughts,
imaginations, intents and purposes of the minds of men, and is acquainted with
all the inward motions of their hearts, ought to teach us not to please our
selves only in this, that we avoid open gross sins, such as would blot and
blemish our lives in the sight of men, when notwithstanding we have within us
foul bosom sins, and our hearts are defiled with wicked and ungodly
thoughts, thoughts of pride, of self-love, of covetousness, of malice, of
uncleanness, and such like. If we so do, we deceive our selves, the Lord sees
and knows, not only outward gross sins, but the most inward and hidden
corruptions of our hearts. Yea consider with thy self, that the Lord knows
thine heart more perfectly then thou thy self do or can do, though thou be
most careful in searching into it; and that made David cry out, Psalm. 19.12.
Cleanse me from my secret faults: and therefore be thou careful, not only to
avoid open gross sins, but also to purge thine heart of all wicked thoughts,
and remember this, that the Lord sees them, and knows them, and will bring
every secret thing to judgment. Yea, the ground of truth now delivered must
teach us, not only to do good duties, (an hypocrite may do them) but we must
labor to approve our souls to God in the doing of them. For why, the Lord
sees and knows thy inwards, he knows with what heart thou come to the
Church, yea with what heart thou hear the word, and receiuest the
Sacraments, with what heart thou prayest in public or in private, with what
heart thou do any good duty, whether thou do it in sincerity of heart, in
conscience and obedience to the commandment of God, in reverence to his holy
majesty, with a heart seeking his glory, and whether thou do it with an heart
prepared, or for fashion and custom, or no, as thousands do: they come before
the Lord, they seem to be willing to hear his word and to do it, but if one
were able to look into their hearts, he should see that they are taken up with
thoughts of the world, yea sometimes with malicious and ill thoughts against
the Preacher, especially if he touch them, and reprove them for their darling
sins. Now how dare thou give way to such thoughts? the Lord sees them, and
he knows them, thou can not bleare his eyes, and he seeing them, it is more
then if all the men in the world were privy to them. Therefore labor thou to
approve thine heart to the Lord in the doing of every good duty. If thine
heart witness against thee and condemn thee, then as John says, 1. Ioh.
3.20. God is greater then thine heart, and he will much more condemn thee.
Take heed then of halting and dissembling with the Lord.

Comfort for sound and single hearted Christians.
Do thou walk before the Lord in truth and in singleness of thine heart,
though in much weakness? Let then the world tax thee with hypocrisy and
dissembling, yet here is thy comfort, the Lord sees and knows thine
uprightness. And if thou be able to say with Job, Job 16.19. howsoever men
speak maliciously against me, yet my witness is in the heaven, and my record
is on high, thou need not care what all the men in the world say against
thee, the Lord will one day clear thine uprightness in the sight of men and
Angels. An upright heart in the sight of God is a precious jewel, it is better
worth then all the riches and treasures in the world, it will yield comfort
when they can yield none at all, and when the mouths of all are open against a
man. And that is to be thought on for the comfort of all sincere and single
hearted Christians.

Terror to such as harbor malice and mischief in their hearts against their
brethren, and keep it close so as men cannot discern it.
imaginations, purposes and intents of the minds of men, and all the inward
motions of their hearts, and is well acquainted with whatsoever men secretly
think, or inwardly affect in the depth of their hearts? Surely then the due
consideration of this may strike a terror into all such as hatch and harbor
malice and mischief in their hearts against their brethren, and do cloak it
and smooth it over, so as men cannot discern it, and do wait only for a fit
opportunity to put their mischievous intents in practice, and especially into
such as harbor malice and mischief in their hearts against the children of
God, and against the dear Saints and servants of God. Howsoever they may hide
their malice and their wicked purposes, and their plots to entrap Gods
children, and their intent to hurt and to wrong them is hid from the eyes of
men, yet the Lord sees them well enough, His eyes are as a flame of fire,
Revel. 1.14. And Lamen. 3.59.60.61. the Church appeals to the Lord to judge
her cause being wronged, she says, The Lord sees all the devices of her
enemies against her, and that he is acquainted with all their imaginations. And
therefore we may boldly say with the Prophet, Isai. 29.15. Isai. 29.15.
Woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, their works
are in darkness, and they say, who sees us? and who knows us? Do thou,
whosoever thou art, carry a cankered heart within thy bosom, an envious and
malicious heart against Gods children, or against any one of them? Can thou
with Cain speak fair and mean ill? Can thou walk with one as thy brother,
and when opportunity serves cut his throat as an enemy? Consider with thy
self, the Lord sees and knows, not only the wrongs done to his children, but
the secret intents of mischief, and the very purposes of evil against any of
his. Yea the devils in hell can devise nothing against his children, but it is
evident in his sight, and he knows it perfectly. And therefore think not that
thou can wrong any one so secretly, though it be but in the very thought of
thine heart, as that the wrong shall be smothered in thine own bosom and
never come to light. No, no, thine heart lies naked and bare before the Lord,
and he sees and knows the malice and mischief that lurks in the secret of
thine heart, and he is able to bring it to light, and will one day so do, to
thine open and everlasting shame. And that may strike a terror into all such
as wrong their brethren in the secret thought of their hearts.

In the next place comes to be considered that which the Apostle does here
affirm of the Lord, having described him to be the searcher of hearts, namely
this, that he knows what is the meaning of the Spirit in those sighs and
groans that are stirred up by him in the hearts of his children, and that he
approues of them: whence note we in the first place.

God alone knows the desires of his children in their sighs and groans.
he knows the mind and meaning of his own good Spirit stirring up sighs and
groans in the hearts of his children: God alone is the searcher of the hearts
of men, and he alone knows the desires of his children in their sighs, and
groans, and cries of their hearts. And this might be confirmed by all those
places before cited, but it is needless.

This for the use Invocation of Saints departed, confuted
this life, which the Papists hold and teach, and it bears strongly against
it, because prayer sometimes is but a sigh or a groan of the heart, and God who
only knows the secret of the hearts of men, he alone knows the desires of our
hearts in the sighs and groans of them, and therefore to him alone belongs
invocation and prayer, and not to Saints departed. Abraham who then was
departed this life, and was in heaven in his soul, and had the sight of God in
his soul, was ignorant of the Church and people of God: Doubtless thou art
our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. And
therefore invocation of Saints departed whatsoever the Papists call it, is flat
idolatry.

Now in that the Apostle says, God who searches the heart knows what is the
meaning of the Spirit; these words being understood as we have expounded them,
thence we are further given to understand thus much.

God only knows the meaning of those unutterable sighs and groans that are
in the hearts of his children in time of their great affliction, and he also
approues of them.
both the meaning of those sighs that Gods children send forth when they are
under the hand of God in great distress, and are not able to utter and
express by words is known to God, and they are also accepted of the Lord. And
to this purpose is that, Exodus 2.24. It is there said, the people of God
sighing and groaning being under grievous bondage, The Lord heard their moan: he
both knew the meaning of their sighs, and he was well pleased with them, yea
the Lord so accepted of them, as Moses says, Numb. 20.16. That he sent his
Angel and delivered them out of their thraldom and bondage. And hence it is
that the Lord says, He will up, Psalm. 12.5. and he will arise for the sighs
of the poor, even because of the sighs and groans of his poor children in
their great distress; he takes notice of them, and he regards them. Yea the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 102.19. The Lord looks down from the height of his
sanctuary, out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth: And then verse 20.
That he may hear the mourning of the prisoner: even the mourning and groaning
of such as are in great affliction. Lamen. 3.56. the Church being in great
distress, she prays thus, Stop not thine ear from my sigh and from my cry.
And it is worth our marking that we find, Psalm. 56.8. David being in a great
strait, and grievously distressed, he prays thus to the Lord, Put my tears
into thy bottle, are they not written in thy register? thereby implying, that
the Lord has as it were a bottle wherein he keeps the tears of his
distressed children, and he keeps them in remembrance as in a register, and
they fall not in vain from the eyes of his children: and so doubtless he both
knows the meaning of those inexpressible sighs that are stirred up in the
hearts of his children by his own good Spirit in the time of their affliction
and distress, and he also approues of them, and they are pleasing to him. And
the reasons are here given by the Apostle in the words following.

They are the sighs and groans of his Saints and dear children.

And they come from his good Spirit, even from the Spirit

And they are requests made according to the will of God.

And this truth to make use Special comfort to Gods children in some
particular cases. Case 1.
and that in some particular cases, as first this.

Do Gods children live in an evil and dangerous time, in a time of great
trouble and persecution, and are much wronged and grievously oppressed, and
they dare not open their mouths to make their complaint to men, but it is
wisdom for them to be silent, as the Prophet says? Amos 5.13. It is an evil
time, and the prudent will keep silence. Yea is it so that they dare not open
their mouths to make their complaints to the Lord in the hearing of men, and
it may be they are in such straites as they cannot be in any private place
where they might power out their complaints to God in the words of prayer? Yet
they may then send up to heaven their minds and meanings, and their complaints
in sighs and groans, and that in the presence of their most malicious and
spiteful enemies, and in the hearing of their cruel persecutors. And though
their enemies and persecutors cannot understand what they mean by their
sighs, and they are not able to diue so far, yet the Lord who is the searcher
of ye heart, he both knows the meaning of those sighs and groans stirred up
in their hearts by his own good Spirit, and he approues of them: and
doubtless he will not let them return empty into their bosoms.

great comfort to a child of God in that particular case. Yet let none hereupon
take occasion willingly to let his mind wander from the things he prays for,
and to pray carelessly and loosely; if he so do, he offers the sacrifice of a
fool, Eccles. 5.17. Labor thou to keep thy mind close to the things thou
prayest for, and in praying, set thy self seriously to mind what thou crauest
at the hands of the Lord; and then if through the weakness of thy memory, or
some distemper of thy body by some sudden pang, thou forget some thing thou
did purpose to pray for, yet thou sighing and groaning in regard of thy
forgetfulness, the Lord will pass by thy weakness, and he knows well
enough what thou would have by thy sighs and groans, and he will accept of
them as pleasing to him, and as if thou had made thy case known to him in
words. And that may be matter of great comfort to thee in that particular case.

We are now to come to the reasons by which the Apostle proves that the prayers
and sighs of Gods children, sent forth by the help of the Spirit of God, are
known and accepted of the Lord: as first this, That they are the prayers and
sighs of the Saints: For he makes request for the Saints, says the Apostle,
that is, as we showed, for that the same holy Spirit of God causes, stirs
up, and enableth such as are cleansed by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by
his grace, and renewed to the image of God, to make requests to God for
themselves. Now from hence in that the Apostle brings this as a reason why the
prayers and sighs of Gods children are known and accepted of the Lord,
because they are the prayers and the sighs of the Saints, of such as are
cleansed by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by his grace, we are given to
understand thus much.

That the prayers and sighs of such as are sanctified, and Only the prayers
and sighs of the Saints of God are accepted of the Lord.
and renewed according to his image in a measure of holiness, are accepted of
the Lord and pleasing to him. Only the prayers and sighs of the Saints of
God, who are dear and precious in the sight of God, are the prayers and sighs
the Lord approues of, and the prayers and sighs that are available with the
Lord. And to this purpose we have plentiful evidence of Scripture. Prou. 15.8.
Solomon says in express terms, The prayer of the righteous is acceptable to
the Lord. And so says the Apostle, Iam. 5.16. The prayer of a righteous man
avails much: it is of great force with the Lord. Job 42.8. the Lord himself
bids Jobs friends offer burnt offerings for themselves, and withal he tells
them, that his servant Job should pray for them: who being an holy man he would
accept of his prayers for them. Psalm. 66.18.19. says David, If I regard
wickedness in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me: but God has heard me,
and considered the voice of my prayer: As if he had said, I not regarding
wickedness in my heart, the Lord has heard me. And hence it is that the Apostle
exhorts, 1. Tim. 2.8. That men lift up pure hands in prayer to God. And 2. Tim.
2.19. That every one that calls on the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity. And this David professes that he would do when he came to the Lords
altar, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash mine hands in innocence O Lord, and compass
thine altar. And we find, Isai. 1.15. the Lord does protest against his people
the Jews, that when they should stretch out their hands to him he would hide
his eyes from them: and though they should make long prayers, he would not
hear, because their hands were full of blood: they were defiled, and came
before him in their blood. And to these might be added many other testimonies
of Scripture, clearing and confirming the truth of the point in hand, that
only the prayers and sighs of the Saints of God, even of such as are
sanctified by the holy Spirit of God, and renewed according to Gods image in a
measure of holiness, are accepted of the Lord, and those only are the prayers
and sighs that the Lord approues of, and that are available with the Lord:
and the reasons and grounds of it are these.



And again, only the Saints of God have the grace of

And thirdly, the prayers of the Saints are sanctified in

But happily some will say,

I answer.

Now then for the use of the point, first this truth now delivered is to be
thought on by all wicked and profane persons, and by all impenitent sinners:
That wicked and impenitent persons cannot possibly find comfort in seeking to
God in prayer in time of their need, discovered.
it serves to discover to them that they cannot possibly find comfort in
seeking to the Lord in prayer in the time of their need, and in the time of
their distress: for why, only the prayers and sighs of the Saints of God, of
such as are sanctified by the holy Spirit of God, and are renewed according to
Gods image in a measure of holiness, are pleasing to God, and available with
the Lord. And therefore doubtless the prayers and sighs of wicked and
profane persons are not pleasing to the Lord: the holy Ghost makes it known
in express terms, that their prayers are abominable, Prou. 15.8. the Lord
abhors their sighs, and what comfort then can they find in going to the Lord
in prayer in the time of their need and distress? and the case of wicked and
graceless persons in the time of their great distress is miserable and
fearful. And consider it thou that art a profane person, a drunkard, a
blasphemer, or the like, thou can not find that a refuge and a comfort to
thee in the time of thy great distress, which Gods children find to be a
special means of comfort to them in their greatest afflictions: namely,
prayer, and sighing, and groaning to the Lord. Thou think within thy self
(as not long since I showed) that though now thou go on in a course of sin,
adding sin to sin, yet when sickness comes, and when the hand of God shall
be heavy on thee, thou will then go to God in prayer, and thou will then call
to God for mercy. Alas thou may be cut short, and not able to open thy mouth
to the Lord: but admit thou be able to sigh and groan, yea to roar, and cry,
and yell, yea to utter words of prayer, and to make an excellent prayer for the
matter of it; yet thy sighing and thy crying, thy roaring and thy prayers will
not then be accepted of the Lord, the Lord will not then hear thee, as he
threatens, Ezech. 8.18. Thy sighing and thy groaning are not the sighs and
groans of a Saint and an holy one, but the sighs and groans of a profane one,
and they are odious and hateful to the Lord. And it is just with the Lord in
the time of thy need, and in the time of thy distress, to reject thy sighs
and groans, and not to regard them, because thou refusest to hear him when he
calls to thee in the ministry of his word; as Solomon says, Prou. 28.9. He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. And therefore think not thou, whosoever thou art, that art
hardened in thy sins, and wilt not be reformed, that thou shall find comfort
in going to the Lord in prayer in the time of thy distress. No, no, though
thou then call and cry to the Lord, The Lord will not answer thee, Prou. 1.28.
and so thy case is wretched and miserable. Why, but will some say,

Is it so that only the prayers of the Saints, of such as are The right way to
find comfort in our sighs, and groans, and prayers to the Lord.
and renewed according to his image in some measure of holiness, are accepted
of the Lord and pleasing to him? Then if thou, whosoever thou art, would
find comfort in thy seeking to the Lord in prayer, and in calling on the Lord
in the time of thy need, never rest till thou find that thou have a measure of
true grace and holiness in thee, and that thou art in some measure sanctified:
look how much grace and holiness thou have, so much comfort shall thou find
in thy sighs, and groans, and prayers, to the Lord. Not that the Lord regards
and hears thy prayers for the merit of any goodness or holiness in thee, but
that grace and holiness that is in thee, is an evidence to the comfort of
thine own soul, that thou art cleansed in the blood of Christ, and sanctified
by the holy Spirit of God, and renewed according to the image of God in a
measure of holiness, and that may assure thee that thy prayers and sighs are
pleasing to God, and available with the Lord. Yea thou may thereupon
conclude, to the comfort of thine own soul, that thy sighs, and thy feeble
and weak prayers, are accepted of the Lord, and the Lord takes notice of them,
and is well pleased with them, as a natural mother takes notice of the cry
and stammering voice of her own infant, and likes that better then she does
the plain speech of an hundred other children: so certainly the Lord is better
pleased with the sighs and groans, and broken petitions that come from thee
that art his child, begotten anew by his word and Spirit, sanctified and
renewed according to his image in some measure of holiness, then he does of
the most pompous and eloquent prayers of all the hypocrites and impenitent
sinners in the world. And that is to be thought on for the comfort of every
one, whosoever he be that finds true grace and holiness in himself.

One thing note we further from these words, The Spirit makes request for the
Saints according to the will of God, and the thing is this: we may hence note.

Prayer is a work of the holy Spirit of God in the best of Gods children.
in the best of Gods children: such as have the greatest measure of holiness
and sanctification, are still moved and stirred up to pray, even by the work
of the holy Spirit of God, and they cannot of themselves pray as they ought,
unless they be helped by the holy Spirit of God; and therefore Jude in his
Epistle verse 20. exhorts true believers to pray in the holy Ghost, that is, by
the power and help of the holy Ghost. And indeed unless the Lord give the
second grace as well as the first grace, and a continual supply of grace to
his children, they can do no good thing, as Christ says, Ioh. 15.5. Without me
ye can do nothing: and it is God who gives both the will and the deed, of his
own good pleasure. Philip. 2.13.

And this for use The popish error, that a man before conversion may turn
himself to seek to the Lord, met withal.
who teach that a man before his conversion may turn himself to seek to the
Lord, and may set himself to seek the face and favor of God. It cannot be:
the best of Gods children, such as have the greatest measure of holiness,
cannot of themselves pray as they ought, unless they be helped by the holy
Spirit of God: and therefore it cannot possibly be, that a man in his natural
state should be able to set himself to seek the Lord in prayer. It is an idle
fancy, and take we notice on this ground of truth, that it is no easy matter
to pray as we ought. No easy matter to pray as we ought.
Indeed to pray formally, and to say prayers (as some use to speak,) is an
easy matter, but to pray truly, with knowledge, with faith, with feeling, and
the like, is a special work of grace, and of the holy Spirit of God, and
therefore when we set on the exercise of prayer, we are to crave the assistance
of the holy Spirit of God.

Now further, it is not to be passed by without observation, we are to mark
it, that the Apostle here styles them whom the holy Spirit of God causes, and
stirs up, and enableth, such as are cleansed by the blood of Christ, and
sanctified by his grace, and are the children of God, to make request to God
for themselves, by the name and title of Saints; he calls them Saints, whence
note we.

That the name and title of Saints, belongs not only to Such as are truly
sanctified, living yet on the earth, may truly be called Saints.
but also to such as are truly sanctified living here on the face of the earth,
such as are truly sanctified by the holy Spirit of God, and renewed according
to his image in some measure of holiness, and living yet on the earth, may
truly be called Saints. So David calls them in express terms, Psalm. 16.3. My
weldoing extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth. And we
find that the Apostles do usually style those to who^ they write their
Epistles, by the name of Saints, Romans 1.7. To all you that be at Rome, beloved
of God, called to be Saints. 1. Cor. 1.2. To the Church of God which is at
Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling. 2.
Cor. 1.1. To the Church of God which is at Corinthus, with all the Saints. Romans
16.15. Salute Philologus and Iulias, Nereas, and his sister, and Olympas, and
all the Saints which are with them, says the Apostle. And in many other places
we find the name of Saints given to such as are truly sanctified by the holy
Spirit of God, and renewd according to his image in some measure of holiness,
yet living on the face of the earth.

And if any say: perfection of holiness, but holiness in part, and sin and
corruption still in part abiding in them?

I answer,

The Papists confuted, who hold none to be Saints, but such as are glorified in
heaven.
and are canonized by their Pope for Saints, who in all likelihood does many
times canonize those for Saints who are damned in hell.

Again, is this a truth that the name of Saints may be truly The wickedness
of those who use the name of Saint as a title of disgrace and mockage,
discovered.
What vile monsters then are they amongst men, who use the name of Saint, and
the name of holy one, as a title of disgrace or mockage, and of scorn and
derision, and as a name of reproach? and what is more usual with the devils
whelps (they are indeed no better then hell hounds) who bark against such as
are truly sanctified? I say what is more usual with them, then to reproach such
as are truly sanctified, in this or the like manner, You are one of the
brotherhood, one of the holy brethren, or one of the holy sisters, you are a
Saint forsooth, and such like. Oh what a fearful height of impiety are men
come to, that they dare thus open their mouths against holiness, which is a
thing the Lord calls for, and commands in his word, and works in the hearts of
all that belong to him, and approues, and without which no man shall ever see
the face of God to his comfort! Do thou, whosoever thou art, mock at
holiness? Do thou use the name of Saint or of holy one, as a title of
disgrace, and as a name of reproach? It is a plain evidence against thee, that
thou art far from holiness, yea it makes known thou art led by the spirit
of the bottomless pit, who is an utter enemy to God and to all goodness, and
that thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, as Act.
8.23. And know it for a certain truth, thou thy self must be that which now
thou make a mock and a scorn of, even a Saint here in this world, or else
thou shall never be a Saint in heaven: and say not thou as some use to say, I
hope I am no Saint. Art thou not? If thou be not in the number of Saints here
in this world, thou shall never come to be in the number of Saints in the
glory of heaven.

Come we now to a second reason, by which the Apostle proves, that the prayers
and sighs of Gods children are known and accepted of the Lord, in the last
words of the verse, According to God, or according to the will of God: even
according to the will of God revealed in his word, both for the matter and
manner, and so after an holy manner, and pleasing to God. Now the point hence
offered is this.

That only such prayers are pleasing to God, as are made Prayers made
according to Gods will, are only such as please God, and are accepted of him.
only then are our prayers accepted of the Lord and pleasing to him, when they
are framed and made according to his will revealed in his word, both for the
matter and for the manner of them. And we have express testimony of Scripture
to this purpose. 1. Ioh. 5.14. This (says Saint John) is the assurance that we
have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us:
whatsoever we ask agreeable to the will of God we are sure to receive it. And
the Apostle Iam. 4.3. he says, Ye ask and receive not: and then he subioynes,
as the reason of it, because ye ask amiss: as if he had said, you are not
careful to frame your requests and your petitions aright, and according to the
will of God, and therefore you obtain not the things you pray for.

And the reasons and grounds of this, that only such prayers are pleasing to
God as are made according to the will of God, are these.





Prayers made according to men's own fancies cannot please God.
who think that the Lord likes of their prayers, when indeed they frame their
prayers according to their own minds and fancies, without any ground or
warrant from the holy word of God, as the Papists do in their praying to Angels
and Saints departed, and as many ignorant and superstitious persons amongst us
do in their praying for the dead, as God be with them, Gods peace be with them:
yea as many do in their praying for good success when they are in hand with
some wicked exercise, as at cards, or dice, or they are going about some ill
purpose, and some wicked practice, or as many do in praying for a blessing on
their ill gotten goods, or the like. Do thou open thy mouth to pray for the
dead? Art thou in hand with some wicked exercise, or setting on some wicked
enterprise? or do thou pray for good success in it? Have thou got wealth by
unlawful, damnable, and cursed means, by fraud, by deceit, by cosinage, by
lying, by stealing, by usury, and such like? and do thou pray for a blessing
on that wealth? Surely thy prayers are not framed according to the holy will of
God, and they are so far from being pleasing to the Lord, as that they are
odious and abominable to his holy Majesty: yea thou so praying, thou do
fearfully take Gods name in vain, and so call for a curse on thine own
soul: and therefore take heed of it.

And for a second use, on the ground of truth now delivered, Our prayers must
be framed according to Gods will, that they may find acceptance with the Lord.
and we are to take notice of it, we must look that our prayers be framed and
made according to the will of God revealed in his word, if we desire they may
be accepted of the Lord. Do thou desire that thy prayers may find acceptance
with the Lord, and may bring from heaven a blessing on thee? Then look thou to
it, that they be framed according to the will of God revealed in his word:
crave thou nothing at the hands of God, but that which thou have warrant for in
the holy word of God, and crave it as the Lord would have thee to seek and sue
for it at his hands. And for more particular direction, How our prayers are
framed according to Gods will.
know that thou must only pray for those things that concern the glory of
God, and such things as concern thine own good in this life, and thine own
everlasting salvation in the life to come; and thou must crave good things the
Lord has promised in his word, and as the Lord has promised them; things that
are absolutely promised, and things absolutely necessary to salvation,
absolutely; and things promised conditionally, with condition, and no further
then the Lord in his wisdom sees to be most meet for his own glory and the
good of his children: as temporal good things, freedom from crosses, freedom
from temptations, less principal graces, a measure of sanctifying grace, with
subjection to the good will of the Lord, both for the time and the manner of
granting of them. And if thy prayers be thus framed and made, and offered up in
the name of Christ, then doubtless they are pleasing to God, and the Lord will
accept them, and grant what thou call for at his hands, so far forth as
shall be for his own glory and thy good. Come we now to the 28. verse.

VERSE 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best unto them
that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose.


IN this verse our Apostle brings another argument, by which he labors further
to arm and to strengthen the believing Romans against the bitterness of the
cross, and to persuade them patiently to bear afflictions they should meet
withal: and his argument here laid before us, is taken from the blessed issue
that afflictions have in respect of true believers: as namely this, they make
for their good, and therefore they are to be borne of them with patience and
with comfort. Now this argument is delivered by the Apostle in the general;
that all things work together for the best to true believers, and therefore
their afflictions in this verse more particularly: we have three things offered
to our consideration.

Three things
First, an excellent privilege, All things work together for which the Apostle
delivers as a certain known truth: We know that all things work together
for the best.

such as love God: and secondly, such as are called, unto them that love God,
even to them that are called.

We know that all things work together for the best unto them that love God,
even to them that are called of his purpose.

And so we see the drift of the Apostle in this verse, and the general matter
of it. Come we to the opening of the words touching the sense and meaning of
them. Also we know. That is, Interpretation.
I and you, and all true believers, do know, and that assuredly, we know it for
a certain and infallible truth, That all things. Some do expound this all,
diverse things, all afflictions and tribulations, all heavy things; which
indeed is true, but that exposition is too scant and too narrow: the original
word (...) has a larger extent and signification: as I take it, it here
comprehends all things, both good and bad, both adverse and prosperous, even
whatsoever befalls man in this world, and whatsoever is within him or without
him, either good or evil: all Angels, all devils, all men, both good and bad,
all gifts both of body and mind, yea all infirmities, weaknesses, defects,
and wants both of body and mind. And as one says well, even those things
which have no nature of their own, but are corruptions of nature, as
sicknesses, diseases, and death it self, Work together, or do cooporate or
work. Not with God, as some expound it, for God is not so fitly said to work
with his creatures, nor the creatures with God: but the meaning is, that the
things among themselves do concur and meet together in working, all things
jointly together work to the good of Gods children; and though good things and
bad things be opposite and contrary one to the other in nature, yet they agree
and they join together in working for the good of Gods children, and that by
the wonderful power and providence of God, and by his wise disposing hand, so
ordering and so disposing of them, as Joseph said to his brethren, Genes.
50.20. When you thought evil against me God disposed it to good, that he might
bring to pass as it is this day, and save much people alive. For the best. The
word in the original signifies good, ((...):) now good is either the good of
the natural being and preservation, or the good of the estate and condition:
and the good estate of men is natural, civil, or spiritual. And the good
which is here meant, is the good of the spiritual estate and condition, which
is both the estate of grace begun in this life, and the estate of glory
perfected in the life to come. And so the meaning is, that all things work
together for the best of Gods children, in regard of their spiritual estate,
both for helping forward grace and holiness in them in this life, and also for
the furtherance of their eternal happiness in the life to come. Unto them
that love God. That is, unto them who love God simply for himself, as the
fountain of all goodness, and do rest in him, and in their hearts cleave to
him as the most absolute good. Even to them that are called. For the
understanding of these words, know that some are called, and that by the voice
of God in the ministry of his word, but they answer not the call of God: and
of them speaks Christ, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called but few are chosen.
Others being called by the voice of God in the ministry of his word, and they
answer the call of God, they are effectually called: and these are here meant
by the Apostle, even as many as are by the holy Spirit of God effectually
wrought on, and brought through the preaching of the word from ignorance and
unbelief to true knowledge and faith in Christ, and are come out of the state
of nature into the state of grace. Of purpose. For so is the text in the
original (...). The word purpose, is not here to be understood of the purpose
of man, as some have taken it, but of Gods purpose: the verses following
plainly show it so to be understood. Those which he knew before, he also
predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Whom he predestinate, them also he called: and
whom he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also be
glorified. And Gods purpose is his eternal and unchangeable decree of saving
some, which the Apostle calls Gods own purpose. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose ((...)) and grace, which was given to us through Christ
Jesus before the world was. And the good pleasure of God, Ephesians. 1.5. And so
the meaning is, even to them that are called according to Gods eternal and
unchangeable decree, he having purposed in himself from all eternity to bring
them to life and salvation. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in
the words of this verse, as if he had said.

Also I and you, and all true believers know, and that assuredly, that all
things whatsoever they be that befall man in this world, whether good or bad,
and whatsoever is within him, or without him, either good or evil, that all do
concur and meet together in working, and by the wonderful power and
providence of God, and by his wise disposing hand, ordering and disposing of
them, do jointly together work for the best, even for the spiritual good
estate both of grace here and of glory hereafter, unto all such as love God
simply for himself, and do rest in him, and in their hearts cleave to him as
the most absolute good; even to such as are effectually called, and are come
out of the state of nature into the state of grace, and by the work of the
holy Spirit of God are brought, through the preaching of the word, from
ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge and faith in Christ: and that
according to Gods eternal and unchangeable decree; he having purposed in
himself from everlasting to bring them to life and salvation.

Here observe we, the Apostle delivers this privilege, that al things work
together for the best unto the^ that love God, as a known truth, a thing
certainly known to all true believers. He says not, we hope, or we
conjecture, or we wish, but we know, I and you, and all true believers know it,
and that assuredly, that all things work together for the best unto the^ that
love God. The point hence offered it is briefly this.

That such as are true believers, they know, All true believers are certainly
assured, that all things work together for the best both of themselves and of
all that truly love God, and how they are assured of it.
and all true believers are certainly assured of this, that all things, yea
even things that their own natural reason tells them are adverse and hurtful,
that those and all other things work together for the best both of themselves
and of all that truly love the Lord. And this true believers know and are
assured of: first by the Scripture, they have Scripture for it, which they
believe and give credit to, as Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted (says David) that I might learn thy statutes. And it stands on
record in the book of God, and they know it by taking notice of the Lords
dealing with his children, and by observing of it; as that Joseph was
afflicted, and it turned to his good; that Job was in great distress, and the
Lord put a good end to his affliction, as the Apostle says, Iam. 5.11. Ye have
heard of the patience of Job, and ye have known what end the Lord made. Of
Jobs affliction ye have known, that the end was good, and they knew it also by
the teaching of the holy Spirit of God: who as he teaches them other divine
truths, and other secrets of the kingdom of God, and things that are given to
them of God, 1. Corinthians. 2.12. so this amongst the rest, that all things work
together for the best to them that love God, and thereupon they are able to say
with the Preacher, Eccles. 8.12. I know it shall be well with them that fear
the Lord, and do reverence before him.

Gods children may be assured of their perseverance in grace.
that Gods children may know it, and may be assured of it, that they shall
persevere in grace to the end, and shall certainly be saved. The Papists hold
and teach the contrary, that Gods children cannot be sure that they shall hold
out and continue in grace to the end, and that they shall be saved: for why,
because (say they) they cannot be sure that they shall stand fast in the time
of affliction, afflictions may divert them and turn them aside. Now the
doctrine delivered makes good to us the contrary, that Gods children shall
stand fast in affliction: for why, they know it, and are assured of it, that
affliction and all other things shall work together for the best unto them,
even for the furtherance of grace in them here in this world, and of their
glory and salvation in the world to come. And how then can they not know it
and be assured of it, that they shall stand fast in affliction, and that they
shall persevere in grace to the end, and that they shall certainly be saved? It
must needs be so: and the contrary held and taught by the Papists, is
erroneous and false.

The happy estate of a child of God discovered.
that all things work together for the best both of themselves and of all that
truly love the Lord? what an happy estate then is a child of God in? A child of
God is in such an happy and blessed estate, as he knows, and is sure of it,
whatsoever befalls him, it shall be well with him: and what a comfort is that to
him? If a man know it and be sure of it, that all things work together for the
best to him, what need he fear what comes to him? Though the earth be moved,
and though the mountains fall into the midst of the sea, Psalm. 46.2. though
heaven and earth come together, doubtless on this ground a child of God is
exceedingly cheered up, and comforted in his greatest affliction; he knows,
and that assuredly, be things that befall him never so cross and contrary to
his good in the judgment of flesh and blood, yet they shall turn to the best
to him. And therefore as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 112.7. He is not afraid of
evil tidings, his heart is fixed and believes in the Lord: his heart is fixed
in this assurance, that all things shall work together to his good. A wicked
man, an unbeliever knows not this, no, he will not believe it, though a man
declare it to him; he thinks the life of a child of God is a most miserable
life, because he is for the most part under the hand of God in affliction; but
true believers know it, and are sure of it, by the evidence of the word of God,
by observation and experience, and by the teaching of the holy Spirit of God,
that all things shall turn to their good: and what a comfort is that to them?
and how should this stir us up to get into the number of Gods children? If we
be in that number, we are in a most comfortable state; the greatest Monarch in
the world cannot assure himself of that which a child of God is sure of, that
all things shall work together for his good.

Let us now go on in the further handling of this worthy privilege: All
things work together for the best: that is, as we showed, all things
whatsoever they be that befall man in this world, and whatsoever is either
within man or without him, whether good or evil, even all do concur and
meet together in working by the wonderful power of God, and by his wise
disposing hand, so ordering and so disposing of them, jointly together work
for the best to Gods children, in regard of their spiritual state, both of
grace here, and of glory hereafter; both for the helping forward of grace and
holiness of them in this life, and for the furtherance of their happiness and
glory in the life to come. Now the point hence offered is in effect, the
proposition here laid before us; and it is this.

All things whatsoever they be, are so ordered by the wonderful power of God,
and by his wise disposing hand, as that they work for the good of the
spiritual state of Gods children.
and all things that befall man in this world, whether good or bad, are so
ordered and so disposed by the wonderful power and providence of God, and by
his wise disposing hand, as that they work for the good of the spiritual
state of Gods children. Not one or two things, or a few things, nor yet many
things, but all things whatsoever they be, one and other; and they all concur
and meet in this, the wise disposing hand of God so ordering and so disposing
them, that they work for the good of Gods children, even for the helping of
them forward in grace here in this life, and for the furtherance of their
happiness and glory in the life to come. It were easy to show this to be a
truth, and no doubt it will easily be yielded to, that all good things work
for the good of Gods children; as that the good Angels are ministering spirits
for their good, Hebr. 1.14. that good men, whether public persons, good
Magistrates, good Ministers, or the like; or private persons that are good, and
holy, and religious; and that good things, both the holy things of God, the
Word, the Sacraments, and other good things, as health, wealth, liberty,
peace, honor, a good name in the world; and all the good gifts of mind or
body, as beauty, strength, wit, learning, knowledge, memory, and especially
gifts sanctified; yea the good gifts in wicked men, modesty, civility,
temperance, sobriety, chastity, and the like, though they do abuse them, and
have not grace to make them good to themselves, that these and all other good
things whatsoever they be, work for the good of Gods children, it will easily
be granted: I will not therefore insist in them, but rather labor to show,
that all evil things, even the worst things that be or can befall man in this
world, and things of a destroying nature, that those things, the wise disposing
hand of God so ordering and disposing of them, do work for the good of Gods
children; for that being euinced and cleared, the truth of the conclusion
delivered will plainly appear and be confirmed. Now then, evil things are
either spiritual or outward. Spiritual evil things, are sin, and that
which follows sin. Sin is either the sin of our first parents, or the
corruption of nature following on that, or actual sin and transgression, and
all these work for the good of Gods children. The sin of our first parents
works for their good, because it makes way for the second Adam the Lord Jesus,
as 1. Corinthians. 15.45. in whom they have a far better state then they had in
the first. In the first Adam at the least they had but a possibility not to
fall: in the second they have no possibility to fall, they are kept by the
power of God through faith to salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. And their happiness is
now kept for them in a sure hand, it is hid with Christ in God, Coloss. 3.3.
The corruption of nature that works for their good, in that it shows them
that perfection of holiness cannot be found in themselves, it hindering them
in doing good things, and staining their best actions, Isai. 64.6. and so it
drives them to seek for it where it is, namely, in Christ, as verse 2. of this
Chapter, The Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me
from the law of sin and of death. And it also serves to pull down their
proud nature, and to humble them, and to make them weary of the earth where
they cannot serve God with free spirits; and to long after heaven: Nothing does
more sharpen our desire after heaven, Note.
then the feeling of our own wretched estate, in regard of our own inbred
corruption, hindering us that we cannot serve God wiih free spirits. This made
Paul cry out, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?

Actual sin and transgression, whether inward or outward, that also works
for the good of Gods children. Inward sins, as doubts, and errors, they work
for their good, in that they make way for sound resolution; and Gods children
are best resolved of those truths whereof they have sometimes doubted, when
they come to see the truth of them. Yea the errors and doubts of others work
for their good, in that they make those truths that are doubted of to be more
thoroughly sifted and searched into. And no points in religion are so well
cleared as those that have been opposed by heretics, as the blessed Trinity
in the Primitive Church. Yea errors and heresies are for the trial of those
that are sound in the truth, 1. Corinthians. 11.19. There must be heresies even
among you, that they which are approved among you might be known.

Outward actual sin and transgression, that likewise makes for the good of
Gods children: when they have fallen into it, and are recovered out of it by
repentance, it makes them more humble and lowly in themselves, more mild and
equal, pitiful and compassionate toward others, Knowing that they themselves
may be tempted, Galat. 6.1. and more fit to comfort and strengthen others, as
Christ said to Peter, Luke 22.32. Luke 22.32.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Yea hereby they come to be
better acquainted with Satan's sleights, and to be more wary and circumspect
for the time to come, and more carefully to avoid them. Now things that follow
sin, as anguish, grief of mind, trouble of conscience, accusation for sin,
these also work for the good of Gods children, in that they cause them to go
out of themselves, to deny themselves, and to seek for comfort where it is to
be found, namely, in Christ, and in that they make ^way for soundness and
truth of heart; for indeed a wounded spirit is afterward a sound spirit when
it comes out of that state; and every accusation of sin past, is to a child
of God a preservative to keep him from sin to come: he reasons thus with
himself, What fruit have I now of the sin that I have fallen into, but
terror and shame, as Romans 6.21. and shall I fall into it again?

Now for outward evils, I might show that every outward particular evil
works for the good of Gods children, as poverty, sickness, disgrace,
banishment, imprisonment, and every sort of persecution. But to wind them up
in general, all these, and all other outward evils that might be reckened up,
do work for the good of Gods children, in that the holy Spirit of God uses
them as means to correct and to mortify their corruption in them, to weaue
them from the love of the world, and of earthly vanities, to stir them up to
better obedience, to quicken them to prayer, and all holy duties, to exercise
their faith, their patience, and other gifts and graces, we see it in
experience. Note.
If we were as good when we are well, as we promise to be when we are sick, we
should be as Angels, and as the Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. 11.32. We are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. The
chastisements of Gods children, in what kind soever, are for their good, yea
death it self is for the best to them, it puts an end to all their miseries,
yea to their sinning against God, which they account the greatest evil in the
world, and it puts them in possession of eternal joys. Therefore the
Apostle desired to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which was best for him.
Philip. 1.23. We see then that all evil things, yea the worst things that be
or can befall men in this world, whether spiritual or outward (the wise
disposing hand of God so ordering and so disposing) do work for the good of
the children of God. And all things whether good or bad are so ordered and so
disposed by the wonderful power of God, as that they work for the good of the
spiritual state of the children of God, even for the helping them forward in
grace here in this life, and for the furtherance of their happiness and glory
in the life to come: and the grounds of this are these.

The first is Gods eternal purpose to bring his children to stones of the
field, Job 5.23. and all things are subordinate to his decree, and therefore
must help forward the execution of it.

Again, Gods children are in Christ, by whom all ill is taken And therefore
all things work together for the best unto the children of God. Shall we sin
that grace may abound? God forbid. Those that do evil that good may come
thereof, their damnation is just, Romans 3.8. Sin works for the good of Gods
children, not of it own nature, but by accident, in regard of Gods ouerruling
hand, the Lord by his wise disposing hand, so disposing of it.

Particular providence of God proved.
and that particular things come not by chance or by fortune: it must needs be
that the hand of God ouerrules in every particular thing, in that things
contrary one to another in nature and working, agree in one conclusion in
working for the good of Gods children. Yea on this ground we are to take
notice, and to admire the wonderful power and goodness of God, in that he can
and does ouerrule the nature of evil things, so as he makes them work for
much good. There is nothing in the world so ill, but the Lord by his ouerruling
hand and power can draw good out of it. Sin it self which is most opposite
and contrary to good, yea to God who is goodness it self, and is the greatest
misery of the reprobate in hell, yet by the power and goodness of God, it
turns to exceeding good to Gods children: and therein appears the power and
goodness of God wonderfully; and we are to take notice of it.

Comfort to God children in that their best is still a working.
are so ordered by the wonderful power and providence of God, as that they
work for the good of his children, even for the helping of them forward in
grace here in this life, and for the furtherance of their happiness and glory
in heaven? Surely the consideration of this, may and ought to cheer up Gods
children in their greatest afflictions: and consider it thou that art a child
of God, and know to thy comfort, that in what state soever thou art, thou art
never miserable, for whatsoever befalls thee by the good hand of God, it turns
to thy good, and thy best is still a working in regard of thy spiritual
estate, for helping thee forward in grace here in this life, and for the
furtherance of thy happiness and glory in heaven: and what a comfort may that
be to thee? Indeed Satan and thine own corruption will be ready to suggest to
thee in the time of thy greatest affliction, when thou art under the hand of
God: if I be a child of God why am I thus afflicted? But thou may retort it
again, and relieve and help thy self with the consideration of this, that
the things that befall thee, though adverse and evil in the judgment of flesh
and blood, yet they are means under God to help thee on toward heaven; and
they are so ordered by the wise disposing hand of God, as they are working for
the best, in regard of thy spiritual state and condition. We know that a man
who takes Physic that is bitter and loathsome, he rests not in the present
feeling and taste of the bitterness of it, but he looks to the health that he
hopes it will bring him afterward by the blessing of God on it: So do thou in
the time of thy great affliction, look not thou so much on thy present
condition, and rest not in thine own present sense, and feeling, and
apprehension, for then a thousand to one thou will sink under the burden, but
look thou further to the blessed issue of it, and to that which the Lord is
working by it, even to the helping thee forward in grace and holiness here in
this life, and the furtherance of thy happiness and glory in heaven, and that
will be a means to stay thee, and a ground of sweet comfort unto thee.

There be yet further uses to be made of this truth. In the A special lesson
to be learned of all Gods children
may and ought to teach all Gods children this lesson, even to resign
themselves willingly into the hands of the Lord at all times, in what state and
condition soever they be, yea in their greatest straights, and in the hardest
condition they are brought into. For why, whatsoever comes to a child of God,
and what condition soever he is brought into, be it never so harsh or hard, it
is so ordered and so disposed of by the power and providence of God, and by his
wise disposing hand, as it works for the best to him: and why then should he
not willingly resign himself into that good hand of the Lord? And let every
child of God on the ground of truth now delivered, learn, in what stat* soever
he is, be it never so harsh, to say with David, 2. Sam. 15.26. Lord here I am,
do with me as it shall seem good in thine eyes: and into thy hands Lord I
commend my self, my soul, my body, and all that I have, only do thou so
dispose of things by thy good hand and providence, as that they may work for
my good, and only help me forward in grace here, and save my soul hereafter;
and then Lord do with me what thou will, and deal with me at thine own good
pleasure. Indeed a child of God being in a straight, and in a hard condition,
may and ought to use all good means within his power, that serve the
providence of God for his help, and for his comfort, and to be earnest with
God in prayer for a blessing on the means, and to crave the help of others in
prayer, as the Apostle says, Philip. 1.19. I know that this shall turn to my
salvation: but how? through your prayers, and by the help of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. Yet withal he is to remember, that his state and condition is
ordered by the good hand and providence of God, and the Lord is wiser then he,
and he knows what is best for him, and if another estate were better for him,
he should certainly be in it, and thereupon willingly and chearefully to
resign himself into the hands of the Lord, resting on this ground: That all
things that befall him are so ordered by the good hand of God, as they make for
the good of his spiritual state, both of grace

Wicked men discover their folly in seeking to hurt Gods children
In the next place, is it so that all things whether good or bad, that befall man
in this world, are so ordered and so disposed of, by the power and providence
of God, and by his wise disposing hand, as they work for the good of Gods
children, and for the helping of them forward in grace here in this life, and
for their happiness and glory hereafter in heaven? What fools then are
wicked men, in seeking to hurt Gods children? Wicked men are always imagining
mischief against Gods children, and are ever seeking to do them hurt by all
the means they can: but poor souls, all in vain, they cannot hurt them in
the things wherein they think they do them most hurt, they are but instruments
of doing most good to them, and all the mischief they do to Gods children, in
spite of their hearts it turns to their good, the wise disposing hand of God
so ordering it. And if wicked men did know what good they (as instruments in
the hand of God) do to Gods children when they think they do them most hurt,
without question it would vex them to the very heart. They (out of their
poison and malice) intend evil against Gods children, and they think they do
them hurt when they effect their wicked purpose, and bring some mischief on
them, but the Lord in his wisdom, out of his love to his children, turns it
to their great good. For example, wicked men revile Gods children, and
persecute them, and say all manner of evil of them for their profession
falsely: what do they thereby but exercise their faith, their patience, and such
like graces, and stir them up to draw nearer to the Lord, and give them cause
of joy and gladness, and add to their glory in heaven, they suffering as
they ought, as Christ says, Math. 5.11.12. Blessed are ye when men revile you,
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely:
rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. And therefore wicked
men or women are but fools in seeking to hurt Gods children.

Happily some may say,

A question easily answered. against them, and they only intend evil against
them, that is only the thing they drive at, and that they are then instruments
of doing good to Gods children, it is by the good hand and providence of God:
for alas they know no such thing, neither do they think it, as Isai. 10.7. it
is besides their purpose, and it is against their will, and therefore they are
justly blameworthy. And take thou notice of it, whosoever thou art that
set thy self against Gods children, and seek to do them hurt, it is
bootlesse for thee so to do, the Lord turns that ill thou intendest against
any child of his to his great good: and the hurt and harm thou seek to do
to a child of God, it turns back on thine own soul, and shall increase
thine own judgment, and thine own condemnation: and therefore learn thou to
forbear thy malice, and thy sinful endeavor against any child of God: and so
I pass from that.

Come we now to consider the persons to whom this privilege belongs, and they
are described by the Apostle to be such, as love God, and such as are called of
his purpose. And before I come to stand on these qualifications in particular,
note with me in general, that this excellent privilege: All things work
together for the best, is limited and restrained only to such as are qualified
as Gods children be, for these words, To them that love God, even to them that
are called of his purpose, are a description of Gods children, and on them
only is this excellent privilege here bounded, that all things work together
for the best unto them. Whence we may gather.

Only the good and godly are the persons who have al things working for the
best to them.
only the good, godly, and religious, are the persons who have all things
working for the best to them: and as for such as are not so qualified, the
wicked and ungodly, they have no share nor portion in this worthy privilege.
And indeed we may set down this for a truth: that as all things work together
for the best to such as are qualified as Gods children be, so certainly all
things work together for the worst, to such as are no^ so qualified, to the
wicked, and to the ungodly. It will no doubt be easily yielded to, that all
evil things, as sin, and things that follow sin, Satan, death, and all
plagues and judgments, work for the worst to the wicked: and it is no hard
matter to show that all good things do the like, all the good creatures of God,
from the Angels in heaven to the dust of the earth, and worms that creep on
the earth, are all ready armed against them, if the Lord let them loose to
execute his wrath and vengeance on them: There is no peace to the wicked, Isai.
57.21. All the good gifts of God, of mind, of body, and the outward good
things of this world, are all for the worst to them, Achitophels wit, Hamans
honor, Herod's applause, Dives riches, were not for their good, but for their
own ruin and destruction. Prou. 1.32. Ease slays the foolish, and the
prosperity of fools destroys them. All the good things of God, even the
holy things of God, his Word and Sacraments, are for the worst to them. The
word is a savor of death, the Sacraments are seals of judgment to them: they
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and the sweet mercies of God into a
license to themselves to sin against God, and the patience of God that should
lead them to repentance, they abuse to the heaping up of the wrath of God
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.
Romans 2.4.5. And so all the good things that be in the world work for the worst
to the wicked and ungodly.

The reasons are, first because they are not in covenant

And again, the extreme poison of their hearts is such, as

And therefore doubtless the best things that be in this world are for the
worst to the wicked and ungodly, and that makes good the truth of the point in
hand: that such only as are qualified as Gods children be, only the good, and
godly, and religious are the persons who have all things working for the best
to them; and such as are not so qualified, the wicked and ungodly, it is not so
with the wicked and ungodly, they have no part nor portion in this worthy
privilege, but all things work for the worst to them.

Wicked persons are miserable in the top of their happiness, as they account.
they are full of misery, it skils not what the things be they enjoy and are
partakers of, be it so that they are rich, honorable, and great in the world,
be it so that they enjoy health, strength, liberty, with great abundance of
the blessings of God, yea be it so that they are partakers of the best things
of God, the Word and Sacraments, and live under the best ministry in the
world, all this is nothing for their good, all things work for the worst to
them, even for their bane and destruction: yea the better the things be they
enjoy, the worse is their condition, because they shall one day rise up in
judgment against them, and increase their judgment and condemnation; and
therefore their state is miserable in the height of their happiness, as they
esteem it. And so to fall on a second use.

We are to look to it, that we be qualified as Gods children are.
that we be qualified as Gods children be, that we are such as truly love God,
and are effectually called of his purpose. Rest not then in a conceit of it,
that thou art a child of God; every one has a good conconceit of himself, but
labor thou for the qualification of a child of God, rest not in that which
deceives thousands, that thou art ciuilly honest, that is not the
qualification of a child of God, an heathen man may be so qualified; and if
thou rest in that, thou have no part nor portion in this worthy privilege,
that all things work together for the best to thee. No, no, be the things thou
enioyest never so good, yea the good things of God, thou can have no comfort
in them or from them, all things then work together for the worst to thee: yea
the better the things be thou enioyest, the worse is thy state and condition;
and therefore never rest till thou find that thou art qualified as Gods
children be, and that in these particulars, that thou art one that truly love
God, and art effectually called and wrought on by the word and Spirit of God.
And if thou be thus qualified, certainly then al things shall work for the
best to thee, both for the helping thee forward in grace here, and for the
furtherance of thy happiness and glory in heaven: and that may be a ground of
sweet and special comfort to thee.

Come we now to handle the qualification of the persons who have all things
working together for the best to them, here laid down more particularly, and
to stand on them severally, and in order. And first of this, That they are such
as love God. All things work together for the best to them that love God,
(says the Apostle) that is, as we showed, to them that love God simply for
himself, as the fountain of goodness, and the author of all good things, and
in their hearts do cleave to him as the chief, and principal, and most
absolute and sovereign good. Now then we see that the Apostle here describes
Gods children, who have all things working together for the best to them, by
this as a special qualification, that they are such as love God: and no doubt
he rather chose to set them out by this then by any other thing, because he
here labors to arm the believing Romans against the bitterness of the
cross, and to persuade them patiently to bear the afflictions they should
meet withal. And true patience dowes from the true love of God immediately as
the next cause of it, and as a friend to it. And again, love is the beginning
of all affections: where there is love of any thing, It is a special
qualification of such as have al things working together for the best, that
they love God.
But to come to the point, the point hence offered is this.

That it is a special qualification of Gods children, and of such persons who
have all things working together for the best to them, that they love God. All
and every one of Gods children who have part in this privilege, that all
things work together for the best to them, are thus qualified, they love God
simply for himself, as the fountain of all goodness, and in their hearts
they cleave to him as the chief and most absolute good. This qualification,
even a true love of God, is found in all and every child of God in some
measure. The Apostle says, Gal. 5.6. that faith works by love: true saving
faith is a working faith, and it works by love, that is, by love both toward
Gods and toward men; and where there is true faith, there is also a measure of
true love both of God and men. Psalm. 116.1. David affirms this of himself,
being a dear child of God, that he was thus qualified, even with a true love
of God: I love the Lord (says he) because he has heard my voice and my
prayer. And Psalm. 31.23. he exhorts all the Saints and children of God to love
the Lord, Love ye the Lord all his Saints: as if he had said, It concerns all
the Saints and children of God to love the Lord. As it is a duty to which Gods
children are stirred up, so doubtless it is a thing found in every child of
God in some measure, and all and every one of Gods children are thus qualified
in some measure, they love God simply for himself, as the fountain of all
goodness: and the grounds of it are these.



John says, 1. Ioh. 4.19. We love him because he loved us first. So the woman
in the Gospel loved much, because she apprehended Gods great love to her in
pardoning many sins. Luke 7.47.

On these grounds Gods children seeing the excellencies of God, and feeling
Gods love shed abroad in their hearts, it must needs be that they are thus
qualified in some measure, they love God simply for himself; and this
qualification, even a true love of God, is found in all and every child of God
in some measure: and for the use and application of this,

First, let this serve as a ground to us of discerning of our selves, whether
we be the children of God or no. By examining our selves hereby we may discern
whether we be so or no; if so be thou find thy self thus qualified, that thou
love God simply for himself, it is evidence enough to thee that thou art a
child of God, Our loving of God simply for himself, is evidence enough to us
that we are Gods children.
but if thou want this qualification, thou have no measure of true love of God
in thine heart: surely then thou deceiuest thy self if thou think that thou
art a child of God. Now because every one will be ready to assume, and to
take this to himself, that he loves God, yea some are so confident in this, as
if ye ask them whether they love God or no, they think they are wronged, and
they scorn the question: they love God, that they do, else it were pity of
their lives, and they would be sorry else. Six notes by which we may try our
selves whether we truly love God or no.
I will therefore lay before you some special notes and marks of the true love
of God, by which we may try our selves whether we be such as truly love God
simply for himself, or no.

And first, such as truly love God, they take pleasure in thinking and speaking
of God, it is the joy of their hearts to

Secondly, where there is true love of God, there is a true If ye love me,
keep my commandments: and also by a willing suffering of any thing for his
sake. The Apostles rejoiced because they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for the name of Christ.

David, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require,
even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord and to visit his temple. And Psalm. 42.1.2. As
the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants my soul after thee O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? And especially the true love of God
accompanied with a desire to have immediate fellowship with Christ as Paul
says, Philip. 1.23. I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ. And a longing
after the appearance of Christ to judgment, as the Church says, Revel. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus.

Eliachim, Shebna, and Ioah rent their clothes when they heard Rabshakehraile
on the living God.

David said, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and I have desired
none in the earth with thee. And Paul says, He counted all things loss, and
judged them to be dung, in comparison of this, that he might win Christ: and
so be assured of Gods love to him in Christ, Philip. 3.8.9.

as bear his image in special manner, and are like to God in a measure of
true holiness, and are the children of God, even because they are his
children. 1. Ioh. 4.20. If any say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a
liar: for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God
whom he has not seen?

Now by these notes, let every one of us try our selves, Particular
application of the notes.
let us deal truly with our selves. In trial sooth not up thy self in a
conceit that thou art one that truly love God, when indeed there is no such
matter. Art thou one that take no pleasure in thinking and speaking of God
and of good things? Is speech of good things irksome and tedious to thee? Have
thou no care to please God in doing the good things he commands, and in
avoiding the evil things that he forbids? Art thou a drunkard, a blasphemer, a
Sabbath breaker? Do thou follow thy pleasures on the holy Sabbath of the
Lord, walking abroad into the fields? Is prayer and hearing of the word of God
a burden to thee? Can thou endure to see and hear God dishonored, his name
blasphemed, and thou art nothing moved with it? Art thou an earth-worme, a
covetous person, an usurer? Do thou prefer the love of the world before the
love of God? Art thou one that hate Gods children, and thou can not abide
them that bear the image of God, thou art ever girding them, and deriding
them, and thou say they are but a company of fools, and such like, and
do thou love God? No, no, if thou so think, thou deceiuest thy self, there
is no dram of the true love of God in thee; and yet I dare say thou have this
good conceit of thy self. Come to one that is a contemner of God and of all
goodness, to a drunkard, to a blasphemer, to an earth-worme, to an usurer, and
such like, to one that has no delight in the word of God or in holy things, to
one that is a scoffer of Gods children, and says in plain terms, they are
but a company of fools: ask such an one whether he love God or no, and he
will presently answer, that he does with all his heart, he would be sorry
else, but indeed and truth there is no such matter; such a person deceiues
himself with a fond conceit. And if thou, whosoever thou art, would have
good evidence of it, that thou truly love God, thou must find these things
in thee, that it is the joy of thine heart to think and to speak of God and
of good things, that thou have a true desire and an holy endeavor to please God
in all things, both by doing the good things he requires, and by avoiding the
evil things he forbids; that thou delightest in the means by which thou
may have an holy familiarity with the Lord, and in speaking to God in
prayer, that thou have a zeal of Gods glory, thou can not endure to hear
or see God any way dishonored; that thou do more esteem of Gods love to
thee in Christ, then of all the riches and treasures in the world, and that
thou love all that bear the image of God, especially such as are like to God
in true holiness and righteousness, they are thy chief delight, as David
says they were his, Psalm. 16.3. If these things be in thee, certainly then
thou truly love God, and thou art beloved of God, and thou art a child of God.

And for a second use: is it so that all and every one of Comfort for such as
find the true love of God in themselves, though it be but weak and in a small
measure.
Then here is matter of great comfort for thee who find the true love of God
in thine own heart, though it be but weak and in poor measure: examine thy
self, do thou delight in the service of God? Is it a grief to thee that
thou can not delight in it as thou would? Do thou abhor all sinful
courses? Comfort thy self, it is an undoubted sign that thou truly love
God: and thereupon thou may conclude to the comfort of thine own soul, that
God is thy loving Father, and thou his child; and thou may then challenge this
privilege to belong to thee, that all things shall work together for the best
to thee, for the helping of thee forward in grace here, and for the furtherance
of thy happiness and glory in heaven, and that is matter of great comfort to
thee: think on it to thy comfort.

Now before I leave this point, I hold it needful to add something to that
which has been already delivered, and that only by way of persuasion to
stir us up, and to persuade us to the love of God, being a special
qualification of all and every one of Gods children, and yielding sweet
comfort to the soul in which it is found. Motives to stir us up to love God
truly, and to increase in love to him.
It ought to stir up every one of us to labor to have our hearts possessed
with a true love of God, and where there is any measure of the true love of
God, to labor to increase it. And to help us forward herein, consider we
further, that love is the best affection of our hearts, and where can we better
bestow this best affection the fashion of it passes away: as 1. Corinthians. 7.31.

Again, consider we the wonderful and unspeakable any measure of true love
of God already in our hearts, to labor to increase it, yea to come to such a
measure of the love of God, and to such a zeal of his glory, as was in Moses
and Paul, who could have been content to lose heaven rather then God should
lose his glory: this we ought to labor for, and to endeavor to come to.

I proceed, come we now to the second qualification of the persons who have all
things working for the best to them, namely, That they are such as are called:
all things work together for the best to them that love God, even to them that
are called of his purpose, says the Apostle, that is, as we showed, to them
that are effectually called, and by the work of the holy Spirit of God are
brought, through the preaching of the word* from ignorance and unbelief to
true knowledge and faith in Christ. Now here we are to mark the coherence of
these two qualifications, To them that love God, and to them that are called of
his purpose: the Apostle subioynes one of these as an explication of the other:
All things work together for the best to them that love God. And who are
these? Why says the Apostle. Those that are called, even to them that are
called of his purpose. Whence in the first place we are given to understand
thus much.

Only such truly love God, as are effectually called.
and wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and are brought from ignorance
and unbelief to knowledge and true faith in Christ, and none but such. Read
Galat. 5.22. we there find love, whereby no doubt the Apostle means the true
love both of God and men, reckened up among the fruits of the Spirit. The
fruit of the Spirit (says the Apostle) is love. The true love of God is a
particular fruit sent out from the holy Spirit of God as the root of it, and
that only in such as are sanctified, and effectually wrought on by the Spirit,
for such the Apostle here speaks of; and so found only in such as are
effectually called. 1. Tim. 1.5. says the Apostle, The end of the commandment
is love: that is, true love both of God and men; and then he subioynes, Out of
a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: whereby he makes
known that the true love of God it comes only from a pure heart, from an
heart purged by faith: for faith purifieth the heart, as we have it, Act. 15.9.
and from a sanctified soul, and so doubtless the true love of God is found
only in such persons as are effectually called, and in such are wrought one by
the word and Spirit of God: and the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.

First, there is no true love of God in men by nature, the

Secondly, the true love of God ever follows an apprehension

Again, according to that 1. Ioh. 4.19. We love him because On these grounds
it follows strongly and undeniably, that the true love of God is found only
in such as are effectually called, and only such persons truly love God, as
are effectually called, and wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and
brought from ignorance and unbelief to knowledge and true faith in Christ, and
none but such.

Now for the uses of it, first this truth meets with that erroneous conceit of
the Papists, who hold and teach, that the first That true love is in us by
nature, is a Popish error.
and that we have in us by nature an inclination to love both God and men, and
that only a second act or exercise of love is from grace; this is but their
conceit, and cannot stand with the evidence and truth of the word of God, and
with the truth of doctrine now delivered. I leave it, and for the use of it to
our selves.

Is it so that the true love of God is found only in such as They are deceived
who think they have loved God from their infancy and childhood.
and only such persons truly love God as are effectually called and wrought on
by the word and Spirit of God, and brought from ignorance and unbelief to
knowledge and true faith in Christ, and none but such? Surely then it must
needs follow from hence, that they deceive themselves, who think they have
truly loved God from their very infancy and childhood, and ever since they
knew any thing. It is a common speech of ignorant persons, and of such as
continue in blindness and in the hardness of their hearts, and never yet felt
the power of grace in their own souls, working in them a through alteration
and change, that they love God with all their hearts, and that they have loved
God ever since they knew their right hand from the left. Poor souls they are
exceedingly deceived, the truth of God now delivered makes known to them, if
they will take notice of it, that there is no such matter. The true love of God
is found only in such as are effectually called and wrought on by the word and
Spirit of God, and are brought from ignorance and unbelief to knowledge and
true faith in Christ. And take thou notice of it, thou that say thou have
loved God ever since thou knew any thing, and yet thou art an ignorant
person, and thou have never yet felt any true change in thine own soul by the
work of grace, thou deceiuest thy self, and of thine own mouth I dare be
bold to judge of thine heart in this particular, and to tell thee there is no
jot of true saving grace in thine heart. Thou art ignorant of God, and of the
things of God, thy speech bewrayes it; and being yet in thy natural ignorance
and blindness, certainly thou art not effectually called, and so it is not
possible that thou should truly love God. Nay, admit it be so that thou have
attained some knowledge of God and of good things, thou living under the means
of knowledge, and thou art able to speak of God and of good things, yet
unless that knowledge be sanctified, and have wrought on thee in some measure
a through change, both in heart and life, thou art as far from loving God
truly, as thou wast before: it is not thy knowledge of God and of good things,
though it be great, that will evidence to thee to thy comfort, that thou art
one truly loving God. No, no, it is thy effectual calling that will give thee
comfort in that respect; one of these arises from the other, when the Lord
calls any effectually, he powers his grace into him, and by the same grace he
frames his heart to love his holy Majesty: and therefore if thou would be
sure that thy love of God is as it ought to be, even a true love of God, and
that thou art a man or a woman truly loving God, look to thy effectual
calling, and never rest till thou fin^ that thou art effectually called. If
thou find that thou art effectually called and wrought on by the word and
Spirit of God, and brought from ignorance and unbelief to saving knowledge and
saving faith in Christ, then thy love of God though it be but weak, and in a
poor measure, yet it comes from a right ground, and from the true natural
mother of it, and there is comfort in it.

I will now as the Lord shall enable me, stand on this second qualification
more particularly. The Apostle here describes Gods children, who have all
things working together for the best to them, that they are such as love God,
and again, that they are such as are called of his purpose, that is,
effectually called and wrought on by the word and Spirit of God. We see then
which is the point I will stand on.

That it is a special qualification of Gods children, and of All and every one
who have part in this worthy privilege, that all things work together for the
best to them, they are effectually called.
and they are wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and they are brought
from ignorance and unbelief, to true knowledge and true says in Christ. And
for the clearing and confirming of this, read Psalm. 65.4. David there
describes the blessed man, namely, the child of God, to be one whom the Lord
chooses, and causes to come to him, one whom the Lord does in his free love
choose to make him a member of his Church, and his adopted child, and then does
move his heart by his word, and by his holy Spirit, to come to him, and that
effectually does cause him to come to him, and to receive his mercy. Psalm.
40.6.7. David says, When his ear was prepared, he answered lo, I come. The
Lord wrought on his heart by his good Spirit, and called him by his word, and
he answered the Lords call, he was effectually wrought on. Act. 2.41. we read
of three thousand souls that were added to the Church, and became true members
of the Church, and so the children of God, they received the word of Peter
preaching, and they were baptized, they were brought to true knowledge and true
faith in Christ, they received the Sacrament of Baptism as a seal of that
faith. And the like we find recorded of Lydia, Acts 16.14.15. The Lord opened
her heart, and she received the word that Paul preached unto her, and she was
effectually called, she was brought to true knowledge, and to true faith in
Christ. 1. Pet. 2.9. we find that the Apostle describes the peculiar people of
God, and such as are indeed the children of God, that they are called out of
darkness into the Lords marvelous light: they are brought from ignorance to
true knowledge, and out of the state of nature into the state of grace. And so
says the Apostle of the believing Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were once
darkness, but are now light in the Lord. We see then sufficient evidence of
Scripture clearing and confirming this truth: that it is a special
qualification of all and every one of Gods children who have part in this
excellent privilege, that all things work together for the best to them, that
they are effectually called, they are wrought on by the word and Spirit of God,
and they are brought from ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge, and true
faith, they are such as have answered the call of God in the ministry and
preaching of his word: and it must needs be so, the reason of it is this.

till then they are in bondage under sin, as the reprobate are, and their
life and conversation differs not from the life and conversation of the
reprobate: so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.2.3. Wherein in time past ye walked
according to the course of this world, and after the Prince that rules in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, among
whom ye had your conversation in time past, in the lusts of your flesh, in
fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the
children of wrath as well as others. 1. Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And therefore that there may be a
manifest and known difference between Gods children and the reprobate, it
must needs be that all and every one of Gods children are effectually called,
and are wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and are brought from
ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge, and to true faith, and they are such
as have answered the call of God in the ministry of his word.

Now then for the use, this also in the first place may serve How we may
discern whether we be the children of God or no.
And let every one of us try our selves by this: If in trial thou find
that thou art effectually called, and that thou have indeed answered the call
of God in the ministry of his word, and thou art brought from ignorance and
unbelief to true knowledge, and true faith, then thy case is good, thou art a
child of God: but if thou find it not thus with thee, especially having lived
under the sound of the Gospel, under the ministry and preaching of it a long
time, surely then thou deceiuest thy self if thou think thou art a child of
God. Now because herein many deceive themselves, and many think their case
good, they are called home, they are reclaimed and wrought on by the word and
Spirit of God, and brought from ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge and
true faith, because happily they have gotten some knowledge, and they avoid some
sin they were heretofore given to, or they now run not into that outrage
they were wont to do, which things I speak not against, but herein some rest,
and think their case good, and so deceive themselves: I will therefore make
known some special notes and marks of effectual calling, by which we may
try our selves, whether we be effectually called and wrought on, or no. Seven
notes by which we may try whether we be effectually called or no.


First then such as are effectually called, their eyes are opened, faith
purifying their hearts. Acts 26.18. Paul says, he was sent to the Gentiles to
this purpose: To open their eyes that they might turn from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith, and true
faith purifieth the heart. Act. 15.9.

abhor that which is evil: not only abstain from it, but hate and loath it
as hell it self, for so the word (...) signifies.

I pray you that ye walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. Yea
they are made able, and they do express the power of grace in their particular
callings: they glorify God, and they serve God in doing the duties of their
callings, as the Apostle says servants do in serving their masters, Colos.
3.4.

Fourthly, where there is effectual calling, there is a choice called out of
the world, as Christ says (Ioh. 15.19.) all his are, he cannot love the world,
he has small joy in it, as the world has small joy in him. Psalm. 26.4.5.
David says, I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with
the dissemblers, I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not companied
with the wicked. And Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee
and keep thy precepts.

Fifthly, where there is effectual calling, there is a special He that is of
God hears Gods words: and Psalm. 119.97. Oh how love I thy Law, it is my
meditation continually.

Sixthly, where there is effectual calling, there is doing of Noah did when all
flesh had corrupt his way upon the earth, Genes. 6.9.12. and as Lot did in the
midst of filthy Sodom, 2. Pet. 2.7. Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me
(says Christ) let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow
me.

The last note of effectual calling, is a precious account of high calling, as
the Apostle speaks of it, Philip. 3.14. I follow hard toward the mark, for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Now by these notes and
marks let every one of us try our selves: and if we do try our selves by
these notes, Application of the notes.
alas how far short will many be found, from that which they conceit of
themselves? Art thou one that art yet in thy natural blindness and ignorance,
thou art not acquainted with thy wretched estate by nature, and thy cursed
state by sin, thou have only a general notion of sin, and thou can
only say as thousands use to do: We are all sinners, God help us? Have thou
in thee no hatred of thy former sins, nor striving against them? Do thou go
on with delight in the practice of known sins, yea happily being past the
practice of thy best pleasing sin, is the remembrance of it pleasing to thee?
Do thou speak of it with delight? Do thou show forth no power of grace in
thy life, in the duties of Christianity, and in thy particular place and
calling? Art thou negligent or careless in the works of thy calling? Do
thou therein only seek thy self, and not the glory of God? And do thou
make no choice of thy company? Art thou ready to go with any that puts forth
his head? Is any one a comparison for thee, though a drunkard, a blasphemer, or
such like? Have thou no delight in the word of God? Do thou hear it with a
dead heart? Does thy prosperity make thee careless of heavenly things, and of
holy duties? And art thou one that can not endure the least disgrace for the
profession of religion, an hard word, or a nicke name will drive thee from the
profession of it? And do thou prefer the honors and preferments of the
world before the high calling of God in Christ Jesus? If it be thus with thee,
surely then if thou think thou art effectually called, and that thou art in
the way of life, thou deceiuest thy self, and thou have yet no good evidence
to that purpose. And if thou would be sure that thou art effectually called,
then look thou find in thy self the notes before spoken of. Are thine eyes
opened and cleared? Do thou see thy wretched estate by nature, and the cursed
corruption of thine own heart? Have thou power against the vile lusts of thine
own heart? Art thou able by a true working faith to apply the promises of life
to thine own soul? Have thou in thee an hatred of thy former sins, and a
striving against them, and a loathing of that sin thy nature is most bent to?
Art thou fitted for the calling of an holy Christian? Art thou able to show
forth the power of grace in thy life and conversation, yea in thy particular
place and calling? Art thou diligent in thy calling? Do thou do the duties of
thy calling in conscience toward God, and in obedience to his will, and with a
mind therein to glorify God? Art thou careful in the choice of thy company?
Are those that truly fear God thy companions? And do thou refrain from
wicked company, and thou art not in their company more then needs thou must,
in regard of thy occasions and dealings in the world? Do thou hear the word
of God, and delight in hearing of it, yea in the hearing of the Law discovering
thy sins to thee, and especially in the Gospel, making known to thee the
sweet promises of life and salvation? Have thou a care of heavenly things, and
art thou conscionable in the practice of holy duties in thy greatest
prosperity, and the more the Lord does heap his mercies on thee in outward
things, the more careful thou art of holy duties: and the richer thou art, the
holier thou art? And do thou hold fast the profession of Religion in the
heat of persecution, and when it is most of all disgraced? And do thou make
more account of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ, and of thy calling out
of the state of nature into the state of grace, then of all the honors and
preferments in the world? Is it thus with thee, and are these things in thee?
Certainly then thy case is good, thou art effectually called and wrought on by
the word and Spirit of God; the Lord has set thy feet into the way of life
and salvation, and thou art going on in the way to heaven, and he will
undoubtedly in his good time bring thee into the full possession of life and
glory in heaven: and that may be a ground of sweet comfort to thee.

There is yet another use to be made of this point before Comfort for such as
find themselves effectually called.
Is it so that effectual calling is a special qualification of Gods children,
and all and every one of them who have part in this privilege, that all
things work together for the best unto them; they are effectually called, they
are wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and they are brought from
ignorance and unbelief, to true knowledge and true faith? Then here is ground
of sweet comfort for thee, whosoever thou art that find thy self
effectually called. Have thou good evidence of thy effectual calling? Art thou
sure of it that thou art now set out of the state of nature into the state of
grace? Surely the meditation of that is more comfortable to thee, then to
think on thy election or on thy redemption by Christ, for that gives thee
assurance of thy election and of thy redemption, and it seals up to thee this
comfort, that thou art in the number of Gods chosen, and one redeemed by
Christ, and that thou shall certainly be saved. And therefore the Apostle 2.
Pet. 1.10 exhorts to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure:
for if we do these things we shall never fall. By making sure our calling, we
make sure our election, and we come to be 2assured of it: and therefore
doubtless it is most sweet and most comfortable to thee whosoever thou art,
if thou be able to say, and that truly, I am effectually called, I was thus or
thus given over to sin, but now I am not; and especially if thou be able to
say so, and that truly, in respect of thy best pleasing sin, I was heretofore
held under the power and tyranny of this or that sin, and I gave my self
over to the practice of it with much delight, but now I have power against it;
and though strength and ability be not wanting to me for ye practice of it,
yet now I have no pleasure in it, I now strive against it, and I now avoid all
occasions leading to it, yea it is now a grief to my soul to think of it, it
is so odious and hateful to me. If thou be able thus to say, and that in
truth, that is a comfortable thing indeed, that gives thee assurance that thou
art in the state of grace, and in the way to life and salvation; and the
consideration of that may yield thee comfort both in life and death. And so I
pass from that.

Come we now to the third and last thing laid before us in this verse, and
that is the ground and cause why all things work together for the best to them
that love God, and are effectually called, and that is Gods purpose: We know
that all things work together for the best unto them that love God, even to
them that are called of his purpos^: that is, as we showed, according to Gods
eternal and unchangeable decree, he having purposed in himself from
everlasting to bring them to life and salvation. Now in that the Apostle here
says, effectual calling is according to Gods eternal purpose, I might stand
to show, that Gods love to his children is not always concealed, his love to
his children before all times is in time made known to them; for it is not an
idle love, but operative and working: but I will not stand on that. Hence
observe we in the first place thus much.

That the evidences and signs of the happiness and salvation The evidences
and signs of the happiness and salvation of Gods children are in themselves,
but the ground of it is out of themselves.
The signs of it that Gods children shall come to life and glory in heaven,
are the true love of God and effectual calling, which are things in Gods
children themselves; and the ground of it is in Gods eternal purpose, and so
out of themselves. And to this purpose we have further evidence, read Ephesians.
1.4. the Apostle says, God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of
the world: there is the ground of our happiness in Gods eternal election out
of our selves; and then he subioynes, That we should be holy and without blame
before him in love. Thereby making known, that true faith and holiness, which
are things in our selves, are evidences and signs of it that we belong to Gods
election and shall be saved. So likewise 2. Tim. 2.19. says the Apostle, The
foundation of the Lord, that is, the eternal purpose of God touching
salvation, in which the salvation of Gods elect is found, Remains sure, and
has this seal, the Lord knows who are his: it is sealed and laid up in God
himself: and then he adds, Let every one that calls on the name of Christ
depart from iniquity: as if he had said. The signs by which any one may be
sure that he belongs to Gods election are in himself, even true faith, and a
serious care and endeavor after holiness. Not to add further testimony of
Scripture to this purpose: the reason why the evidences and signs of the
happiness of Gods children are in themselves, and the ground of it out of
themselves, in Gods eternal and unchangeable purpose, is.



They deceive themselves who lay claim to happiness and salvation without any
evidence and sign of it in themselves.
And thus stands the case with thousands in the world, they will be saved, and
they say they hope to go to heaven, and yet they have no manner of evidence in
themselves for it, they are not able to make good their claim by any evidence
of grace in their own souls. Were it not folly and madness in any one to
lay claim to a piece of land having neither hand, nor seal, nor word, nor
promise, nor any deed nor evidence in ye world to show for it? Surely so is it
with many in the world, they lay claim to heaven, and yet they have neither
word, nor promise of God to that purpose, nor hand nor seal of God, they want
the seal of Gods Spirit, and evidence of grace in their own souls. Poor
souls they deceive themselves, and herein does the devil delude thousands in
the world, and he takes advantage on the doctrine of our Church to deceive
them, we teaching (according to the truth) that in the matter of justification
in the sight of God and in the matter of salvation, we must go out of our
selves, and must seek for justification and salvation only in Christ:
hereupon the devil takes the hint and deludes thousands, persuading them it is
sufficient if they fancy to themselves (for it is no better then a fancy)
that Christ died for them, and that they shall be saved by the merit of Christ,
though they never find Christ in them by the work of his Spirit, applying his
merit to their justification, and cleansing them to their sanctification. Well
know it, whosoever thou art, if thou will lay claim to happiness and
salvation on a good ground, thou must not only go out of thy self, and find
the ground of it in Gods eternal purpose, and in Gods mercy, and in the merit
of Christ, but thou must also find the evidences and signs of it in thine own
self, even the evidence of effectual calling, and of sanctifying grace in
thine own soul. Yea know it for a certain truth, thou must find Christ a
Savior to thee, not only out of thy self by his merit but also in thy self
by the efficacy of his Spirit, and that Christ has not only saved thee from
hell, but has also turned thee from sin to God; that must be an evidence to
thee that thou art in the way to heaven: think on it.

Again, for a second use: is it so that the evidences and Comfort to such of
Gods children as find the work of grace but weak and feeble in the^.
and they complain of the weakness of it, as indeed it is many times the
complaint of a dear child of God: Oh I find but a poor and weak measure of
grace in my self, and it does much daunt me, yea it makes me many times to
doubt of my estate. Why, consider with thy self, the work of grace in thy
soul is not the ground of thy comfort, it is but only an evidence and sign
of it, and of thy happiness and salvation, and the ground of it is out of thy
self laid up in Gods eternal purpose. Indeed if so be the ground of thy
comfort and salvation lay in thine own hand, and if thy happiness and
salvation were built on any thing in thy self as the ground of it, thou
might justly doubt of thy state and standing; but it is not so, it is set on
a better and a more sure foundation and ground work, on the eternal and
unchangeable purpose of God, and that stands fast and firm for ever. And
therefore comfort thy self, and when thou find thy self wavering and
doubting of thy state, and troubled in regard of the weakness of grace in thy
self, remember this, that the grace that is in thee is but the evidence and
sign of thy happiness and salvation; and being in thee in truth, though but
weak, yet it is sufficient to evidence that to thee, it is not the ground of
it: no, the ground of thy comfort and of thy happiness and salvation, is out
of thy self in Gods eternal purpose, and is built on that ground, and that is
a foundation most firm and stable, and immouable, and all the devils in hell
are not able to raze it: and the consideration of that may be a great comfort
to thee.

There is yet further matter offered from these words, Even to them that are
called of his purpose, or according to his own good purpose, and according to
the good pleasure of his will. And in that the Apostle here makes the ground
and cause of effectual calling Gods eternal purpose, and his unchangeable
decree touching the salvation of his chosen, we may further gather some
special conclusions that may be of use and profit to us. I will propound them
and speak of them as the Lord shall enable me: and hence it follows, and the
point in the next place hence arising is this.

Effectual calling is a free calling.
It is not in respect of any goodness in man or woman, or for any good thing
done by them that God does effectually call and convert them, and work on them
powerfully by his word and Spirit. Whom the Lord calls effectually he calls
freely, according to his own good purpose, and according to the good pleasure
of his will: so speaks the Apostle in express terms, Ephesians. 1.5. says he,
Who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, even to be called
out of the state of nature into the state of grace, and to be made his adopted
sons and daughters through Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will. 2. Tim. 1 9. says the Apostle, God has called us with an holy
calling: that is, with an effectual calling, Not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace. Where we see, the Apostle excludes
works from effectual calling, from being any cause of it, and he ioynes
together Gods purpose and grace, plainly teaching, that effectual calling is
according to Gods own purpose, and merely of his grace, and so a free
calling: and whom the Lord calls effectually, he calls them freely without any
respect of any goodness in themselves, or of any thing done by them: and the
reason is.

Because the Lord will have all the glory of the beginning and end of the
salvation of his chosen. to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6.
The Lord says by his Prophet, speaking of the calling and converting of the
Gentiles, Isai. 4.6.7* I will say to the North, give, and to the South, keep
not ba^ke: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the
earth, Every one shall be called by my name; for I created him for my glory,
formed him and made him. The Lord will have all the glory of the calling and
converting of his chosen: and therefore effectual calling must needs be a free
calling, without respect had to any goodness in man or woman, or to any good
thing done by them.

Now this truth is of use, first for confutation; it meets with Merit of
congruitie confuted.
They hold and teach, that a man by the strength of nature before conversion,
may so dispose himself, and may so fit himself for grace, as that it is
convenient the Lord should bestow grace on him: and they say, he merits grace
(ex congruo) by a kind of congruitie and conueniencie. Thus they labor to
obscure and darken the bright shining of Gods free grace in effectual calling,
clean contrary to the truth now delivered. I leave them, and for use to our
selves.

Is it so that effectual calling is a free calling? Is it not in We are to
ascribe our effectual calling only to Gods free grace and mercy.
or for any good thing done by them, that the Lord does effectually call and
convert them? Surely then, such as are effectually called are to magnify the
free grace of God, and to ascribe that work of their effectual calling only
to the free grace and mercy of God. Do not thou being effectually called,
ascribe any thing to the goodness of thine own nature, and think with thy
self, I am of a better temper then others, and I have a better nature then
others, and the Lord saw some goodness in me above others, as some erroneous
spirits do hold: the Lord saw that I would use his grace offered to me well,
and therefore he has wrought on me by his word and Spirit. No, no, think thus
with thy self, as the truth is, I am no better then others by nature, there is
no more goodness in me by nature then in the vilest miscreant that lives on
the face of the earth, I lived once as others do that are yet in the state of
nature, I took as great pleasure in my sin as others now do in theirs, and I
ran as fast in the way to hell as they now run, and what has moved the
Lord thus to put a difference between me and others, as to call me
effectually, and to leave others still in their natural state and condition?
surely nothing in me, only his free grace and goodness: Oh then how am I
bound to magnify the free grace and mercy of God toward me, in working on me
effectually by his word and Spirit! Thus art thou to acknowledge and to
magnify the free grace of God, in regard of thy effectual calling: yea take
thou notice of it, thou being effectually called, and set out of the state of
nature into the state of grace, thou art still to acknowledge the free grace of
God in adding one measure of grace to another. Though thou be careful in using
grace given thee, and in the use of the means that serve for the increase of
it, yet know, the Lord adds one measure of grace to another freely, not
because thou art good, but because he is good and gracious; not for thy well
using of grace, or for the careful use of the means, though thou art bound so
to do, but still of his free grace: the Lord is still free in his working, and
in adding one measure of grace to another. The Spirit blows where he lists,
as the Lord Jesus says, comparing him to wind, Ioh. 3.8. he works freely where
he will, and when he will, and so far as it pleases him. And therefore thou
art to magnify the free grace of God, and the free working of his Spirit, in
adding one measure of grace to another.

Now another conclusion and point offered from hence, that the ground of
effectual calling is Gods eternal purpose, and his unchangeable decree
touching the salvation of his chosen, is this.

That effectual calling is unchangeable, Effectual calling is unchangeable.
is is according to I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me: where we see the Lord promises that he will so work on the
hearts of his, and set them so fast and firm in the state of grace, as they
shall never fall from it, but shall continue in that state for ever. Romans
11.29. the Apostle says, The gifts and calling of God are without repentance,
they are unchangeable. A plain text, we need no more for the proof of the
point in hand, it strongly confirms it, that effectual calling (for that is
the calling of God) is unchangeable, and cannot be altered, and the reasons and
grounds of it are these.

First, because God himself is unchangeable, and with him there is no
variableness, nor shadow by turning, Iam. 1.17. and therefore his calling is
unchangeable.

And secondly, because he is Almighty, and nothing can

Now then for use, first we may easily see that this truth makes Falling away
from effectual calling can never befall Gods children
that such as are to day in the state of grace, may to morrow be out of that
state, and that such as are effectually called and set into the way that leads
to life and salvation, may shake off their calling, and may fall quite from it,
and may run back again in the way that leads to hell; that is a flat
contradiction to the truth now delivered: yea it contradicts this, that Gods
eternal purpose is unchangeable, and that God abides constant in his purpose:
yea it is contrary to this, that God is constant in that promise of his before
alleged, Ierem. 32.40. that he will put his fear into their hearts, and they
shall not depart from him: and so it must needs be erroneous and false.

Comfort to such as find themselves effectually called.
Have thou good evidence of it, that thou art effectually called, that thou art
set out of the state of nature into the state of grace? Surely then thou art in
a more settled state then Adam was in his innocence, his state was then
changeable, and he might and did fall from it, but thy state is unchangeable.
And though indeed thy corrupt nature be changeable in it self, and if it were
left to it self, it would go back and would fall away, yet it is vpheld by
the power of God: thou can not have in thee a will to reject thy calling, thy
will is now confirmed to perseverance, and all the devils in hell are not able
by all their malice or might to bereave thee of thy effectual calling: thy
state is unchangeable, and that may be a great comfort to thee, and it may be
an evidence to thee (if thou desire evidence of it) that thou art in this
unchangeable state, in that the grace that is in thee is permanent and
continuing grace, it is not vanishing and fleeting, as it is in the wicked:
thou art not affected at the hearing of the word of God with joy or with
sorrow, according to the matter delivered, only in the time of hearing; thou
art not Sermon sick, as some are sea sick, sick at sea and well at shore, so
thou art not touched with the word only in the hearing of it, and when thou
come abroad into the air those good motions are gone: thou art not a
penitent in the Church and profane without, as wicked persons are, but thy
joy, and thy sorrow, thy love of God and of good things, thy delight in God and
in good things are constant and continuing. Surely that is an evidence unto
thee, that thou art in an unchangeable state, and that thou art set into such a
state of grace as is grounded on Gods eternal purpose, and cannot be altered.
And the consideration of that may yield thee sweet and heavenly comfort and
joy, yea such joy as Christ promises to his, Ioh. 16.22. Such joy as can never
be taken from thee. Think on that to thy comfort. Come we now to the 29. and
30. verses.

VERSE 29.30. For those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be made
like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren.

Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them
also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.


Our Apostle having in the verse foregoing delivered this ground of comfort,
that all things work together for the best to them that love God, even to them
that are called of his purpose, thereby to arm the believing Romans against
the bitterness of the cross, and to persuade them patiently to bear
afflictions; in these two verses he proceeds to prove that all things, even
afflictions, work for the best to those that are called according to Gods
eternal purpose, and that by two arguments. The first argument is laid down
verse 29. and it is taken from the immutabilitie and infallible certainty of
Gods eternal purpose, in regard of that which the Lord has set down in his
eternal purpose to bring his chosen to. And it stands thus, that God in his
eternal purpose has ordained his chosen to be conformable and to be made like
to the glorious image of his Son; and his purpose is unchangeable, and most
sure and certain, and it is impossible that God should be disappointed of this
intention and purpose of his, and therefore it must needs be that all things
work together for the best to them that love God, and are called of Gods
purpose.

The second argument is in verse 30. I will lay it forth when we come to the
handling of it.

Now in this verse for the general matter of it, the Apostle delivers first
this proposition: Those which God knew before, he predestinate them to be
conformable to his Son; wherein we have to consider the subject: Those which
he knew before: then that which is affirmed of them; that they were
predestinate, with the determination of the act of predestination, namely, to
be conformed and made like to the image of his Son.

Then secondly, he amplifies this proposition by adding a limitation of that
conformity, that those which God knew before, he predestined them to be made
like to the image of his Son, yet so as that his Son has and might have
the pre-eminence, as elder brother, or as first begotten, and that they might
not be equal to him in that conformity, in the last words of the verse, That
he might be the first borne among many brethren.

Interpretation.
Come we to the opening of the words: Those which he knew before. The word
before here signifies, before they had their being, yea before the foundation
of the world, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1.4. For foreknowledge is ascribed
to God, in respect of the creature properly. In respect of God there is nothing
past, nothing to come; all things past, and all things to come are present to
him. Now the Lord is said in the Scripture to foreknow things or persons two
ways.

David speaks, Psalm. 139.16. Thine eyes did see me when I was without form,
for in thy book were all things written, which in continuance were fashioned,
when there was none of them before.

The Lord knows who are his. The Lord from everlasting knows his with love
and with approbation. Romans 11.2. says the Apostle, Has God cast away his
people which he knew before? that is, which he before loved and approved; and
this foreknowledge of God is here meant. Those which he knew before, that is,
those which he did foreknowledge and embrace in his eternal love as his own,
and of his free love set apart to life and salvation, them he also
predestinate, or foreordained, or decreed beforehand. For to destinate, is to
appoint a thing to a certain end: and to predestinate is to appoint a thing to
such an end beforehand; and the Apostle here determines the end in the words
following. We shall not need further to explane the word predestinate, we shall
speak more of it in the verse following. To be made like or conformable to the
image of his Son. This likeness and this conformity to the image of Christ,
is not here to be referred either to the body of Christ, or soul of Christ,
neither is it in the essence of his divine nature, but it is a conformity in
divine qualities and graces, as the Apostle says, 2. Pet. 1.4. We are
partakers of the godly nature in flying the corruption which is in the world by
lust. This conformity to Christ, is partly in this life, and partly in the
life to come. In this life it is a conformity to the holy actions, and to the
holy sufferings of Christ, a living after the example of Christ, and a
suffering with Christ after the similitude of Christ, which the Apostle calls, A
partaking of Christ's sufferings, 1. Pet. 4.13. In the life to come it is a
likeness and conformity to Christ in the perfection of glory, as the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 15.49. We shall bear the image of the heavenly. And 1. Ioh.
3.2. When he shall appear we shall be like him: the meaning is in glory. That
he might be the first borne among many brethren. In these words the Apostle
speaks by way of similitude and allusion, and he alludes to the first borne,
spoken of in the old Testament. As the first borne in the old Testament did
excel, and did bear both the chief burden in the family, and had also the
chief honor in the family, as might be showed: so Christ has preferment and
pre-eminence among his brethren, both in holiness, in suffering, and also in
glory. And so the meaning of the Apostle is this: that he might be the first
borne, and have preferment, and pre-eminence among his brethren, both in
holiness, in suffering, and also in glory. Among many brethren: that is,
among the sons of God by adoption and grace, who in that regard are the
brethren of Christ, and are here said to be many, as they are considered by
themselves. Now then thus conceive we the meaning of the words of this verse,
as if the Apostle had said.

For those which the Lord did fore-acknowledge and embrace in his eternal love
as his own, and of his free love did set apart to life and salvation before
the foundation of the world, them did he also fore-ordaine, and aforehand
decree and fore-appoint to be made like and conformable to Christ his Son,
partly in this life, both in holy actions and also in holy sufferings, both in
living after the example of Christ, and also in suffering after the similitude
of Christ, and al^o in the life to come in eternal glory; yet so, as that
Christ his Son might be the first borne, and might have preferment and
pre-eminence both in holiness and suffering, and also in glory among those
that are the sons of God by adoption, who in that regard are his brethren,
and are many being considered by themselves.

Now first the Apostle here speaks of Gods foreknowledge, that is, of his
fore-knowledging of some, and his embracing of them in his eternal love as his
own before the foundation of the world, he gives us to understand thus much.

Gods loving of his to life and salvation does not begin with their conversion,
but was before they had a being in the world.
yea before the world was. And hence it is that the Scripture says not, that
in Christ sent into the world to work our redemption, the love of God toward
his chosen was first conceived, but that it was then manifested, Tit. 2.11. The
grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has appeared: and Tit. 3.4.
When the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. 2.
Tim. 1.9.10. says the Apostle, God has called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given to us through Christ Jesus before the world was, but is now made manifest
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and
has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. 1. Ioh. 4.9 In
this appeared the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. And so in many other
places of Scripture we find this truth euidenced and made good: that God does
not then begin to love his children, when they come to have their being in the
world, or come to be effectually called, but that he has loved them from
everlasting.

And the reason is, because they were present to him, Who has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world.

If any say, The Jews, says the Apostle, as concerning the Gospel are
enemies, but as touching election they are beloved for the fathers sakes. So
indeed Gods chosen being yet in their natural state and condition, are enemies
to God, and God is an enemy to them in respect of their corruption and sin,
sin being opposite to good, yea to God who is goodness it self: but they
are beloved of God as touching election: it is not their enimitie toward him
that can make him turn away his love from them in regard of election. Why but,
will some say, called, with that degree of love that is proper to the elect
uncalled: and when they are effectually called and justified, then they are
loved with a further degree of his love, even to an actual acceptance of
their persons, and of their good works, as pleasing to him in Christ. And so it
still remains a truth, that God does not then begin to love his children, when
they come to have their being in the world, or come to be effectually called,
but he has loved them from everlasting.

It is erroneous and false, that God loves not any sinner to life and
salvation, till he see his faith and repentance.
till he do see his faith and repentance: that cannot stand with the truth now
delivered.

Again, is it so that God does not then begin to love his children when they
come to have a being in the world, or come to be effectually called, but that
he has loved them from everlasting? Su^ely the consideration of this may be a
Comfort to as many as find and feel the love of God shed abroad in their
hearts.
they may thereupon assure themselves that the love of God shall never be taken
from them. Did God love thee from everlasting, yea when thou wast an enemy to
him, thy mind being set in evil works, as Colos. 1.21. and will his love now
fail thee, thou being reconciled to him by his Son through faith in his
blood? Did God love thee before thou knew of it, and will he now withdraw
his love from thee, having testified and manifested his love to thee in
special manner in thy effectual calling, and in setting his own stamp and
image on thee, and having now marked thee out for one of his own? It is not
possible. Though it may be so that for ye present the Lord may seem to hide
his face from thee, yet if ever thou have had any pledge of his special love
toward thee, comfort thy self, thou may be assured his love will never
forsake thee, his love is eternal, and he has loved thee from everlasting,
and having testified that love of his to thee in special manner, he will still
continue to love thee, and he will add one testimony of his love to another,
and one measure of love to another: and therefore build thou on it for a
certain truth, his love shall never fail thee, nor forsake thee: and that may
be a ground of sweet comfort to thee.

In the next place we are to mark that the Apostle places Gods foreknowledge
before predestination: and he says, Those which God knew before, he also
predestinate, that is, as we heard, those which God did fore-acknowledge, and
in his eternal love embrace as his own, and of his free love set apart to
life and salvation, them he also foreordained or fore-appointed to be made
conformable to Christ his Son. Whence we are given to understand thus much.

That the cause of Gods predestination to life and salvation The cause of Gods
predestination to life and salvation is only Gods fore-acknowledging of some,
and his free love to them.
and his free love to them. The Lord from everlasting, and before the
foundation of the world, foreordained, or fore-appointed some to be made
conformable to the glorious image of his Son, even to be like him in heavenly
glory, nothing moving him thereunto but his own good pleasure and his own
free love. And to this purpose that is a plain text, Ephesians. 1.5. God has
predestinate us (says the Apostle) to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, in himself, nothing
moving him thereunto out of himself, and according to the good pleasure of his
will. And verse 4. the Apostle says, God has chosen us in Christ before the
foundation of the world: and therefore not in our selves, or with respect had
to any thing in us. Yea he says further, that God has chosen his in Christ
before the foundation of the world, that they should be holy and without blame
before him in love. Where we see, the Apostle puts down holiness and
salvation as an effect of predestination, and as things following Gods eternal
election, therefore they cannot be the cause of it. And thus we find faith put
as an effect of Gods predestination to life and salvation, Act. 13.48. As many
as were ordained to eternal life believed. To the same purpose speaks the
Apostle, 1. Pet. 1.2.3. Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father
unto sanctification of the Spirit, through obedience and sprinckling of the
blood of Jesus Christ: not because of a lively hope, but unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. And Romans 9.11. the Apostle
says, that God chose Jacob before he was, or had done any thing, that election
might be according to Gods free purpose. And to these might be added other
testimonies euidencing thus much unto us, that the cause of Gods predestination
to life and salvation is only Gods free love, and that the Lord from
everlasting has foreordained some to be made conformable to his Son in
heavenly glory, nothing moving him thereunto but his own free love, and his
own good pleasure: for why,





Some erroneous opinions of Papists, Arminians, and Anabaptists confuted.
as first it conuinceth the Papists of error, in that they hold and teach, that
Gods predestination to life and salvation is on Gods foresight of man's faith
and good works. And likewise the Arminians and Anabaptists are hereby
convinced of error. The Arminians, in that they hold that God did fore-appoint
some to life and salvation on his foresight of their faith, and perseverance in
faith and holiness. The Anabaptists, in that they hold that God has
predestinate some to be saved on their receiving of Christ, or believing in
Christ, which is all one in effect with the opinion of the Arminians. These
opinions are all of them erroneous and false, and they cannot stand with the
truth now delivered: yea these opinions do all of them derogate from the
all-sufficiencie of God, and do make predestination to life and salvation
conditional; and they make Gods will which is the highest cause, to depend on
something inferior to it, and on something that does follow on it, and is the
effect of it, God so loved the world that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. 1. Ioh. 4.9. In this appeared the love of God toward us, because God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
But say the Papists, Christ is made the Author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him: and therefore say they, Gods eternal election is on the
condition of our obedience. The answer to this is easy. touching election or
predestination. Again, though none come to salvation unless they obey Christ,
yet our obedience is not the cause, nor so much as an instrument of our
salvation, but only a thing annexed and adjoined, and necessarily required in
all that shall be saved, and as a way wherein all true believers must walk to
salvation, as we have it, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in
them. And therefore doubtless notwithstanding these and other things objected
by adversaries of the truth, the point still remains a truth, that the cause
of Gods predestination to life and salvation is only Gods foreknowledge of
some, and his free love to them. And the opinions of Papists, of Arminians, and
of Anabaptists, that Gods foresight of faith, and good works of faith, and
perseverance in faith, and holiness, and receiving of Christ, or believing in
Christ, are the causes moving God to predestinate to life and salvation, they
are erroneous and false, and we are to renounce them.

Comfort to such as have good evidence of it that they belong to Gods election.
must take notice of this to their comfort, and they must know that as God has
loved them freely, and of his free love fore-appointed them to life and
salvation, so assuredly he will save them freely. Gods free love and his free
grace is the cause of all good things that come from God to them from
everlasting to everlasting. Their election is of grace, Romans 11.5. their
effectual calling is of grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. their faith is of grace, Philip.
1.29. their justification is freely of grace, Romans 3.24. and their salvation
shall be of grace, and of the free love of God, Romans 6.23. cause of their
salvation? It is true indeed, Note.
that in his fore-appointing thee to life and salvation, he did not respect the
merit of Christ as the cause of it. Indeed thou belonging to his election, he
will save thee in and through Christ, and for his sake, but when he did
fore-appoint thee to life and salvation, he did not respect the merit of Christ
as the cause of it, so free is his love to thee. And therefore when thou
feel weakness of grace in thy self, if it be true grace euidencing to
thee that thou belongest to Gods election, comfort thy self, and think thus
with thy self, Surely the Lord will not put me back from salvation because
the grace that is in me is but weak: no, no, he has loved me freely from
everlasting, yea so freely, as that in fore-appointing me to life and
salvation, he respected not the merit of Christ as the cause of it: and
therefore doubtless he will also freely save me without respect had to any
goodness in me as the cause of my salvation. And that may be a ground of
sweet comfort to thee when thou art troubled in regard of weakness of grace
in thine own soul.

Come we now to the determination of the act of Gods predestination here put
down by the Apostle, namely this, conformity to the image of his Son. Those
which God knew before he predestined them (says the Apostle) to be made like
to the image of his Son: that is, (as we showed) to be made conformable and
like to Christ his Son, partly in this life, both in holy actions and in holy
sufferings, both in living according to the example of Christ, and in suffering
after the similitude of Christ; and in the life to come, in full and perfect
glory.

Now the point hence offered in the first place is easily gathered: it is this.

God has appointed his chosen to be like to his own Son in holiness.
Those whom God has fore-appointed and foreordained to be like to his Son
in heavenly glory, he has also appointed to be like to his Son in a measure
of true holiness, both inward and outward, both in their hearts and lives; and
all that shall be like to Christ in glory, they must by the Lords
fore-appointment be first like to him in a measure of true holiness. And hence
it is that we are often exhorted and stirred up in the Scripture to be like to
Christ, and to imitate him in holiness, as Philip. 2.5.6. says the Apostle,
Let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus. As if he had said,
Be ye humble and lowly minded as Christ the Son of God was. And it is the
exhortation of Christ himself, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, that I am meek and
lowly in heart: be ye like to me in meekness and lowliness. And he tells his
disciples, Ioh. 13.14.15. that if he their Lord and Master had washed their
feet, so ought they to wash one another feet, and to be serviceable one to
another in the duties of love, and that in the meanest and basest office, to
the washing of the feet one of another: and he subioynes, For I have given you
an example, that ye should do even as I have done to you. And thus we find that
we are stirred up to forgive our brethren, having matter of quarrel and of
just complaint against them for some injury offered or done by them, as Christ
has forgiven us. Coloss. 3.13. Forgiving one another if any have a quarrel to
another; even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. I might instance in many
other particulars wherein we are stirred up to be like to Christ, and to be
conformed to the image of Christ, and to imitate him in holiness. Wherein we
are not to imitate Christ.
Indeed we are dot to imitate Christ in the works proper to his Godhead, as in
working miracles, and the like, nor in the works of his mediation, as in the
work of redemption, and in satisfying for sin, and such like: but in the
works of godliness, Wherein we are to imitate him.
sanctification and holiness, therein we are stirred up to imitate Christ, and
to be like to him; yea therein we are to labor to resemble him as much as is
possible, yea to be pure as he is pure, as says S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.3. Every
one that has this hope: as if he had said, Every one that hopes and looks,
on good ground, to be like to Christ in glory, must labor to be like to him
in holiness and purity: whereby Saint John confirms the truth of the point
in hand, that those whom God has fore-appointed to be like to his Son in
heavenly glory, he has also appointed them to be like to his Son in a
measure of true holiness; and they must in their measure be pure as he is
pure, and holy as he is holy, before they come to be like to him in glory. And
the reasons of it are these.

First, as the Lord has appointed his chosen to end their

Again, such as come to be partakers of Christ his glory

Now for the use of this, let us take notice of this truth, and on this ground
learn to take heed we deceive not our selves. They deceive themselves who
think they shall go to heaven, and yet re not like to Christ in the least
measure of holiness.
Thousands in the world have this conceit, that they shall go to heaven, and
that they shall partake with Christ in glory, and yet they are not like to
Christ in the least measure of holiness; they are filthy, and they are openly
profane, their hearts and lives are soyled with many foul and abominable
sins, and they bear the express image of the devil, and they are like to
him: poor souls they deceive themselves. And take thou heed of this deceiving
thy self, whosoever thou art, Art thou one that have no dram of holiness in
thee? Art thou filthy and profane? Yea is it so with thee that whatsoever is
holy thou do hate and loath it, and thou can not abide it, no not in
others? Do thou belch out thy venom against others who desire and endeavor
to be holy? And do thou say they will be hanged, and they will all go to the
devil? Surely thy case is fearful, and it seals up to thee this fearful
conclusion, that thou art not only a child of wrath, as all are by nature, but
that thou art a child of perdition, and that God never appointed thee to be
like to Christ in the glory of heaven. Do thou live as a limb of the
devil, and beat the express image of the devil, and do thou think that
thou shall be like to Christ in glory? Do thou think that thy body which
thou make an instrument of whoredom, of drunkenness, and set out in
pride and vanity, shall be made like to the glorious body of the Lord Jesus?
No, no, if grace to amend thy life be not granted to thee, assuredly God never
appointed thee to life and salvation. Thou must be like to Christ the Son of
God in holiness, or else never look thou to be like him in glory: yea know
it for a certain truth, thou must be more then ciuilly honest. Dare any man
say that Christ was no more but ciuilly honest? if he do, he blasphemes. And
therefore think not that thy civil honesty will carry thee up to heaven,
and that thou being only ciuilly honest shall one day be like to Christ in
glory: no, no, thou must in some measure be pure as Christ is pure, and holy
as he is holy, or else never look thou to come where he is to the glory of
heaven: and so for a second use.

excellent thing is conformity to Christ in a measure of true holiness? Why,
surely it is so precious and so excellent, What a precious thing true holiness
is.
as it makes a man or woman able to read their own names written in heaven,
which may yield them matter of rejoicing, as Christ tells us, Luke 10.20. Let
then the world mock and scoff at holiness and purity, but let us make
precious account of it, and esteem it better worth then all things in the
world, and labor after it: true holiness and conformity to Christ will make
us able to see our selves in the number of those whom God has from everlasting
appointed to be like to his own Son in heavenly glory; and finding it in
our selves, it will give ^s matter of joy unspeakable and glorious, as 1. Pet.
1.8. and therefore let us make precious reckoning of it, and labor for it
above all things in the world: and so I pass from that.

Now in the second place, in that the Apostle says, those which God knew
before, he predestined them to be made like to the image of his Son, that
is, as before we showed, in this life, like to him in holy actions, and in holy
sufferings, we may further gather this point.

That those whom God has before appointed to be like to his Son in heavenly
glory, All that shall partake with Christ in glory must also be partakers of
his sufferings.
he has also appointed them to be like to his Son in a measure of suffering.
All that shall partake with Christ in glory, they must also be partakers of
his sufferings, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 4.13. and they must drink of
the cup that Christ drank of, as he told the sons of Zebedeus, James and
John, Mar. 10.39. Mat. 16.24. the Lord Jesus says, If any will follow me, let
him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Acts 14.22. Paul
and Barnabas exhorted the disciples to continue in the faith, affirming that
through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. And to this
purpose we might bring many other testimonies c^^^irming this truth, that all
that shall partake with Christ in glory, they must also partake with him in
suffering: and there is reason for it.

The cross and suffering was the way by which Christ himself was to go to his
glory in heaven, as he says, 26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and to enter into his glory? and he was necessarily bound, first to
suffer, and then to enter into his glory; and therefore doubtless the members
of Christ must be like and conformable to Christ their head, and they must go
to glory in heaven by the same way that he has gone before them: and
whosoever looks to partake with Christ in glory, must first look to partake
with him in a measure of suffering.

They are deceived who think they shall go to heaven without trials, crosses,
and afflictions.
we must make reckoning of the cross, and make account to meet with
afflictions in the way to heaven, and we must go by the cross to the crown of
life and glory in heaven. And if we look to wear the crown of glory with
Christ in heaven, we must in one kind or other wear the crown of thorns with
him, and suffer with him here on earth.

Comfort to Gods children that they are conformable to Christ in their
sufferings.
and that therein they are like the Son of God, as one says well, God has
many sons, and one only Son without sin, yet was not that Son without
the cross. The Son of God came into the world and lived in the world without
sin, but he got not out of the world without the cross: and shall we then
who are sinful think much of the cross, we are herein no otherwise dealt
withal then the Lord dealt with his own Son, we are herein like to the
Son of God: and the consideration of that may cheer up our hearts, and yield
us much comfort. Art thou then who art a child of God poor? remember Christ
was so, he had not whereon to rest his head. Do men deal despitefully with
thee? call to mind how the Lord Jesus was dealt withal, how he was reviled,
mocked, buffeted, spit on, and many ways hardly dealt withal. Art thou
troubled in mind and conscience? consider that the soul of the Lord Jesus was
heavy to the death. And so in all thy trials and afflictions, thou suffering
them with patience, and bearing them as they ought to be borne, remember that
thou art therein conformable to Christ the Son of God, and like to him, and
that may minister matter of great comfort to thee. For assuredly, as thou art
like to the Son of God in suffering, so shall thou one day be like to him in
the glory of heaven: and that may be a matter of great comfort to thee.

There is yet something further to be gathered from these words, To be made
like to the image of his Son. It is not to be passed by without observation,
that the Apostle says, those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be
made like to the image of his Son, or conformable to Christ his Son, that is,
in this life in holiness, and also in suffering: we are to mark it, The
Apostle says not, Note.
equal to the image of Christ the Son of God, but like to his image, both in
holiness and in suffering: whence we might stand to show, that the conformity
of Gods children to Christ in holiness in this life, is not in full and
absolute perfection, equal to the holiness of Christ, but it is only in
similitude and likeness, they are truly pure as Christ is pure, and they are
truly holy as Christ, in some measure, not in full perfection: but I pass by
that, we have had occasion often to speak of it, and only note we hence thus
much.

That howsoever Gods children are like to Christ the The sufferings of Gods
children though they be exceeding sharp, bitter, and painful, yet are they
not equal to the sufferings of Christ.
and they must be like to him in suffering in this world, yet they are are not
equal to him in suffering. The sufferings of Gods children though they be
exceeding sharp, and bitter, and pain^ull, yet are they not equal to the
sufferings of Christ: all the pains that Gods children endure, be they never
so grievous, are but as a dram in respect of the infinite weight of pain that
Christ endured: and for this we have further plain testimony of Scripture.
Isai. 53.5. 6.7. the Prophet tells us, that Christ was wounded, and broken, and
that the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all, even that which the sins
of all Gods chosen had deserved: yea he says verse 10. That the Lord would
break him: and we find that the Evangelists set out the greatness and
bitterness of Christ his sufferings by many weighty circumstances, as that he
was sorrowful and grievously troubled, That his soul was heavy even unto
death, Math. 26.37.38. That his cries were strong, and that he fell on his face
and prayed, O Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, verse 39.
That his agony was so great, That blood for sweat burst out of his body, and
that an Angel was sent to comfort him, Luke 22.43.44. That his complaint on
the cross was, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! Math. 27.46. All
which do make plain, that Christ endured more grievous pains then ever did
any. And that the sufferings of Gods children, though they be martyred, and
though their sufferings be exceeding sharp and bitter, yet are they not equal
to the sufferings of Christ. And there be reasons to lead us thus to conceive,
as first this.

He was made a curse for us: but from the afflictions and sufferings of Gods
children, the venom and bitterness of the curfe is removed and taken away, in
that Christ was made a curse for them.

He will not always be wroth, for the Spirit should fail before him, and he
has made the breath, and he does proportion them to the end of their
afflictions. Now we must needs grant that Christ his strengrh did far exceed
the strength of any child of God, yea of all Gods children, he being God and
man in one person, and the end of his suffering was satisfaction for sin, as
we have it in the place before cited, Isai. 53.5. He was wounded for our
transgressious, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed: but the end of the sufferings
of Gods children is only correction, or trial, or witnesse-bearing to the
truth of God, and such like. And therefore doubtless howsoever Gods children
are like to Christ the Son of God, and they must be like to him in suffering,
yet are they not equal with him in suffering; and though their sufferings be
exceeding sharp and bitter, yet are they not equal or comparable to the
sufferings of Christ. And for use.

First on this ground of truth, let every child of God learn When a child of
God is in any affliction he is then to consider what Christ has suffered for
him.
When thou find a little torment, and a little pain in the least part of
thy body exceeding bitter, and sharp, and painful, oh consider then with thy
self what bitterness was in the whole sufferings of Christ: Christ drunk the
full cup of the bitterness of Gods wrath, and thou do but only sip and
taste of it, ot rather indeed not so much as taste of it; the cup is sugared and
sweetened to thee by the bitter sufferings of Christ. Do thou feel the pain
of the gout, stone, toothache, or the like grinding and griping pain to be so
grievous to thee, as to be eased of that pain thou could with all thine
heart wish thy self out of the world? let that pain lead thee to consider
the infinite pain and torment of Christ his sufferings, and what he has
suffered for thee and for thy redemption, let it lead thee to consider of thy
sins, that were the cause of the sufferings of Christ. When thou lie under
any grievous pain and torment, think thus with thy self: Surely that which I
endure or can endure is nothing to that which the Lord Jesus endured, and that
for my sins, and thereby be stirred up to take heed of sin and to avoid it:
think thus with thy self, shall I by my sins pierce Christ his sides
again, for indeed by those sins thou do as much as in thee is, put new
passions on the Lord Jesus, and pierce his sides again, and even add torments
to him that shed his blood for thee, and suffered the extremity of Gods wrath
for thee, and that is most vile and monstrous. When therefore thou art under
any grievous pain, let it lead thee to remember the bitter passion of the
Lord Jesus, and withal remember that thy sins were some cause of the
bitterness of his painful passion, yea that by thy sins thou do as it
were put new passions on him, and let that teach thee to make conscience of
every sin, both in thought, word, and deed.

The fault of those who in time of great affliction break out and say, never
any suffered that which they endure, discovered.
yet are they not equal to the sufferings of Christ? Surely then the
consideration of this may check that thought that sometimes arises in the
hearts of some in the time of their great afflictions: sometimes it breaks
out of their mouths, never was any in like case that they are in, never was
any so grievously afflicted as they are; it is thus sometimes with Gods own
children. The Church, Lamen. 1.12. cries out, Behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow. Now if such a thought arise in thine heart in the
time of thy great and grievous afflictions, learn to check it by calling to
mind the bitter passion of the Lord Jesus, and remember that the pain thou
endurest is but as a dram in comparison of the infinite weight of pain that
Christ endured, Abraham, Job, Daniel, David, and others whose sufferings the
holy Ghost makes exemplarie, were far more grievously afflicted then thou
art, they were endued with greater strength to bear afflictions then thou art,
and therefore doubtless their prayers and afflictions were greater then thine,
and thou art not tried like one of them. And therefore lay aside such
reasonings, they are but reasonings of the flesh, they are but thoughts arising
from thine own corruption, when thou think that never was any so afflicted,
or so tormented as thou art, and learn to cast them out of thine heart.

There is yet one thing further offered from these words: Made like to the
image of his Son. In that the Apostle says, Those which God knew before, he
also predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son: the words being
understood as before we have showed, we are further given to understand thus
much.

That Gods chosen shall one day be conformed and made Gods chosen shall one day
be made like the Lord Jesus in heavenly glory.
they shall one day, namely at the day of judgment, in their measure, be
glorious as Christ is glorious, in their bodies, and in their souls: their
bodies shall then shine in brightness and glory, like to the glorious body of
Christ, and their souls shall then be invested with glory like the blessed
soul of Christ. Philip. 3.21. the Apostle speaking of himself, and of other
true believers says, Christ shall one day change our vile body, and fashion
it like to his glorious body. And Revel. 19.8. it is said, the bride, that is,
the Church, shall be arrayed with pure fine linen, and shining, she shall have
a most pure and glorious vesture put on her. Math. 13.43. Christ himself
says, that at the end, The just shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of
their Father. Colos. 3.4. the Apostle says, When Christ which is our life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. And 1. John 3.2.
We know (says Saint John) that when he shall appear, we shall be like him.
All these testimonies do evidence and confirm this truth, that Gods chosen
shall one day, namely at the day of judgment, be made like to the Lord Jesus
in heavenly glory, and shall then be glorious as Christ is glorious, in their
bodies and in their souls. Father I will that they which thou have given me be
with me, even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me. It is his will that all his members should be with him where he is, and be
partakers of his glory. If any ask what that glory shall be, I must answer:
If I had the tongue of men and Angels I am not able to express it: the Apostle
expresses it in very weighty but yet in general terms, 2. Cor. 4.17. A most
excellent and an eternal weight of glory. And for the use briefly.

Comfort to as many as find themselves in the number of Gods chosen.
no sooner shall Christ appear from heaven in his glory, but they shall also
be made most glorious, even like to Christ in glory both in their bodies and
in their souls. What though it be so then that thou who art a child of God,
art now contemned and despised in the world, and thou art held base in the
world, and the proud rufflers of the world look big on thee, and hold thee
not worthy to bear their shoes? Care not for it, remember this to thy
comfort, a day will come when thou shall be honored before men and Angels, and
shall be made like to the Lord Jesus in heavenly glory, and in heaven be
glorious as he is glorious, in thy body and in thy soul. Yea know it for a
certain truth, it is as possible that Christ himself should not be glorious,
as that thou should not be like him in glory at his appearance: and what an
excellent comfort may that be to thee?

They who find themselves in the number of Gods children ought earnestly to
desire the coming of Christ to judgment
Surely the consideration ought to stir them up to desire that the Lord Jesus
would now break the heavens, and that they might now see him coming in the
clouds. No sooner shall he appear in his glory, but they shall be like him in
glory, in their bodies and in their souls. Indeed if the glory we look for
(we being the children of God) were either uncertain, or certain glory, but
small, it might be but a small inducement to long after it, but seeing it is as
sure that we shall be glorious in our bodies and in our souls, as Christ the
God of glory is glorious, how shall not this quicken and stir up our hearts,
and fill our hearts with an earnest longing for the appearance of the Lord
Jesus.

Come we now to the second general thing laid before us in this verse,
namely, the limitation of the conformity to the image of Christ the Son of
God, in the last words of the verse: That he might be the first borne among
many brethren. The meaning of which words I showed before to be this; that
those which God knew before, he also predestinate, to be made like to the image
of his Son, in holiness, in suffering, and in full and perfect heavenly
glory: yet so, as that Christ his Son might be as the first borne, and might
have preferment and pre-eminence in holiness and in suffering, and also in
glory among those that are the sons of God by adoption, who in that regard
are his brethren, and are many being considered by themselves. Now in that the
Apostle gives to Christ the Son of God prioritie, preferment, and
pre-eminence, in holiness, in suffering, and in the glory of heaven: and
says, he is as the first borne among many brethren, we may easily see.

That Christ Jesus the Son of God is to be preferred in Christ Jesus is to be
preferred before all his members in honor and dignity.
both in heaven and in earth, and he is to have pre-eminence above them in all
things, as the Apostle says in express terms, Coloss. 1.18. He is the head
of the body of the Church, he is the beginning and the first borne of the
dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence: for indeed, in him
dwells all fullness, as the Apostle there subioynes, verse 19. both the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, as we have it, Col. 2.9. and the fullness of grace and
truth, as it is, Ioh. 1.14. And as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.20.21. He is
exalted to the right hand of God in heaven, and set far above all
principality, and power, and might, and domination, and every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come. The Lord
Jesus as man is exalted above every creature in heaven and earth: his manhood
being personally united to his Godhead, it is fit that he should have the
prerogative and pre-eminence above all things; and therefore he is to be
preferred in honor and dignity before all his members both in heaven and
earth, and to have pre-eminence above them in all things, which I note in a
word: and for the use.

Who they be that teach true and sound doctrine touching the Lord Jesus. 1.
Cor. 1.24. 1. Cor. 2.2.
namely, those who in their doctrine give Christ his due honor, and give him
pre-eminence in all things. The whole doctrine of the Apostle Paul runs on
Christ, and is as a goodly building set on Christ the foundation, as himself
speaks, 1. Corinthians. 3.11. And no man more advanced the glory of Christ then
he did. 1. Corinthians. 1.24. We preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom
of God. And Chap 2.2. I esteemed to know nothing among you save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. And almost in every line of his Epistles he runs on the
name of Christ, and on the advancement of his glory. And doubtless they teach
Christ truly and soundly, who thus in their doctrine give him his due honor.
And it is a special note by which we may discern who they be that expound the
writings of the Apostles aright, and derive doctrines from thence agreeable to
the meaning of the holy Ghost, namely, they who with the Apostle preach Christ
with all due respect of his glory in the work of redemption and salvation,
and without any impeachmennt or derogation from him, in regard of his Kingly,
Priestly, and Prophetical office, and they that teach Christ in all things to
have pre-eminence. And if by this note we examine the doctrine of Popery, it
will easily be found to be rotten and unsound. How do they impeach the honor
of Christ, and rob him of his glory, and derogate from him in regard of his
Kingly, Priestly, and Protheticall office? I might show it in diverse
particulars: to instance but in one; what a monstrous derogation is it to the
honor of Christ, in that they equalize the Saints departed with him, and make
them their mediators between God and themselves, yea they blasphemously call
the virgin Marie Mediatrix, the mother of grace and fountain of mercy, and
say, that she is placed in the throne with God the Father, and that she may
command Christ her Son. Thus monstrous and blasphemous are they in their
doctrine: and thus do they grossly derogate from the glory of Christ, now
advanced to the highest heavens, and preferred in glory above all his members.
And therefore their doctrine is unsound, erroneous, and damnable., and we are
so to hold it, and to renounce it.

Now further, in that the Apostle here says, that Christ the Son of God is
as the first borne among many brethren, that is, among those that are the
sons of God by adoption, who are many being considered by themselves, we are
given to understand thus much.

That all true believers, all such as truly believe in Christ, All true
believers are brethren to Christ.
and there is that relation between Christ and all true believers, that there
is between the elder brother or first borne brother, and the younger brethren.
Christ is the first borne or elder brother, and all true believers are as
younger brethren to him. And this Christ himself affirms, Ioh. 20.17. Ioh.
20.17.
says he to Marie, Go to my brethren, and say to them I ascend to my Father
and to your Father, and to my God and to your God. And Matthew. 12.49.^0. when
one told Christ that his mother and his brethren stood without desiring to
speak with him, the text says, He stretched forth his hand toward his
disciples and said, Behold my mother and my brethren, for whosoever shall do my
Fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my brother, my sister, and mother.
As if he had said, Whosoever they be that truly believe in me, and show forth
the power of their faith in holy obedience to the will of my Father, they are
my brethren, and sisters, and mother. And we find, Mat. 25.40. it is said, that
Christ shall say at the day of judgment to them on his right hand, In as much
as they did good to the least of his brethren, they did it to him: accounting
true believers to whom any good is done, as his brethren. And Hebr. 2.11. it is
said, He is not ashamed to call them brethren. And Psalm. 22.22. it is thus
prophesied and foretold of Christ, I will declare thy name to my brethren. It
is a clear point often made known to us in the Scripture, that all true
believers are brethren to Christ, and that there is that near relation
between Christ and all true believers, that there is between the elder
brother and the younger brethren. But yet know, that we mistake stake not the
matter, that the brotherhood that is between Christ and tine believers is not
carnal, it is not in regard of the flesh: though the Son of God took flesh
on him, and affirmed our nature into unity of person with his Godhead, and in
that respect became like to us in all things, sin only excepted, yet is it
not in respect of flesh and blood that true believers are brethren to Christ,
for then were every man in the world brother to Christ, but the brotherhood
that is between Christ and true believers is a spiritual brotherhood: and the
ground of it What the brotherhood between Christ and true believers is, and
the ground of it.
is the spiritual union with Christ, and new birth, in that true believers are
united to Christ by the bond of the same Spirit, and in that they are borne of
God, as 1. Ioh. 4.1. in that they are begotten again by the immortal seed of
the word, and by the work of the holy Spirit of God, as we have it, Ioh.
1.12.13. As many as received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name, which are borne, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: and in that respect
are true believers brethren to Christ, and there is that near relation
between Christ and al true believers, that there is between the elder brother
and the younger brethren.

True believers are to take notice of their honor and dignity.
his honor is exceeding great: in that he is a true believer he is brother to
the Son of God the great Lord of heaven and earth, which is a greater honor
to him then if he were brother to the greatest Monarch in the world. And take
thou notice of it, thou that art a true believer, learn thou to stand on thine
honor, and shrink not from it for any disgrace that can be cast on thee in
the world: for indeed it is the fault of some that would be held to be true
believers and of the brotherhood of Christ, to pull back and to shrink when
it is said to them in derision, you are one of the brotherhood. Oh consider
with thy self, if thou be an holy brother indeed, the Lord Jesus, the great
Lord of heaven and earth is thine elder brother, and thou art brother to him,
and thou have no cause to be ashamed of thy brotherhood: no, no, thou have
cause to boast of it with an holy boasting, and to profess it openly to the
face of the proudest, that thou art one of them that they in scorn and
derision call holy brethren, and that in that respect thou have the Lord Jesus
for thine elder brother; and withal remember the words of Christ himself,
Mark. 8.38. If thou be ashamed of him and of his words, even to be accounted a
professor of the name and Gospel of Christ, and that in the midst of the
rout of the wicked and profane, he will be ashamed of thee when he comes in
the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

Again, for a second use: is it so that all true believers are Terror to such
as offer the least wrong, indignity, or disgrace to any true believer.
How dare thou mock and scoff, or any way abuse the poorest member of
Christ? Consider with thy self, he has a brother that will take his part, and
he is one able to right his wrong. We know that natural brethren though they
sometimes jar among themselves, yet they will take one another part against
a common enemy, so that wrong one and wrong all: and do thou think that the
Lord Jesus will not take the part of his brethren whom he loves dearly, and
that with an everlasting love? Yes assuredly he will, and therefore do thou
wrong any true believer, yea do to turn his glory into shame? as David
speaks, Psalm. 4.2. Do thou cast that on him as a disgrace, which indeed is
his greatest honor, that he is an holy brother, and one of the holy
brotherhood? Assure thy self, the Lord Jesus his elder brother takes notice of
it, and he will not suffer it, he will one day (if thou persist in thy wicked
course) bring shame on thee, and cover thy face with shame before men and
Angels, and will bring utter confusion on thy soul. And therefore be warned to
take heed how thou do offer the least wrong or the least disgrace to any true
believer.

Last of all: is it so that all true believers are brethren to Christ, and
there is that relation between him and them, Comfort for poor despised and
distressed members of Christ.
that there is between the elder brother and the younger brethren? Then here is
matter of great comfort for thee that art a poor despised and distressed child
of God, cheer up thy self in this, thou art brother to the Son of God the
Lord Jesus, and assure thy self he will acknowledge thee so to be, even his
dear beloved brother in thy greatest distress. It is not thy affliction that
can divide between him and thee, and make him hide his face from thee, he will
not be ashamed to call thee brother when thou art plonged into the deepest
distress. He is not like the proud people of the world, who will know one in a
gay coat and high place, but in baseness and poverty will not vouchsafe to
look on him, though he be near to them in blood and kindred, yea their own
brother. It is not so with the Lord Jesus, when thou art in the poorest plight,
when thy back is bare for want of clothing, thy face lean and quite altered
with brinish tears that have made furrows in it, when thou hangest down thy
head, yea when all thy bones are disiointed by the racking tortures of the
cruel tormentors; then will the Lord Jesus know thee, and graciously
acknowledge thee for his dear beloved brother, and deal with thee as a kind
and loving brother, even every way do thee good, yea do thee good to thine
everlasting comfort: and that may be a matter of great comfort to thee.

There be yet some things further offered from these words, That he might be
the first borne among many brethren. And in the next place, in that such as are
the sons of God by adoption, are here styled by the name of brethren, we may
easily see, that this is a title that belongs to all true believers, that they
are brethren: and the point hence further offered is this.

All true believers are brethren.
All that truly believe in Christ are in as near relation one to another as
natural brethren: they are not only brethren to Christ, but they are also
brethren one to another. So says Christ himself, Matthew. 23.8. speaking to his
disciples, says he, All ye are brethren. And it is an usual thing with the
Apostles in their writings to style true believers by the name and title of
brethren. Romans 1.13. Now my brethren, I would that ye should not be ignorant.
And Chap. 7.1. Know ye not brethren. Chap. 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire,
etc. And so in many places of his Epistles. Coloss. 4.15. says the Apostle,
Salute the brethren which are of Laodicea. It were easy to add many other
places where true believers are styled by the name and title of brethren,
plainly showing that they are as brethren one to another, and are in as near
relation one to another as natural brethren, yea true believers stand in a
more near relation one to another then natural brethren do: for why, the
reason and ground of it is this.

They are knit together into one body by the bond of the Spirit, as the
Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one
body. By the Spirit men are more nearly conjoined then they are or can be by
nature; by the Spirit they are made members of one mystical body, yea members
one of another, as the Apostle says in express words, Romans 12.5. We being
many are one body in Christ, and every one one another members. And
therefore doubtless all true believers are as brethren one to another, and in
as near relation one to another as brethren, or rather indeed in a nearer
relation one to another then natural brethren.

And for the use, first on this ground of truth, all true believers All true
believers must be affected one to another as brethren.
even to love one another heartily and mutually, for so do natural brethren,
unless they degenerate and grow out of kind. And so it was ever held odious
amongst the very heathen, and a growing out of kind for men in nature nearely
conjoined, to be far disioyned one from another in affection: and much more
odious is it for such as are conjoined by the bond of the same Spirit to be
disioyned one from another in inward affection of the heart. It is an usual
thing in the Scripture to urge and press love under the name and title of
brethren. Abraham used it as an argument to quiet matters, and to end all
strife between him and Lot, Genesis 13.8. I pray thee let there be no strife
between me and thee, neither between mine heardmen and thine heardmen, for we
are brethren. Moses used no other argument to accord two Hebrews that were at
discord, as we have it, Act. 7.26. Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one
another? And it is the exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 12.10. Be affectioned
to love one another with brotherly love. And 1. Pet. 3.8. Love as brethren. And
it is worthy our marking that we find, Genesis 37. when Joseph's brethren forgot
him to be their brother, or at least did not so consider him, Genesis 37.19 20
they said, Behold this dreamer comes, come therefore let us slay him, and
cast him into some pit, verse 19.20. but when they consider him as their
brother, then they think of a more mild and gentle course, and they say, Come
and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hands be upon him, for
he is our brother and our flesh, verse 27. Verse 27.
Let then this lesson so often urged and pressed in the Scripture, be learned
by all of us that profess our selves true believers, A needful lesson to be
learned of all true believers.
in that respect we are brethren; and let us learn to be affected one to
another, and to love one another as brethren: yea let all of us that profess
fellowship and communion of the Spirit, consider yt we have one God to our
Father, one Church to our mother, Christ our elder brother, and yt we are
begotten of the same immortal seed, nourished with the same milk of the word,
drink of the same cup, eat of the same bread in the Sacrament, and that we all
look for the same blessed inheritance, and therefore ought to be knit together
in the bond of love. Yea remember we that brotherly love is the badge and
cognizance of Christ his disciples, Ioh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that
ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. Yea consider we that
brotherly love is a thing not only taught by precept, but also inwardly taught
and implanted in the hearts of all that are partakers of the Spirit of God.
Mark what the Apostle says, 1. These. 4.9. Touching brotherly love ye need not
that I write unto you, why so? for ye are taught of God to love one another. As
if he had said, as natural brethren (not degenerate and becoming unnatural)
are taught by nature to love one another, so you to whom God has given his
holy Spirit, are taught by the Spirit of God to love one another. Whence we may
reason thus with our selves: If brotherly love be a lesson taught by the Spirit
of God, who then is the teacher of deadly hatred? who puts into any man or
woman swelling and heart-burning against their brerhren? are these lessons
taught of Gods Spirit? No, no, he is the God of peace and love, and these are
the teachings of another spirit, even of that spirit who is the author of
confusion, and sower of dissension among brethren: these are the teachings of
the devil himself, and take we heed of them, yea take thou heed whosoever
thou art, that thy heart be not estranged and drawn away in the affections of
it from others in whom thou may discern the image of God, and the true fear
of God, because they differ from thee in judgment and opinion touching matters
of circumstance and Church-gouemment; and let not thine heart vent out the
malice of it in bitter words against such persons. How dare thou professing
the true fear of God, prefer a Preacher that in his teaching derogates from
the infinite merit of Christ his death, his suffering being of infinite merit,
because the person that suffered was both God and man, when it is said that the
Church was purchased with the blood of God, Acts 20.28? how dare thou
prefer such a Preacher before one who is sound and faithful in his teaching,
because happily he tells thee, and offers to make it good, that in the four
Evangelists there is not a word of Church-gouernment? Surely thy hard censuring
of such a man is either out of thy weakness of judgment, or out of the
malice of thine heart, or from both; and it is thy sin, and take thou notice
of it, and learn to be reformed, and labor thou to be knit to all that truly
fear God, and bear the image of God in a measure of true holiness, in the
true love and affection of thine heart, though they differ from thee in
judgment in matters circumstantiall. And if thou have not learned this lesson,
surely thou art not taught of the Spirit of God.

Again, is it so that all true believers are as brethren, and are in as near
relation, and rather nearer then natural brethren? Surely then they must be
affected with the miseries one of another as brethren: True believers must be
affected with the miseries one of another as brethren.
and when we that profess our selves true believers, either see or hear of
the troubles and afflictions of the Church and people of God, though they be
far from us, we must be touched with a feeling of them, as the afflictions of
our brethren. Heb. 13.1. says the author of that Epistle, Let brotherly love
continue: and then he subioynes verse 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as
though ye were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as if ye were
also afflicted in the body. Thus are we to do, even when our state is
prosperous, then are we to be touched with a feeling of the afflictions and
miseries of the people of God. Excellent and memorable is the example of
Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.4. though he for his part was in health, and high place, and
in great favor with the King, yet when he heard of the afflictions and
distress of Jerusalem, the text says, He sat down and wept, mourned
certain days, and he fasted and prayed before the God of heaven. And if we be
not thus affected with the troubles and afflictions of the Church and people of
God, it is a sign we are not of the same brotherhood with them: let it be
thought on.

One thing remains yet to be noted: the Apostle here says, Christ the Son
of God is the first borne among many brethren: whence note we.

That the brethren of Christ, namely, true believers, and the The number is
great of such as shall be saved. 1. King. 19.18
and they are many thousands, yea many millions that shall go to heaven. The
answer of God to Eliah when he complained that he was left alone, recorded by
the Apostle, Romans 11.4. was, that he had reserved unto himself seven thousand
which had not bowed the knee to Baall. Revel. 7.4. we read that the number of
them that were sealed of the tribes of the children of Israel was an hundred
and four and forty thousand. And verse 9. John says, He beheld, and lo a
great multitude which no man could number of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb clothed with
long white robes, and palms in their hands.

they are many that shall be saved, is, because it makes much for the glory of
God, and for the magnifying and setting out of the greatness of Gods mercy.

Objection. Christ says, Matthew. 7.14. The gate is strait, and the way narrow
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it: how then is that true,
that the brethren of Christ, namely, true believers, and the adopted sons and
daughters of God, are many, and the number of such as shall be saved is great,
and they are many thousands, yea many millions of thousands that shall go to
heaven?

The answer is. Christ here speaks comparatively,

But some may say,

No, it is his wonderful mercy that any one is saved,

And for the use, let this be a ground of comfort to us, Comfort to us when we
see times of distress, and havoc of the Church, and when idolatry and open
propnanenesse, and bloody persecutions do ouerspread all.
let us not then think that Gods Church is quite ouer-turned and come to utter
ruin. No, no, let us know to our comfort, that in that confusion the Lord has
many thousands that belong to him, and do truly believe in Christ, and truly
fear the Lords and the Church of God shall never be brought to such a
scantling in the most difficult times, but that there shall be many thousands
which shall worship God in spirit and truth. The Church of God can never
utterly fail: Christ has promised, Matthew. 16.18. that the gates of hell shall
never be able to overcome it. And this may be a ground of comfort to us, to
stay us, and to hold us from fainting, and from shrinking from our holy
profession in the hardest times that can come. Come we now to the 30. verse.

VERSE 30. Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he
called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.


I Showed you when I entered on verse 29. that in that and this 30. verse our
Apostle proves, that all things, even afflictions work for the best to those
that are called according to Gods eternal purpose, and that by two arguments.
The first laid down verse 29. which we have already handled. Now his second
argument proving that conclusion, is in this 30. verse: and it is taken from
the infallible certainty of that order which the Lord holds in bringing his
chosen to life and glory in heaven: even from the first ground and beginning,
and the first cause of it, to the thing it self, their full and perfect
glorification in heaven. And the argument stands thus.

That the Lord having of his free love from everlasting, and before the world
was, fore-appointed, and foreordained his chosen to life and glory in heaven,
he certainly proceeds, and he goes on in his manifestation of that his love,
and in the accomplishment of his own eternal purpose, in that order that he
has appointed, by adding one degree of the manifestation of his love and of
the accomplishment of his own purpose to another: and to his preordination and
fore-appointing his chosen to life and glory, he adds in time their vocation,
and to their vocation their justification, and to their justification the full
accomplishment of his love to them, namely, their full and perfect
glorification in heaven. And therefore it must needs be that all things work
together for the best unto them that are called according to Gods eternal
purpose.

Now in this verse, for the general matter of it, the Apostle lays down
four effects by which God does witness his eternal love to his chosen, which
are set down as four steps or degrees by which Gods chosen ascend and climb
up to their blessedness in heaven, and those four degrees are inseparably
linked and tied one to another, as so many linkes of a golden chain, and they
cannot be broke off or severed one from another. As that God does predestinate
some to life and glory; and whom he has predestinate, them he certainly calls;
and whom he calls, them he iustifies; and whom he iustifies, them he also
glorifies. Moreover (says the Apostle) whom he predestinate, them also he
called: and whom he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them
also he glorified. And of these four degrees, the first is done from all
eternity and before all times, namely, predestination: and the other three
they are effected in time.

Come we now to search out the meaning of the words. Interpretation.
Moreover whom he predestinate. I showed you in the verse foregoing what is the
meaning of the word predestinate, namely, to appoint a thing to a certain end
aforehand, and it is here to be understood of Gods act of predestination
touching his elect, and that is plain from the context. In the verse foregoing
the Apostle says, Whom he knew before, he predestinate them to be made like to
the image of his Son: that is, in heavenly glory: and here he says, Whom he
predestinate, them he called, and justified, and glorified. And therefore it
must be understood of predestination to life and glory in heaven, and so the
meaning of the Apostle is, whom the Lord before all times fore-appointed and
foreordained to life and glory in heaven, Them also he called. The word
called was before expounded verse 28. Verse 28.
and I there showed that some are called, and that by the voice of God in the
ministry of his word, but they answer not the call of God: and of such
speaks Christ, Matt. 20.16. Many are called but few are chosen. Others being
called by the voice of God in the ministry of his word, they answer the call
of God, and they are effectually called out of darkness into a marvelous
light, as 1. Pet. 2.9. And in this sense is the word here taken: and the
Apostles meaning is, Them also does the Lord in time effectually work on by his
holy Spirit, and bring them by the work of his good Spirit, through the
preaching of his word, from ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge and faith
in Christ, and set them out of the state of nature into the state of grace. And
whom he has thus called, them also he justified, The word justify has many
acceptions, I will not trouble you with them, it is here to be taken as a term
fetched from courts of justice, and it is opposed to condemning: so the Apostle
himself makes opposition, verse 33.34. It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? and so it signifies to acquit and to absolve in judgment. When
therefore the Apostle says, them also he justifies, it is as if he had said,
them also he acquitteth and absolueth both from the guilt and punishment of all
their sins, and accounts them just and righteous in his sight by Christ his
righteousness imputed to them, and apprehended by faith, as the Apostle says,
Romans 4.5.6. To him that believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness: as David declares the blessedness of the man
to whom God imputes righteousness. And 2. Corinthians. 5.21. the Apostle
affirms, that Christ was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. And whom he justifies, them also he
glorifieth. To glorify is to make glorious, by putting away baseness and
dishonor, and by putting on of honor and glory. Now the Lord does make his
chosen glorious, and put away their baseness, and put honor and glory on
them, partly in this life, by making them holy; for their holiness and
sanctification in this life is their glorification begun. And hence the Church
is said to be all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. And holiness of life here in
this world is termed glory by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.18. We are changed into
the same image from glory to glory. But the Lord does make his chosen fully
glorious in the life to come in heaven, by making them there perfectly holy,
their glorification in heaven being their sanctification consummate and made
perfect, and by putting on their bodies and on their souls immortality, and
full happiness and glory: both these are here to be understood under the word
glorified. Them also he glorifieth: that is, them also does the Lord make
glorious, partly in this life, by making them holy, and by sanctifying them in
part, in their souls and bodies; and in the life to come in heaven fully
glorious, by making them perfectly holy, and by putting on their bodies and
souls immortality, eternal life, and full and perfect happiness and glory.
Now then thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in this verse, as if he
had said.

Moreover, whom the Lord before all times fore-appointed and foreordained to
life and glory in heaven, they also are by him in time effectually called,
they are effectually wrought on by his holy Spirit, and brought by the work of
his holy Spirit, through the preaching of the word, from ignorance and
unbelief, to true knowledge and faith in Christ, and set out of the state of
ignorance and unbelief into the state of true knowledge and faith in Christ
Jesus: and they that are thus effectually called, they are also by him
acquitted and absolved from the guilt and punishment of all their sins, and
they are accounted just and righteous in his sight by Christ his righteousness
imputed to them, and apprehended by faith: and they that are thus justified,
they are also by him made glorious, partly in this life, he here making them
holy, and sanctifying them in part, and in the life to come in heaven fully
glorious, he there making them perfectly holy, and there putting on them, on
their bodies and souls immortality, eternal life, and full and perfect
happiness and glory.

Now in that the Apostle here and in the verse foregoing speaks of Gods
predestination, of his fore-appointing some to life and glory in heaven, I
might stand to show that the doctrine of Gods predestination is a doctrine that
ou^^t to be published and made known to Gods people. Some are of opinion that
it ought to be concealed and kept from the people of God, but they are
deceived, it is a thing revealed in the written word of God, and so it belongs
to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Oh but some say,

Gods predestination to life and glory in heaven is not universal.
it is not common to all men and women in the world, the Lord has not from
everlasting fore-appointed all and every man and woman in the world to
eternal life and salvation, Gods election to life and glory is not
universal. Act. 13.48. it is said, As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed: thereby implying, that some were ordained to eternal life, and some
were not. Romans 9.22.23. the Apostle makes known that some were vessels of Gods
mercy prepared to glory, and others were vessels of Gods wrath prepared to
destruction. Ephesians. 1.4.5. the Apostle does appropriate Gods eternal election
and predestination to life and glory only to himself, and to other true
believers, and says, God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: And has
predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself according to
the good pleasure of his will. And the reason of this, that Gods predestination
to life and glory is not universal and reaching to all, is this.

The Lord is both infinitely merciful and also infinitely just, and he will be
known so to be:

First, this truth serves to discover the error of that opinion Universal
redemption by Christ held by some, confuted.
that the work of redemption wrought by Christ is universal, that Christ died
for all generally without exception of any, and that quoad efficatiam realem,
and not only quoad sufficientiam praetij: and that some notwithstanding are
not saved, they say it is through their own default, because they will not.
Besides the error of this position, it making the sin of man, death and
hell, stronger then Christ, at least Gods purpose variable and subject to man's
will, which are foul errors. Besides this, it cannot stand with the truth now
delivered; for if predestination to life and glory be not universal, if it
reach not to every man and woman in the world, then certainly Christ died not
for all and every one, his death was not really effectual for all and every
one. For the Scripture is plain that Christ died only for Gods elect, and
that he is the Savior of his Church and of his body, Ephe. 5.23. and that he
only redeemed his Church by his blood, Act. 20.28. I know the exception of ye
Arminians, His Church say they, Christ gave himself for his Church: and then
he subioynes by way of explication what he means by the word Church, verse
26.27. namely, that Church that he sanctifies and cleanses by the washing of
water through the word, and that he makes to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blame: which must needs be understood of the invisible Church, and of
the elect of God only. And therefore universal redemption wrought by Christ,
touching the real efficacy of it, is but a device of man's brain, and we
shall find it to be but a deceiving ground of comfort, if we rest on this, that
Christ died for all: and if thou have no better ground of comfort in the time
of need, (as indeed many have not) thou shall find it will deceive thee, and
when thy conscience shall be awakened and distressed, it will then be ready to
exempt thee from the benefit of redemption, and will then tell thee, Christ
indeed died for all, if all would receive him, but thou by thy sins have cut
thy self off from him, and therefore the benefit of his death belongs not to
thee, and it will do thee no good. Learn therefore to renounce it as erroneous
and false, and a deceiving ground of comfort, that Christ died for all, and
that the real efficacy of his death belongs to all.

The Anabaptists confuted in that they hold universal election on condition of
faith, and of obedience to the Gospel.
Did not God from everlasting fore-appoint every man and woman in the world to
life and salvation? Surely then the Anabaptists are deceived, and it must needs
be erroneous and false which they hold and teach; that God did choose all men
both good and bad to the kingdom of heaven, on condition of faith and of
obedience to the Gospel, for that is their position, as appears by their own
words in a Pamphlet lately put forth by them. And to this purpose (forsooth)
they make Gods election twofold, eternal and before the creation of the world,
and actual and in time: and they say, Gods eternal election is Gods eternal
purpose and decree to elect such persons to life and salvation in whom he
finds faith and obedience; and those persons he electeth to salvation for the
quality he finds in them. And so they say, Gods eternal election is not of
the particular person, but of the quality; and Gods actual election they say
is his electing of those in time who are instructed and taught by the Gospel
preached, and do believe it and yield obedience to it, and so are actually
chosen for their faith and for their obedience. And thus they make Gods
eternal election to be a purpose in God before the creation of the world, to
save all generally without exception of any, and a fore-ordaining of all to
life and salvation, as well unbelievers as believers, on the condition of faith
and obedience, if they would believe and obey the Gospel; and his actual
election to be an electing and choosing of some to life and glory now
believing the Gospel, and now yielding obedience to it. A mere idle and
foolish distinction, yea such as has no ground or footing in the word of God.
Where do they find in all the book of God such a distinction, let them show
it if they can? In what Gospel is it written, Believe and obey the Gospel and
thou shall be actually elected? Indeed we find it written in the Gospel,
Believe and obey the Gospel and thou shall be saved. Believing and obeying the
Gospel is a necessary antecedent to life and salvation, and is necessarily
required before salvation, but never do we find it to be an antecedent, going
before Gods election to life and glory in heaven, and as a thing required to
Gods election to life and salvation. God indeed decreed with himself to save
through Christ all them that do believe, but their believing is not before Gods
actual choosing of them to life and salvation, that we find not in any place of
Scripture, but it necessarily goes before their salvation. Ioh. 10.27. Ioh. 10
27.
Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, or believe in me, because I know them.
But they say, We are sheep, or elect ordained to life and glory because we
believe.

Again, when as they say, Gods eternal election is not of the particular
person but of the quality, they speak absurdly. Did God choose faith and
obedience to salvation? Did he choose these qualities to go to heaven, and not
the person in whom these qualities of faith and obedience are found? But to
take them in the best sense, and their meaning to be this; In regard they
expound it, that God did purpose and decree before the creation to elect to
salvation such persons in whom he should find faith and obedience, this being
their meaning their position does exceedingly derogate from the
all-sufficiencie of God, as if the Lord must be beholding to something in us
before his will could be determined; and as if his will must depend on
something out of himself in man, on which it may be determined to elect; yea
it makes God to be in suspense touching that wherein afterward on some sight
he comes to be fully determined: as if the Lord who is infinite in wisdom, in
will, and power, should thus demurre with himself, I purpose if hereafter I
shall find in men faith and obedience to the Gospel, to choose them to life
and salvation, otherwise not. Oh what a monstrous derogation is this from the
Lords all-sufficiencie! and how does this derogate from the absolute will of
God, and from the good pleasure of God, which is the supreme cause of Gods
predestination to life and salvation, as Ephesians. 1.5. Now for the places of
Scripture they bring to prove that God did purpose and decree before the
creation of the world to save all persons in whom he should find faith and
obedience, they are not worthy the answering, they do fearfully abuse and
pervert the Scripture, they bring that, Act. 17.28. where it is said, We are
Gods generation, and they reason thus, All persons are Gods generation,
therefore Gods eternal election is not of the particular person but of the
quality. What an absurd kind of reasoning is this? does it follow because all
persons are Gods generation, and have their being in him, therefore Gods
eternal election is not of particular person, but of quality, or of persons
thus and thus qualified? these things follow not one another. And for the
places they bring to prove that God does actually elect some to life and
salvation now believing the Gospel, and now yielding obedience to it, they are
most impertinent, they prove no such matter: they bring Romans 9.25. Ephesians.
1.13.14. 1. Pet. 2.10. in all which places, if ye look into them, you shall
find there is not a word touching Gods election, they imply no such thing, but
they rather import effectual vocation and calling, or dwelling of the Spirit
of God in the hearts of true believers to their sanctification, and to the
assurance of their full redemption. Thus gross and thus absurd are the
Anabaptists, both in their affections and proofs; and their opinion touching
Gods eternal election to life and salvation, cannot stand with the doctrine
now delivered, that the act of Gods predestination to life and glory is not
universal and common to all men and women in the world. I have stood somewhat
longer in confuting their error, because of that book which may happily bleare
the eyes of the simple, and deceive them; and I hear that some do begin to
call the truth of God in question on that book.

I leave them, and for a third use, is it so that the act of Gods They who find
themselves in the number of Gods chosen are exceedingly bound to admire and
magnify Gods free love toward them.
Does it not reach, and is it not common to all and every man and woman in the
world? How then are they who find themselves in the number of Gods chosen, and
have good evidence of it, that they are such as the Lord has from everlasting
fore-appointed and foreordained to life and glory, how I say are they bound
to admire and to magnify the free love of God toward them? Surely that free
love of God can never be sufficiently advanced and extolled: and consider it
thou that have good evidence of it, that thou belongest to Gods election. Did
the Lord from everlasting set his free love on thee, purposing thy eternal
happiness and salvation, and did he pass by others intending to glorify
himself in their just punishment? How then can thou sufficiently admire and
magnify the free love of God toward thee? If the Lord had fore-appointed and
foreordained all men and women to life and glory, it had been an
infinite-mercie of God, and an infinite cause to praise him, but that the Lord
has of his free love set thee apart from all eternity to life and salvation,
and passed by others, even many thousands, that makes the mercy of God to thee
much more admirable, and thou art to consider it: and in that respect thou art
to be stirred up much more to admire, and to magnify, and to praise the
goodness and mercy of God toward thee, and to labor to be thankful to God
for his great mercy.

Now in the next place observe we, that our Apostle here goes on by degrees
from predestination to glorification; he does not p^esently subioyne
glorification to predestination: he says not, Whom he has predestinate, them
he has also glorified, but whom he has predestinate, them also he called, and
whom he called, them also he justified. He makes known to us, that between
predestination and glorification, there comes vocation and justification, and
so gives us to understand thus much.

Those whom God did predestinate to life and glory in heaven, them also he
appointed in time to be called, justified, and sanctified.
And whomsoever the Lord has in his eternal election decreed to save, them
has he also decreed to sanctify, and to make holy before they come to enjoy
that salvation. That is a clear text to this purpose, Ephesians. 1.4. God has
chosen us (says the Apostle) in Christ before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. 1. Pet. 1.2. the
Apostle affirms of them to whom he writ, that they were elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father unto sanctification of the Spirit, through
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And 2. These. 2.13. the
Apostle speaks thus of the believing Thessalonians, that God had from the
beginning chosen them to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and
the faith of truth. It is then a clear point, that whomsoever the Lord has
fore-appointed and foreordained to life and glory, he has also appointed
them in time to be called, and justified, and sanctified, and to be made holy
before they come to enjoy that life and salvation: and the reason and ground of
it is.

means as shall effectually work for the fitting of them thereunto: and those
means are, effectual vocation, justification, and sanctification: and Gods
chosen are made meet and fit for life and salvation by their effectual
vocation, justification, and sanctification. And therefore doubtless
whomsoever the Lord has from everlasting decreed to save, them has he also
decreed to sanctify, and to make holy before they come to enjoy that salvation.

And this truth, for the use, A foolish and blasphemous manner of reasoning
commonly used by some met withal.
then we may live as we list, for howsoever we live, and though we live never
so wickedly, yet we must needs be saved. A devilish kind of reasoning; men or
women have not this conclusion from God, nor from his word, but indeed from the
devil, and from their own ignorance. Note.
And herein appears the subtlety of Satan, he teaches men in outward things
wholly to distrust God, and to rely altogether on the means: but in matters
of salvation he makes them lay all on Gods mercy, and on Gods purpose, without
any regard had to the means. They might as well say, the Lord has appointed
that we shall live to such a time, and before that time come we shall not die,
and therefore we need not use either meat or drink in the time of health, or
physic in the time of sickness. This is most absurd even in reason: and it is
blasphemous thus to reason in the matter of salvation. It is all one, as if
wicked wretches should think they have God at some advantage, that the Lord
having appointed them to life and salvation, now they may do what they list,
and they may now live according to the lusts of their own hearts, and yet the
Lord cannot choose but save them. This is monstrous, thus to think, and thus to
reason, and we are to take heed of this kind of reasoning: and know that thou
thus reasoning, whosoever thou art, that very reasoning of thine is a fearful
sign that thou art none of Gods chosen, but that (indeed) thou art in the
state of reprobation, and in the way to damnation. Let us then ever remember,
that Gods decree does not remove the use of the means, but it does stablish
and confirm: and whomsoever the Lord has from everlasting decreed to save,
them has he also decreed to call, to justify, and to sanctify, and to make
holy, before they come to enjoy that salvation: and thou must find thy self
thus wrought on, or else never look thou to come to heaven.

Now in that the Apostle here subioynes to Gods act of predestination to life
and salvation, his effectual calling of such as are predestinate, and says,
Whom the Lord has predestinate, them also he called, we may gather some
special points of instruction, I will speak of them in order.

Gods chosen shall undoubtedly be in time effectually called.
Gods effectual calling follows necessarily on predestination to life and
salvation. All those that belong to election of grace, and are in Gods eternal
purpose fore-appointed to life and salvation, shall assuredly in time be
effectually wrought on by the word and Spirit of God, and shall be brought out
of the state of ignorance and unbelief, into the state of true knowledge and
true faith in Christ, and out of the state of nature into the state of grace.
Ioh. 6.37. says the Lord Jesus, All that the Father gives me, that is, all
that are appointed to life and salvation, and so given to me of my Father, they
shall come to me, they shall certainly come to believe in me, for so he
expounds coming to him, verse 35. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst. And Ioh. 10.16. Other sheep I have
which are not of this fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my
voice: they must be brought, or they shall certainly be brought to hear my
voice, and to yield obedience to it. And verse 26.27. says he to the Jews, Ye
believe not, for ye are not of my sheep; my sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me: as if he had said, those that are my sheep, because
they are my sheep they hear my voice, and they shall certainly believe in me,
and yield obedience to my voice and call. 2. These. 2. the Apostle having spoken
thus of the believing Thessalonians, verse 13. that God had from the beginning
chosen them to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and faith of
truth, he subioynes verse 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to
obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. And we find it euidenced and made
good in many other places of Scripture, that Gods effectual calling follows
necessarily, and certainly on his predestination. That all those that belong to
Gods election, and are in his eternal purpose fore-appointed to life and
salvation, shall certainly in time be effectually wrought on by the word and
Spirit of God, and shall be brought out of the state of ignorance and
unbelief, into the state of true knowledge and true faith in Christ.

And it must needs be so,

But some will say,

I answer, their inward and effectual calling is by some unutterable work of
the holy Spirit of God not known to us. But here a question will be further
moved.





Every man that has heard and learned of the Father, he comes to him, and he
receives grace, and he believes in him, and he cannot but receive grace, and he
receives it willingly. Come we now to make use of this doctrine.

Preposterous and rash judgment touching wicked and ungodly persons ought to
be avoided.
and that all that belong to Gods election shall assuredly in time be
effectually called; then this must teach us in the first place, to take heed of
preposterous and rash judgment touching wicked and ungodly persons, we must
take heed we give not our definitive sentence of some wicked and ungodly men,
and that we take not on us to pronounce them reprobates and utterly cast away.
Thus to determine of their final state, is monstrous boldness, and high
presumption, and indeed to step up into Gods chair of judgment; we must take
heed of it, and know that we are not to despair of the final estate of any
wicked man, be he never so vile, unless his sin be against the holy Ghost,
which can hardly be known and discerned: for the Lord can (in his appointed
time) call him home, and if he belong to his eternal election, he will
assuredly in his good time convert and turn him, and call him effectually.
Consider we the example of the blessed Apostle Paul, how was he estranged from
God, and from all goodness? How far was he carried in fury and rage against
the Church and people of God? How did he thirst after the blood of the Saints,
Acts 9.1? It is said, that he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord: and he confesses of himself, Galat. 1.13. that he
persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it: yet afterward we know it
pleased God to call and to convert him, and of a violent and bloody persecutor
to make him an excellent and famous Preacher. Let us then in his example learn
to expect with patience the conversion of rebellious sinners, knowing this,
that the Lord can call when he will, and he will assuredly in his appointed
time effectually call those that belong to his election.

And for a second use of the point: Is it so that Gods chosen The means of
calling and conversion may lawfully be offered to rebellious sinners.
howsoever some are of a contrary opinion, and would have a separation made
between good and bad, and would have rebellious sinners put away from the
means of calling. But alas, if all rebellious sinners should be shut out from
the means, how then should such amongst them as belong to Gods election be
effectually called? We may and we ought to offer to them the means of working
good on their souls, both in public and private, following the rule of the
Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.25. Instructing them with meekness, and suffering them with
patience, proving if God at any time will call them to repentance. Note.
Doubtless it is an hopeful thing, where God gives the means of grace, that
there the Lord has a gracious work toward some, and he has there some that
belong to his election, whom he will in time call and convert, and work on by
his word and Spirit. When a man in the time of harvest carries his reapers
further into a field, it is a sign he has there some come to be inned: so
when the Lord sends his ministers and means of grace to a place, it is a sign
he has some there to be gathered and to be brought home to himself; and
learn we carefully to attend on the means that serve for the calling of Gods
chosen. Yea though it be so that as yet thou find no sweetness in the means
of salvation, nor any benefit by them, but they are harsh, unpleasing and
tedious to thee, yet neglect not thou to come to them. It is the subtlety of
Satan to keep men, if possibly he can, from the use of the means; he will not
grossly tell them, they need not repent at all, he knows the most profane will
then discern him, but he labors what he can to keep men from the means that
might work repentance in them, and from the means of grace. Let him not
herein prevail with thee, though as yet thou come to the means for form and
fashion, and as yet find no delight in them. I do not desire nor advise thee
so to come, but I say though thou do so come, yet continue coming to the
means, the Lord will have thee wait on him in the use of the means, and he
will deal with thee as with a reasonable creature: if thou belong to him,
assuredly he will in his good time strike an holy stroke on thy soul, and thou
shall not withstand the power of his grace, it shall certainly work on thee,
the Lord will enlighten thy mind, alter thy will, change thy affections, and
bring thee out of the state of ignorance and unbelief, into the state of true
knowledge, and true faith in Christ: and therefore be thou careful to attend
on the means of grace.

For a third use: is it so that Gods effectual calling follows A child of God
is not to doubt of the power of Gods grace, and of the effectual working of
his grace for the ouerco^ming of some strong corruption.
and whom the Lord has fore-appointed to life and saluati^^ will he certainly
in his good time work on them by his word and Spirit? shall nothing hinder his
work? will he of unwilling make them willing to receive his grace? Then doubt
not, thou that art a child of God, of the power of his grace, and of the
effectual working of his grace touching some strong corruption that still
abides in thee, and thou art still wrestling withal. It is the fault of Gods
own children finding some corruption still strong in them, and they cannot yet
get the maisterie of it, though they strive against it by all good means, to
think it will never be better with them, and they shall never be able to get
the maisterie of it, they shall never be able to overcome their doubting, their
fear, or the like. Oh think not so whosoever thou art that art a child of
God, but remember to thy comfort, that the Lord can and will call and convert
those that belong to his election, though they go on in a clean contrary
course; he can and he will of auerse, of repugnant, and of such as are
altogether unwilling, make willing to receive his grace: and therefore he can
and will, thou being one that do belong to him, give thee strength to
overcome it, fear it not. It may be the Lord in his wisdom seeing it meet,
for good causes known to his holy majesty, as for the exercise of thy faith,
the humbling of thee, or the stirring thee up to greater feruencie in prayer,
or the like, will exercise thee for a time under that corruption, in wrestling
with it, and in striving against it: but assure thy self, thou continuing to
strive against it, in his appointed time he will set thee free from it, he is
able to do it, and he will do it: and let that be thy comfort.

Come we now to a second conclusion following from hence, in that the Apostle
here subioynes to the act of Gods predestination to life and salvation, his
effectual calling of such as are predestinate, in that the Apostle here says,
Whom God has predestinate, them also he called: (as I told you) hence we may
gather a second conclusion following from hence, namely this.

Only they and none but they, who belong to Gods election, are or shall be
effectually called.
Only they, and none but they, who in Gods eternal purpose are fore-appointed
to life and salvation, are or shall be in time effectually wrought on by the
word and Spirit of God, and brought out of ignorance and unbelief into the
state of true knowledge, and true faith in Christ, and set out of the state of
nature into the state of grace. Indeed others may be and are outwardly called,
and may and do hear the sound of Gods voice in the ministry of his word, as
Christ says, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but only such as belong to Gods
election are or shall be inwardly called, and effectually wrought on by the
work of Gods Spirit. And to this purpose is that, Act. 13.48. As many (says
the text) as were ordained to eternal life believed: they only that were
ordained to eternal life believed, they only were called to faith, and others
were not. And hence it is that the Apostle calls faith the faith of Gods elect,
Tit. 1.1. Tit. 1.1.
And hence it is that when the disciples asked Christ why he spoke to the
people in parables, he answered and said to them, Matthew 13.11. Matthew. 13.11.
To you it is given to understand the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but
to them it is not given: making that proper and peculiar to his disciples, to
know and to understand the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, and to be
acquainted with them, and not a thing common to all that heard him. And Matthew.
11.25. says the Lord Jesus, I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and men of
understanding, and have opened them unto babes. Things concerning life and
salvation are hid from most of the wise of the world, and are revealed to
others that are but babes in comparison of them. We read Act. 16.13.14. that
Paul preached to many women that were gathered together, but in that great
number only Lydia was wrought on, and her heart only did the Lord open, that
she attended to the things that Paul spoke: and she only was effectually
called. It is well observed by one, that the Gospel entered into the court of
Nero in Rome, and wrought on some in his Court, but it wrought not on Nero
himself: and it entered into the family of Narcissus, but not into the heart
of Narcissus himself, as we may gather, Romans 16.11. And to these we might add
many other examples, all proving and confirming the truth of this conclusion,
that none but such as belong to Gods election, are or shall be effectually
called, and they only, and none but they who are fore-appointed to life and
salvation, are or shall be in time effectually wrought on by the word and
Spirit of God, and brought out of the state of ignorance and unbelief into the
state of true knowledge and true faith in Christ. For why,

Howsoever the word of God is said Psalm. 19.7.8. to convert, to give wisdom
and understanding, yet it does so only as an instrument, and that not as a
natural instrument, as having virtue in it self, as a medicine is a means of
health; but as an instrument signifying and testifying that which the Spirit of
God does inwardly work: and only where it pleases God to work, there the
word does enlighten: and the Lord is pleased to work by his Spirit
effectually, only where he has set his eternal love, and no where else, as
we have it, Iam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth,
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures. He will not work by
his grace where he has not set his love freely: and therefore though many be
and are outwardly called, and may and do hear the sound of Gods voice in the
ministry of his word, yet only such as belong to Gods election are or shall
be inwardly called, and effectually wrought on by the word and Spirit of God.

But happily some may say,

I answer. Lord in his wise dispensation will have his word preached to all,
both elect and reprobate Why God will have his word preached to all, both elect
and reprobate.
mingled together for special ends, as namely, to let his elect see when they
are eff^ctually called, how much they are bound to the free and special grace
of God: and that their faith and effectual calling was not from any power and
strength in themselves, but merely from the work of Gods grace, in that they
see others partakers with them of the same outward means, and of the same
outward calling, still left in their ignorance, and hardness, and unbelief:
and also to let such as belong not to Gods election see, that God is not
wanting to them, he vouchsafing to them the same outward means he does to his
chosen, and to manifest to them their guiltiness of the sin of our first
parents, whereby they have voluntarily made themselves unable to receive grace,
and so to leave them altogether without excuse, God being not now bound to give
them grace, he having once given it to them, and they having willingly
forfeited and lost that grace, and so disabled themselves. And thirdly, the
Lord will have his word preached to all, both elect and reprobate, even so
far to work on the reprobate as to restrain them from extremity and
outrage in sin, and to keep them in outward order, and to make them more fit
for humane society, and more fit to converse with his children, and more
serviceable to them in outward offices and duties. And therefore it is not in
vain that the reprobate are made partakers of the preaching of the word.



I answer.

But the Lord in commanding and exhorting them to believe the forgiveness of
their sins and life everlasting, he has no such purpose but only to
convince them. Abraham by Gods commandment, Genesis 20.2. was bound to persuade
himself that Isaac was to dye under his own hand, yet was he not bound to
persuade himself of an untruth, because the intent of that commandment of God
was but to prove him, and so God may bid the reprobates believe this or that,
whilst he does it but to convince their contumacie, and does see well how
far they are from believing any such matter. This then still remains a
truth, that none but such as belong to Gods election, are or shall be
effectually called and w^^^ght on by the word and Spirit of God. And for the
use.

First, the consideration of this truth may serve to stay us We are not to
think it strange that where many enjoy the like means of salvation, yet there
all are not wrought on by the same.
that whereas many are partakers of the like means, and enjoy the same
ministry and preaching of the word, yet all are not wrought on by it, and all
are not converted. We are not to marvel at this, and to take offense at it,
that where the Gospel and preaching of the word comes to a people, a parish, a
family, there it works not on all to their effectual calling, but some still
continue in their ignorance, and in their hardness and sin, and are
unreformed: we must remember that none are or shall be wrought on by the word
and Spirit of God, but such as belong to Gods election. And though the
Preachers of the Gospel should with Paul wish themselves separate from Christ
for the winning of men, yet shall no more be brought to saving knowledge and
saving faith, then those whom the Lord has in his eternal purpose
fore-appointed to life and salvation, and those whom the Lord shall draw to
Christ, Ioh. 6.44. Consider we the preaching of Christ himself, never man did
or shall preach with like holiness and power that he did: were all that heard
him wrought on? nay were his own disciples wrought on thoroughly as they ought
to have been? No surely, Christ himself often complained of their want of
faith. Let us not then think it strange that all are not wrought on that live
under the same powerful means, and where the word of God is truly and
powerfully preached, neither let us murmr against Gods mercy and bounty in
spiritual graces vouchsafed to some in their effectual calling, and denied to
others. Act. 11.17. it was the fault of the Jews who were angry with Peter
that he had gone to the Gentiles, and that they were wrought on by his
preaching and had received the Gospel, Who was I (says Peter) that I could
let God?

Comfort to such as have evidence of it that they are effectually called.
their effectual calling does discover to them and seal up to them this
comfort, that they are such as God has loved from all eternity, and that the
Lord has before the world was fore-appointed them to life and salvation in
heaven; and that is a ground of sweet comfort. The way to find our selves in
the number of Gods chosen, and to be such as have been predestinate to life and
salvation before the world was, is not to step up into heaven and to search the
Court roles of heaven whether our names be there written, but to look into our
own hearts and souls, and there to find the work of grace written and
imprinted by the finger of Gods Spirit. And if thou whosoever thou art, find
that work of grace in thee, if thou find thy self effectually called, surely
then thou have cause to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet.
1.8. thou have then a sure and a sweet testimony of Gods eternal love to
thee, and thy salvation is built on a stronger foundation then the very
heavens, even on Gods eternal and unchangeable purpose, and thou may know
that thou art effectually called and wrought on by the word and Spirit of God.
I have heretofore given notes by which a man may know that he is effectually
called, as if he find himself enlightened, and that he now sees his wretched
estate by nature, and his cursed condition by sin, and is able to apply the
promises of life and salvation to himself particularly, and that he has now
in him an hatred and loathing of those sins that have been formerly most
pleasing to him; and that now he is fitted for the high calling of a Christian,
with graces needful for the exercise of piety and religion toward God, and
of love, and mercy, and equity, and justice toward men, and is able to show
forth the power of grace in his life and conversation, and does now make choice
of holy and religious company, and does now delight in the means by which he
has been wrought on, as in hearing the word, even the Law discovering sin to
him, and laying open his hidden corruptions, and especially in hearing the
sweet promises of the Gospel touching life and salvation, and that now he
does those things that flesh and blould would never teach him to do; as that he
has a care of religion and of heavenly things in prosperity, and the more the
Lord does prosper him in outward things, the more holy he is: and that in time
of adversity he draws nearer to God, and holds close to the profession of
religion, and is constant in a disgraced profession, and that now he makes more
precious account of his high calling in Jesus Christ then of all the honors
and preferments in the world. If a man find these things in himself, he may
assure himself that he is effectually called. And howsoever the Papists say to
the contrary, that a man cannot certainly know whether he have the Spirit of
God working in him or no, yet doubtless he may plainly and sensibly perceive
the working of the Spirit of God in his own soul. The Spirit is compared to
fire, Note.
and to the wind, and as sensible as a man may perceive the burning of the
fire, and the blowing of the wind, so sensibly may a child of God perceive in
himself the work of the Spirit of God. If thou find that work in thine own
soul, thou may thereby assure thy self that thou art in the number of Gods
chosen, and so have strong consolation.

Come we now to the third effect by which God does witness his eternal love
to his chosen, and the third degree by which Gods chosen ascend up to their
blessedness in heaven, here put down by the Apostle, namely, their
justification. Whom he predestinate (says the Apostle) them also he called:
and whom he called, them also he justified: that is, as I showed, they that are
effectually called of God, they are also by him acquitted and absolved from the
guilt and punishment of all their sins, and they are accounted just and
righteous in his sight by Christ his righteousness imputed to them, and
apprehended by faith. Now here we see that effectual calling and justification
are distinct benefits, and they are here made several and distinct effects of
Gods love to his chosen, and they are not to be confounded and made one, as
they are by the doctrine of the Papists: for according to the doctrine of the
Papists, they teaching a double justification in the sight of God, their first
justification is nothing else but the calling of a sinner; in effect they make
their first justification and calling of a sinner all one, they teaching that
their first justification is, when a sinner of an evil man is made a good man
by infusion of inward righteousness, whereby the heart is purged and
sanctified, and so indeed all one with the calling of a sinner out of the state
of nature into the state of grace; and so they confound things that are to be
distinguished one from another. I leave that.

Now though effectual calling and justification be distinct benefits, yet they
follow one another immediately, and we see they are here linked one to the other
inseparably; whom the Lord calls, them also he iustifies: whence we are given to
understand thus much.

Such as are effectually called, are at the same time also justified.
Though in respect of the order of nature, effectual calling goes before
justification, yet in time they go together, and whosoever they be that are
effectually called, they are at the same time justified, acquitted, and
absolved from the guilt and punishment of all their sins, and they are
accounted just and righteous in the sight of God, by Christ his righteousness
imputed to them, and apprehended by faith. We read Isai. 53.11. that the
Prophet there speaking of Christ Jesus, he says, By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many: as if he had said, such as shall be brought
out of their ignorance and unbelief, to know my righteous servant, my Son
Jesus Christ, and to acknowledge him, and to believe in him, they shall
thereupon be justified: they being called to the true knowledge of Christ, they
shall by him, on that knowledge of theirs, be justified. Acts 26.18. the
Apostle says, he was sent to the Gentiles, To open their eyes that they might
turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that by
his preaching the Gospel to them, they might be effectually called, and
wrought on, and converted, and then he presently subioynes, That they might
receive forgiveness of sins, that they might be justified, remission of sins
being one part of justification; plainly teaching, that effectual calling and
justification in the sight of God, they go together. And to this purpose
speaks the Apostle Peter, Acts 13.39. By him says the Apostle, that is by
Christ, every one that believes is justified. Every one that is brought out of
the state of unbelief into the state of true faith in Christ, he is at that
very instant justified. And hence it is that Christ sends his Ministers, as his
Ambassadors, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5.20. With the word of
reconciliation, to inuit and to call men to believe in him, even to call and
to convert men, and to bring them to faith, that so they may receive
forgiveness of their sins, and be reconciled to God, that they may be
justified in the sight of God, and so have peace with God, as we have it, Romans
5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. We see then the point clear by evidence and testimony of the
Scripture, that the called of God are also justified in the sight of God, and
such as are effectually called, they are also at the same time justified, they
are at the same time acquitted and absolved from the guilt and punishment of
all their sins, and they are accounted just and righteous in the sight of God
by Christ his righteousness imputed to them, and apprehended by faith. And it
must needs be so, the ground of this truth is this.

Such as are effectually called and wrought on by the holy Spirit, they are
brought to believe in Christ, of Christ, and so are actually justified. For
howsoever Gods chosen were justified virtually in Christ when he suffered for
their sins, and when he was quit from all their sins, having borne the
punishment of them, yet then only are they actually justified in Christ, when
they believe in Christ, and that is when they are called to faith, when they
are effectually called: and therefore doubtless the called of God are also at
the same time justified in the sight of God.

Now here a question

To which I answer, For the blood of Christ cleanses him from all sin, 1.
Ioh. 1.7. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
And a man that is once purged by the blood of Christ, has no more conscience
of sin, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, Heb. 10.2. he has no more his
conscience charging him with the guilt of sin, and the peace of his
conscience is not once disturbed by his after sin, he having a full remission
of all his sins past, present, and to come.

God is just in foregiuing sins passed before time through his patience:
therefore it seems that such as are effectually called, and at the same time
justified, are freed only from the guilt and punishment of their sins past
and going before.

I answer.

same time justified and acquitted from the guilt and punishment of all their
sins past, present, and to come, why then does any that is effectually
called, pray daily for the forgiveness of his sins?

I answer.

Come we now to make use of the point; and first, is it so that Our
justification in Gods sight is most free.
and that it is without respect had to any good in us, or done by us. So soon
as ever any of Gods chosen is effectually called, he is at the very same
instant of his calling justified, before he has done any good work at all.
And therefore the Papists err grossly, in that they ascribe justification in
the sight of God to good works; good works are fruits following
justification, and therefore cannot be causes of it: Good works are fruits
following justification, and not causes of it.
and whereas they say, we being justified by faith, are justified by a good
work, faith being a good work, they are easily answered: Faith does not
justify as it is a work, as it is a grace wrought in the heart, or for the
dignity or worthiness of it self, of any act of it, the faith of Jesus, Romans
3.26.

For a second use: Comfort to al such as find themselves effectually called.
Is it so that the called of God are also at the same time justified? Are such
as are effectually called, at the same instant justified? Are they at the same
instant of time acquitted from the guilt and punishment of all their sins
past, present, and to come? What a sweet comfort may this be to all such as
find themselves effectually called? Consider it thou that find thy self set
out of the state of ignorance and unbelief, into the state of true knowledge
and true faith in Christ, thou being in that state, thou art in a most happy
and blessed state, nothing can hurt thee, no not thine own sins past,
present, or to come, sin is the cause of all evils that come to men. Now thou
art in such an happy state and condition, as thou need not fear any evil
in regard of thy sins, either past, present, or to come, thy God has put
them all out of his sight, and all blame, and all that is properly a plague or
punishment for sin is removed from thee, and though it be so that sin still
abides in thee in part, and thou art combred with many sinful infirmities, and
thou art sometimes ouercarried to the doing of evil, yet fear not, so soon
as thou wast effectually called, even at the very instant of thy effectual
calling, wast thou freely acquitted from the guilt and punishment of all thy
sins, and the Lord then gave thee full pardon of all thy sins, and that
gift of God is without repentance, Romans 11.29. it is unchangeable: and the
consideration of that may yield thee sweet comfort. And withal be thou stirred
up to thankfulness to God for so great a mercy: thou can not be thankful
enough for so great a mercy: thou finding thy self combred and clogged with
sinful infirmities, or with dullness in prayer, deadness in hearing the word
of God, with distrust, with natural fear, and the like, thou will freely
profess and acknowlede, that if the Lord would take those infirmities from
thee, thou would be exceeding thankful to God for so great a mercy. How
much more art thou bound to be thankful to him, in that he has freed thee
from the guilt and punishment of those, and of all other thy sins, and
howsoever those sinful infirmities do still cleave to thy soul, and trouble
and molest thee, yet thy conscience cannot justly condemn thee for them, or
for any other of thy sins: and that is a mercy of God for which thou can
not be sufficiently thankful. Let it then be thought on, that thou being
effectually called, thou art at the very instant of thy calling justified, and
acquitted from the guilt and punishment of all thy sins, past, present, and
to come, which is a matter of great comfort: and let it stir thee up to be
thankful to God for so great a mercy.

Come we now to the fourth and last effect by which God does witness his
eternal love to his chosen, and the fourth degree by which Gods chosen ascend
up to their blessedness in heaven, namely, their glorification. Whom he
predestinate, them also he called: (says the Apostle) and whom he called, them
also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. That is, as I
made known, they that are justified in the sight of God, and whom the Lord
does acquit from the guilt and punishment of their sins by the merit of
Christ his death, and account just and righteous in his sight by Christ his
righteousness imputed, they are also by him made glorious, partly in this
life, he here making them holy, and sanctifying them in part, and in the life
to come in heaven fully glorious, he here making them perfectly holy, and there
putting on them on their bodies and souls immortality, eternal life, and full
and perfect happiness and glory. Now the word glorified having his extent
reaching both to sanctification here in this world, and to full and perfect
happiness and glory in the life to come, diverse things are offered, as first
this: in the first place we are given to understand thus much.

That sanctification ever follows on justification, Sanctification ever
follows on justification.
and justification he would power clean water on his people, and that he would
cleanse them from all their filthiness: that he would take from them the
guiltiness of their sins, he presently subioynes, verse 26.27. that he would
also give them new hearts, and put new spirits within them, and put his own
good Spirit within them, and sanctify them in their souls, and so cause them
to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments, and to do them. 1. Corinthians. 6.11. the Apostle says of the believing Corinthians, that whereas
they had been filthy, and guilty of many soul sins there reckened up, Yet
now they were washed from the guilt of those sins in the blood of Christ, and
now they were sanctified and justified. He affirms that these two,
justification and sanctification met together in them, they were now justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and now also sanctified by the Spirit of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. the Apostle ioynes faith of truth: that is, faith of the Gospel,
or believing the Gospel, and justification and sanctification of the Spirit
together, plainly teaching that justification and sanctification are ever found
together, and they go hand in hand together. And Jude verse 1. we find that
these two, called and sanctified of God, are there joined together, and such as
are effectually called (as ye have heard) they are also justified in the sight
of God. And so it must needs be a truth, that sanctification ever follows on
justification, and such as are justified in the sight of God in and through
Christ, they are also sanctified by the grace of his Spirit. For why, the
reasons and grounds of this truth are these.

It purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. and it works by love, Gal. 5.6. it puts
forth the efficacy and fruit of it by love both to God and men, which is a
special part of sanctification.

Rivers of the water of life flow from him, which is spoken of that Spirit of
life, and grace, and holiness, which they receive that believe in Christ: so
says Christ himself, Ioh. 7.38.39. And howsoever none can believe before they
have the Spirit, yet we are said to receive the Spirit by faith, because when
we believe, we then receive the Spirit, now fully and manifestly dwelling in us
to our sanctification. And therefore on these grounds we may resolve on this as
a certain truth, that sanctification ever follows on justification, and they
are ever found together: and such as are justified in the sight of God in and
through Christ, certainly they are also sanctified by the grace of his Spirit.
And they are made holy in part in their souls and bodies, and they are made
able to live an holy life here in this world.

Now to make use of this: first the ground of truth now delivered Many deceive
themselves touching the forgiveness of their sins, and their being in the
favor of God.
wherein indeed stands the blessedness of man, as Psalm. 32.1.2. and without
which, though a man have never so much wealth or honor, or whatsoever
excellency the world can cast on him, yet he is in a miserable case. Now (as I
say) in this matter of such moment do thousands deceive themselves: do not
thousands in the world think they are in the favor of God, and their sins
are forgiven, and they are washed in the blood of Christ from the guiltiness
of their sins, and yet they are not purged in any measure from the
filthiness of sin by the sanctifying grace of the Spirit of Christ, they
have no dram of true holiness and sanctification in them? No, they are so
far from being partakers of the holy and sanctifying Spirit of Christ, as
indeed they are possessed with a spirit of sensuality, of fleshly
profaneness, of filthiness, of pride, of self love, of covetousness, and
the like, and they are so far from living an holy life, as they wallow and
tumble in all filthiness, and please themselves in fulfilling the lusts of
their hearts; they give themselves over to all manner of riot and excess,
especially now at this time, at the feast we now celebrate, they now take
liberty to themselves to break out into all disorder. Are such persons
sanctified? Surely no, they are far from it, and being not sanctified,
assuredly they are not justified: sanctification ever follows justification.
Poor souls, they deceive themselves, the devil will suffer any one to say
his sins are forgiven, and to fancy to himself on a groundless presumption
that Christ shed his blood for him, and such like: but would thou, whosoever
thou art, prove that thy sins are forgiven, and have such sound evidence and
proof of it, as may silence the devil himself standing against it? then
never rest till thou find that thou art truly sanctified both in thy heart and
life. And if thou be able from thy true sanctification to prove thy
justification, then indeed thy reasoning is sound and good, and such as will
never deceive thee, but will yield thee comfort at all times both in life and
death.

Comfort to such as find themselves truly sanctified.
their sound and true sanctification does necessarily and infallibly infer
their justification. Art thou then truly sanctified in thine heart and soul,
not only reformed in thy outward man, and in thy outward carriage, for so a
wicked man may be, even one who may tread under foot the blood of Christ
wherewith he was sanctified, as the holy Ghost speaks, Hebr. 10.29. namely,
externally sanctified, but do thou find in thy soul a divine efficacy and
power, a quality that has life and spirit in it, turning and moving about all
motions that are in thy soul, and working in thee a through change in thy mind,
will, and effections, mortifying the corruptions and lusts of thy heart, and
making thee able to mind, will, and affect good things, and making thee able to
live an holy life? Then comfort thy self, thou have then good evidence to show
for thy justification in the sight of God, and thou may thereupon conclude
and that infallibly, that thou art justified in the sight of God, that thy
sins are forgiven thee, and thou art in the favor of God which is better
then life it self, yea thou art then in such a blessed state and condition,
that though Satan should mingle heaven and earth together, yet shall he not be
able to prevail against thee to thy ruin and confusion.

In the next place, in that the Apostle here under the word glorified,
comprehends sanctification here in this world, and he means that such as are
justified in the sight of God they are made glorious partly in this life, the
Lord here making them holy, and sanctifying them, and so glorious in respect of
their sanctification: note we.

That the holiness and sanctification of Gods children is a The holiness of
Gods children is a most glorious thing.
it is part of the glory that God bestows on his chosen: and such as are clad
with the habit of true holiness, they are glorious in the sight of God, and
they are seen of him, as it were apparelled with that which is exceeding
gracious and pleasing to his holy Majesty; and though it be somewhat spotted
by the flesh, as the best holiness of Gods children is in it self, yet it is
accepted of him in and through Christ his Son. 1. Pet. 4.14. the Apostle
says, The Spirit of glory rests on Gods children: how then can it be but
that they are most glorious? And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of them, Isai.
4.5. he says, That on all the glory there shall be a defense. And the Lord
himself speaks thus of his people, Isai. 43.4. Thou wast glorious in my sight
and honorable. And hence it is that the Apostle Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.4. The
hid man of the heart, that is, inward holiness and sanctification is a thing
much set by before God; that is the thing that makes Gods children glorious,
and that is part of the glory of God bestowed on them, and that makes them
exceeding gracious and pleasing in his sight: and it must needs be so, for why.

True holiness and sanctification is the express image of God in the souls
of men,

What fools then are wicked and graceless persons, who The folly of wicked
persons discovered, in that they mock at the holiness of Gods children.
and deride them for it? They seek to turn their glory into shame, and cast
that on Gods children as a matter of disgrace, which indeed is their glory,
and so they discover their own shame and folly. Well, thou that art a child
of God, care not for their mocks, but be thou stirred up to a special care of
holiness and sanctification, even to have thy soul invested with it as with a
goodly glorious garment; that is part of thy glory begun here to be made
perfect in heaven, and that indeed will make thee glorious within and without;
that is the clothing of broidered gold, spoken of Psalm. 45.13. and that will
make thee glorious in the sight of God, and of his holy Angels, and of all good
men. Many in the world spend much time, and take great pains in trimming up
their bodies, yea some are afraid of nothing more then of true holiness and
sanctification: for indeed if proud persons, and the nice dames of our age had
true holiness in them, they durst not do as they do, if they had sanctifying
grace in their hearts, without question it would cross their pride, and it
would not suffer them to make idols of their bodies, and to bestow so much time
as commonly they do in tricking and trimming up their bodies in vain and new
sangled attire, which indeed makes them odious and ugly in the sight of God and
of all good men; yea many times by the just hand of God, in the sight of men
and women like to themselves, and men and women like to themselves scorn and
contemn them, yea point at them, and say, there goes a proud fool. Oh
therefore labor thou whosoever thou art that do profess the fear of God,
labor thou for holiness and sanctification, to adorn thy soul with that,
and to deck thy soul with the sanctifying grace of Gods Spirit; thereby
through Christ thou shall appear glorious and pleasing in the sight of the
highest majesty, whom thou should seek to please above all the world: yea
seek thou to please him both in heart and life, and to be gracious in his
sight, though thou cross thine own humor never so much, and discontent the
best friends thou have in the world.

Now from hence, that the word glorified here comprehends under it, both
sanctification here in this world, and full and perfect happiness and glory
in heaven; and in that Gods chosen being called and justified, are said to be
glorified, that is, to be made glorious in respect of their sanctification
begun here in this life, which shall be made perfect hereafter in heaven, I
might note.

That true sanctification here in this life, is a beginning of eternal
glorification in heaven, and when men or women begin to be truly sanctified,
they are then within heaven gate, and they have then as it were one foot
already in heaven: but to that we have already spoken in part, and therefore
I pass by it, and hence in the third place we may gather.

That true sanctification begun in the souls of men, shall In whomsoever God
has wrought a measure of true holiness he will perfect it hereafter in heaven.
In whomsoever the Lord has wrought a measure of true holiness and
sanctification, he will perfect that good woke of his hereafter in heaven, and
whom he has begun to sanctify in part here in this life, he will assuredly
fully sanctify them hereafter in heaven. 1. Cor. 1^.9.10. the Apostle says,
We now know but in part, and prophecy in part, meaning here in this world, but
the time shall come, When that which is now in part shall be abolished, and
shall be made perfect, when we shall have perfect knowledge and perfect love,
and a full perfection of holiness and sanctification, namely in heaven. For
why, not to stand on this.

True sanctification in soul being the work of God, He that has begun this
good work in you, will perform it, and will make that work of his perfect,
and nothing can hinder it from coming to perfection, it must needs be so, that
where true sanctification is begun, it shall certainly be made perfect; and the
Lord having begun to sanctify any in part here in this life, he will assuredly
fully sanctify them hereafter in heaven. And take this as a ground of sweet
comfort, it may serve as a notable comfort to thee whosoever thou art, that
do find that the Lord has begun in thy soul the least measure of true
holiness and sanctification. It is many times the complaint of a poor weak
Christian, Oh I find in my self but a scant and small measure of grace and
holiness, and I find my self oppressed with dullness and deadness in regard
of good motions and of good duties, and I cannot serve God and glorify God as
I desire. Well, comfort thy self in this, that little and scant measure of
grace and holiness that is in thy soul, has been wrought by that good hand
of God which is able to add to the measure of it, and will add to it as he in
his wisdom shall see fit here in this life, and in the life to come he will
assuredly fill thy soul with fullness of grace, and with holiness in full
perfection. The Lord has laid the groundworke of grace and holiness in thy
heart, in that he has given thee an hatred of thine own sins, a resolved
purpose of not sinning against him, and a constant desire of pleasing him in
all things; and assure thy self he will go on with his own good work, and he
will in his good time perfect it; and though now thou can not serve God, nor
glorify God with a free spirit as thou desire, yet the time shall come when
thou shall be able to serve him, and to glorify him in full perfection: and
therefore bless God for that measure of grace and true holiness he has
vouchsafed to thee, and go on chearefully using the means that serve for the
daily growth of grace in thy soul, and wait thou for full holiness in time
to be given to thee. The Lord having begun to sanctify thee in part here in
this life, he will assuredly fully sanctify thee hereafter in heaven.

Now further in that the Apostle here under the word glorified, comprehends
full and perfect happiness and glory, even full glorification in heaven, this
point follows from hence.

Glorification in heaven follows necessarily on justification in the sight of
God.
glorification in heaven follows necessarily and infallibly on justification
in the sight of God, and whosoever they be that are justified in the sight of
God through Christ, they shall certainly have eternal life, happiness and
glory in heaven put on them, even full glorification of their souls and of
their bodies. And this truth is not only clear from this text, but from other
places of Scripture. Ioh. 5.24. says Christ, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, and so is justified
in the sight of my Father, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. He sets it down in the
time present, as a thing so sure and certain, as that which a man has in
present possession. And Ioh. 10.27.28. He says again, that he gives to his
sheep eternal life, even to them who hear his voice, and know him, and
follow him, that is, who believe in him, and yield obedience to his voice and
call, and are effectually called, and consequently justified in the sight of
God, He gives to them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of his hands. Ephesians. 5.25.26. The Apostle says, Christ
gave himself for his Church, that he might cleanse it by the washing of water:
that is, that he might wash it, and purge it by his blood from the guilt of
sin, washing by the water of Baptism being a sign and seal of that
washing: and then he subioynes verse 27. That he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, that it being washed here in his blood, it might hereafter be
set before him a glorious Church, and fully glorified in heaven. These
testimonies do sufficiently confirm the truth of the point in hand, that
glorification in heaven follows necessarily and infallibly on justification in
the sight of God, and that all such as are justified in the sight of God, shall
assuredly be fully glorified in heaven; and the reason and ground of it is
plain, namely this.

Such as are justified in the sight of God, they are in Christ, God has given
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, and he that has the Son has
life, and is sure of eternal life: and as he says, Chap. 3.2. We that are now
sons of God, we that are now justified in the sight of God, and the adopted
sons of God, shall be like to Christ in glory, when he shall appear in
glory. It must needs then be a truth, that glorification in heaven follows
necessarily and infallibly on justification in the sight of God, and that all
that are justified in the sight of God shall assuredly be fully glorified in
heaven, and have fullness of glory put on them in their souls and in their
bodies in heaven.

That justified persons may fall away from that state of theirs, discovered to
be a gross error.
that that is erroneous and false that is held and taught by the Papists and
Anabaptists, and other erring spirits: That such as are justified in the sight
of God through Christ, they may fall away from that state of theirs, and may
come to be out of the favor of God, yea may so far fall, as that they may
fall short of glorification in heaven, and may utterly perish and be damned in
hell. A doctrine devilish, and directly contrary to the truth now delivered
and proved out of the holy word of God: yea it is a position and doctrine
directly thwarting and crossing the plain evidence of the word of God in many
places of it. Christ says in the place cited, Ioh. 10.28. I give to my sheep
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out
of my hand. Yea, say the Anabaptists, so long as they continue the sheep of
Christ. An idle gloss. Christ says, they shall continue to be his sheep, and
shall never perish: they say, so long as they continue his sheep, implying
that they may not continue to be the sheep of Christ; clean contrary to the
purpose of Christ, he being able to keep them, and none able to take them out
of his hand. To which purpose the Apostle Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.5. True
believers, and such as are justified in and through Christ, They be kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. Their eternal happiness is not in
their own keeping, but it is kept for them, and they for it, by the power of
God: and is it then possible that they should fall short of life and happiness
and glory in heaven? No, no, it cannot possibly be; neither the fraud nor
force of the world nor the devil without, nor of their own flesh within, can
deprive them of it, their eternal happiness and glorification is laid up in
the grace, mercy, and power of God: and therefore they cannot possibly be
disappointed of it.

serve as a ground of sweet and heavenly comfort to as many as find themselves
justified in the sight of God through Christ: Comfort to such as find
themselves justified in Gods sight through Christ.
and a man may find himself so to be by his effectual calling and
sanctification. Now then do thou find thy self in the state of justification
in the sight of God? Certainly then thou art sure of glorification in heaven,
and thou shall hereafter as certainly be invested with glory in heaven, as
Christ himself is now possessed of it. What an excellent comfort may that be
to thy soul? the meditation of that may cheer thee up, and cause thee to sing
and rejoice in the midst of thy greatest troubles and afflictions, and when
thou art made heavy with diverse tentations. 1. Pet. 1.6. For what though here
thou art exceedingly vexed, and have much disgrace cast upon thee, yet the
meditation of this may hold up thy fainting heart, with comfort that one day
thou shall be freed from all, and shall as surely be invested with eternal
happiness and glory in heaven, as Christ himself now lives in heaven: and
the meditation of this may indeed sway with thee to thy comfort in thy greatest
afflictions. Consider the weight of happiness and glory that shall be put on
thee in heaven, and though it be unspeakable and glorious, yet consider it in
the beginnings of it here in this life. The peace of a good conscience here in
this life, though it be imperfect, and many times intercepted and troubled, yet
is it as a continual feast: what then will be the comfort of it in heaven,
when it shall be in full perfection? The joy that comes from the assurance of
Gods love here in this world, is unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1.8. what
then will be the greatness of it, when it shall be in fullness in the kingdom
of heaven, where the believing soul shall possess God himself in Christ, as
the husband of it, and the sufficient portion of it? Oh then think on the
weight of thy happiness and glory that shall be put on thy soul and body in
heaven, by the beginnings of it here in this life, and that will be a notable
ground of comfort to thee in thy greatest afflictions; and remember to thy
comfort, thou being justified in the sight of God through Christ, thou shall
assuredly be glorified in heaven, and thou art as sure of it as if thou were
already in heaven.

All is of God, from predestination to glorification, and the praise of all
belongs to him alone
We see here that from predestination to glorification, all is of God, and of
his free love, and glorification in heaven is as well a fruit of Gods love as
predestination, effectual calling, and justification: and therefore the praise
of all belongs to God, and we are bound to magnify and to praise him for all,
for our election, vocation, justification, sanctification, and glorification in
heaven: which were not so, if we had free will as the Papists and Anabaptists
teach, and of our selves could choose life and salvation; we had then cause to
thank our selves, and not God, he having done no more for us then for such as
go to hell, it being in their power to choose life and salvation if they would,
as in ours, and so we should derogate and detract from the glory of Gods free
grace and mercy, and of his free love in Jesus Christ, which is the cause and
ground of all, from predestination to glorification in heaven. Come we now the
31. verse.

VERSE 31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who
can be against us?


IN this verse our Apostle falls on a third part of this Chapter, the conclusion
of it, which is continued from this verse to the end of the Chapter. And in
this conclusion the Apostle sets before us the victory and triumph of a true
believer, and of a justified person, and he brings him in as it were triumphing
over all the assaults and encounters of all enemies, and over all temptations
and trials whatsoever, showing that no assault or temptation ought to be feared
of a true believer and of a justified person, declaring the confidence of true
believers, in regard of their immutable state and condition, and of their
certainty of salvation, grounded on the immutable love and counsel of God.

Now the Apostle in setting down this magnificent and glorious triumph of a
true believer and of a justified person, opposes to all temptations and
assaults that might disquiet him, and trouble him, contrary causes of comfort,
removing every assault with a contrary cause and ground of comfort; and this
he does first generally verse 31. and then more particularly in the verses
following: we will lay them forth as we shall come to them.

First then in this verse 31. we have laid down this cause and ground of
comfort in general.

That howsoever all things on all sides are against true believes, justified
persons, yet indeed none can be against them, because God is on their side, or
for them. If God be on our side, or for us (says the Apostle) who can be
against us?

And to this ground of comfort he makes way by a question and interrogation,
What shall we say to these things?

So that in this verse, we have first a question which has respect to the
things foregoing, What shall we then say to these things? Secondly, an answer
containing a ground of sweet comfort to all true believers, that God being on
their side, or for them, what can be against them?

Come we to open and to explane the words of this verse touching the sense and
meaning of them. Interpretation*
What shall we then say to these things? To what things, may some say? Surely
to the things going before, from the beginning of the Chapter hitherto, the
grounds of comfort before delivered. As that there is no condemnation to such
as are in Christ Jesus: that true believers have the Spirit of Christ: are the
children of God: have all things working together for the best unto them: and
that they are predestined, and called, and justified, and glorified. The
Apostle having delivered these grounds of comfort, he here breaks out into an
admiration and exclamation, and says, What shall we then say to these things?
as if he had said, These things being so, oh then what shall we say to them?
And his meaning in these words, What shall we say, is, what comfort may we
gather from these things? let us not pass them by, or let them slip without
meditation and application, the comfort is exceeding great: what admirable
sweetness, and what heavenly comfort may we suck out of these things, if they
be duly thought on and soundly applied? If God be on our side, or for us. The
word If, is not here used doubtfully, but affirmatively, and the meaning is,
God being on our side, or for us. Now God is said to be on our side, or with
us, either by his general power upholding us, as he does uphold and sustain
all things in their being by his mighty word, Hebr. 1.3. or by his special
care and providence, as a loving and gracious father and protector. In which
sense David speaks, Psalm. 23.4. Though I should walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me: thou Lord art
with me as a gracious father and protector. And so Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is
with me, I will not fear what man can do unto me. And thus it is here meant,
God being on our side, or for us, or with us, as a gracious father and
protector, as has been said before, God predestinating us to life and
salvation, calling and justifying us, sanctifying of us, purposing in time
fully to glorify us: God being thus with us, or for us, Who can be against us?
The words are in the original, (...), who against us? as if he had said, none
against us, more emphatically put down by way of question, who can be against
us? Yet the meaning of the Apostle in these words is not, that God being with
us or on our side, none are against us, for many bend themselves against Gods
children, the devil, the world, persecuting tyrants, idolaters, and such like,
yea many times their nearest friends and kindred: but his meaning is, though
the devil, the world, and other enemies do set themselves against us, yet they
cannot prevail against us in that which they intend, namely, to our hurt; and
their setting themselves aginst us is but as throwing stones against the wind,
in vain and to no purpose in respect of their end. Now then thus conceive we
the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said.

Now then these grounds of comfort being made known to us, that there is no
condemnation to such as are in Christ Jesus, that true believers have the
Spirit of Christ, and are the children of God, and have all things working
together for the best unto them, and are predestinate, called, justified, and
glorified: oh what shall we say to these things? what comfort may we that are
true believers gather from these things? let us not pass them by, or let them
slip without meditation and application. Oh what admirable sweetness and
heavenly comfort may we suck out of these things duly thought on, and soundly
applied by us! For why, God being on our side, or with us, as has been said,
predestinating us to life and salvation, calling, justifying, and sanctifying
us, and purposing in time fully to glorify us, God I say, being thus with us,
even by his special care and providence as a loving and gracious father and
protector, though the devil, the world, and other enemies do set against us,
yet can they not prevail against us to our hurt; and their setting themselves
against us is but in vain, and to no purpose, in respect of the end they aim
at.

Now first observe we; the Apostle having before delivered grounds of sweet
comfort, he here pawseth on them, and here stays his thoughts on them by
meditation and application, and he breaks out and says, What shall we then
say to these things? let us not pass them by, or let them slip without
meditation and application: oh what sweet and heavenly comfort may we gather
from these things duly thought on, and soundly applied by us! Whence we are
taught thus much.

That we are to meditate on the good things, the divine We ought to meditate on
the good things we hear and learn out of Gods holy word, and to make use of
them.
and to make use of them to our selves: we must not rest only in hearing of
good things made known to us out of the word of God, whether they be in
matters of instruction or reproof, nor in the vnderstnding and knowledge of
them, nor yet in the use and application that is made of them in the public
ministry of the word, but we must recall those good things to mind, and
further meditate and think on them, and labor to make them more profitable by
further and more particular application of them to our selves. When we have
heard good things, we must say to our selves and others, what shall we say to
these things, and so make a more particular application of them to our selves.
And this duty we find urged and pressed on us, Deuteronomy. 11.18. says the Lord,
You shall lay up these my words in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them
for a sign unto your hand, that they may be as a front let between your eyes.
The like is charged on Joshua, Josh. 1.8. Let not this book of the Law depart
out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe
and do according to all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy
way prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. Psalm. 1.2. the blessed
man is described by this as a special qualification, that he meditates in the
Law of God day and night. Job 5. Eliphas having told Job what he conceived was
fit for him to do, and showed him the Lords dealing with good and godly men, he
concludes verse 27. Lo thus have we enquired of it, and so it is, hear this
and know it for thy self, make thy use of it to thine own particular good.
Heb. 12.5. says the holy Ghost, Have ye forgotten the consolation which
speaks unto you, as unto children? as if he had said, Do not you remember and
think on that ye have heard and learned out of the word of God? and then he
subioynes a place out of Pro. 3.11. My son, refuse not the chastening of the
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him: plainly teaching the duty we
now stand on, that we are to meditate on the good things that we hear and
learn out of the holy word of God, and not rest in hearing or understanding of
them, nor yet in the use that is made of them in the public ministry of the
word of God, that such a use is to be made of them, but we must further think
on them, and labor to make them more profitable by further and more particular
application of them to our selves.

we can better apply good things to our own particular benefit and comfort
then our teachers do or can do. And therefore we are not to rest in our hearing
or understanding of good things made known to us out of the holy word of God,
nor yet in the use that is made of them, as that such a use or such a use is to
be made of them; but we must further meditate and think on them, and labor to
make them more profitable by further and more particular application of them to
our selves; Reproof of such as rest in their hearing or understanding of good
things made known to them out of the word of God.
Yea some are so far from meditating and thinking on things made known to
them out of the word of God, and from making further and more particular
application of them to themselves, as they purposely put them clean out of
their minds, and would not willingly think on them unless it be with dislike,
especially if they be just reproves of the sins whereof they are guilty.
And for matter of instruction and comfort delivered in the public ministry
of the word, alas how few be there that do meditate and think of those things
after they have heard them. It may be in the time of hearing of good things,
and whilst thou art in the Church, thou art somewhat moved and affected with
them, and thou hear comforts delivered out of the word of God with much
delight, and thy mind seems to be ravished with joy in the time of the hearing
of them: but that joy and that delight is commonly but as a flash of lightening
suddenly gone, and thou let good things slip away from thee, as if thou
had never heard them, and when thou art gone home to thine house thou give
thy mind to think on other things, and thy tongue to speak of other things:
thou never say, what worthy instructions, or what sweet comforts have this
day been made known to us; oh what shall we say to these things? shall we let
these things slip from us without meditation, and without further application,
and thereupon set thy self to meditate and to think on them further, and
labourest to make them more profitable by further and more particular
application of them to thy self? No, no, this is far from the most of us.
Well let us take notice of it, that this is our duty, and this we ought to do.
And to help us forward in this duty, consider we these things.

Motives to stir us up to meditate on things heard and learned out of Gods
word.
First, all the comfort and all the good we do or can gather from the word of
God, will be found little enough in the time of trial, and in the hour of
temptation, or hour of death.

And again, if we rest in our conceiving and understanding of that we hear
and learn in the public ministry of the word, and do not further meditate
and think on it, and labor to make it more profitable by further and more
particular application of it to our selves, our knowledge may end in ignorance
and profaneness. And withal consider, that the holy Spirit of God does
communicate to them that set themselves to meditate and think on good things
heard and learned out of the word of God with care and conscience to profit by
the same, more heavenly things then they can possibly reach to, either by
hearing or reading. And hence it was no doubt that David had more understanding
then all his teachers, because the testimonies of the Lord were his
counselors, Psalm. 119.99.

Come we now to a second general, laid before us in this verse, in these
words, If God be on our side, who can be against us? that is, as we have heard,
God being on our side, or for us, or with us, (as has been said)
predestinating us to life and salvation, calling, justifying, and sanctifying
us, and purposing in time fully to glorify us, God I say, being thus with us,
even by his special care and providence, and so as a loving and gracious
father, and powerful protector watching over us by his special care and
providence, though the devil, the world, and many enemies set themselves
against us to our hurt, and their setting themselves against us is but in
vain, and to no purpose in respect of the end they aim at, now these words
thus understood, three things are hence offered to be stood on, I will speak
of them in order.

God is with them after a special manner who belong to his election, and are
of him effectually called, and justified in his sight.
and are of him effectually called, and justified in his sight. Though the Lord
be with all men and women in the world, sustaining them in their being,
otherwise they cannot continue one minute of an hour, and in him they live,
move, and have their being, Act. 17.28. yet he is not with all after a special
manner, but only with his elect, being now effectually called, and justified
in his sight; with them, and with them only is the Lord as a gracious and
loving father, and as a powerful protector, watching over them by his special
care and providence. Psalm. 91.1. They who dwell in the secret of the most High,
they abide in the shadow of the Almighty: and who are they? he subioynes verse
2. Such as have God their God, and trust in him: they only are safe. And as it
is verse 4. They only are under the cover of his wings, and they are sure
under his feathers: the Lord does as it were cover them, and shelter them as an
hen does her chickens under her wings. To which similitude Christ alludes,
Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen
gathers her chickens under her wings? and he is to them as a shield, as a
buckler. And to the same purpose speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.18. The eye of
the Lord is on them that fear him: not on all, but on them that fear him, and
on them that trust in his mercy. The meaning is, the Lord has a special eye
and regard to them, and his providence is over them in special manner. The
phrase there used is very weighty, it carries this sense, that the Lord as it
were sits in his watchtower spying the wants and necessities of them that
fear him, and carefully looking to them, and continually watching over them
after a special manner, and over none but them. For why, the reason of this
truth is this.

Such as belong to Gods election, of the household and family of God, Ephesians.
2.19. Yea they truly are children in that family, and are accepted of God in
and through his beloved Son, the Son of his love the Lord Jesus, who is the
foundation and complement of all the promises of God. In him they are Yea, and
are in him Amen, 2. Corin. 1.20. and in him justified persons have right and
title to all Gods promises, and so to the promise of Gods special providence
and protection, and that he will be with them after a special manner, and they
only have title to that promise, and none but they. And therefore howsoever
the Lord be with all men and women in the world, sustaining them in their
being, yet he is only with his elect now effectually called and justified in
and after a special manner, as a loving father, and as a powerful protector.
Would thou then, whosoever thou art, be sure of it, How men may have good
assurance that God is with them after a special manner.
as a loving and gracious father, and as a powerful protector, watching over
thee by his special providence? then labor thou and never rest till thou find
that thou have good evidence of thy election to life and salvation, and that
thou art effectually called and justified in and through Christ, and that thou
have true grace in thine heart. Alas, thousands in the world think that God is
with them, and God keeps them by his special providence, and yet they have no
other ground for it but a vain presumption, and blind hope of their own. When
they lie down at night on their beds, they hope God will keep them safe till
morning, yet they have no other ground for it but their own blind conceit. And
do not many judge of Gods presence with them by their thriuing in outward
things? Do they not think God is with them after a special manner, because
they prosper in the world? Is it not a usual speech of wicked worldlings who
have gotten abundance of wealth by unlawful means, by usury, extortion, and
such like, God has been with them, and God has blessed them hitherto, and
they hope he will still be with them, and still bless them? Poor souls, they
measure Gods presence and his being with them after a special manner, by a
leaden rule. Profane Esau, and the rich glutton in the Gospel, who suddenly
went down to hell, had as good evidence of Gods special presence and of his
being with them after a special manner as they have. And know it whosoever thou
art, if thou be not effectually called and justified in the sight of God, and
so a child of God, God is no more with thee then he is with the brute beast,
the horse or ox; and he has no more care over thee, then ^e has over the
reprobate and vilest wretches that live in the world, he sustaines them in
their being, and so he does thee, and thou art as yet but under the long
sufferance of God as the wicked are, and there is but a step between them and
destruction. Oh then never rest till thou find that thou art one that do
belong to Gods election, that thou art effectually called and justified in and
through Christ, and that thou have true grace in thine heart, and that thou
walk not after the steps of the wicked. That indeed will give thee good
assurance of it, that God is with thee after a special manner, as a loving and
kind father, and powerful protector, watching over thee continually by his
special providence, and that thou art under the special providence of God.

Now a second thing offered from these words, If God be on our side, or for us,
or with us, who can be against us? being understood as they have been
expounded, is this.

That such as have God on their side, for them, or with Gods children and
justified persons want not some to oppose them.
and to set themselves against them: for (as I have showed you) the Apostles
meaning is, in saying God being on our side, or for us, or with us, who can be
against us? is not, that none are against Gods children and true believers; but
though the devil, the world, and other enemies do oppress them, yet they
cannot prevail to their hurt. So then this is employed, and it arises from
hence naturally,

That Gods children, justified persons, or members of Christ, who have God on
their side, or for them, or with them, they meet with opposition, they have
some who oppose them, and set themselves against them, yea many rise up against
them, as David complained, when he fled from Absalom, as Psalm. 31. The devil,
the world, persecuting tyrants, Idolaters, heretics, and such like, these set
themselves against God; and this Christ has foretold, Ioh. 16.33. In the world
(says he) ye shall have affliction and trouble, but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world: in the world ye shall be sure to meet with many rubs, and
much opposition. Yea he has foretold, Luke 12.52.53. that there shall be five
dwelling together in one house, divided and set against one another, The father
against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the mother. And Math. 10.36. that a man's
enemies shall be they of his own household: as David complained out of his own
experience, Psalm. 41.9. My familiar friend (says he) whom I trusted, which did
eat my bread, has lift up the heel against me, has spurned at me, and set
himself against me. And this truth might be further exemplified from the
beginning since the fall of Adam to this very day, and daily experience shows
it so to be: we see it, or we may see it, that the children of God, who have
God on their side, or for them, or with them, they are opposed and set against,
not only by the devil, and the world, and by enemies abroad, but many times
by their own kindred and nearest friends: the father sets himself against the
son because he is religious, the son against the father, and the mother
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother: and the reasons of
it are these.

enimitie between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, Genesis
3.15. and those two seeds are mingled together in this world.



And therefore it is no wonder that Gods children, justified persons, and
members of Christ, who have God on their side, for them, or with them, do meet
with opposition, and that they have the devil, the world, and many enemies
opposing them, and setting themselves against them. And for the use of this.

We are not to think it strange that many do oppose Gods children.
and setting themselves against them, that is no new or strange thing, as 1.
Pet. 4.12. it has been so, and it will be so to the end. The world commonly
thinks Gods children turbulent and troublesome persons, busybodies, and that
the course of their life is not good. Why so? For sooth because many speak
against them, and many set themselves against them. Oh say men, these
Puritanes, who are accounted the children of God, are surely vile and bad
persons, so many mouths are opened against them, and so many set themselves
against them: would men set themselves against them, if there were not just
cause? The Apostle says, 1. Pet. 3.13. Who is it that will harm you, if ye
follow that which is good? But mark what the Apostle subioynes verse 14.
Notwithstanding blessed are ye, if ye suffer for righteousness sake: giving us
to understand, that the wicked of the world do many times harm Gods children
because they are holy, and the devil and the world will oppose and set
themselves against them because they are the children of God. It is no new
thing that so they do, and we may not so conclude, that Gods children are vile
and bad persons, and that the course of their life is not good, because they
are opposed and much set against in the world: that is no good conclusion, that
is but the conclusion of the blind multitude; and yet sometimes a child of God
is ready thus to conclude against himself, and to think, Surely I am not in
the right way, and the course of my life is not good and pleasing to God, and
to say as Gedeon did, Judge. 6.13. If the Lord were with me, why am I then thus
troubled, and thus opposed and set against? I find terrors within, and
fightings without, and I am on every side hardly dealt withal, and ill
entreated, and therefore I doubt of my standing, and that the course of my life
is not good and pleasing to God. Now this is no good conclusion, Satan
thrusts it on thee whosoever thou art, taking advantage of thy weakness. The
heathen man could say, Laudari a non laudato est illaudari, to be praised of a
wicked man is rather dispraise then commendation. And so to be ill spoken of
and set against by wicked men, no occasion being given them, is no
disparagement, it may rather be an argument of comfort, and may persuade thee
that thou art in the right way, and in a good course, because the devil; and
the instruments of the devil, the wicked of the world, heretics, and
Atheists, and such like, speak evil of thee, and set themselves against thee.
The devil were not like himself, nor the world like it self, if they did not
set themselves against Gods children. Ioh. 15.19. Christ says, If ye were of
the world, the world would love you, but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world: because I have called you out of the corrupt
state of the world, and you now differ from the world in the disposition of
your hearts, and in the course of your lives, Therefore the world hates you,
and cannot but oppose against you. Thus it has been, thus it is, and thus it
will be to the end of the world: and therefore think it not strange, thou
being a child of God, that thou meetest with opposition, and that the wicked of
the world set against thee: the more holy thou art, the more will the devil
rage against thee, and the more will the wicked of the world oppose against
thee, and be not thereupon discouraged, but draw nearer to God, and go on
chearefully and comfortably.

Come we now to the third thing offered from these words, If God be on our
side, who can be against us? These words being understood, as before they have
been expounded, do further offer unto us this point.

Neither men nor Angels, nor all the devils in hell, opposing Gods children who
have God on their side, can prevail against them to their hurt.
Indeed the devil and the world, persecuting tyrants, Idolaters, and such
like, may molest, and trouble, and vex, and disquiet Gods. children, justified
persons, the Lord suffering them so to do, but they cannot touch one hair of
their head further then he gives them leave: and though they do touch them,
yet they cannot possibly prevail against them, either to hinder their comfort
or work of grace in them here, or their happiness and glory hereafter in
heaven, because God is on their side, or for them, or with them after a
special manner. And on this ground does the Lord comfort his people, and
encourage them against the rage and fury of all their enemies, and bids them
not to fear their enemies at all, Isai. 41.10.11. Fear not, for I am with
thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee and help thee,
and I will sustain thee with the right hand of my justice. Behold, all they
that provoke thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing,
and they that strive with thee shall perish. And verse 14. Fear not thou worm
Jacob, and ye men of Israel, though thou be but as a worm that every one
treads on, I will help thee says the Lord, and thy redeemer, the holy one of
Israel. And Chap. 43.1.2. Fear not says the Lord, for I have redeemed thee, I
have called thee by thy name, thou art mine, when thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee, and through the floods that they do not ouerflow
thee. When thou walk through the very fire thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. And hence it was that David was so confident,
and held himself so safe and so secure under the Lords special protection, as
he says, Psalm. 3.6. He would not be afraid for ten thousands of the people
that should beset him round about. And Psalm. 23.4. Though he should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, he would fear no evil, for the
Lord was with him. And Psalm. 27.1. says he, The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? And verse 3. Though an host pitched against me, mine heart
should not be afraid, though war be raised against me I will trust in this.
And so in many other Psalms David makes known to us, that he rested secure
under the special providence of God, and that he was persuaded, though many
enemies should oppose and set themselves against him, yet they should not
prevail against him to his hurt, the Lord being on his side, for him, or with
him, after a special manner. Other examples we have, proving and confirming
the truth of the point delivered: to instance in one or two in stead of many.
1. King. 19.2. Iesabell vowed the death of Elijah the holy Prophet of the Lord,
yet the Lord being with him he was hid from her hands, and she failed of the
evil she intended against him. So wicked Haman fully purposed to root out the
Jews, and attempted many ways their destruction for Mordecai his sake whom he
hated, but the Lord being with them, they were delivered, and Haman himself
was hanged on a tree that he had provided for the death of Mordecai, Hest.
7.10. And we read Act. 23.10.13. That there were more then forty men who had
bound themselves with an oath, that they would neither eat nor drink till
they had killed Paul: yet the Lord being with him, we find that their
conspiracy was discovered, and Paul was delivered out of their hands. The
truth of this point then appears, that though the devil, the world, and many
enemies, do oppose and set themselves against Gods children, justified persons,
who have God on their sides, for them or with them after a special manner, yet
can they not hurt them, they cannot prevail in that evil they intend against
them, nor so much as touch on hair of their heads, further then the Lord is
pleased to suffer them: for why.

Of him, by him, and for him, are all things, Romans 11.36.

And in him, they live, move, and have their being, Act. 17.28. And as he
says, Isai. 43.13. There is none that can deliver out of mine hand, I will do
it, and who shall let it? The world is but vanity, the devil as a scarcrow,
and the greatest men in the world but as a bubble, in comparison of the great
Lord of heaven and earth. And therefore though the devil, the world, and many
mighty enemies do oppose and set themselves against Gods children, justified
persons, yet they having the mighty and powerful God on their side, for them,
or with them, what can they do against them? Assuredly nothing to their hurt,
they cannot touch one hair of their heads but as he gives them leave: and
though the Lord do suffer them to touch his children, yet can they not possibly
prevail against them, to the hindering either of their comfort in the work of
grace in them here in this world, or the hindering of their happiness and
glory in heaven. And for the use of this.

First on this ground of truth it follows, that the devil and The devil and
his instruments do but discover their folly in setting themselves against Gods
children.
in so doing, they do but as it were cast stones against the wind, they labor
but in vain, they shall never prevail against them to their hurt, God is on
the side of his Church and children, and he stands for their defense, and
therefore their enemies cannot possibly prevail against them to their hurt. We
know that now the enemies of the Church and people of God and of the Gospel,
they band themselves together, and they make themselves strong, and they plot
and devise all the mischief they can against such as profess the truth of
religion, yea they imagine that they shall effect their purpose, and they bear
themselves high on it. Well, the Lord is the same strong and powerful God that
he has been, and he is able to disappoint them, and even suddenly to ouerturne
their counsels, and to bring to naught their wicked plots and devices, we have
had experience of it. How suddenly did the Lord ouerturne the wicked purpose of
the cursed leaguers, Anno 1588. when that invincible navy, as they made
account, came against this land, and they made no question but that they should
certainly overcome it? And how did the Lord wonderfully defeat that gunpowder
plot, and bring confusion on the heads of the plotters of it? The Lord is still
the same strong God, and he is now as able to bring to naught the counsels of
the wicked enemies of his Church as heretofore, and certainly they can go no
further in their plots and practices against his people then he will give them
leave, and they shall but execute the Lords own purpose, and what he has
appointed. Indeed I grant they may be as rods in the hand of God for the
correction and trial of his children, and the Lord may suffer them to go far
for our sins: but assuredly his children shall never be given over, to be
used or rather abused and wronged of them at their pleasure and as they list.
No, no, the Lord stands for the defense of his children, and will never suffer
their enemies to prevail against them to their hurt. The counsel of the Lord
shall stand for ever, Psalm. 33.11. and there is no counsel, policy, or
strength, that can prevail against his purpose. The enemies of the Gospel do
but what the Lord has appointed, and what he will suffer them, and no more can
they do though they burst themselves, and when they have done the Lords work
he will ease his children of them, and take them as rods and throw them into
the fire. And though, as the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 4.17. Judgment begin at
the house of God, yet certainly it shall not there rest, but from thence be
derived to the wicked enemies of the Church to continue on them for ever.

The safety and security of Gods children is exceeding great.
What man living on the face of the earth, be he the greatest Monarch in the
world, having the command of many nations, and having many thousands standing
about him and garding him continually, can say and that truly, (unless he be a
child of God) that he is so safe and so secure, that neither men nor devils can
break in on him and prevail against him to his hurt? Now such is the safety
and security of a child of God, he may boldly say that he is safe and secure
under the shadow of the Lords wings, and under his special providence, yea so
safe and so secure as that none, either men or devils, can hurt him, unless
they can overcome God who is omnipotent. Oh then thou that art a child of God,
take notice of thy safety and security, and learn not to fear any enemy
whatsoever. The highest sinner in the world is unable to hurt thee that art the
lowest and the meanest of the Saints of God: thou have on thy side a stronger
then all the men in the world, and then all the devils in hell, and they are
not able to touch one hair of thine head further then he gives them leave: and
though they do touch thee yet shall they not be able to hurt thee; and
therefore fear thou not what either men or devils can do against thee. But
happily thou will say, Daniel in the Lions den, and with Joseph in prison, and
with the companions of Daniel in the hot fiery furnace, and he will make thee
able to stand in the time of the greatest trial, fear it not; keep thou
close to God, and be thou with him in the affiance of thine heart, and he will
be with thee, as Azariah said, 2. Chron. 15.2. honor thou the Lord so far as
to trust in him, and do thou rely, and rest thy self, thy soul, thy body,
and all that thou have on his power and providence, and assure thy self he
will not fail thee; he will be with thee after a special manner in thy
greatest trouble, and in the greatest trial that can befall thee: think on
that to thy comfort. Come we now to the 32. Verse.

VERSE 32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death: how
shall he not with him give us all things also?


IN this Verse our Apostle opposes to a particular assault and temptation that
might happily trouble and disquiet the true believing Romans and other true
believers, a contrary ground of comfort: and he here preuents an objection
that might be made by them, namely this: They might say, Paul you tell us that
God being on our side, for us, or with us, after a special manner, as a
loving, kind, and gracious father, and powerful protector, none can be against
us, none can prevail against us to our hurt: but in the mean while we must
tell you, that we are pressed with want, and penury, and extreme poverty,
and lack, and want of things needful. Now this the Apostle meets withal, and
in the words of this verse he makes known to the believing Romans and to other
true believers, that God will certainly and that freely give them all things
needful, and they need not to be distracted and troubled with diffidence and
doubting, in respect of any good thing needful for them, but to rest on it,
and to be fully persuaded of it, that God will supply all their wants, and not
suffer them to want any needful good thing. And this ground of comfort the
Apostle here puts down, not nakedly and barely, but in the proof of it, and
he proves it by an argument from the greater to the less, that God having
given to his children, to true believers, the greater, he will not deny them
the less, but will certainly give it to them; he having given them Christ who
is the greatest good thing, and more worth then a thousand worlds, he will not
suffer them to want other good things needful, that is the Apostles argument,
and that is amplified.

1. By a description of Christ, that he is Gods own Son, Who spared not his
own Son. And

2. By an opposition of actions, that God spared not, but gave up or delivered
that Son of his.

Together with the persons for whom, namely, for us all: Who spared not his
Son, but gave him for us all.

And then follows the Apostles inference which he infers on that, that God
spared not, but gave him for us all. That therefore he will deny us no good
thing needful, but together with his Son he will give us all needful good
things: which the Apostle delivers more emphetically by way of interrogation:
How shall he not with him give us all things also? So then in this verse we
have two things in general laid before us.

1. First this proposition, that God has not spared his own Son, but has
given him for all true believers.

2. An inference following necessarily on this, that therefore God will not
deny true believers any good thing.

Let us now examine the words of this verse touching the sense and meaning of
them. Who spared not his own Son, Interpretation.
or he that spared not: that is, God, spoken of verse before. And those words
spared not, are very weighty, they signify more then if it had been said, he
gave, though freely, and without any desert at all: for one may give and that
freely, out of his own abundance, but under those words spared not, is implied
the raritie and excellency of the thing given, and the great worth of the
gift, as a man is said to spare no cost when he lays it on and bestows the
dearest thing he has; as if it had been said, God who has not with held or
kept back that gift of the greatest price and worth, even that most rich and
precious gift, His own Son: that is, his eternal Son, begotten of him
from all eternity, and of the same eternal essence with God the Father, and
so his only begotten Son, as he is called, Ioh. 3.16. his own dear Son,
But gave him, or delivered him up. The meaning is, God gave his Son to death,
(for that being not in the text original, may well be supplied) as the
principal cause. Judas is said to be traditor, or to deliver him up, Matthew.
26.15. as the cause isntrumental, but God delivered him up as the principal
cause, ordering and governing the tradition of Judas, and his delivering him
up, as we have it, Act. 2.23. He was taken by the hands of the wicked, being
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, and so
crucified and slain for us all: that is, for me and you, and all true
believers. As if he had said, Not only for me and for other Apostles, and for
you and others that are more eminent in grace, but for all that do or shall
believe in Christ, according to that of Christ his prayer, Ioh. 17.20. I pray
not for these alone, but for them also that shall believe in me through their
word. How shall he not with him, namely, with Christ his Son, give us all
things? and that freely, for so the word (...) signifies. And by all things, we
are to understand all good things, even all the benefits of Christ, and all the
good things of this life, so far as he in wisdom sees needful and meet
for us. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this
verse, as if he had said.

Who has not withheld or kept back that gift of the greatest price and worth,
that most rare and precious gift, his own dear Son, the Son of his love,
his eternal Son, his only begotten Son, but has (as the principal
cause) given him or delivered him up to death for me, and you, and all true
believers, for all that do or shall believe in him: it cannot be but that
together with that Son of his Christ Jesus, he will freely give us all good
things, even all the benefits of Christ, and all the good things of this life,
so far as he in his wisdom sees needful and fit for us.

Now first observe we, the Apostle here says not barely, that God gave his
own Son to death for his chosen, and for true believers, but he says, he
spared not his own Son; though his Son was most dear to him, the Son of
his love, yet he thought him not too dear to be given for his chosen, he
spared not the most precious and dear thing that he had, even his own dear
Son, but gave him to death for his chosen. Hence then we are given to
understand thus much.

Gods giving of his Son for his chosen was a manifestation of the exceeding
greatness of his love to them.
in giving his own Son to die for them. His giving of his Son for his
chosen, was not only a fruit of his love, but also a manifestation and a
declaration of the exceeding greatness of his love to them, as Christ says,
Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him should not perish but have everlasting life. He loved
his chosen, and he loved them so richly and so abundantly, as that he spared
not his only begotten Son, but gave him for them. And as the Apostle says,
Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us, he commended or made his love
appear exceeding great and abundant, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
dyed for us. That God gave his Son to dye for us, therein he set forth the
wonderful greatness of his love. Nothing is dearer to a man then his own
son: who knows not the strong affection of a tender hearted father toward
his son? common experience shows it to be exceeding great. David showed it
in bewailing the death of his ungracious and rebellious son Absalom, 2. Sam.
18.33. O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God I had dyed for
thee Absalom, my son, my son. And therefore God set forth his love to be
wonderful and unspeakable, in that he sent not an Angel, or an Archangell,
or any of his glorious creatures to dye for his chosen, but his own dear
Son, the Son of his love, and of the same eternal essence with his own holy
and glorious Majesty. Great was the love that Abraham showed toward God in yt
he was ready to offer his son Isaac at the commandment of the Lord, Genesis
22. but the love of God to his chosen far surmounteth that love of Abraham,
in that he spared not his own Son, but gave him to dye for them. For God
loved Christ his Son better then Abraham could love Isaac his son; Gods
love to Christ being infinite as his own blessed Majesty is, and God
voluntarily and freely gave his Son, which Abraham would not have done
without a command. Again Isaac was to be offered after the manner of holy
sacrifices, but Christ the Son of God was given up to a shameful and an
accursed death, and suffered after the manner of malefactors. And yet further,
Isaac was in the hands of a tender hearted father, but Christ was delivered
into the hands of barbarous and cruel enemies. And therefore doubtless the
love of God in giving his Son to die for his chosen, was far beyond the
love of Abraham in offering his son Isaac. One calls the love of God in this
respect an hyperbole, an excess of love, a miracle of love, and the Apostle
calls it a love passing knowledge, beyond the reach of man's brain, Ephesians. 3.19.

We are to acknowledge it with all thankfulness, that God has exceedingly
manifested his love toward us in giving his own Son to dye for us.
as every one will be held) we are to acknowledge it with all thankfulness,
that the Lord has exceedingly manifested his love toward us, in not sparing
his own Son, but has given him to die for us, and in lieu of his love we
are to love him again, and to labor to be thankful to him for his great
love. Those who find loving and bounteous Lords amongst men, how will they
tell of their bounty and liberality, and of every circumstance wherein they
have done them any favor? and how will they protest themselves to be devoted
to their service? How impatient are they if they see or know any thing tending
to their disparagement? What a shame then is it for us, to walk neither
feeling our hearts affected, nor having our mouths opened, to magnify him who
has showed so great love to us, as not to spare his own Son for our sakes?
Has God of his mere free love not spared his own dear Son? how then can
thou find in thine heart to offend such a good God? Oh spare not thou for his
sake to cut off thy dearest sin, sin that is as dear to thee as any member
of thy body; yea spare not thou thy dearest blood for his sake, if he call
thee to shed it: he spared not the blood of his own dear Son for thy sake.
Can thou think thou love God as thou art bound, when thou will not at his
bidding, and when he commands thee, forsake so much as a cup of wine or beer
not needful for thee, or not cut off any needless vanity or sensual
pleasure? Oh no, deceive not thy self, assuredly there is no argument to this,
if it be duly considered, to draw a man to God: and he shows himself
senseless that is not moved with the due consideration of this, that God spared
not his own Son, but gave him to dye for him, to show himself sensible of
it, so as that it work in him an holy affection and love toward God again,
and stir him up to an holy walking, and to an holy course of life all the
days of his life.

In the next place, in that the Apostle here says, God spared not his own
Son, but gave him to dye for us all: that is, his own dear Son, the Son
of his love, his only begotten Son, begotten of him from all eternity, and
of the same eternal essence and substance with God the Father: understanding
this of Christ, we have ground for this truth, and we hence are plainly taught
thus much.

That Christ who dyed for the sins of Gods chosen, was Christ who dyed for
the sins of Gods chosen, was true God.
Christ Jesus who suffered death for the sins of Gods chosen, was not only man
but God also, even the Son of God, begotten of God his Father from all
eternity, of the same most glorious eternal essence and substance with God
his Father. Indeed we must know, that we err not in this point of weight, that
Christ considered without relation to the Father, is God of himself equal to
his Father, and he received not his Godhead from his Father, his Godhead is of
it self, and Christ in regard of his Godhead is of himself as well as the
Father, but his person or his Sonship (as I may so speak) is from the Father:
and as Christ is the second person in the Trinity, and the eternal Son of
God, so he is from the Father, and was begotten of God the Father from all
eternity, and is of the same eternal essence and substance with God his
Father, even true God coeternall and coessentiall with God his Father. And for
this we have evidence in many places of Scripture. Ioh. 1.1. says the
Evangelist, In the beginning was the Word, even before the world was or had a
being, the Word was: that is, the second person in the Trinity, the Son of
God, and that Word was with God, and that Word was God. And verse 14. he says,
That Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. We saw the glory thereof as the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. Ioh. 8.58. Christ says to
the Jews, Before Abraham was I am, not I was, but I am; a speech proper and
peculiar to God, as we read, Exodus 3 14. when Moses was to go to the children
of Israel being in bondage in Egypt, God bids him say, I am has sent me unto
you. And Ro^. 9.5. the Apostle affirms it boldly, that Christ, who concerning
the flesh came of the Jews, Is God over all blessed for ever, Amen. And
Philip. 2.6. the Apostle says that Christ Jesus who humbled himself even to
the death of the cross, was before his incarnation in the form of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. He was of equal majesty and
glory with God his Father, and begotten of him from all eternity. It were
easy further to prove the truth of the point in hand, as by the prophetical
predictions of the Prophets of God, spoken only of the Lord of hosts, of
Jehovah in the old Testament, and applied by the Apostles to Christ in the new
Testament; by the works proper to God truly ascribed to Christ, as to make the
world, to forgive sin, to know the hearts of men, and such like: yea the
miracles that Christ wrought in the sight of his disciples and of his enemies,
were so far above the power of man, as that they may assure us that he was
the Son of God, as it is said, Ioh. 20.30.31. Many other signs did Jesus in
the presence of his disciples, which are not written, but these things are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. This
then we may resolve on for a certain truth, that Christ Jesus who suffered
death for the sins of Gods chosen, was not only man but God also, even the
Son of God, begotten of God his Father from all eternity, and of the same
eternal essence and substance with God his Father. Come we now to make our use
of it.

The infinite worth of Christ his death and sufferi^g, discovered.
and that his blood is of infinite price and value, able to satisfy for the
sins of all Gods chosen, as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. The blood of Jesus Christ, he
being the Son of God, is able to purge and cleanse from the guilt and
punishment of all sin. The ground and worth of the sufficiency of Christ his
blood is from the inualuable worth of the person, because the person, namely
Christ, who suffered, was not only man but God also; and howsoever Christ his
suffering was but for a time, and Gods chosen by their sins deserved eternal
death and punishment in hell for ever, and so there may seem to be no
proportion between his suffering and the desert of their sins, for between
finite and infinite there is no proportion, yet we must esteem the merit of
Christ his death, not by the time of his suffering, but by the person who
suffered, that Christ who suffered was not only man, but God also, and by
virtue of his Godhead he gave power to his death to be meritorious, and of
infinite price and value. And hence the Church is said, To be purchased with
the blood of God, Acts 20.28. And 1. Cor. 2.8. the Apostle says, The Lord of
glory was crucified: the meaning is, not that God suffered or shed his blood,
for that is impossible, he has no blood to shed, but those places do note to
us the infinite merit and sufficiency of Christ his suffering, that Christ
suffering was not as mere man but God also, his death was in respect of the
worth of the person infinitely sufficient and effectual, and a sufficient
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.

Again, for a second use: is it so that Christ Jesus who suffered Comfort to
as many as truly believe in Christ.
even to assure them that their sins are fully satisfied for by the death of
Christ, and they need not seek for satisfaction for their sins elsewhere.
And this truth being duly considered, it may strengthen Gods children against a
bitter and a dangerous assault of Satan; Satan sometimes sets on a child of
God, a true believer, specially in the time of affliction and weakness, and
he sets before him the grieuousnesse of his sins, and the furiousness of
Gods displeasure for his sins, and he labors to persuade him, that his
sins are so great as they cannot be forgiven; he tells them that God is a most
just God, and that the wrath of God is infinite against him for his sins. Now
this assault of Satan a child of God may refell, and beat back on this
ground, and may tell Satan, though his sins be great and grievous, and do
deserve infinite punishment, being committed against an infinite Majesty, yet
the sacrifice and death of Jesus Christ (he being not a mere man but God also)
is inualuable, and of infinite worth, and is able to counteruaile the
greatness of his sins, and fully to satisfy for them. Note.
And though God be a most just God, and his justice will not be corrupted by
fear, pity, or briberie, yet it will be satisfied: and though the wrath of
God be infinite against his sins, yet an infinite sacrifice may appease it
and pacify it: though the Lord will not accept the best thing that he can
offer to him, his first borne for his transgression, even the fruit of his
body for the sin of his soul, Micah 6.7. yet he will not refuse the
sacrifice of his first begotten, yea of his only begotten Son, the Son of
his love, and of the same eternal essence and substance with his own
Majesty: that sacrifice being of infinite price and value, the Lord will not
refuse it. I dare boldly affirm it, that he that knows aright and duly
considers it, that the price of his redemption is the blood of Jesus Christ,
infinite in value, the greatness of his sins cannot make him despair. No,
no, the more that Satan does extol and set out the justice of God, the more
does he strengthen and confirm a child of God in this, that the sacrifice and
death of Christ is accepted of God as a full satisfastion for all his sins,
for why: The satisfaction made by Christ being of infinite worth and
sufficiency, and God being a just God, he will not, no he cannot deny the
sufficiency of it for the sins of all that truly believe in Christ. Indeed
if we had to deal with an unjust tyrant, one that regarded not right nor
wrong, justice nor equity, whatsoever the satisfaction of our sins were, we
could hardly be out of danger, we should have cause still to fear it would not
be accepted, but our God is a most just God, who values all things aright, and
he finding the sacrifice of Christ sufficient, it being the sacrifice of his
own Son, even his Son begotten of him from all eternity, and of the same
eternal essence and substance with himself, and so of infinite worth and
value, he cannot but accept it as a sufficient satisfaction, and he clearly
acquits all them for whom it was offered from the guilt and punishment of all
their sins: yea he holds himself so fully satisfied with that sacrifice of
his own Son, being of infinite worth and value, as he will never remember
the sins of his chosen now believing in Christ any more against them. And the
consideration of that may be matter of great comfort to as many as truly
believe in Christ.

Now further, one thing I will further note, in that the Apostle says, God
spared not his own Son, but gave him, or delivered him up to death for us
all, that is, as I showed in opening the words, God gave or delivered up his
Son to death, as a principal cause of that tradition and delivering of him
up: we see we may hold this as a truth of God, grounded on the word of God,
that God had a principal working hand in Judas, God had a principal hand in
the betraying of Christ, and in the crucifying of him, yet none in the sin.
and in crucifying and putting of Christ to death by the Jews, as I showed you
out of Acts 2.23. He was taken by the hands of the wicked, he was delivered up
and crucified, and slain by the determinate counsel and providence of God:
God did appoint, decree, and will his betraying and crucifying. Now this the
Anabaptists deny, and they say that God did not determine, appoint, or decree,
that by the wicked he should be betrayed or murdered, Confutation of the
Anabaptists who hold the contrary.
God knew what they would do to his Son, and he decreed to suffer them to do
that which they did, but he did not decree that they should do it as they did,
by betraying him, and by murdering of him. An idle conceit, as if they should
say, God decreed not that his Son should be betrayed and murdered by the
wicked, but given into their hands, that he should be betrayed and murdered by
them, and to suffer them to betray and murder him. A conceit of brainsicke
persons, and clean contrary to the plain evidence of the word of God in the
place cited, Acts 2.23. and likewise contrary to that, Act 4.27.28. where it is
said, That both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were gathered together to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. It is not said, that the hand and counsel of God
determined to suffer them to do what they did, but it was determined in the
counsel and purpose of God, that they should do what they did: and whatsoever
they did to Christ the Son of God, the hand and counsel of God had
determined to be done. But say the Anabaptists in their Pamphlet, Judas to
betray Christ, nor the Scribes and Pharisees to murder him, this was
wickedness, which God cannot appoint, as (say they) God cannot lie, he cannot
destroy the righteous with the wicked, and so he cannot appoint Judas and the
rest to commit such horrible wickedness as they did. I answer them,



of his chosen, and therefore their act was execrable and abominable.

But say the Anabaptists,

Still they reason foolishly: He made h^s grave with the wicked, though he had
done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth. And Christ says,
Luke 22.37. The same which is written must be performed in me, even with the
wicked was he numbered: for doubtless those things which are written of me have
an end. And therefore doubtless notwithstanding these cauils of the
Anabaptists, we may hold this for a certain truth, even an holy truth of God,
grounded on the word of God, that God had a principal working hand in the
betraying of Christ by Judas, and in crucifying of Christ by the Jews, and
they are not able with all their shifts to ouerturne this holy truth of God.

There is yet one thing to be observed of us in this proposition of the
Apostle, God spared not his own Son, but gave him, or delivered him up to
death for us all: namely, the persons for whom God gave or delivered up his
own dear Son to death, to be crucified and slain, here expressed by the
Apostle, for us all, that is, as I showed you, for all true believers, for all
that do or shall believe in Christ to the end of the world.

The conceit of universal redemption wrought by Christ, that Christ died for
all and every man and woman in the world without exception of any, we have
already met withal verse 30. I will not now meddle with it; but these words,
for us all, being thus understood, for all true believers, for all that do or
shall believe in Christ to the end of the world, afford to us this ground of
truth.

The infinite merit of Christ his death belongs to every true believer
every one whosoever he be that truly believes in Christ, has part and share
in the infinite merit of Christ his death; and though his faith be but weak,
yet if it be a true faith, it does certainly entitle him to the infinite merit
of the death of Christ. Indeed the greater measure of faith a man has, the
greater will be his comfort, but the least measure of true faith, gives a man
or woman right and title to the infinite merit of the death of Christ Jesus the
Son of God; God gave his Son to death for all and every one that truly
believes in him. And to this purpose speaks Christ, and he amplifies his
speech by a similitude. Ioh. 3.14.15. says he, As Moses lift up the serpent in
the wilernesse, so must the Son of man be lift up: that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have eternal life. The story of Moses lifting
up the serpent, we have Numb. 21.9. The people of Israel being stung with
fiery serpents in the wilderness, the Lord commanded Moses to make a brazen
serpent, and to set it up on a pole, that such of the people as were stung
might look to it and live: so says Christ must the Son of man be lift up,
even lift up on the cross, that whosoever believes in him, whosoever looks
on him by the eye of faith hanging on the cross, should not perish, but have
eternal life. The similitude is very apt and fit: as those amongst the people
of Israel that were able, when they were bitten and stung with fiery serpents,
to eye the brazen serpent, though it were but with a squint eye, with a dim
or bleare eye, or with half an eye, were healed; so whosoever they be that are
able to look on Christ lift up on the cross by the eye of faith, and to eye
Christ Jesus the Son of God crucified, though it be with a weak faith, and
with the least measure of true faith, they are sure to be healed of the bitings
of Satan the old serpent, and of the sting of sin, and they are certainly
partakers of the infinite merit of the death of Christ Jesus the Son of God,
and they are freed from the guilt and punishment of all their sins. For why,
it is a ruled case in Divinity,

A ground, for the use, Comfort to such as truly believe in Christ though their
faith be very weak.
Do thou whosoever thou art believe in Christ truly, though weakly, even
with much wrestling and tugging, and thou can hardly keep thy faith on
foot, it is ready to be borne down with every blast of temptation or trial:
yet is thy weak faith carried to a right object? Is it truly set on the Lord
Jesus? Assuredly then it does entitle thee to the infinite merit of the death
of Christ Jesus the Son of God, and thou art thereby as truly freed from the
guilt and punishment of all thy sins, as they be that have the strongest
faith, and the greatest measure of true faith. Labor thou to get greater
strength of faith, and use all good means that serve to add one measure of
faith to another, the greater the measure of thy faith is that thou have, the
greater will be thy comfort; but be thy faith never so weak, yet if it be set
on the Lord Jesus the Son of God in truth, certainly the infinite merit of
Christ his death belongs to thee, and thou have part and share in it, as truly
as any other who has the greatest measure of faith: yea thy faith is like
precious to the faith of the best of Gods children: I have warrant so to
speak. 2. Pet. 1.1. the Apostle writing to ordinary believing Christians, he
says, They had obtained like precious faith with him, and with other Apostles.
Thy faith being set on the Lord Jesus the Son of God in truth, it is as
precious to thee as the faith of the blessed Apostles was, and as the faith of
the best of Gods children, and does as truly and as certainly entitle thee to
the infinite merit of Christ his death, as theirs did or does. A ground of
sweet comfort to the weakest true believing soul yt lives, even to such as are
ever co^plaining of the weakness of their faith, this may refresh and cheer
up their hearts with comfort, Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a
peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. If thy faith being set
on Christ the right object of it, be a purging faith, purifying thy heart, as
Acts 15.9. If thou find thy heart turned from sin to God, and purged from
corruption, surely then thy faith is a true faith, and though it be but weak,
and thou art combred with much doubting, it does as truly entitle thee to the
infinite merit of the death of Christ the Son of God, as the strongest faith
of the soundest Christian in the world. Think on that to thy comfort.

Come we to the Apostles inference, which he brings on this proposition, God
spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death. Hereupon the
Apostle infers, that together with that Son of his, God will freely give to
all true believers all good things, which he delivers in this manner: How shall
he not with him give us all things also? As if he had said, it cannot be but
that undoubtedly together with Christ his Son, he will give us all other good
things. Now this manner of delivering this inference is to be observed: How
shall he not with him give us all things also: and hence we may conclude in the
first place thus much.

That it cannot be, it is not possible that God should withhold It is not
possible that God should withhold any good thing from true believers.
The Lord will not keep from such as truly believe in Christ any thing which
he in his wisdom fees meet and good for them. Psalm. 84.11. the Psalmist
says, The Lord will withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly. And
hence it is that the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 3.21.22. says to the believing
Corinthians, All things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death, whether they be things present or things to
come, all are yours. And he makes this the ground of it, Ye are Christ's, ye
believe in Christ, ye belong to Christ, and Christ is yours; and therefore all
things are yours, and it cannot be that God should suffer you to want any thing
that he sees meet and good for you. And not to enlarge the proof of this
truth, the grounds of it are these.

First, God who is infinite in power, goodness and mercy, Your heavenly
Father has given you your bodies and your lives, and he will much more feed
you and cloth you.

Again, Christ is the fountain of all good things, in and through him God
does bless his children with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. yea with
all temporal blessings, and with all good things: and therefore they having
Christ, they can want no good thing. And on these grounds it follows
necessarily, that the Lord will not keep from such as truly believe in Christ
any thing which he in his wisdom fees meet and good for them.

And the due meditation of this truth may afford matter of strong comfort to
every true believer, and to every child of God in the time of any want, or
penury, or loss, or distress whatsoever; Comfort to every true believer in
ti^e of any want, or loss, or distress whatsoever.
yea the due consideration of this may arm and strengthen a child of God, a
true believer, against the fear of want, or penury, or any other evil. For
why should thou that art a child of God, a true believer, fear want, or
poverty, or any other evil? Remember this, God has given thee Christ his
own dear Son, the best gift he could give to thee, yea he gave that dear
Son of his to thee when thou wast a stranger and an enemy to him, and will
he now deny thee any good thing that he sees good for thee, thou being
justified and reconciled to him by the death of his Son? No, no, fear it
not, it cannot possibly be. Do thou persuade thy self that thou art Christ's
and Christ is thine? and do thou look for salvation by Christ, and persuade
thy self that God will bring thee to heaven by Christ, and will thou not trust
God for other good things? Oh learn thou on this ground to check thy self
when thou art troubled with fear of want, or poverty, or such like, Christ is
thine, and therefore all things are thine, life, death, things present, things
to come, yea all are thy servants, and what then can thou want that God sees
good for thee? If we could carry this in mind, and duly consider it, without
question it would free us from a great deal of carking care, and disburden our
souls of much anxiety, and disquietnesse, and vexation of mind and spirit, and
it would be a stronger prop to uphold us, and to keep us from fear of want,
or penury, or any other evil, then that promise of God, Heb. 13.5. That God
will not fail nor forsake us. For has God given us Christ, he has then given
us a pawn of his love, yea a rich pawn, and of great price, and that of the
greatest love that could be; and will he then withdraw his love from us, and
suffer us to want other good things that he sees meet and good for us? it
cannot be, it is not possible. It may be thou art poor, God sees it good thou
should be so, he will give thee contentment which is better then riches: or
thou art sick, God sees it good for thee thou should be so, he will give
thee patience and comfort in Christ which is b^tter then health, and so in
other particulars. Oh then leave carking care and distrustful thoughts
touching the things of this world to the world, and to the men of the world,
who have their por^ion in this life, and want faith, and have not Christ. Thou
have Christ, thou being a true believer, and having Christ, thou can want no
manner of good thing that the Lord sees meet for thee: and therefore cast out
fear of want, of penury, and such like, and learn thou to trust God, as for
salvation, so for other good things.

There is yet further matter of instruction offered to us from this inference
of the Apostle, How shall he not with him give us all things also? And in the
next place observe we, the Apostle here says, How shall not God with Christ
give us all things? as if he had said, It cannot be but that God will together
with Christ freely give us both all the benefits of Christ, and all other good
things of this life which he in his wisdom sees meet and good for us. Now
hence note we thus much.

That Christ and the benefits of Christ cannot be severed: Christ and the
benefits of Christ cannot be severed.
To whom God gives Christ, to them also he gives all the benefits of Christ:
and whosoever he be that has Christ, he has also the benefits of Christ, and
he is partaker of all the benefits of Christ, and that truly and really, and
they are truly and really his; even whatsoever Christ did or suffered as
Mediator God and man, it is by the covenant of grace truly and really his who
is one with Christ, and who has Christ himself. Ioh. 6.40. It is the will of
him that sent me, that every man which sees the Son (says Christ) and
believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him at the
last day. It is the will of my Father, that he should be partaker of all my
benefits, that concern his justification, and his eternal happiness and
salvation. 1. Ioh. 5.12. it is said, He that has the Son has life: he that
has Christ the Son of God, he has all the benefits of Christ that concern
life and salvation, and they are truly and really his, even wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: as they are reckoned up, 1. Cor.
1.30. This I note in a word: it meets with some erroneous conceits of the
Papists.

First, Confutation of some erroneous conceits of the Papists.
that they affirm that the wicked eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood in the Sacrament: and if they so do, they must needs have Christ
himself, and be partakers of the benefits of Christ, Ioh. 6.54. and yet they
shut them out from all the benefits of Christ, and from eternal life.

Again, they affirm that the imputation of Christ his righteousness to true
believers is but a fancy. We hold that Christ his righteousness is truly and
really imputed to every true believer: they say it is but a putatiue justice,
so they scornfully term it, and a mere supposed imputation, and a mere
imagination. They are deceived, the truth now delivered bears down this
erroneous conceit of theirs. Such as have Christ, as all true believers have,
they being one with Christ by a most near and real union, Even flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, as Ephesians. 5.30. certainly they have all the
benefits of Christ; and it must needs be that all the graces and benefits of
Christ do truly and really belong to them, and they are truly really partakers
of the infinite merits of Christ his death, and of his obedience.

Now in a second place, in that the Apostle here says, With him: that is, with
Christ, even together with Christ God gives to true believers not only all the
benefits of Christ, but all other good things of this life that he sees meet
and necessary for them. God gives Christ to his chosen, to true believers, and
together with him all other good things: we are given to understand thus much.

Only they, and none but they who have Christ, have true spiritual right and
title to the good things of this life.
Men may have temporal good things, and they may have them in great abundance
without Christ, but they have no just spiritual right and title to them,
neither can they have any true comfort in them or from them: only they, and
none but they who truly believe in Christ, and that have Christ, they only
have true spiritual right and title to the good things of this life, and only
they have a comfortable use of them, and true comfort in them and from them.
And to this purpose serves that, 1. Cor. 3.21.22. where the Apostle having put
it down in the general, All things are yours: you believing in Christ, and
Christ being yours, or you having Christ, all things are yours: and then
reckoning up particulars, he names the world, The world is yours, even the
whole frame of the world and all the good creatures in it are yours, you are
the right owners of the world; and though you be not possessed of the world,
yet in Christ you have just right and title to the world, and to all the good
things that be in the world. Galat. 3.29. says the Apostle, If ye be Christ's;
if ye belong to Christ, and Christ be yours, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs by promise: then are ye heirs of God, and have right and title to all
the good things promised in the covenant, then are ye heirs with Abraham both
of heaven and of earth. And hence it is that the Apostle says, Godliness has
the promise of the life present, and of that which is to come. Such as are
godly, and none are truly so but such as are in Christ, and have Christ who is
the root of true godliness, they have the promise of all good things, not
only of the life to come, but also of this life present, they only, and none
but they have true spiritual right and title to the good things of this life,
they only have true comfort in them and from them: and the ground of this
truth is.

Because man who was once Lord of all creatures, Adam, it is restored only to
all true believers, to all that truly believe in Christ the Son of God, whom
God has made heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2. And true believers are joint
heirs, or heirs annexed to Christ, Romans 8.17.
verse 17. of this Chapter: and therefore doubtless only they, and none but
they who have Christ, have true spiritual right and title to the good things
of this life; and only they, and none but they

Now then for the use, first this ground of truth serves to discover that they
deceive themselves who think that God has bl^ssed them with the good things
of this life that they enjoy, and yet they have not Christ; They deceive
themselves who think God has blessed them with the good things of this life
they enjoy, and yet they have not Christ.
it is an usual speech, it often breaks out of the mouths of worldlings, of
earthwormes, of usurers and such like, who have scraped together abundance of
wealth, that God has blessed them with that abundance. They are deceived, the
gold and silver, and the good things of this life they do enjoy without Christ
(and it cannot be that they have Christ, living in known gross sins as they
do) are not blessings to them, but rather curses and snares to them, and they
are but given them to leave them without excuse at the day of judgment, and do
add weight to their judgment, to make their condemnation heavier and deeper
in hell. And take thou notice of it whosoever thou art, thou may have
temporal good things without Christ, but alas thou have no true spiritual
right to them, thou have them but as a thief has a true man's purse, and what
shall it profit the thief to have it, when he shall come to hold up his hand
for it at the bar? If thou have not Christ, thou art but an usurper of the
good things of this life thou do possess by a lawful civil right, and thou
shall one day be accountable for them, yea for every bit of bread thou have to
put into thy mouth, for every ragge thou have to put on thy back. Yea consider
with thy self, if thou have not Christ, and yet have gold, silver, house,
land, and such like, thou art but an intruder into the right, not of a mortal
man but of the Son of God, even into the right of the Lord Jesus, Gods heir
of all things: he is Lord of the whole world, and of all things in it; and
assure thy self, thou shall one day pay dear for thy intruding, the
recompense of the wrong done to him will one day fall heavy on thee. And what
an heavy account have they to make, who have abundance of outward good things
and yet have not Christ? they shall one day cast away their gold and silver,
and wish they had never gone beyond the spade or shouell: and what an heavy
account have they to Comfort for such as have Christ, in regard of the good
things of this life they do enjoy


Again for a second use: is it so that only they, and none but they who have
Christ, have true spiritual right and title to the good things of this life,
and only they, and none but they have a comfortable use of them, and true
comfort in them? Here is then matter of comfort for such as have Christ, in
regard of the good things of this life they do enjoy: have they little or have
they much of the good things of this life, it is their own, and they have true
spiritual right and title to it. Art thou a member of Christ? Have thou
Christ? and have thou abundance of good things of this life well gotten, and
cast on thee by the good hand and providence of God? That abundance is thine
own, and it is truly comfortable to thee. Or have thou little, but from hand to
mouth? that little is better to thee then the great abundance that worldlings
have who have not Christ, they shall be accountable for their abundance, and
they have an heavy account to make for it: but thy little is truly thine, thou
have true right to it, even before God; and not only in the courts of men, but
also in the high Court of heaven, and thou may comfortably use it. If thou
have but brown bread, or a dinner of green herbs, as Solomon speaks, Prou.
15.17. with Christ, it is better then a stalled ox, and the greatest dainties
in the world without Christ. If thou know thy self by faith to be a member of
Christ, his right gives thee right and title to the good creatures of God thou
do enjoy, and thou may lawfully use them for thy necessity, yea sometimes
for thy honest delight; the beauty, sweetness, and comfort of them belongs to
thee, and thou may eat with peace and drink with peace, so as it be with
moderation and thanksgiving to God, and thou may with peace and comfort
possess and use gold and silver, and other good things of this life the Lord
is pleased to cast on thee by his good hand and providence: think on that to
thy comfort.

One thing yet remains to be noted from these words, How shall he not with him
give us all things also? the word signifying (as we have showed) freely give us
all things: hence

That the good things of this life, that true believers and they who have
Christ do enjoy, are the free gift of God, The good things of this life that
true, believers enjoy, are the free gift of God.
they are given to them of God freely, and without any merit or desert of their
own. Christ teaches this plainly, Matthew. 6.11. where he bids such as are able
truly to call God Father, thus to pray, Give us this day our daily bread. Gods
children must pray to God their Father to give them every morsel of bread they
stand in need of, and every bit of bread they have to use is the mere and free
gift of God without any desert of theirs. It is then a good argument, The
argument is good, we cannot merit the least bit of bread we have to put into
our mouths, therefore we cannot merit and deserve heaven.
This argument being used by a reverend Divine now with the Lord, the Papists
scoff at it, and they seek to shift it off, but they are not able to avoid
the force and dint of it, all is Gods free gift to his children to the least
bit of bread they have to put into their mouths, and therefore without
question they cannot merit heaven. And though we be the children of God, and
have true spiritual right and title in Christ to the good things of this life,
yet we are to acknowledge every bit of bread we have to put into our mouths,
and every ragge we have to put on our backs to be the free gift of God, and we
are to praise him for it, and to be thankful to his holy Majesty for the
same, and we are to use the good things of this life we do enjoy, to the honor
and glory of God the giver of them; and to honor God with our riches, Prou.
3.9. that is our duty. Come we now to thee 33. and 34. verses.

VERSE 33.34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God
that justifies.

Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us.


Our Apostle having in the verse foregoing armed the believing Romans and other
true believers, against the assault and tentation that might arise from the
want of good things, and made known to them they need not fear the want of
any good thing needful for them, God having given them Christ his Son, he
now begins to arm and strengthen them against the assaults and tentations that
might come from the presence of evil things, and he opposes to the particular
assaults that might trouble and disquiet them touching the presence of evil
things, contrary grounds of comfort: and this he does from this 33. verse to
the end of the Chapter. I will God willing lay forth the grounds of comfort
opposed to the particular assaults, as we shall come to them. In these two
verses 33. and 34. the Apostle pus down a ground of comfort that might come
from the evil of sin, and he shows that the evil of sin cannot hurt Gods
chosen, either in regard of accusation, or in respect of condemnation. First in
regard of accusation, he affirms verse 33. that Gods chosen are not to fear
any accuser, any that can accuse them for their sins, which he puts down by
way of interrogation, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? And
then against the fear of accusation for their sins, he opposes a strong
reason, as a ground of comfort, because God justifies them, and therefore no
accusation for sin need to be feared: Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, says the Apostle. In regard of
condemnation he likewise affirms verse 34. that Gods chosen are not to fear
that any shall condemn them for their sins. Who shall condemn, says the
Apostle: as if he had said, None shall, or none can condemn. And then he also
opposes to the fear of condemnation this reason and particular ground of
comfort, because Christ is dead: It is Christ which is dead. Which he further
enlarges by Christ his resurrection, and his sitting at the right hand of God,
and his intercession: It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us.
But to keep within the compass of verse 33. two things in general are laid
before us in that verse. First this proposition: None can lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen, delivered by way of interrogation, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Secondly the reason of it, because God
justifies them, Who can lay any thing to their charge? It is God that
justifies.

Let us now a little stand to examine the words of this verse touching the
sense and meaning of them. Interpretation.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? as if he had said, none
shall, or none can, neither man nor devil, none either in heaven, in earth, or
in hell, is able to do it. Lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen. These
words are metaphorical, borrowed and taken from civil courts, and the verb
(...), used in the original, properly signifies to call one into law, to
enter action or suite against him in some open Court, to endite him, to accuse
him with some evil, and to charge him with some crime before a Judge: and so
the meaning of the Apostle is this, None is able to indite Gods chosen, or to
accuse them, or to charge them with any crime before the tribunal and
judgment seat of God, so as they are not able there to prevail against them
by their indictment or accusation, and to convince them as guilty of any
crime. Indeed Gods chosen have many accusers, and many there be that are ready
to charge sin on them; but the words of the Apostle carry this sense, None
are able in truth to fasten any crime or any guiltiness on them. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? that is, of such as God has in his
eternal love, elected and chosen, and set apart before the foundation of the
world, as Ephesians. 1.4. to eternal life, they now truly believing in Christ; for
those the Apostle here calls Gods chosen, whom before he said were fore-knowne
of God, predestinate, and called according to his purpose. It is God that
justifies: the words are in the original (...), God justifying, or God who
justifies, and some read these words by way of interrogation thus: Who shall
lay anything to the charge of Gods chosen, shall God who justifies? but that
reading obscures the sense, and the words are better thus read, It is God that
justifies. The word justify is diversely taken in the Scripture, there be two
special significations of the word, as first it signifies to acknowledge or to
declare one to be just; and in this sense it is taken, Matthew. 12.37. By thy
words thou art justified, that is, by thy words thou shall be declared to be
just, for words do not make but declare a man to be just or unjust. So Luke
7.29. it is said, The people that heard Christ, and the publicans justified
God, which must be understood thus, they acknowledged God to be just, or they
approved the justice of God.

Secondly, the word justify, is a judicial term, borrowed from the Courts
of justice, and it signifies a judicial act, namely, to absolve, and to acquit
in judgment, or to pronounce innocent in judgment: in which sense the word is
used, Acts 13.39. And from all things from which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses, by him is justified: that is, absolved or cleared. The words
can signify no other thing the^ absolution from sin, and in this sense is
the word here used by the Apostle: and that is clear, in that he here sets it
against accusing and condemning, which are two acts of judgment, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, and who shall condemn? It is God that
justifies: and so his meaning is, It is God who does absolve and acquit his
chosen now believing in Christ, from the guilt of all their sins, and does
account or pronounce them innocent and just in his sight through Christ his
Son. Thus then conceive we the Apostles meaning in the words of this verse,
as if he had said.

Who is able to accuse them whom God has chosen, and set apart before the
foundation of the world to life eternal, now truly believing in Christ, or to
charge them with any crime before the judgment seat of God, so as they are
able there to make their accusation good, and there to prevail against them,
by their accusation to convince them as guilty of any crime? Surely none,
either in heaven, in earth, or in hell, is able to do it, for it is God who
does absolve and acquit them from the guilt of all their sins, and does
account or pronounce them innocent and just in his sight through Christ his
Son.

Now first in that the Apostle says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? they being justified of God: hereby he implies, that Gods chosen
now believing in Christ, and justified in the sight of God, are liable to be
accused, and to have sin laid to their charge. The Apostle does not here
exempt Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, and justified by Christ,
altogether from accusation, and from all trouble in respect of sin, but from
being hurt by any accusation for their sins: he says none is able to lay any
sin to them, so as they can prevail against them by their accusation before
Gods tribunal. Hence then we may gather in the first place.

Gods chosen now believing in Christ are not altogether free from being accused
for sin, and from being troubled in regard of sin.
are not in such a state and condition as that they are altogether free from
being accused for sin, and from having sin and the guiltiness of sin
charged on them, and from being troubled in regard of sin. The best of Gods
children, and justified persons in this world, are liable to be accused as
guilty of sin, and to have sin and guiltiness charged on them, and to be
troubled with the guiltiness of sin. Revel. 12.10. Satan is called the
accuser of the brethren, and he is said to accuse them before God day and
night. He is busy in accusing the best of Gods children, and justified
persons, and in charging sin on their souls, and in troubling their
consciences with the guiltiness of sin day and night. He accused Job to God,
even contrary to Gods own testimony, and he charged him to be but an
hypocrite, and that he served God only in regard of Gods gifts and blessings
bestowed on him, Job 1.9.10. Does Job serve God for naught? Have thou not made
an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every
side? Thou have blessed the works of his hands, and his substance is increased
in the land. It is an ordinary thing for the world, and the men of the world
to traduce Gods children and justified persons, and to charge on them foul
sins, as to accuse them to be hypocrites, proud persons, covetous persons:
yea wicked men will sift Gods children, as a man sifts his corn, and as
narrowly search into their words and deeds as Laban did into Jacobs stuff,
Genes. 31.33. to see if they can spy out any thing whereof to accuse them, and
when they can find nothing, they will invent false things, and on shadows of
evil be bold to accuse them; witness Joseph, Genes. 39.14. Jeremiah, Iere.
37.13. Amos, Amos 7.10. A cloud of witnesses we have of this kind: Christ
himself was thus dealt withal, Matthew. 26.61. and so Stephen, Paul and Sylas,
and many others; yea the conscience of Gods children and justified persons are
ready to charge sin on them, and they are sometimes troubled in their
consciences, not only for sins lately committed, but for sins they have
done many years before, and now truly repented of. Psalm. 25.7. Psalm. 25.7.
David desires the Lord not to remember the sins of his youth, nor his
rebellions. We see then that Gods children and justified persons are in no such
state and condition in this world, as that they are altogether exempt from
accusation for sin. No, may comfort others with the comforts wherewith
themselves have been comforted. 2. Cor. 1.4. And therefore doubtless the best
of Gods children, justified persons, are in this world liable to be accused as
guilty of sin, and to have sin and guiltiness of sin charged on them,
and to be troubled with the guiltiness of sin.

The rash judgment of the world taxed, in that they censure Gods children for
trouble of mind for sin.
Men of the world presently judge the state of Gods children not good, because
they are accused as guilty of sin, and because the mouths of many are open
against them, and do charge them with pride, with hypocrisy, and like sins
they are never able to prove: and especially if they see or know a child of God
troubled in mind and conscience for sin, then they fly on them and conclude;
certainly he is but an hypocrite, and God has found him out: the truth now
delivered discouers this to be rash judgment, and meets with it. A child of
God, a justified person, is in no such state and condition in this world, as
that he is freed from accusation, and from trouble of mind for sin; though he
be freed from the venom, poison, and bitterness of it, as afterward we shall
see, yet he is not freed from the thing it self. And know, it is no good
argument: the state of such an one is not good, because men charge him with
hypocrisy; or because he is troubled in this world for sin, therefore he is
an hypocrite: no, no, one may be troubled in this world, yea much terrified and
grievously perplexed, and yet be a dear child of God, a justified person, and
be acquitted from the guilt of sin in Gods sight. Yea know it for a truth,
one may be so grievously troubled in this world for sin, as it may force him
to show forth strange behavior, as David says, Psalm. 38.8. He roared after
the manner of a beast, and yet be a dear child of God, and one justified in
the sight of God. And therefore take we heed we judge not any one to be in a
bad state and condition, when we see the course of his life to be holy and
good, only because he is now troubled in mind and conscience for sin. A
child of God may be troubled, yea so troubled, as he may be stirred up to
impatiencie, and may show forth strange behavior, yea he may die showing forth
strange behavior, and yet we are not hereupon to judge him an hypocrite, or
forsaken of God, and out of Gods favor: if we so do, we judge rashly.

And for a second use, on this ground of truth now delivered, Judge not thy
self in a bad state and condition, only because thy mind is troubled for sin,
thou having evidence of the work of grace in thine own heart with power.
thou having good evidence of the work of grace in thine own heart with
power, learn thou, I say, not to judge thy self in a bad state and condition
only because thy mind is troubled for thy sins, and thou can not come to
that quietness of conscience thou desire: do not thou thus reason, If I were
a justified person, if I were in the favor of God, surely I should have peace
with God, Romans 5.1. and my conscience would then be at quiet, I should have
that peace and that quietness of mind that I see others of Gods children have,
but alas I cannot find that peace in mine own soul, and therefore I doubt my
state is not good. Oh take heed of this kind of reasoning, and know, though it
be so that such as are justified by faith in Christ have peace toward God, yet
a child of God, a justified person, has not that peace at all times alike and
without any interruption. No, no, the best of Gods children have their turbida
interualla, their troubled fits, as it were anguish fits, sometimes sweet and
gracious feelings, much peace and quietness of mind and conscience, and
sometimes again trouble of mind and disquietnesse, and a just complaining of
the want of feeling of Gods favor. This is the state of the best of Gods
children in this world, they are subject to trouble of mind and conscience for
sin: and therefore do not thou think thy state is not good, only because
thy mind is troubled, and thou can not come to that quietness of conscience
thou desire. If thou feel grace truly wrought in thee, and there is a true
change in thy soul, then comfo^t thy self in this, the Lord will excuse thee
under that trouble of mind for a time, and in his good time he will fill thine
heart with abundance of peace and comfort, and joy in believing; fear it not
but let that be thy comfort.

In the next place, in that the Apostle says, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen? that is, as we showed, none is able to accuse Gods
chosen now believing in Christ, and to charge any sin on them, so as they can
prevail against them by any accusation, so as they can convince them as
guilty of sin before the tribunal and judgment seat of God: and then he
subioynes this reason and ground of it, It is God that justifies: because God
does acquit and absolve them from all their sins, and accounts them just in
his sight through Christ his Son. The Apostles proposition here laid down
before us, being thus considered, together with the reason and ground of it, it
affoordeth this point.

Gods chosen now believing in Christ cannot be hurt by any accusation laid
against them before the judgment seat of God.
No accusation for sin brought against true believers, now justified of God
through Christ his Son, either by the devil, or by the world, or by their
own consciences, can hurt them, or prevail against them; they need not fear
the accusation of any enemy whatsoever for their sins, that the accusation
shall hurt them before the judgment seat of God. We read Isai. 50.8. the
Prophet brings in Christ thus speaking, He is near that justifies, who will
contend with me? Let us stand together, who is mine adversary? Let him come
near to me. Thus does Christ challenge all his enemies, that none of them is
able to contend with him, or to lay any thing to his charge, as he said of the
Jews, Ioh. 8.46. Which of you can rebuke me of sin? And thus may any member
of Christ, as Christ the head might do it, so he being justified of God in and
through Christ, challenge all his enemies and say: God is near to me, who
shall contend with me? who can lay any thing to my charge, so as his accusation
may hurt me, or prevail against me? Isai. 38.17. Hezechiah says, The Lord had
cast all his sins behind his back. And Psalm. 103.2.3. Psalm. 103.2.3.
David stirs up his soul to praise the Lord, and not to forget his benefits,
who forgave him all his iniquity, and healed all his infirmities. And thus it
is with all true believers and justified persons, they being justified of God;
God justifying them through Christ his Son, they are freed from the guilt of
all their sins, so as no accusation brought against them for any sin by any
enemy whatsoever, can possibly hurt them or prevail against them before the
judgment seat of God: for why,

To God alone are his chosen indebted by their sins, as David says, Psalm.
51.4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy
sight. And Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, are taught by Christ himself
to pray to God only for the pardon of their sins, Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our
debts as we also forgive our debtors. God only has power to forgive the debt
of sin, as he says by his Prophet, Isai. 43.25. I, even I am he that puts
away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. And
therefore God remitting the debt of sin to his chosen, who can justly charge it
on them?

Again, God is the highest Judge, and his tribunal his be truly charged with
sin before the judgment seat of God, and God is a just God, and he cannot
account sinners to be just, He makes not the wicked innocent, Exodus 34.7. how
then cannot they be hurt by any accusation laid against them for their sins?

I answer. God justifies the ungodly: that is, God acquitteth such as are
ungodly in themselves, and have ungodliness in themselves, looking on them in
Christ his Son, who has fully satisfied for their sins.



I answer all their other sins. And therefore this still remains a truth,
that Gods chosen now believing in Christ, and justified of God, God justifying
them in and through Christ his Son, they cannot be hurt by any accusation for
sin that can be brought against them before the judgment seat of God, and
they need not fear any accuser or any accusation laid against them before
Gods judgment seat, either by the devil, or by the world, or by their own
consciences for their sins. What folly then is it either in the devil, or in
the It is folly in the devil, and in the world, and in men of the world, to
accuse Gods children and to charge foul things on them.
they do but therein show themselves malicious against Gods children, they
cannot hurt them or prevail against them before the judgment seat of God.
And know it whosoever thou art, thou charging foul things on Gods children,
and on such as give good evidence that they are true believers, in so doing
thou do but play the devils part, who is styled the accuser of the brethren.
Thou will say, I know the party to be guilty of that sin that I charge on
him. Yea but it may be the party has truly repented of that sin, Peter,
Act. 10.15. That which God has cleansed do not thou account unclean: so do
not thou charge sin on him whom it may be God has acquitted; set not thou a
curse where thou see the print of Gods blessing, do not thou load him with
an heavy burden, whom God (for any thing thou know) has disburdened: if
thou so do, thou make thy self odious in the sight of God. Prou. 17.15. He
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, especially whom
God has justified, they are abomination to the Lord, they are odious to the
Lord.

Now, is it so that Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, Comfort to as many as
are justified in the sight of God.
God justifying them in and through Christ his Son, they cannot be hurt by
any accusation for sin that can be brought against them before the judgment
seat of God, and they need not fear any accuser or any accusation laid
against them before the judgment seat of God for their sins, that they
shall be hurt by that accusation? Here is then ground of sweet and of heavenly
comfort to as many as truly believe in Christ, and are justified in the sight
of God. This truth tells them they are in a most blessed state and condition; as
David says, Psalm. 32.1.2. Blessed he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity:
that is the blessed man indeed whom God acquits from the guilt of all his
sinn^s. Yea the consideration of this truth may cheer up the hearts of Gods
chosen and true believers, and strengthen them against the terror of their
consciences, being frighted with the guilt of sin, and against the sentence
of the Law and cruelty of Satan. What though these enemies trouble and disquiet
them; yet they dare not appear before God to accuse them, and to charge sin
on their souls: if they do, it is but lost labor, they cannot prevail by any
accusation they bring against them. And on this ground a child of God, a true
believer, may challenge the devil, and all the enemies of his salvation, and
even dare them to come with him before Gods tribunal and judgment seat, and
he may boldly say to Satan, thou art ever troubling me, and setting before me
my guiltiness of sin, I dare thee Satan, or any enemy of my soul to come
with me before the holy Majesty of God, and there if thou dare to accuse me,
and if thou dare so do, I fear thee not, I know thou shall not prevail by
any accusation thou can bring against me; God himself the highest Judge has
acquitted me from the guilt of all my sins. What an excellent comfort is this
to every child of God, and to every true believer? And this comfort belongs to
thee whosoever thou art, that have good evidence of true grace in thine heart,
and that thou truly beleeuest in Christ. What though it be so that thou art
traduced by men, and men charge foul things on thee, that thou art an
hypocrite? comfort thy self in this, they dare not stand to their accusation,
and charge thee so to be before the judgment seat of God; thou may challenge
them, and dare them, and stand at defiance with them. conscience also accuses
me of the same thing, and tells me that in some measure I am guilty of that
they charge on me. Be it so, yet is that sin they truly charge on thee,

Lastly, as the ground of truth now delivered discouers the The miserable state
of unbelievers, and hard-hearted, and impenitent persons, discovered.
no accusation for sin can prevail against true believers before the
judgment seat of God, but every just accusation for sin shall there be
available and of force against unbelievers and impenitent persons. Art thou
then a profane wretch? have thou no good evidence of true grace in thine
heart, and that thou art a true believer? surely thy state is most wretched and
miserable: though now thy conscience lie asleep and be benumbed, yet it will
one day be awakened and fly in thy face, and fearfully accuse thee; and though
now the devil lull thee asleep, and draw thee on the to practice of sin
under the color of pleasure, profit, or the like, yet he will one day eagerly
accuse thee before the judge of all the world; yea the very insensible
creatures will one day rise up against thee and accuse thee, the heavens, the
earth, the air thou breathest in, thy food, thy apparel, even the drink
that thou drunkard have swilled in, thy gold and silver that thou cursed usurer
have heaped up, and such like, and especially the means of salvation under
which thou have lived, every Sermon thou have heard or might have heard, yea
the very dust of the Preachers feet shall one day rise up in judgment and
witness against thee, Luke 9.5. All these shall one day accuse thee before the
great Judge of all the world, and he will admit of every just accusation
against thee, every accusation for sin justly brought shall be of force
against thee, yea God himself will be a swift witness against thee, Malac.
3.5. Mal. 3.5.
Oh then in what a miserable state and condition art thou that art a profane
person! if thou had eyes to see it, and an heart to consider it, it would
make thine heart ache within thee Now therefore in the fear of God be stirred
up to think on thy miserable state and condition, and consider with thy self,
that one day thine own conscience, the Law of God, the devil, yea all things
within thee, without thee, and round about thee, will stand up against thee,
and accuse thee before the Judge of the quick and dead, and unless now thou
humble thy self and make thy peace with God, assuredly thou shall then have
none to plead for thee. And therefore now whilst thou have time labor to
come out of that miserable state and condition: and if hell have not full
possession of thy soul, bethink thy self of speedy reformation. Come we now
to the 34. verse.

VERSE 34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for
us.


IN this Verse (as I have said) the Apostle labors to strengthen Gods chosen
against the fear of condemnation for their sins, and to that purpose he here
affirms that none can condemn Gods chosen: which position he puts down as he
did the former, by way of interrogation, who shall condemn? as if he had said,
None is able to condemn Gods chosen. Then he brings a reason as a ground of
comfort against the fear of condemnation, from the death of Christ, that
Christ is dead for Gods chosen, and therefore they need not fear condemnation
for their sins: Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead. And that
reason and ground of comfort the Apostle further amplifies by the resurrection
of Christ, and by his sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven, and by
his intercession for them: and in those four things the Apostle goes on by
degrees, preventing all scruples and doubts that might trouble the minds of
Gods chosen touching condemnation: none can condemn them: why? because Christ
is dead for them, says the Apostle. But might some say, what can Christ being
dead profit us? Indeed nothing at all if he had been swallowed up of death, but
he is risen again, and has overcome death: yea or rather which is risen
again. And not only so, but he also sits at the right hand of God, and
has received all power for the safety of Gods chosen now believing in him:
and not only so, but he also is continually exercised in making intercession
for them. It is Christ which is dead, or rather which is risen again, who is
also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. And so we see the
general drift of the Apostle in this verse.

Come we to the opening of the words of it, Interpretation.
touching the sense and meaning of them. Who shall. That is as if he had said,
None shall, or none can, none in heaven, in earth, or in hell, is able to do
it. Condemn. The word condemn is here also a judicial term, and it
signifies the act of a Judge in open court, whose act is to adiudge such as are
found guilty of any crime, and justly deserve punishment, to death, or to some
other punishment. And the word here is to be understood with respect to sin,
as it is used, Romans 5.18. By the offense of one. And so the meaning is, none
can pronounce Gods chosen now believing in Christ, worthy of punishment for
sin, or truly adiudge them to any punishment, either temporal or eternal
for their sins. It is Christ which is dead: the words are (...) Christ dying.
And some read them with an interrogation, Who shall condemn? Shall Christ
which is dead? but they are better thus read, It is Christ which is dead: and
so they are a reason why none can condemn Gods chosen, because Christ is dead
for them, and by his death has made a full satisfaction to God for their
sins, his death being of infinite price and value, and fully answerable to
the justice of God, as the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 2.24. He his own self bare
our sins in his body on the tree. According to that, Isai. 53.5. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. And
so the meaning of the Apostle is, that none can condemn Gods chosen, now
believing in Christ, because Christ has dyed for them, and has by his death
fully satisfied for all their sins, and has borne that punishment that they
should have borne for their sins. Yea or rather which is risen again* this
is a further ground of comfort, and hereby the Apostle means that Christ is
not only dead for the sins of Gods chosen, but is also risen again from the
dead, and has vanquished and overcome death, and made it manifest by his
resurrection that he has fully absolved and discharged them from all their
sins: as Romans 4.25. He was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen
again for our justification. Who is also at the right hand of God. These words
right hand of God, are used by way of similitude, they are metaphorical; for
indeed in proper speech God has neither right hand nor left, he is a Spirit
infinite and incomprehensible: and these words set out the glorious state of
Christ in heaven, that he is there advanced to an unspeakable height of
glory: they are taken from the manner of the kings of the earth, who use to
set those on high whom they purpose most of all to honor. As 1. King. 2.19.
Solomon in token of honor caused a seat to be set for his mother, and she
sat at his right hand. And by this form of speech here rightly applied to
Christ, 2. things are signified.

First, That Christ is exalted to unspeakable glory in heaven, 1. Tim. 3.16.
and is there partaker of the infinite glory of his Father. And

Secondly, that Christ is exalted to the full administration of his kingdom,
to be the head of his Church, and with his Father to be Lord and governor of
all things in heaven and earth, Having all power given to him, both in heaven
and in earth, as himself says, Matthew. 28.18. and as the Apostle says, 1.
Pet. 3.22. He is at the right hand of God gone into heaven, to whom the Angels,
and powers, and might are subject. These two things are here intended by the
Apostle, in saying that Christ is at the right hand of God.

And makes request or intercession also for us. These words are not to be
conceived as if Christ now in heaven did prostrate himself and kneel on his
knees, and utter words of prayer to God his Father, as he did in the days of
his flesh, but Christ does now make request by the merit of his death, he now
presenting himself continually in the sight of God his Father, as Heb. 9.24.
He is entered into very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us: and by
presenting the sacrifice of himself once offered on the cross, and the
infinite merit of that sacrifice before the eyes of his Father, willing as he
is God and man, and desiring as he is man, that his Father would accept of his
perfect satisfaction, and turn away his eyes from the indignities and sins
of his chosen, and be well pleased with them, in and through him. For us, says
the Apostle, that is, for me and you, and for all true believers. Now then thus
take we up the sense and meaning of the words of this verse, as if the Apostle
had said.

Who can pronounce Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, worthy of punishment
for sin, or truly judge them to any punishment, either temporal or eternal
for their sins? Surely none in heaven, in earth, or in hell can do it: for
why, Christ has died for them, and by his death which was of infinite worth,
has fully satisfied for all their sins, and has borne that punishment that
they should have borne for their sins: and not only so, but Christ has
vanquished and overcome death, and made it manifest by his resurrection, that
he has fully absolved and discharged them from all their sins, and he is now
also exalted to unspeakable glory in heaven, and to the full administration
of his kingdom, to be the head of his Church, and with his Father to be Lord
and governor of all things in heaven and earth; and he does now also make
request, by the merit of death presenting himself and the sacrifice of
himself once offered on the cross, and the infinite merit of that sacrifice
continually before the eyes of his Father, willing as he is God and man, and
desiring as he is man, that his Father would accept of his perfect
satisfaction, and turn away his eyes from the indignities and sins of his
chosen, and be well pleased with them in and through him: and this he does for
me, and you, and all true believers.

Now first in that the Apostle puts down this for a certain truth, that none
can condemn Gods chosen now believing in Christ, none can adiudge them to any
punishment, either temporal or eternal for their sins, and then gives this
reason of it, it is Christ which is dead, because Christ has died for them;
hence in the first place we are given to understand thus much.

Gods chosen now believing in Christ cannot possibly be condemned for their
sins.
Ioh. 5.24. Neither Satan, nor the Law of God, nor yet the justice of God, can
truly adiudge them to any punishment, either temporal or eternal for their
sins. And to show this to be a truth in these particulars.

First, Satan has no power to require judgment and condemnation against true
believers for whom Christ died, because Christ by his death has spoiled and
stripped him of that power, Colos. 2.15. Has spoiled the principalities, and
powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in
his cross. Heb. 2.14.15. the holy Ghost says, that Christ through his death
destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. And has
delivered them which for fear of death were all their life time subject to
bondage. And Revel. 12.10.11. we read, after the battle between Michael and
the great Dragon, that is, between Christ and the devil, Christ ouercoming,
John says, I heard a loud voice saying, now is salvation in heaven, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and
night, but they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb. By the blood of Christ
all power is taken from Satan to accuse, or to require judgment and
condemnation against true believers.

Again, the Law of God has no power to bind true believers for whom Christ
died to the curse of the Law for the transgression of it, because Christ by his
death has redeemed them from the curse, in that he was made a curse for them,
as the Apostle speaks plainly, Galat. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us, when he
was made a curse for us.

And thirdly, though the justice of God be such, that where there is
guiltiness of sin, there damnation is due, yet the justice of God is fully
answered by the death of Christ, his death being of infinite merit, it is every
way answerable to the justice of God, it has fully satisfied Gods justice for
the sins of all true believers. And hence it is that Christ is said to be the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. And Heb.
10.14. it is said, that Christ with his own offering has consecrated for ever
them that are sanctified. This then we may resolve on as a certain holy truth
of God, that Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, and now having part in the
death of Christ, they cannot possibly be condemned; neither Satan, nor the Law
of God, nor yet the justice of God can truly adiudge them to any punishment
either temporal or eternal for their sins. Come we to make some use of this:
and,

First this being a truth, it meets with that rashness of the The rash
judgment of profane men of the world, adiudgin true believers to the bottom
of hell, mer withal and reproved.
and in their hasty sentence they send them to hell, and stick not to say,
fie on them, they will one day be hanged, or they will one day go to the
devil. Poor souls, they show themselves ignorant and sottish, and rash
headed, they do but vent their poison and malice against Gods children, their
sentence cannot hurt any child of God, it is but as we use to say, a fools
bolt soon shot, neither they nor their father the devil can truly adiudge any
true believer, any child of God, to any punishment, either temporal or
eternal.

Some erroneous conceits of some erring spirits, met withal and overthrown.
as first that of the Anabaptists, in that they boldly affirm and say, that
those that Christ has bought with his precious blood may be damned, these be
their very words: a damnable opinion, and in flat contradiction to the truth
now delivered, and to the truth of the word of God in many places of it. None
can possibly perish and be damned for whom Christ died. Oh but they think they
have ground for their assertion, 2. Pet. 2.1. Some says he shall privily bring
in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring on
themselves swift damnation. See (say they) those whom Christ has bought with
his blood may be damned. They are deceived, and they conclude without ground,
they are too shallow braind to look into the depth of that text, there is not
a word in that text of the death of Christ, or of his blood, or of Christ
himself expressly, no nor yet by implication. It is said, denying the Lord,
(...).
the word is not (...), but (...), which word signifies master, or ruler, and
is commonly attributed to God the Father. And it is said, denying the Lord,
(...), that bought them, because false teachers who come professing the name of
God and the name of Christ, they seem to be taken out of the world, through
the knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Christ Jesus, as the Apostle
describes them verse 20. and in some-sort free from the corruption by external
profession: and they themselves acknowledge, that God is their Lord and
master, and say they are his messengers and ministers, and they profess his
name amongst his bought and purchased servants, and so in their own opinion
and in the judgment of others, they are in the number of the bought servants
of God, but in deed and truth they are not: and so that place rightly
understood makes nothing for the opinion of the Anabaptists.

Again, secondly the truth now delivered serves to ouerturne that conceit of
the Papists, that for the merit of Christ his death God does pardon the fault
and eternal punishment of sin, but he retains a temporary punishment to be
inflicted on them that have sinned: now what is this but to adiudge them who
have part in the death of Christ to some punishment for their sins, clean
contrary to the truth of doctrine now delivered? And indeed if God inflict any
punishment on him whose fault is remitted, and whose sins are taken away by
the blood of Christ, then he is unjust, which is blasphemy once to think: it
is all one, as to require the payment and satisfaction of a debt forgiven or
already paid, which whosoever does, is unjust.

Object.

Answ. Whom he loves he chasteneth: and they are laid on such as have their
sins pardoned, for the exercise of their faith, trial of their patience,
stirring up of the languishing graces of God that are in them, and to make them
draw nearer to God, and to walk more humbly before him: and therefore this
makes it not good, that for the merit of Christ God does pardon the fault and
eternal punishment of sin, but retains a temporary punishment to be
inflicted on the sinner. No, no, they that have part in the death of Christ,
they cannot be truly adjudged to any punishment, either temporal or eternal
for their sins.

There is yet an use of comfort to be added: Is it so that Sweet and heavenly
comfort for every true believer.
and now having part in the death of Christ, they cannot be condemned, neither
by Satan, nor by the Law of God, nor yet the justice of God can truly adiudge
them to any punishment, either temporal or eternal for their sins? Surely
then here is a ground of sweet and of admirable and heavenly comfort for every
true believer, for every one who is sure that he has part in the death of
Christ: this truth tells thee, whosoever thou art that art a true believer, and
have part in the death of Christ, that thou art in a most happy and blessed
state and condition, thou need not fear the yelling and roaring of the
devil thundering out hell and damnation for sin, nor the fearful sentence
of the Law of God, denouncing judgment and the curse for every transgression
of it: no, nor yet the sin revenging justice of God, which is most strict,
and most sharp and severe against all ungodliness and wrong: and what an
happy and blessed state is that? How may the consideration of this affect thy
soul, and fill thine heart with comfort and joy unspeakable? We know, if a
man that is to stand before an earthly Judge to be tried touching some matter
of crime, persuade himself that neither any enemy of his, though most
malicious and thirsting after blood, has power to require sentence against
him, nor the law it self has power to bind him over to any penalty, nor yet
the Judge himself, if he deal truly, can adiudge him to any punishment, it is
a marvelous comfort to him, and it cheeres him up exceedingly: though indeed
the law of man may be wrested, and an earthly Judge may be carried aside, and
may give unjust judgment, yet this is his comfort, that neither his enemy,
nor the Law it self, nor the Judge himself can justly proceed against him,
and adiudge him to any punishment. Oh how much more may it cheer up thy heart,
thou that art a child of God, truly believing in Christ, and have part in the
death of Christ, and on that ground art sure of this, that neither the devil
that thirsts after thy blood and the precious life of thy soul, nor the Law of
God, which is terrible in the curse of it against unbelievers, nor yet the
justice of God, which cannot but give sentence of damnation against unrepentant
sinners, that none of these can truly adiudge thee to any punishment, either
temporal or eternal for thy sins? Think on this to thy comfort when thou
art troubled with the sight of thy sins, yea even of those sins thou have
often fallen into of weakness, and against thy purpose and holy resolution to
the contrary: and when thou art troubled with fear of punishment due to thee
for thy sins, oh then call to mind this ground of comfort, that Christ has
suffered that punishment that thou should have undergone for all thy sins,
and that he was condemned in thy room, and in thy stead, and that he has
fully satisfied the justice of God for thy sin; and therefore in the justice
of God thou can not be condemned. No, know it to thy comfort, it is as
possible for thee to be damned for any of thy sins, though often fallen into
of weakness, and committed after thy true believing in Christ, as it is for
God to be unjust, which is impossible: and what a sweet comfort may that be to
thy soul? Exercise thy thoughts in this ground of comfort, yea exercise thy
faith in it, and labor thou more and more to be settled in this ground of
comfort. Many poor Christians wrong themselves exceedingly, in that they
measure their happy estate and condition by their feeling of comfort: when
their feelings fail them, then they call all into question. Oh learn then to
measure thy happy state and condition by this, that thou art a true believer,
and have part in the death of Christ, and so art in such a blessed state and
condition as thou can not be condemned for any of thy sins, no not for
those sins that have deprived thee of the feeling of comfort: and how may
this cheer up thine heart? Surely the due consideration of this may cheer
thee up, and comfort thee against the fear of that which follows after death;
for howsoever as we have it, Hebr. 9 27. After death comes judgment, and
hereupon to the wicked and unbelievers death is most terrible, and the * king
of fear, as Bildad calls it, Job 18.14. Job 18.14. (...)
because they go out of the body not only comfortless, but also certain of
condemnation, having received the sentence within themselves that they shall
never see the face of God to their comfort; yet it is not so to thee, thou
being a true believer, and having part in the death of Christ, thou art sure
thou shall not come into the judgment of condemnation, and thou art sure of it
before thou be removed out of the world by death, that thy sentence after death
shall be a comfortable sentence, even the sentence of absolution, and thou art
sure that when thy soul goes out of thy body, it shall come before a Judge
who is most just indeed, but yet whose justice is already answered and
satisfied by the death of his own Son: yea thou art sure that thy soul and
body shall one day stand before his judgment seat who is thy redeemer, even
before the judgment seat of the Lord Jesus, who has shed his own precious
blood to set thee free from hell, and from damnation, and therefore certainly
thou can not be condemned, and what a comfort may that be to thee?

Now in that Gods chosen, now believing in Christ, none can truly adiudge them
to any punishment, either temporal or eternal for their sins, and he gives
this reason and ground of it, Christ died for them; we may easily see, and
hence we may conclude.

Christ his death is a sufficient expiation of the sins of all Gods chosen.
(...).
It is the death and suffering of Christ that takes away the guilt and
punishment due to Gods chosen for their sins, and his death and suffering
does sufficiently satisfy for their sins, and free them from all punishment
for sin, both temporal and eternal. Ephesians. 1.7. the Apostle says, We have
redemption through the blood of Christ: and the same word he has Colos. 1.14.
Colos 1.14
And 1. Tim. 2.6. 1. Tim. 2.6.
the Apostle says, He gave himself (...), a ransom, a price for all men,
that he might satisfy for the sins of Gods chosen. And Heb. 7.27. it is
said, that Christ offered himself a sacrifice to God for our sins: and to
offer himself a sacrifice for sin, is to expiate sin, and to take away the
guilt and punishment of sin. Heb. 9.26. Now in the end (says the Author of
that Epistle) has Christ appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. And Heb. 10.14. it is said, With one offering Christ has made
perfect for ever them that are sanctified. Thus the Scripture runs on it in
many places, and does plainly evidence to us, that Christ his death was the
expiation of sins, and that Christ by his death and suffering has taken away
the guilt and punishment due to Gods chosen for their sins, and has
sufficiently satisfied for them, and freed them from all punishment for sin,
both temporal and eternal: and the ground of this is.

Because Christ in his suffering did endure the extremity of Gods wrath,

And this truth, to make use of it, in the first place it serves Though Christ
his active obedience was most perfect and meritorious yet was it not the
expiation of sin.
that was not the thing that did expiate and take away the punishment due to
Gods chosen for their sins, but the passive obedience of Christ, his death
and suffering was that which was the expiation of sin, and Christ only in
his suffering was the propitiation ((...)) for our sins. 1. Ioh. 2.2. (...),
etc. Popish pride touching expiation of sin discovered.
And therefore it is monstrous and intolerable pride in the Papists, in that
they take on them to expiate sin, and to satisfy for sin, by things done
by themselves, yea by some things done by them for which they have no warrant
in the word of God, but are things merely devised by themselves, as by their
Masses, Diriges, pilgrimages, wilful poverty, vow of single life. Jesus
Christ the righteous did not expiate sin, and satisfy for sin by his
perfect fulfilling of the Law of God in his life, and yet the proud Papists
dare challenge it to themselves, The Popish propitiatory sacrifice of the very
body and blood of Christ offered up to God in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
under the forms of bread and wine, confuted.
and by their devised obedience, which indeed is monstrous, and most
abominable pride and presumption.

Again in a second place, was Christ his death the expiation of sin, and was
his death and suffering sufficient to satisfy for the sins of Gods chosen,
and to free them from all punishment for sin, both temporal and eternal?
what need then is there of any other real and external sacrifice for sin? The
Papists hold and teach, that in the Sacrament of the Supper the very body and
blood of Christ are offered up to God the Father under the forms of bread and
wine, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead. Now this cannot
stand with the ground of truth now delivered, but does exceedingly derogate
from the full satisfaction that was made by Christ his sacrifice of himself
for the sins of Gods chosen, and from the infinite and eternal virtue and
efficacy of that sacrifice. An idle Popish distinction met withal, and
confuted
it is idle, and very absurd and foolish; for the sacrifice and offering of
Christ, and his death and suffering (which cannot be without effusion and
shedding of blood) are made all one by the holy Ghost: Christ cannot be offered
without dying and suffering, Hebr. 9.25.27.28. Heb. 9.25.27.28.
and therefore this distinction of the bloody sacrifice of Christ and
unbloody, was never known to the holy Ghost: the sacrifice of Christ once
offered on the cross was a full satisfaction for the sins of all Gods
chosen, and it is of infinite and eternal virtue and efficacy, and able to
free them from all punishment for sin, both temporal and eternal: and
therefore all other real external sacrifices, whether bloody or unbloody,
are needless and superfluous, and indeed abominable.

Come we now to the Apostles amplification of his reason, and ground of comfort
and strength against the fear of condemnation, from the death of Christ.
Christ is dead for Gods chosen, and therefore they need not fear condemnation,
none can condemn them. This reason and ground of comfort our Apostle further
enlarges by the resurrection of Christ, and by his sitting at the right hand
of God in heaven, and by his making intercession there for God chosen; that
Christ is not only dead for Gods chosen, but is also risen again from the
dead, ascended up into heaven, and now sits at the right hand of God in heaven,
and there makes continual intercession for Gods chosen. And here from this
amplification in general, before I come to stand on the particular branches of
it, note we, that the Apostle here conioynes and couples together inseparably
these four things, The death of Christ, his resurrection, his ascension, and
sitting at the right hand of God, and his intercession: and the Apostle limits
and restraines these four things only to Gods chosen, now believing in
Christ. First then it is clear from hence, that it is very gross, and is to
be exploded and utterly to be rejected which the Arminians and others of their
mind and judgment hold, A gross opinion of the Arminians met withal, and
confuted.
that the death of Christ belongs to many to whom his resurrection and
intercession belongs not, for so they affirm, that Christ died for all men
both good and bad, but he rose again and makes intercession not for all, but
only for believers. Now if Christ dyed for all, and rose not again for all,
then he suffered death for some for whom he never overcame death, which is very
absurd and gross once to think, and clean contrary to this text of the
Apostle, he here conioyning the death of Christ, his resurrection, and
intercession together. Again, in that the Apostle here limits and restraines
the death of Christ, and his resurrection, his sitting at the right hand of
God, and his intercession, only to Gods chosen, it makes directly against
universal redemption wrought by the death of Christ, The Arminia^ conceit of
universal redemption by the death of Christ confuted.
and held likewise by the Arminians and others: for if Christ redeemed all
universally by his death, then he also rose again for all, and sits at the
right hand of God for all, and makes continual intercession for all, which is
directly contrary to the plain evidence of this text, and so erroneous and
false. Let it suffice to have touched these things in a word.

Come we now to the first degree of the Apostles amplification, Yea or rather
which is risen again: that is, as I showed, it is Christ which is dead for the
sins of Gods chosen, and not only so, but he is risen again, and has
vanquished death, and made it manifest by his rising again that he has fully
absolved and discharged them from all their sins: that is the purpose of the
Apostle in these words, Yea or rather which is risen again. Hence then we have
ground for this point of divine truth, it is hence plainly offered to us.

Christ his rising from the dead is a manifestation of the full redemption
wrought by his death.
Indeed the resurrection of Christ did add nothing to the price of redemption
which was paid in the death of Christ, yet it is a plain evidence and
demonstration of the full redemption wrought by the death of Christ. By his
rising from the dead he has made himself known to be a most Almighty,
strong, and powerful Savior and redeemer, and has made it manifest that by
his death and blood shedding he has fully redeemed Gods chosen believing in
him from all their sins, and set them free from sin, from hell, from death,
and from damnation, and from all punishment due to them for sin, both
temporal and eternal. And for this we have evidence in other places of
Scripture. Romans 1.4. the Apostle says, Christ was declared mightily to be the
Son of God, touching the Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from
the dead: and so a most powerful, mighty, and strong Savior and redeemer by
his resurrection from the dead. And Romans 4.25. he says, Christ was delivered
to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. His meaning
is, that the resurrection of Christ is an evident demonstration of our
justification, that is, of our acquitting and full discharge from all our sins
(we believing in Christ) purchased by the death of Christ. And hence it is that
the Apostle puts it down for a certain truth, 1. Corinthians. 15.17. that if
Christ be not risen our faith is vain, we that believe in Christ are yet in
our sins: we are not yet freed from the guilt and punishment due for our
sins. Where we see he makes the clearing of Gods chosen from their sins,
and setting of them free from sin, and from hell and damnation, and the
resurrection of Christ, to go together, that if Christ be risen from the dead,
then they are free from sin: if he be not risen from the dead, they are yet
in their sins. And so be strongly confirms the truth of the point in hand,
that Christ his rising from the dead is a manifestation of the full and perfect
redemption wrought by the death of Christ; and he thereby has made himself
known to be a most mighty, strong, and powerful Savior and redeemer, and
thereby manifested that by his death he has fully redeemed Gods chosen from
all their sins, and set them free from hell, from death and damnation, and
from all punishment for sin, both temporal and eternal: and the reason and
ground of it is this.

Christ became surety for Gods chosen, No man takes away my life, but I lay
it down of my self. Christ by voluntary dispensation having thus taken on
him the sins of Gods chosen, and to satisfy for them, and having of his own
accord put himself under the power of death, if he had not satisfied for the
sins of Gods chosen to the full, he had not risen again; if any one of their
sins had not been satisfied for by him he had not risen from the dead, or
being risen, he should return again to dye: for where sin remains
unsatisfied for, there of necessity death has power, it being the stipend of
sin: but Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, Death has no more
power or dominion over him, says the Apostle, Romans 6.9. And therefore
doubtless Christ his rising from the dead is a manifestation of the full
redemption wrought by the death of Christ, and thereby Christ has made
himself known to be a most mighty, strong, and powerful Savior and
redeemer, and has made it manifest that by his death he has fully redeemed
Gods chosen from all their sins, and set them free from sin, from hell,
from death, and from damnation, and from all punishment for sin both
temporal and eternal.

And for the use, this ground of truth serves to teach us a special comfort,
that we may take from the consideration of the resurrection of Christ. We being
true believers, we are not to make the resurrection of Christ a matter of
speculation and of knowledge only, but a ground of comfort: The resurrection
of Christ ought to be unto us not a matter of speculatio^ and knowledge only,
but a ground of comfort, and what comfort we may thence gather discovered.
and the due consideration of it ought to teach us thus much for our comfort,
that we may safely and securely rest on the death of Christ as a full
satisfaction for all our sins. Yea on this ground, that Christ is risen from
the dead, we may be assured of it to our comfort (we being true believers) that
none of our sins are vnexpiated or unsatisfied for by the death of Christ, no
not our most heinous sins, no not those wherein we have continued long, and
have doubled and repeated often, no not those we have done with much boldness
and presumption; we now believing in Christ, and having good evidence of it
that we are true believers, we may assure our selves that we have full
deliverance and freedom from the guilt and punishment of all our sins by the
death of Christ: and Christ by his rising from the dead has made it manifest
yt by his death, and by the shedding of his blood he has fully redeemed us
from all our sins, and set us free from sin, from hell, from death, and from
condemnation, and that he as our Sampson has carried away the gates of death,
yea the gates of hell, and the gates of death and of hell shall never be able
to prevail against us. And what a sweet comfort may that be to us if we duly
consider it? Think on it to thy comfort thou that art a true believer; and
when thou art troubled and terrified with the sight of thy most foul and
heinous sins, and they grate and rub on thy conscience, and the devil he
gals thee with the remembrance of them, then consider to thy comfort that none
of thy sins, no not the most heinous and foulest of them, shall sink thee to
hell, and bring damnation on thee, Christ has dyed for them, yea he is risen
again from death, and has made it manifest to men and Angels, and the devil
himself cannot deny it, but that by his rising again he has given evident
demonstration of it, that by his death he has fully satisfied for thy foulest
sin, and for all thy other sins, and freed thee for ever from the guilt and
punishment of them all. For thou being a true believer, assuredly Christ
undertook to satisfy for all thy sins, and he put himself under the power
of death for thy sins; and if any of thy sins had not been satisfied for,
he had not risen from the dead, but now he being risen from the dead, thou
may thereupon assure thy self and build on it, that by his death he has
fully redeemed the from sin, from hell, and from damnation, and from all
punishment for thy sins, both temporal and eternal. Oh then think on this
to thy comfort, and give the Lord Jesus his due honor, rest on him and on his
death as a full redemption and deliverance of thee from all thy sins: yea
know to thy comfort, that Christ is able, and he will also free thee from the
power of sin, yea from the power of that sin that is most strong and
powerful in thee. He took our nature on him to chase sin and death out of
it, as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.8. He appeared that he might loose the
works of the devil. And has he broken the bars of death when he was under
the power of it, and has he overcome sin and death by his rising from the
dead, and will he now leave thee for whom he dyed and rose again, and set free
from sin, hell, death, and damnation, under the power of sin? Was he able
to break the bars and gates of death when he was under the power of it, Note.
and is he not now much more able to break into thy dead soul, and to free
thee from the deadness of heart, and the like of which thou complainest? Will
he leave thee under the power of corruption? No, no, he is able to free thee,
and he will in his good time free thee from the power of thy strongest
corruption and sin: think on that to thy comfort.

Come we now to the second degree of the Apostles amplification of his reason
and ground of comfort taken from the death of Christ, It is Christ which is
dead, yea or rather which is risen again: and he adds further, Who is also at
the right hand of God, that is (as I showed) who is now exalted to unspeakable
glory in heaven, and to the full administration of his kingdom, to be the
head of his Church, and with his Father to be Lord and governor of all things,
both in heaven and in earth. Diverse particulars might from hence be derived,
but I desire to point out those things that are proper to this place: and two
things especially are here offered, I will speak of them in order. And first,
in that the Apostle says, It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is
risen again, and then adds, Who is also at the right hand of God, we are given
to understand thus much.

Christ Jesus as man is now in heaven, possessed of such glory as far exceeds
the glory of all creatures.
yea of the most holy and glorious Angels: and to this purpose the Apostle
speaks plainly, Ephesians. 1.20.21. Ephesians. 1.17.20.21.
where he says, that The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
has raised up Christ from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly
places, far above all principalities, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that which is to
come. So Philip. 2.9. God (says the Apostle) has highly exalted him, and
given him a name above every name. And Heb. 1.13. says the Author of that
Epistle, Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, sit at my right hand
till I make thine enemies thy footstool. Thereby implying, that the glory of
Christ in heaven is far above the glory of the most glorious Angels: yea such
is the visible glory and brightness of Christ his manhood in heaven, as it is
said to be the light of the heavenly Jerusalem, Revel. 21.23. and so it far
exceeds the glory of the most glorious creatures, yea of the most holy and
glorious Angels: and it must needs be so, there is reason and ground for it,

Godhead, and made one personally with God, it is meet and fit that in his
manhood he should have pre-eminence in glory above all creatures, yea above the
most glorious creatures, they being not in that manner made one with God. And
therefore doubtless Christ in his manhood and humane nature in which he died
and rose from the dead, is exalted to unspeakable glory in heaven, and as man
he is now in heaven, possessed of such glory as far exceeds the glory of all
creatures, yea of the most holy and glorious Angels.

And the consideration of this in the first place ought to We are to be stricken
with a due admiration of the glory of the Lord Jesus.
which now he is possessed of in heaven. Earthly dignities do commonly so dazzle
our eyes, as we know not how sufficiently to admire them: oh then what honor,
and reverence, and admiration is due to the Lord Jesus, now advanced to such
glory in heaven, even in his humane nature, as far exceeds the glory of the
most glorious Angels! Did the Papists duly consider this excellency and glory
the Lord Jesus is now possessed of at the right hand of God his Father in heaven,
they would not so derogate and so detract from his glory as commonly they do.
The cause of popish adoration of Angels.
And without question their too much admiring and magnifying of the Angels,
has been the cause of their giving too much to them, even divine worship and
adoration. We are to have our hearts taken up with a due admiration of the
excellency and glory of Christ now at the right hand of God in heaven, and
there in his humane nature possessing unspeakable glory.

And for a second use: the consideration of this, that Christ in his humane
nature is now advanced to such glory in heaven as far exceeds the glory of
the most holy Angels, may yield matter of great comfort to the believing
members of Christ: Matter of great comfort to the believing members of Christ
for Christ being now possessed of unspeakable glory in heaven in our nature,
it is even as a pawn or a pledge to the believing members of Christ, that
their bodies and souls shall one day be made partakers of the like glory:
Christ will in his due time draw up all his members to partake with him in his
glory, and as he is in his own blessed body and soul most glorious, so will
he one day be most glorious in his members, and he will make them partakers,
though not of equal glory, yet of like glory with himself: it is one part
of his prayer, Ioh. 17.24. that his members should be with him, and be
partakers of his glory. And the Apostle says expressly, Philip. 3.21. He shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.
What then though thy body lie under some lingering disease and pain, or be
pinched with hunger, cold, nakedness, and such like, and thy body is tossed
up and down from prison to prison, and many ways abused and hardly entreated,
yet thou being a believing member of Christ, that distressed or any way abused
body of thine shall one day be advanced to unspeakable glory in heaven. Christ
thy head and Savior is now possessed of that glory in his blessed body, and
he will in due time advance thy body to the like glory: and that duly
considered may yield thee matter of sweet comfort.

Now the second thing offered from these words, Who is also at the right hand
of God, being understood as they have been formerly expounded, and that
agreeable to the purpose of the Apostle in this place, is this.

Christ Jesus not only as God, but as man also, has now power in his hand to
save and to destroy, and is now Lord and king of all things.
And to this purpose speaks Christ himself after his resurrection, Matthew.
28.18. All power is given unto me: that is, such power whereunto every creature
is subject. Act. 2.36. says Peter, Let all the house of Israel know for a
surety, that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom ye have
crucified And this is further manifest by that Ephesians. 1.22. where the Apostle
says, that Christ sitting at the right hand of God, is made head to his
Church, governing it as an head, and that all other things are made subject
under his feet: and especially the enemies of his kingdom are subject under
his feet, to tread them down at his pleasure. And hence it is said, Revel.
1.5. that He is the Prince or ruler of the kings of the earth. Apocal. 19.16
(...).
And Revel. 19.16. he has this royal style written on his garment and upon
his thigh, THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS, and so all earthly powers are
subject to him. And that he has power over the Angels both good and bad, it is
plain: the good do him reverence, and yield him obedience willingly and
religiously, Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him: and the bad they
yield subjection unto him, either deceitfully and to wrong ends, or by force
compelled, as the Apostle says, Philip. 2.10. They bow their knees: the
meaning is, they are subject to him, and they yield subjection to him. This
then we see to be confirmed and made good to be an holy truth of God, that
Christ Jesus has received power over all creatures in heaven, in earth, and in
hell, and that he not only as God but as man also, has power in his hand to
save and to destroy, and is now Lord and King over all things.

This truth first discouers the folly of those that will not The folly of
those that will not submit themselves to Christ, not yield o^ed^ence to him,
discovered.
he having so great power, even power over all things. You will say: Be there
any such? Too many, not only professed enemies of Christ and of his Gospel,
as Turks, Jews, Infidels, but many others who live in the bosom of the
Church, and take on them the name of Christians. Are not many such careless,
to get knowledge, to believe and repent of their sins? Christ calls them in
the preaching of the Gospel, to knowledge, to faith, and to repentance, and
they will not yield to his call, but wilfully go on in their ignorance, and
unbelief, and hardness of heart, and wilfully refuse to yield obedience to
him: and so doing, they discover their folly exceedingly, they refuse to
submit themselves to him who has all power in his hand, and is able suddenly
to bring them to utter confusion. And take thou notice of it thou that live
under the sound of the Gospel, and art called in the preaching of it, to
knowledge, faith, and repentance, and thou wilfully go on in thy ignorance,
and in thy sins, thou refusest to yield obedience to Christ, who ha^h power
to destroy thee, to open the mouth of hell on thee, and suddenly to throw thee
down to the bottom of hell: and mark what doom abides thee, put down by
the Apostle, 2. These. 1.8. Christ Jesus will one day show himself from heaven
with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Not only to his
open professed foes and enemies, but to such also as live under the sound of
his Gospel, and yield not obedience to it, by believing in him, and repenting
of their sins. Learn therefore to kiss the Son, as Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the
Lord Jesus, and salute him with the kiss of obedience, lest his wrath be
kindled against thee: if it once be kindled, woe be to thee, it will burn thee
down to the bottom of hell.

Matter of co^fid^nc^ and of sweet comfort to every true believing member of
Christ.
and consider it to thy comfort, thou that art a true believer, here is further
ground of comfort for thee, Christ Jesus has not only died for thy sins,
and risen again from the dead for thee, but he has received all power to save
and to destroy for thy good: and though men and devils, sin and troubles, and
every thing in the world do oppose and set against thee, yet be not dismayed,
look up to the Lord Jesus thy head and Savior, who has power over all
things, in heaven, in earth, and in hell, and has all his enemies under his
feet to tread them down at his pleasure; know that neither men nor devils
can stir further then he gives them leave, and let the consideration of
Christ his great power comfort and encourage thee against the fear of any
adversary power whatsoever, and know that whatsoever the devil and his
instruments, Antichrist and his adherents, do against the members of Christ,
though Christ Jesus may suffer them for a time to exercise some cruelty on
their bodies for a time, that they may be made conformable to him their head in
a measure of suffering, and for other good ends best known to himself, yet
they shall never be able to prevail to the hurt of the souls of his members,
Christ Jesus sits in heaven, and ouerrules them, limiting their power and their
rage, and they going on in their bloody persecution, he will in the end bring
them to utter confusion: and they may as well pull Christ out of his seat in
heaven, as any one of his members out of his hands, and that is a ground of
sweet comfort for all that truly believe in Christ.

Come we now to the third and last degree of the Apostles amplification of his
reason and ground of comfort from the death of Christ in the last words of this
verse, And makes request also for us. These words have been formerly thus
expounded, and the same Christ Jesus does now also make request by the merit of
his death, presenting himself and the sacrifice of himself once offered on
the cross, and the infinite merit of that sacrifice continually before the
eyes of his Father, willing as he is God and man, and desiring as he is man,
that his Father would accept of his perfect satisfaction, and turn away his
eyes from the indignities and sins of his chosen, and be well pleased with
them in and through him; and this he does for me, and for you, and for all true
believers. Now the point of doctrine hence offered is this.

Christ Jesus makes continual intercession in heaven by the merit of his death
for all Gods chosen, now bel^euing in him.
Christ Jesus now in heaven appears continually before his Father, and is
there continually exercised in executing that part of his Priestly office, even
in making intercession for all his true believing members: and Christ
presenting himself, and the sacrifice of himself and the infinite merit of
that sacrifice continually before his Father, he causes his Father to turn
away his eyes from the indignities and sins of all his true believing members,
and he procures his Fathers favor and loving countenance toward them
continually. Heb. 9.24. says the Author of that Epistle, Christ is entered into
very heaven to this end, to appear now in the sight of God for us: to appear
in the presence of God his Father to make intercession for us. The holy Ghost
there has respect to the manner of the high Priest in the time of the Law, who
used to go into the Sanctu^ sanctorum, into the most holy place, with the names
of the children of Israel written in precious stones, for a remembrance of
them, that he might remember them to God in his prayers, as Exodus 30.7. So
Christ Jesus being now gone up into heaven, he there presents to his Father the
names of all his chosen, and remembers them to his Father, and by the merit of
his death procures mercy for them continually. And to this purpose is that a
plain text, Heb. 7.24 25. where the holy Ghost comparing Christ his priesthood
with the Leuiticall priesthood, he prefers his before that, in respect of the
perpetuity of it, and he says, the Leuiticall Priests were many, there was a
succession and a passing of that priesthood from one to another, because they
were not suffered to endure by the reason of death, But this man, meaning
Christ, because he (that is Christ) has an everlasting priesthood, or a
priesthood that passes not from him to any other, wherefore he is able also
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. A plain and pregnant proof of this, that Christ Jesus
enduring for ever, and now living with God his Father eternally in heaven, he
has an everlasting priesthood, and is continually before his Fathers eyes
executing that office, even making continual intercession by the merit of his
death for all Gods chosen now believing in him: For why,

Now this truth in the first place bears strongly against the intercession of
Angels and Saints departed, which the Papists hold and teach, and stand much on
it; The intercession of Angels and Saints departed, held and taught by the
Papists, confuted.
and it shows that to be altogether needless and vain: for why, Does Christ
now in heaven appear continually before his Father, setting before him the
sacrifice of himself, and the infinite merit of that sacrifice, and thereby
make continually intercession for all Gods chosen now believing in him? What
need then is there of the intercession of Angels and Saints departed? Surely
their intercession is altogether needless, and the Papists in making them
intercessors between God and themselves, do rob Christ of a great part of the
honor of his priesthood. Christ has an everlasting priesthood, therefore his
intercession is perpetual: and Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 2.1. If any man sin
we have an advocate with the Father (not the Virgin Marie, Peter or Paul, or
any other Saint, but) Jesus Christ the Just. And 1. Tim. 2.5. says the
Apostle, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the
man Christ Jesus. And therefore we ought not to make any our Mediator between
God and us, but only Christ Jesus. Yea say the Papists,

I answer

Again, to call Angels and Saints mediators of intercession, is very absurd
and foolish; for who knows not this, that knows any thing, that to mediate
and to intercede, in common understanding is all one? And indeed intercession
partaines to Christ as part of his mediation, it is one part of it, and
therefore to say that Angels and Saints departed are mediators of intercession
is most absurd and foolish. I will not further stand on this idle conceit of
our adversaries, I leave them to vanish in their own vain speculations: and
for the use of the ground of truth now delivered to our

A ground of sweet comfort for every true believer.
Is it so that Christ Jesus has not only dyed for the sins of Gods chosen,
and by his death fully satisfied for all their sins, but he is risen again
from the dead, and ascended up into heaven, and there makes continual
intercession by the merit of his death for all Gods chosen now believing in
him, he there presents himself and the sacrifice of himself, and the infinite
merit of that sacrifice continually before the eyes of his Father, and thereby
causes his Father to turn away his eyes from the indignities and sins of
all his true believing members, and procures his Fathers face and favor
toward them continually? Surely this is to be thought on and considered of for
the comfort of all true believers: here is a ground of sweet and heavenly
comfort for every true believer; for mark I beseech you, Christ has not only
by his death fully satisfied for the sins of every true believer, and taken
away the guilt and punishment due to him for sin, but being risen from the
dead and ascended up into heaven, he now lives with God his Father for ever in
heaven, and his living there is to the further great good of all and every one
of his members, he there makes continual intercession for them by the merit of
his death, and by his perpetual intercession he keeps them perpetually in the
favor of God, and howsoever they sometimes slip and fall of infirmity into
some sin, yet he does intercede, and as it were step between them and the
wrath of his Father, and he wills that his Father would accept of his perfect
sacrifice once offered for the daily and particular sins of every one of his
members: and what a sweet comfort is that to every true believer? A child of
God, a true believer is sometimes much cast down because he is now and then
overtaken with sin that he falls into against his purpose: Comfort for Gods
children falling into sin against their purposes
now here is matter of comfort for thee that art a child of God, in this case
Christ does intercede and step between thee and the wrath of his Father that
it cannot break forth on thee; yea by his intercession he reconciles thee to
his Father for those sins thou do daily commit, thou being humbled for
them, and craving pardon of them; for Christ lives for ever in the presence of
his Father in heaven, and he is continually exercised in making intercession by
the merit of his death, not only for Gods chosen generally, but for particular
men, and that particularly, even for every one in particular that belongs to
him; and by his intercession he keeps every particular member of his in the
state of grace continually: he ma^ing request to his Father for the
perseverance of his members in grace, and so for their continuance in the state
of grace, he is certainly heard for that he prays for, Ioh. 11.42. Yea not
only the person of a true believer stand, just in the sight of God, and is
kept in the state of grace continually through the intercession of Christ, but
the good things done by him are thereby also sanctified and made acceptable and
pleasing to God. A child of God finds his best works, his prayers full of
defects and wantings; now by Christ his intercession, those defects and
wantings are covered and removed, and the Lord looking on them in and through
Christ, accepts them, and is well pleased with them. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye are made an
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And this is a matter of sweet comfort to all true believers, and to be
thought on to the comfort of all that have part in the death of Christ, For
certainly Christ his intercession in heaven breeds another intercession in all
his true believing members that live here on the face of the earth, Note.
and the same Spirit dwelling in Christ and in all his members, moves and
stirs them up to cry Abba, Father, and to make request to God with sighs
which cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26.
as verse 26. If then thou find this in thine own heart that thou art enabled
by the Spirit of Christ to cry Abba, Father, and to call on God with feruencie
of spirit, and with a longing desire after heavenly and spiritual things, that
is an infallible sign that thou have part in the intercession of Christ, and
that Christ Jesus continually makes intercession for thee in heaven. As for
those that cannot truly pray in some measure with feruencie of spirit, but are
only able to repeat a certain number of words for fashions sake, they can
have no assurance that Christ makes intercession for them. Oh then never rest
till thou find and feel the Spirit of Christ enabling thee to cry to God
Abba, Father, and to make request to God for things heavenly and spiritual
with feruencie of spirit: thereby thou may assure thy self that Christ Jesus
makes continual intercession for thee in heaven by the merit of his death,
presented before the eyes of his Father continually, and thereby causes his
Father to turn away his eyes from thy indignities and sins, and thereby
procures his Fathers face and favor and loving countenance toward thee
continually. Come we now to the 35. verse.

VERSE 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?


Our Apostle having in the two verses foregoing put down a ground of comfort
against the assaults that might come from the evil of sin, and showed that
the evil of sin cannot hurt Gods chosen believing in Christ, either in
regard of accusation or in respect of condemnation; he now in this 35. verse,
and in the verses following labors to arm and strengthen the believing
Romans, and other true believers, against the assault that might come from the
evil of affliction, and he shows that the evil of affliction cannot hurt
them: and he falls on this ground of comfort by way of prevention of an
objection; for the believing Romans out of their weakness might say to him,
Paul you tell us that God having not spared his own Son, but given him for us
all to death, that together with him he will give us all things needful and
fit for us, and that God justifying us none can lay any thing to our charge,
and Christ being dead for us and risen again for us, and ascended into heaven,
and sitting at the right hand of God, and there ma^ing intercession for us,
none can condemn us, which we must needs confess are matters of great
comfort: but we must tell you again, that we are subject to many sore and
grievous crosses and troubles, and we are pressed with many and great
afflictions, which make us doubt that we are not loved of God, and we fear
that our troubles and crosses are so many testimonies of Gods anger and wrath
against us. Now this doubt and fear the Apostle here preuents, by showing that
no cross or trouble be it never so great or strong, can possibly shake true
believers, Gods children, out of Gods favor, and separate them from the love
of Christ. The order the Apostle holds in setting down this ground of comfort
is this: in the 35. verse he first affirms in general, that no enemy
whatsoever can possibly separate true believers and Gods children from the love
of Christ, which he puts down by way of interrogation, adding force and life
to his position, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Secondly, he
affirms in more special manner, that particular evils, he reckoning up
diverse, cannot separate true believers and Gods children from the love of
Christ, which he likewise delivers by way of interrogation, more emphatically
and with greater force, Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Then verse 36. he brings a
testimony of Scripture out of Psalm. 44. to show that the particular evils
reckoned up by him, are such as have and do usually befall the Church and
children of God, and that they are no fained or new and strange things, as it
is written (says the Apostle) for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. We will lay forth the particulars of
that verse when we come to stand on it. In the 37. verse the Apostle makes
answer to his interrogation, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? and his answer is negative, that none of those evils can
separate true believers and Gods children from the love of Christ, which he
puts down, not in plain terms, but in the p^oofe of it, on this manner,
Those things in which true believers and Gods children are conquerours cannot
separate them from the love of Christ; but in the evils reckoned up they are
conquerours: therefore those cannot separate them from the love of Christ.

First, the minor or second proposition the Apostle amplifies, first by the
degree of victory or conquest, that in those evils true believers are potent
conquerours, Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours.
And secondly, the cause of that conquest, the powerful assistance of God who
loves them, Through him that loved us.

Come we now to the handling of these verses as they lie in order.

Verse. 35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?

36 As it is written, for thy sake are we ki^led all day long: we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter.

37 Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours through him
that loved us.

I will first open the sense and meaning of the words of this 35. verse. Who
shall separate us. As if the Apostle had said, Interpretation.
None shall, or none can, neither the devil nor any instrument of his can do
it, by any evil they can bring on us; I defy them all, as to be able to
separate us: that is me, or you, or any other true believer. From the love of
Christ. Some would have the love of Christ here to be taken actiuely, for that
love wherewith we love Christ; but indeed it is better to take it passiuely,
for that love wherewith we are beloved of Christ, that is more agreeable to the
context and purpose of the Apostle, having before spoken of Christ his love to
his chosen now believing in him, testified by his dying for them, his rising
again, and by his sitting at the right hand of God, and making intercession
for them: and the Apostle himself expounds it of Gods love to us in Christ,
verse 37. and 39. and the word separate leads us thus to understand it; for we
are not properly said to be separated from our selves, or from our own love,
but from another, or from the love of another. Shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As if he had
said, neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor
nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, shall be able or can separate us from the
love of Christ. By tribulation is meant any pressure or vexation by
imprisonment, bonds, banishment, or the like. Anguish or distress. The word
signifies properly straightness of place, and it is here used metaphorically
for perplexity of mind, when one knows not what to do, or which way to turn
himself, as David said, 2. Sam. 24.14. I am in a wonderful strait. Or
persecution. The word persecution signifies the extreme violence used to Gods
children by tyrants and wicked men, whereby they do hunt them and chase them up
and down, and pursue them from place to place, as David said, 1. Sam. 24.15.
Whom do thou pursue? And Chap. 26.20. that Saul hunted him as one would hunt
a partrich in the mountains. Or famine, or nakedness. These are known
things, one signifies want of food to sustain life, and the other want of
clothing to cover and defend the body from the injury of weather. Or peril. By
peril is meant any dangerous distress, whereby the life of man is in great
hazard, such as the Apostle speaks of, 2. Corinthians. 11.26. Or sword. By sword
we are to understand any kind of violent slaughter, and cruel tormenting
death; as Hebr. 11.37. it is said, they were slain with the sword. Thus then
conceive we the Apostles meaning in the words of this verse, as if he had said.

Who is able to separate me, or you, or any true believer, from that love
wherewith we are beloved of Christ, or to make us less beloved of him? Surely,
neither the devil nor any instrument of his, can do it by any evil they can
bring on us. Is any pressure or vexation, or any perplexity of mind, or any
extreme violence used to us by tyrants and wicked men, whereby they pursue us
from place to place, or is want of necessary food, or want of necessary
clothing, or any dangerous distress whereby our lives are in hazard, or any
kind of violent and cruel tormenting death, able to separate us from the love
wherewith we are beloved of Christ, or to make us less beloved of him? Surely
neither these nor any other evils that befall us, or can come to us, are able
to do it.

Now in that the Apostle says, who shall separate us, we being true believers,
from that love wherewith we are beloved of Christ, meaning this, that none can
do it, neither Satan nor any instrument of his, by any evil they can bring on
us or do unto us; he points out plainly what Satan would do if he were able,
and what Satan chiefly aims at, namely, to separate Gods children from the
love of God, and from the love of Christ: and the point hence in the first
place is this.

That the thing that Satan chiefly aims at and labors after Satan's chief
aim in all temptations, trials, crosses, and evils that he brings on Gods
children is (if it were possible) to separate them from the love of God and
Christ, or at least to shake out of their hearts the sense and feeling of Gods
love to them.
and to empty their hearts of the persuasion of Gods love, and to cast doubts
into their minds of Gods love toward them. Thus de dealt with David, Psalm. 73.
he had almost tript up his heels, verse 2. and he brought him to say in regard
of his affliction, verse 13. Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed mine hands in innocence: I am not in favor with God. And so Gideon,
Judge. 6.13. If the Lord be with us, how then is all this come upon us? And this
was Satan's aim in Jobs affliction and trials, he spoiled him of his goods, and
he vexed him grievously in his body, not so much to make him poor or to hurt
his body, as to make him blaspheme or deny God, and to call into question
Gods love toward him, Job 1.11. And this was Satan's chief aim in his
tempting of Christ, Mat. 4. the special thing he aimed at, was to make Christ
call into question his Fathers love toward him, and the truth of that voice of
his from heaven, Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: and to think, through unbelief, that he was not the Son of God,
and therefore he comes on him with that, verse. 3.6. If thou be the Son of
God. And it is no marvel that Satan thus in all temptations and trials that he
brings on Gods children, chiefly aims at this, and labors what he can to
shake out of their hearts the sense and feeling of Gods love to them, and to
empty their hearts of the persuasion of Gods love toward them.



Gods children are to labor especially to strengthen their faith and
persuasion of Gods love toward the^ in time of their trials, crosses, and
afflictions.
Surely then it behoues Gods children in the time of their trials, crosses, and
afflictions, to labor to disappoint Satan of his purpose, and in their
afflictions they are to labor especially to strengthen their faith, and their
persuasion of Gods love toward them: and the more Satan seeks to empty their
hearts of the persuasion of Gods love, the more they are to labor by all means
to settle their hearts in the persuasion of it, that God loves them. And take
thou heed when thou art under any temptation, trial, or cross, thou yield not
to Satan his own conclusion, that because thou art afflicted and that
grievously, therefore God loves thee not. It is an holy logic in this case to
deny the conclusinn, though it be against the art of logic, and learn thou
thus to do when thou art under the greatest trials and afflictions: labor thou
to preserve in thine heart a persuasion of Gods love toward thee, that God
still loves thee though he do grievously afflict thee, and so disappoint Satan
of his aim, and of his drift in seeking to shake out of thine heart the
feeling and persuasion of Gads love to thee. be done that serve to this
purpose: I will briefly commend them to thee, mark them well.

First hold thou fast this ground of truth, which is undeniable, that Gods love
is most constant and unchangeable as his own blessed Majesty, with whom there
is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning, Iam. 1.17. and that nothing
in the world can pluck his love from his children, no not so much as hinder it
or keep it back from them, and that a child of God once beloved of God in his
best beloved the Lord Jesus, is as dear to God in his greatest distress as in
his greatest prosperity; and though his estate be changed, yet Gods love
toward him is not changed.

And again secondly, cleave thou fast to the word and promise David, 2. Sam.
7.15. that which he said to him, he says to all his children, and cleave thou
fast to this word of promise. And though the Lord hide his face from thee, and
his love and mercy are so ouershadowed with the cloud of thy present
afflictions as they cannot be seen, yet cleave thou fast to his word and
promise, even to his bare word, when all other things for thy trial seem
contrary to thee, and consider that then the Lord has a secret working for
thy good, which thou can not sensibly perceive. Thus did Abraham, as we find
Romans 4.18. Above hope he believed under hope: he hoped in God, and did cleave
fast and close to the promise of God against sense and reason, and when all
things seemed contrary to him, he considering the power and secret working of
the Lord. And if thou thus hold fast that truth of God which cannot be
gainsaid, that Gods love is most constant and unchangeable, and if thou thus
cleave fast to the word of promise, yea to the bare word, when all things for
trial seem contrary to thee, thou shall be able in thy greatest distress to
preserve in thine heart and soul a persuasion of Gods love to thee; and so
thou shall frustrate Satan of his purpose, and disappoint him of his aim and
drift.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? We see the
Apostle here speaks very boldly and confidently, as it were by way of
challenge, and by way of triumph over Satan and all his instruments: Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? as if he had said, I defy the devil and
all his instruments, as able to separate us from the love of Christ by any
evil they can bring; I am sure they are never able Gods children are after an
holy manner bold and undaunted in respect of the evil of affliction and
outward crosses.
in respect of the evil of affliction and outward crosses. Without question
Gods children have in them a natural fear of the evil of affliction and
outward troubles and crosses, as they be enemies to nature, and tend to the
destruction of nature, and they are afraid of them so far, as they are
careful to avoid them by all good and lawful ways and means, and not to
draw and pull them on themselves needlessly, but they have in them an holy
boldness, and courage, and vndauntednesse, in respect of afflictions and
outward troubles that come to them from the hand of God, which they cannot
avoid: and a child of God more fears the evil of sin then the evil of
affliction. In respect of sin, a child of God quakes and trembles, and is
ready to swoune, and even to fall down dead at the least known sin, yet in
respect of adversity and outward troubles that do or may befall him, he is
marvelous comfortable and courageous in an holy manner, undaunted through the
grace of faith in the promises of God. Dan. 3.16.17.18. we find that Shadrach
Mesbach and Abednego were afraid to sin against God by falling down to worship
Nebuchadnezzars golden image, but they were nothing daunted nor appalled with
the hot fiery furnace threatened against the^ for refusing so to do. We might
further exemplify this, but for the application of it briefly.

The different disposition of Gods children and the wicked discovered.
where Gods children are most bold, there wicked persons are very cowards; and
where Gods children are most afraid, there the wicked and ungodly are most
bold; a child of God quakes and fears in respect sin, but a wicked person is
most bold in sin, yea he thinks it strange that men will suffer themselves to
be feared with sins, and that they will stand trembling at some sins, that
he accounts trifling. And again, in respect of adversity and outward trouble
a child of God is bold and undaunted, but there the wicked man's heart fails
him, and there he shows himself a very coward: yea a bare conceit and
suspicion of some outward trouble coming toward him, daunts him, and makes him
tremble and quake. If then thou find thy self more afraid of the least known
sin, then thou art at the greatest outward trouble, and thou had rather
undergo the one then fall into the other, it is an evidence to thee that thy
heart is right, and there is true grace in it: but if thou be bold in respect
of sin, and a coward in regard of outward trouble, and thou art more afraid
of outward trouble then of sin, and thou more fear poverty and loss of
outward things then the breach of Gods commandments, as Sabbath-breaking,
using unlawful means to enrich thy self, surely it is a certain note thou
have not in thee the spirit and disposition of a child of God, but the spirit
and disposition of a wicked and graceless person.

Now further these words of the Apostle, Who shall separate us, we being true
believers, the meaning of them being as ye have heard, that none is able to do
it, neither the devil nor any instrument of his can do it by any evil they
can bring on us, they afford to us this proposition, this ground of truth, it
is the thing here intended.

That the love of Christ, or Gods love in Christ, cannot possibly Gods love in
Christ cannot possibly be severed from true believers, nor they from it.
no adversary power whatsoever, either of men or devils, is able to separate
and to keep away the love of God and the love of Christ from true believers
and Gods children, neirher the devil nor any instrument of his, is able by any
evil they can do to one that is beloved of God in Christ, to make him not
beloved of God, or less beloved of him. We read Ierem. 31.3. the Church and
people of Israel complain that the Lord of old appeared to them, and showed
himself a loving God to their fathers, but now he seemed to withdraw his love
and favor from them. No says the Lord, he presently subioynes an answer to
them, and by way of correction of that speech of theirs: I have loved thee with
an everlasting love, therefore with mercy I have drawn thee. The Lord has
appeared unto me of old, say they: Yea (says he) I have loved thee with an
everlasting love; my love to you that are my children, is as it has been, and
it is the same for ever, nothing can separate between my love and you. Ioh.
15.9. Christ says to his disciples, As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you, continue in my love. Ioh. 13.1. it is said, Forasmuch as Christ
loved his own which were in the world, to the end he loved them. He loves them
to the end, yea without end, and for ever, and no power either of men or devils
is able to separate or to keep away the love of Christ and the love of God
from his children: for why, the reasons and grounds of this truth are these.

With him is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning: and as he says by
his Prophet Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not: and God himself being
unchangeable, he is unchangeably good, holy, merciful, loving.

His love is strong as death, and much water cannot quench it, neither can the
floods drown it: it is stronger then all floods of evil that can come to Gods
children. Yea the Lord says, he will be with his children in love, and in
mercy for their good and comfort, Isai. 43.2. When thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee, and through the floods that they do not ouerflow
thee, and when they walk through the very fire, they should not be burnt,
neither should the flame kindle upon them. And therefore doubtless on these
grounds we may resolve on this as a certain truth, that Gods love in Christ
cannot possibly be severed from true believers, nor they from it; neither the
devil nor any instrument of his is able by any evil they can do to one that
is beloved of God in Christ, to make him not beloved of God, or less beloved
of him.

And this for the use and application of it, in the first place The Arminians
and Anabaptists confuted, in that they hold a child of God may be shaken out of
the state of grace and out of Gods favor.
and that one who is beloved of God in Christ may in time come not to be
beloved of him: this is clean contrary to the truth now delivered, that Gods
love in Christ abides with his children continually without separation, and it
cannot possibly be severed from them nor they from it. Yea say they, there is
no question of the continuance of Gods love or of Christ his love to his, but
of their love to him;

Again, such is the nature of Gods love, and of Christ his love to his, as it
does not only abide and continue with them for ever, but it is also effectual
in them, and it keeps them continually in their love to God, and it preserues
in their hearts a continual love to God and to Christ, so as their love of God
and of Christ can never be quite shaken out of their hearts, as the Lord says
by Jeremiah, Iere. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me: my love to them shall be so effectual, as it shall
make them continue and persevere in fearing me, and loving me for ever. And
therefore the Anabaptisticall conceit is very idle and contrary to the truth,
that God continues to love his children in Christ, if they continue to love
him. I leave them, and for a second use.

Sweet comfort to a true believer when he is plonged into the deepest distress.
nor they from it, neither the devil nor any instrument of his is able by any
evil they do or can do to one that is beloved of God in Christ, to make him
not beloved of God, or less beloved of God? Oh then lay up this in thine heart
as a ground of sweet comfort, whosoever thou art that have good evidence of it
that thou art a true believer, a child of God: on this truth thou may cheer
up thine heart, when thou art plonged in the deepest distress that either man
or devil can bring thee into. What though the devil rage against thee, and
his wicked instruments do malice thee, and practice against thee all the
mischief they can, and bring thee into great trouble and distress? What
though they cause others to hate and malign thee, and thou art hated of
thousands in the world, yea thy nearest and dearest friends, such as are knit
to thee in the nearest bond of nature, they abhor thee, fly far from thee,
and spare not to spit in thy face, as Job says he was dealt withal, Job
30.10. Job 30.10.
yet comfort thy self in this, God still loves thee, and thou art still dear
to him, and all that Satan or any instrument of his can do to thee, cannot
possibly sever either Gods love from thee, or thee from the love of God in
Christ. And though thy distress be never so great, yet thy condition is happy
and comfortable, thou art still beloved of God, and his love is better then the
love of the whole world, yea better then life it self, yea better then heaven,
it is better to be loved of God though hated of all the world, then to have the
love of the world and to be out of Gods favor.

and mine own heart is ready to tell me, that God is rather angry then well
pleased with me?

I answer: Job. Job 13.15. Though the Lord kill thee, yet thou will still trust
in him, and still reprove thy ways in his sight: and thou will still strive
against sin: and though thou can not tell whether thou strive against it
for fear of the punishment of it, or out of thy love to God thy good and
gracious Father, yet if thou desire to love the Lord Jesus, and out of that
love to strive against sin, and to be better being wearied and tired with
sin, and thou desire to please God in a simple obedience of faith, then
comfort thy self, thou may thereupon conclude to the comfort of thine own
soul, that notwithstanding thy deep distress, thou art still beloved of God
in Christ, and nothing can separate thee from that love of his.

Come we now to the second general laid before us in this verse, the Apostles
second affirmation propounded in more special manner, by an enumeration and
reckoning up of diverse particulars, and that also by way of interrogation:
Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? that is (as I showed) neither tribulation, neither any
pressure or vexation, nor anguish, any perplexity of mind, nor any extreme
violence used to us by tyrants and wicked men, whereby they pursue us from
place to place, nor want of necessary food, nor want of necessary clothing,
nor any dangerous distress whereby our lives are in hazard, nor any kind of
violent and cruel tormenting death: neither these nor any other evils that do
or may befall us, are able to separate us that are true believers from that
love wherewith Christ loves us, or wherewith God loves us in Christ. In this
enumeration, Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Our Apostle goes on from the lesser to the
greater, he begins with lighter troubles and rises up by degrees to greater,
and he puts down the particulars here mentioned, not casually, but by
singular art. Yea some observe, that the Apostles style, here and in the whole
conclusion following to the end of the Chapter, is beautified with such
wonderful eloquence and Rhetoric, as neither Tullie nor Demosthenes could
ever have spoken more eloquently. See then, the holy Spirit of God is pleased
sometimes to use eloquence, and the help of art, not such eloquence as is in
common use amongst men, a whorish painted eloquence, standing in vain
inventions and frothy conceits of men's wit, but divine grave eloquence, and
ponderous and weighty, and such as is powerful to sway the conscience, and to
move the affections for the good of the soul. We are not then simply to
condeme eloquence, Rhetoric, and other liberal arts and sciences, Rhetoric
and other liberal arts and sciences are not simply to be condemned.
as some foolishly do, accounting them heathenish and antichristian; there is
good use of them, if they be used in due place, and in a right manner, as
servants and handmaids to Divinity, but I pass by that.

We see here our Apostle rests not in the general, that none either man or
devil can separate us that are true believers from the love of God in Christ,
by any evil they do or can bring on us, but he descends to particulars, and
reckons up particular evils, tribulation, and anguish, and persecution, and
famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword: affirming that these cannot
separate true believers from the love of Christ; and in this Catalogue observe
we, that the Apostle reckons up the greatest, and most bitter, and most
shameful evils that can befall true believers in this world. Now the point
hence (not to stand on these particulars severally, we shall happily insist on
them more particularly verse 37.) the point I say hence offered is this.

No particular evil, trial, or affliction, whatsoever it be, though most
smart, bitter, and shameful, can possibly separate or keep back the love of
God and the love of Christ from true believers.
though they be most smart, bitter, and shameful, cannot possibly sever Gods
love from them, nor them from Gods love in Christ. No particular evil, trial,
or affliction whatsoever it be, inward or outward, can possibly separate or
keep back the love of God and the love of Christ from true believers, and
from Gods children: neither any vexation of body, nor any perplexity of mind,
nor any extreme violence and persecution, or things following that, hunger,
cold, nakedness, and need of all things for the body, nor any dangerous
distress whereby the life is in hazard or endangered, nor loss of life it
self, by most violent, cruel, and bloody torments, neither these nor any
other evils that do or may befall Gods children, and such as are beloved of
God, can possibly make them not beloved of him, or less beloved of him. And
that this is so, we may easily conceive, in that the Lord promises to be with
his children in love and mercy, even in their particular evils, trials, and
afflictions. Genes. 28.15. the Lord says to Iaacob, Lo I am with thee, and
will keep thee whither soever thou go. Job 5.19.20.21. Eliphas says, the
Lord will deliver his children in six troubles, and in the seventh evil shall
not touch them: and in famine he will deliver them from death, and in battle
from the power of the sword: and they shall be hid from the scourge of the
tongue, and shall not be afraid of destruction when it comes. And so Psalm.
33.19. the Psalmist says, The eye of the Lord is upon his children, to deliver
them from death, and to preserve them in famine. The Scripture is plentiful in
this, and we find that the Lord has been with his children from time to time
in love and in mercy in their greatest particular evils, trials, and
afflictions that can or may befall them. As with Joseph in prison, Genesis 39.21.
with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the hot fiery furnace, Dan. 3.25. with
Jonah in the belly of the fish, Ion. 2.2. with the Apostles in prison, Act.
5.19. with Paul in danger to lose his life, Act. 24.25. with Peter in prison,
Act. 12.7.8. A cloud of witnesses we have to this purpose, all of them
euidencing and confirming the truth of the point in hand, that particular
evils, trials, and afflictions that befall Gods children, though most bitter,
cannot possibly sever Gods love from them, nor them from Gods love in Christ;
neither any vexation of body, nor perplexity of mind, nor any of the evils
reckoned up by the Apostle, nor any other that do or may befall Gods children,
and such as are beloved of God, can possibly make them not beloved of him, or
less beloved of him: and the reasons of it are these.





And this truth for the use may first serve further to batter and beat down
that opinion of the Arminians and Anabaptists, that a child of God may be quite
shaken out of Gods favor, Further confutation of that opinion of the Arminians
and Anabaptists that a child of God may be quite shaken our of Gods favor.
and one that is beloved of God in Christ, may in time to come not be beloved
of him: the truth now delivered bears more strongly and makes further against
this conceit.

Yea but, say the Arminians, you must observe, that in the catalogue of
particular evils put down by the Apostle, there is no mention made of sin,
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God; and your sins have
hid his face from you that he will not hear.

I answer them, It is true,

Is it so that the particular evils, trials, crosses, and troubles Further
ground of comfort for every true believer.
and shameful, cannot possibly sever Gods love from them, nor them from it,
neither any vexation of body, or perplexity of mind, nor any other particular
evil that does or may befall Gods children and such as are beloved of God, can
possibly make them not beloved of him, or less beloved of him? Surely then
here is yet further ground of comfort for every one that has good evidence of
it, that he or she is a true believer, and a child of God, (and still the
comfort belongs to such, and to none but such.) On this ground of truth thou
that art a true believer may comfort thy self when thou lie under any
particular evil, trial, cross, or trouble, though never so bitter and
painful, and never so shameful; yea when one trouble follows thee in the
neck of another, and one is greater then another, and in the eye of the world
thou art in a miserable case, and the men of the world are ready to judge thee
an hypocrite, and out of Gods favor, because of particular seen and known
evils and crosses thou lie under: yet comfort thy self, thou being a child
of God, God still loves thee, and thou still art dear to him. It is not thy
particular distress, be it sickness, pain, poverty, imprisonment, and these
in great extremity, that can possibly sever either Gods love from thee, or
thee from the love of God in Christ. Be it with thee as it was with Lazarus,
thou lie in the streets full of sores, wanting bread to put into thy mouth,
and scarce having a ragge to cover thy nakedness, yet still Gods love abides
with thee without separation. Labor thou to be resolved of this when thou art
under any particular evil, trial, cross or trouble, that thou art still
beloved of God, and thou shall find it will yield thee matter of great comfort.
I know it is a very hard thing to persuade our selves of Gods love to us in the
time of particular trials, they being bitter, smart, and shameful: out of such
trials there is no great difficulty and hardness in it, but to persuade our
selves that we are beloved of God when we lie under some particular cross and
affliction, it lying hard and heavy on us, Hoc opus hic labor est, that is an
hard matter indeed. And this then we are to labor for: how soon we may come
under particular trials we know not, yea under the particular trials here
reckoned up by the Apostle, under tribulation, and anguish, persecution,
famine, nakedness, peril, and sword: the times we live in are dangerous,
Satan and his instruments, Antichrist and his adherents are set on mischief,
and the Lord seems to threaten to bring us into heavy trials. And if it
please him so to do, oh labor we even when we are in the particular trial to
be resolved on this, that we are still beloved of God, and then whatsoever
becomes of us, we shall be sure to find comfort.

able to persuade my self that God still loves me, when I am in a particular
trial and affliction, and it lies hard and heavy on me?

I answer. By doing two things.

First, by calling to mind and thinking on former and fore-passed mercies of
God toward thee, and by remembering with comfort the sweet mercies of the Lord
formerly vouchsafed to thee, especially in things heavenly and spiritual.
David says this was his practice, Psalm. 143.4.5. When his spirit was in
perplexity within him, and his heart amazed, he remembered the time past, and
meditated in the works of the Lord.

Secondly, by possessing thy soul in patience, and by attending on the Lords
mercy, as it is Psalm. 147.11. verse, by waiting on the Lord for help,
comfort, and deliverance, and patiently tarrying the Lords leisure: for if God
give thee an heart to wait on him in patience in the time of distress, it
lying hard and heavy on thee, and that a long time, it is an evidence of his
love to thee. If thou do these two things, if thou call to mind and think on
the former mercies of the Lord vouchsafed to thee with comfort, and if thou
possess thy soul in patience, and attend on the Lords mercy, waiting for it
in his due time to be vouchsafed to thee, assuredly thou shall be able even
when thou art in the particular trial and affliction, and it lies hard and
heavy on thee, to persuade thy self that thou art still beloved of God; and
that will yield thee matter of sweet comfort. Think on these things, and
labor to put them in practice. Come we now to the 36. Verse.

VERSE 36. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all day long: we are
counted as sheep for the slaughter.


IN this Verse our Apostle brings a testimony of Scripture out of Psalm. 44.22.
to show that the particular evils reckoned up by him verse. 35. tribulation,
anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, and sword, are such as have
and do usually befall the Church and children of God, are no fained things, or
put down by way of supposition, or any new and strange things, but such as
stand on record in the book of God, as things ordinarily befalling the Church
and people of God: As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all day long:
we are counted as sheep for the slaughter. Now here we have to consider two
things in general.

First, the Apostles alleging of Scripture, As it is written.

Secondly, the testimony of Scripture he does allege, For thy sake are we
killed all day long: we are counted as sheep for the slaughter. Which
allegation and testimony (as I said) is taken out of Psalm. 44.22. Reverend
Calvin observes, and Peter Martyr notes the same, that the Psalm from which
this testimony is taken, describes rather the horrible persecution of the
Church of God under Antiochus Epiphanes, then under the Chaldeans in the 70.
years captivity as some think, because the people that were carried away to
Babylon were afflicted by the Chaldeans for their idolatry, but under
Antiochus the people of God suffered for giving testimony to the Law of God:
and therefore they complain to God as we may read verse. 9. to the end of that
Psalm, that though they had not fallen away from the pure worship of God,
verse 17.18.19. Yet they were slain continually, and counted as sheep for the
slaughter, verse 22.

In this testimony, For thy sake are we killed all day long: we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter: it being a complaint of the Church and people of God
under great affliction, we have three materials to be observed.

1. First, the greatness of the sufferings of the Church and people of God
complained of, they were killed, they had their blood shed violently, they were
slaughtered, which is set out by a similitude, they were as sheep appointed
and drawn out to slaughter.

2. Secondly, the cause of their sufferings, not for their own sins, but for
the Lords sake, For thy sake are we killed all day long: we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter.

3. Thirdly, the continuance of their sufferings, put down in these words, All
day long. For thy sake are we killed all day long.

Let us now examine the words of this verse standing on record in the book of
God in the holy Scripture: Interpretation.
he cites not the particular place, but delivers in general, As it is written,
For thy sake. These words carry this sense, as we may easily conceive if we
look into the Psalm out of which they are taken, as if the Church and people
of God persecuted had said, for the confession of thy name o Lord, and for the
profession of thy truth, even because we acknowledge thee only to be our God,
and we worship thee alone, and will not be drawn from thy holy religion, and
from the fear of thy name. Christ says, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men
persecute you for my sake: that is, for professing my name, and Gospel, and
truth of religion. Are we killed: that is, are we thy Church and people hardly
and extremely dealt withal, and suffer extreme violence, sometimes to the
shedding of our blood, and to the loss of our lives. All day long. These words
are diversely interpreted: the best and fittest exposition is, continually and
without intermission, as Paul says of himself, 1. Corinthians. 15.31. He dyed
daily. And 2. Cor. 11.23. he was in death often: that is, continually in danger
of death, and subject to it, for a man can dye but once, or be killed but once.
We are counted as sheep for the slaughter: that is, our cruel persecutors and
bloody minded enemies, make no more reckoning of us then of such as are fit to
be murdered and slaughtered, and they make no more of taking away our lives on
any occasion, then a butcher does of drawing out a sheep and cutting the
throat of it at his pleasure. And as the butcher thinks he has done well
when he has killed a sheep, and is glad when he has so done, so are our.
bloody persecutours glad when they can shed our blood, and take away our
lives, and they rejoice in it, and think that thy have therein done good
service to God, as Christ says, Ioh. 16.2. The time shall come that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service. Now then thus conceive we the
meaning of the words of this verse, as if the Apostle had said.

As we find it standing on record in the book of God, in the holy Scripture,
the Church and people of God in former times have justly complained to God on
this manner: For the confession of thy name O Lord, and for the profession of
thy truth, even because we acknowledge thee only to be our God, and we worship
thee alone, and will not be drawn from thy truth, and from the fear of thy
name, we thy Church and people continually and without intermission are
extremely ill dealt withal, and do suffer extreme violence, sometimes to the
shedding of our blood, and to the loss of our lives: yea our cruel
parsecutours and bloody minded enemies make no more reckoning of us, then as
of those that are fit to be murdered and slaughtered: and they make no more
account of taking away our lives, when they can on any occasion, then a butcher
does of cutting the throat of a poor sheep: no they are glad when they can
cruelly shed our blood and take away our lives, and they rejoice in so doing.

Now first from these words, As it is written, the Apostle here citing a place
of Scripture serving his purpose, and that out of the old Testament, I might
stand to show the harmony that is between the old and new Testament, and the
sweet consent of one part of Scripture with another, which indeed is an
infallible note and mark by which we may know Scripture to be Scripture, and
the very word of God The consent of one part of Scripture with another, an
infallible note that it is the very word of God.
breathed out by the holy Spirit; yea the quotations that the Lord Jesus and
his Apostles do bring out of the former writings of the Prophets, do manifest
to us what books written before the Gospel penned by Matthew the Evangelist
are to be received as Canonical Scripture, what books are to be rejected as
not Canonical, but I pass by these things, only note we thus much. The
Apostle here says, It is written, and he names not the place where, he only
cites the words of Scripture out of Psalm. 44.22. and says, It is written: this
is an usual thing both with Christ and with his Apostles. Matthew. 4.4.7.10.
Christ says to Satan tempting him, It is written, not naming the places where.
Yea Ioh. 7.38. says Christ, He that believes in me, as says the Scripture,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. And yet the very words
there put down by him, are not found in any place of the old Testament, but
may only be gathered out of the writings of the Prophets, as out of Isai.
44.3. Isai. 49.10. Joel 3.18. and such like. So Heb. 2.6. the Author of that
Epistle says, One in a certain place witnessed saying: What is man that thou
should be mindful of him, or the son of man that thou would consider
him? he cites

That we ought to be so well acquainted with the written word of God, that when
any place of Scripture is alleged, though the very Chapter or book out of
which it is taken be not named, yet we should be able to know it, and to take
notice of it to be Scripture, We ought to be so well acquainted with the
written word of God, that when a place of Scripture is alleged, though the
book or Chapter out of which it is taken be not named, yet we should be able
to know it to be Scripture.
and that such words are indeed recorded in the written word of God, though we
cannot for the present call to mind the book, chapter, or verse where they are
found.

It is the fault of thousands in the world, they know not the voice of God in
his written word, Reproof of such as know not the voice of God in his written
word.
they are not acquainted with the sentences of Scripture, no not with the
examples of it, which of all things are most easy. I am persuaded a man in
preaching might cite a sentence of an heathen man, of a Poet, in the hearing of
some, and tell them it is Scripture, and they are not able to discern it: a
foul fault, and such as cannot be sufficiently taxed, especially in these
days, wherein we have the written word of God not locked up as among the
Papists in a strange tongue, but in our own mother tongue, and we may hear it
in public, and read it in private, and come to be well acquainted with it.
Thou then that art guilty of this fault, be stirred up to reform it, and
never rest till by hearing, and reading, and turning over the leaves of the
book of God, thou be so well acquainted with it, as when the words of
Scripture are brought, and neither the verse nor Chapter named, yet thou art
able to know the sentence to be a sentence of Scripture, and that such words
indeed are recorded in the written word of God, though for the present thou
can not call to mind the particular place where they are found. I pass from
that.

One thing I will note further from the testimony of Scripture here brought by
the Apostle in general. In that the Apostle here cites a place out of the old
Testament, to show that the particular evils reckoned up by him in the verse
foregoing, are such as have and do usually befall the Church and children of
God, and such as stand on record in the book of God as ordinarily befalling
the children and people of God, he points out plainly thus much.

The Church and people of God are subject to the same afflictions in all ages
and times.
and when they are under any trial or affliction, they are not singular in
their sufferings, they have the Saints of all times their companions, as Christ
says to his disciples, Matthew. 5.12. So persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you, as if he had said: If the trials and troubles I speak of befall
you, you are no otherwise dealt withal then were the holy Prophets of God in
former times. 1 Pet. 5.9. says the Apostle, The same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren, which are in the world. Not to enlarge the
point, the reasons and grounds of this truth are plain. As,

First, God bears the same love to his children now as in

And again, the devil and his instruments the wicked of

And therefore doubtless the same troubles, trials, and afflictions that have
befallen Gods children in the times of old, may and do usually befall Gods
children now in these days.

We are not then for the use of this in the first place, to We are not to
think it strange though we be brought under great and grievous tria^s and
afflictions.
And if the Lord be pleased to bring us to the fiery trial, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Pet. 4.12. and if the Lord should try us by the most extreme
torments and tortures that the devil or wicked men could devise to lay on us,
we are not to think it strange, as if some new thing were befallen us. Thus
the Lord tried his dearest servants in the times of old, as appears plainly,
Heb 11.36.37.38. When a child of God is under some great affliction, Satan is
commonly busy with him, and he then labors to persuade him, and to fasten
this on him, that never was any afflicted as he is; and sometimes he preuailes
so far with a dear child of God through his weakness, as he makes him cry
out with the Church, Lam. 1.12. Was there ever any sorrow like to my sorrow*
and never man or woman felt and endured that which I feel and endure. Now
learn thou whosoever thou art that art a child of God, to repel this assault
on the ground of truth now delivered, that the same troubles, trials, and
afflictions that have befallen Gods children in the times of old, may and do
usually befall Gods children now in these days: and know it for a certain
truth, what thou do now abide, others of Gods children have endured, and
thou art not singular in thy suffering, thou have the Saints of God of all
times thy companions, and no other trial or affliction is on thee, then has
been or now is endured by other of Gods children, and thou art no otherwise
chastised of God, then with the rod which his good hand has laid on the backs
of his dearest servants, whose salvation he had sealed up and made sure to
them. Consider this seriously, and thou shall find it will be a ground of sweet
comfort to thee.

Gods children must make account to undergo as great trials and afflictions
now, as other of Gods children have in former ages and times.
the constant profession of Christ, of the truth of the Gospel and religion,
it has cost men and women the loss of friends, of goods, of liberty, yea of
their dearest blood, and that by most cruel torments and tortures, by fire and
faggot. Yea we daily hear of the troubles and distresses, and the great trials
that the Church and people of God are under in foreign countries, and in our
neighbor nations, that they are thrust out of house and home, and most cruelly
dealt withal by persecuting enemies. Now we must make account that the case
may be our own, and that we may be brought under the like troubles and trials,
and under the like cruelties, and how soon we may so be we know not. A man
that rightly considers the evil of the times in which we live, may easily
discern that the Lord is making way for heavy trials to be brought on us, and
we must set down this as a conclusion in our own hearts, that the same evils,
troubles, and afflictions, that have befallen Gods people and children, either
in the times of old or in our times, they may befall us, and we are to resolve
with our selves to undergo as hard trials as any of the children of God have
done heretofore, or as any of them do at this day; and we must be ready in the
preparation of our hearts willingly to bear them. It is the counsel of Christ
himself, Luke 14.28. to 34. that as wise builders cast the charge of their
buildings before they begin to build, and as good warriors consider of their
strength before they go out to meet their enemies in the field, lest they leave
off and turn back like fools and cowards: so should we cast our account
aforehand, and consider with our selves what things may befall us for our
profession of Christ and of his Gospel, and resolve with our selves not only
to bear mockes and scoffs, and nicknames, and reproaches, but to endure the
greatest and bitterest trials that we hear or read of that any of Gods
children have endured or do endure, even to the loss of our lives by most
cruel torments, if the Lord be pleased to call us to it for the constant
profession of his truth and Gospel: and to that purpose to get our hearts
stored with grace, that we may be able to stand in the day of trial, not to
content our selves with knowledge or common gifts of the Spirit, but to labor
for the true saving grace of Gods Spirit, especially to have our hearts soundly
rooted and grounded in the love of God through faith, as Ephesians. 3.17. whereby
we may be assured that God is our Father in Christ, Christ Jesus our redeemer,
and the holy Ghost our comforter and sanctifier; and then doubtless we shall
be able to hold out in the greatest trials that can befall us.

Come we now to the testimony of Scripture, the words here alleged by the
Apostle, For thy sake are we killed all day long: we are counted as sheep for
the slaughter. For thy sake, that is, (as I showed you) for the confession of
thy name, O Lord, and for the profession of thy truth, because we acknowledge
thee only to be our God, and we worship thee alone, and will not be drawn
from thy truth and fear of thy name, we thy Church and people continually and
without intermission are extremely ill dealt withal. Now hence two things are
offered for our instruction, I will speak of them in order: first this.

It has been and is, piety, religion, and grace, and the fear of God, for
which Gods children commonly hear ^^l, and suffer hard measure from the wick^d
of the world.
What was it that made Cain deal so hardly with his brother Abel, as to shed
his blood, Genes. 4.8? Saint John tells us plainly, 1. Ioh. 3.12. it was because
his works were good and his own evil. And what was it that Ishmael mocked
Isaacke for, Genes. 21.9? Surely the grace of God in Isaacke, which Paul notes,
when he says, that he was persecuted which was borne after the Spirit, Galat.
4.29. And the Apostle says, as it was then so it is now. To pass by other
examples, a great part of the suffering of the Lord Jesus stood in this, he was
mocked for his confidence and trust in God, as appears Psalm. 22.8. and Matthew.
27.43. compared together. Matthew. 24.9. Christ puts it down as a certain
truth, that his disciples and followers shall be hated of all nations: and why?
for his names sake, for their piety, and for their holy religion. And we read
in the Ecclesiastical stories, that the persecuting Emperors in the Primitive
times dealt most cruelly with the professors of the Gospel of Christ, for
their religion, for their wicked religion, as they called it. And it is no
marvel that the children of God be ill dealt withal, and that they suffer
hard measure from the tongues and from the hands of the wicked, for their
piety and religion, and for the grace and fear of God appearing in their
hearts.

and as I may say, a visible confutation of the disposition and courses of
ungodly persons, it is in flat opposition to them, and so odious and
abominable in their eyes, Prou. 29.27.

Again, the wicked of the world, they think it strange that and run not
with them to all excess of riot, and for this cause says the Apostle, 1. Pet.
4.4. they conceive hatred and purpose mischief against Gods children: and
hence it is that they usually deal hardly with Gods children both by word and
deed.

And for the use of this; on this ground of truth we must We are not to think
it strange that the Papists at this day are so enraged against the Protestants,
and that they deal so hardly and cruelly with them where they have power.
it is in regard of the truth of religion they hold and maintain, which is in
flat opposition to their Antichristian apostasy, and in regard of the clear
light of the Gospel now shining in the Church of God, which is in flat
contrariety to the darkness of Popery. Yea the more the light of the
Gospel shines, and the more soundly it is prof^ssed, the more it is opposed
and persecuted by the Papists. Who are more hated and persecuted by them then
those whom they term Puritanes? Of all Protestants the Puritan is most hated
and most hardly dealt withal by the Papists if he come into their hands,
because he not only holds the sound truth in the matter of faith, but he is
also sound and sincere in the practice of religion, and therefore of all others
they cannot abide him. We are not to wonder at this, it has been so, and it
will be so to the end of the world, that piety and religion is the thing for
which Gods chidren commonly hear ill and suffer hard measure from the wicked
of the world.

And on this ground of truth learn we not to stand amazed It is not to be
wondered at, that men professing the truth of religion, and expressing the
power of it in their lives, be ^ll dealt withal by wicked persons, living with
them, and professing the same truth that they do in word.
no, think it not strange, though such as ought to love thee most dearly, and
to deal best with thee, as thy father, thy mother, thy brethren, thy husband,
and such like, do hate thee, and deal most hardly with thee, both by word and
deed for thy piety and religion, and for thy grace and fear of God appearing
in thee: this is no new thing, it has been so from the beginning, and will be
so to the end of the world. Do not thou say as some use to do: If I deserved
such hard speeches and such ill dealing, it would never grieve me. If thou
had deserved them, then were there just cause of grief, but not deserving
them, there is no cause of grief at all, but rather of comfort and rejoicing,
and therefore let them not trouble thee.

A second thing offered from these words, For thy sake are we killed all day
long: we are counted as sheep for the slaughter, being understood as before,
is this.

Only that suffering or vexation from the hands of men is truly comfortable,
which is for a good cause.
for the name of Christ, for the true profession of his truth and Gospel, for
keeping of faith and a good conscience: then only may a man or woman take
comfort in their suffering of trouble or any hard measure from the hands of
men, when they suffer for a good cause, especially for the truth of religion,
and for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ, as John
speaks, Revel. 1.9. Matthew. 5.10. Christ pronounces not all that suffer
blessed, but only those who suffer persecution for righteousness sake. 1.
Pet. 4.15.16. says the Apostle, Let none of you suffer as a murderer, as a
thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-bodie in other men's matters. But if
any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
in this behalf: as if he had said, there is matter of comfort in that
suffering, and it must needs be that only that suffering of trouble or any
vexation from the hands of men, is truly comfortable, which is for a good
cause, especially for the cause of God.

Peter's suffering death by the hands of persecutors should be to the glory of
God, Ioh, 21.19. Suffering for a good cause and for Gods glory, are ever
joined together, and that suffering is sure to have a good issue and shall
certainly end well: and therefore doubtless only that suffering is truly
comfortable.

And on this ground for application, Such as suffer for their errors and sins,
cannot possibly find true comfort in their sufferings.
as the Papists brag of their sufferings, and are lift up in a conceit that
they merit heaven by them: but poor souls they can find no true comfort in
them, they suffer but as fools, no not those amongst them that suffer for
their conscience and for religion. To pass by them that are canonized for
Saints and for Martyrs, who suffer death for no less then monstrous treason
against their Princes, even those their persecuted Catholics (as they call
them) who suffer for their religion, can take no true comfort in their
sufferings, they suffer not for the truth and religion of Christ, but for
superstition and Antichristian heresy, and their sufferings cannot be truly
comfortable to them. And so other erring spirits, Anabaptists, Separatists, and
such like, suffering for their own fond opinions and fancies, they cannot
possibly find true comfort in their sufferings. When they are justly dealt
against and censured by the Magistrate, they commonly cry out, and say they
are persecuted: alas, they are deceived, their censure is not properly
persecution, but the just hand of God on them for their gross errors. And
howsoever they please themselves in their sufferings, yet assuredly they cannot
be truly comfortable to them. It is a true saying, not the suffering or
punishment, but the cause for which a man suffers, that being good and any part
of Gods truth, that is that which makes him a Martyr, and a witnesse-bearer to
the truth of God, and a comfortable sufferer. And therefore look thou to the
cause of thy suffering of trouble, or thy enduring any hard measure from the
hands of men in any kind whatsoever; and it thou suffer justly for thine error
or sin, or for going beyond the compass of thy place and calling, be humbled
and repent of thy sins, otherwise the Lord will charge it more fully and
heavily on thy soul at the last day: and if thou suffer unjustly or for a good
cause with meekness and patience, possess thy soul in patience and rejoice,
thou art therein partaker of Christ his sufferings, 1. Pet. 4.13. and thou
may then find much comfort in thy suffering, and bless God for it, that he
has not only given thee to believe in Christ, but to suffer for his sake,
Philip. 1.29.

In the next place we are to consider the greatness of the suffering that the
Church and people of God complain of; they were killed, and they were counted
as sheep for the slaughter: that is, (as I showed) they were extremely ill
dealt withal, and did suffer extreme violence and cruelty, sometimes to the
shedding of their blood, and the loss of their lives; and their cruel
persecutours and bloody minded enemies made no more reckoning of them then as
of such as were fit to be murdered and slaughtered, and they made no more
account of shedding of their blood and taking away their lives by any cruelty,
then the butcher does of drawing out a sheep and cutting the throat of it.
Hence then we may take notice of the savage disposition and behavior of wicked
men and enemies, toward the Church and children of God: and the point hence is
this.

Wicked persons ever have been and are at this day most bitterly and bloudily
bent against Gods children for their piety and religion.
and for the grace and true fear of God in them. The wicked and such as are
enemies to the Church and children of God, are so maliciously bent against
them, as nothing will satisfy them but the blood of Gods children, and they
commonly exercise on them, if they be able and have power in their hands,
whatsoever cruelty the devil can put into their hearts, and they usually make
no more reckoning of shedding of the blood of Gods children and servants, then
a butcher does of cutting the throat of a sheep. And that this has been and
is the disposition and behavior of the wicked toward Gods children, we may
easily see if we take a view of it in all ages. Genes. 27.41. the text says,
Esau hated Iaacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him, and
Esau thought in his mind, the days of mourning for my father will come
shortly, then I will slay my brother Iaacob: I will then have his blood. See,
nothing would satisfy him but the blood of his brother, and it was his purpose
to shed his blood, but the Lord kept Iaacob that he could not so do, as he
maliciously and mischieuously intended. Isai. 47.6. the Lord says, He was
wroth with his people, he polluted his inheritance and gave them into the hands
of the Babylonians their enemies: and they showed them no mercy, but laid a
very heavy yoke on the ancient. The wicked enemies of the Church and people
of God are merciless, yea their mercies are cruel, Prou. 12.10. What then are
their cruelties? Surely monstrous, especially against Gods children, and that
for their piety and religion. We may see this in the Apostle Paul himself
before his conversion, he puts down himself for an example in this kind: Act.
22.4. says he, I persecuted this way, meaning the holy way of God, the true
profession of the Gospel, to death, binding and delivering into prison both
men and women. Nothing would satisfy him but the blould of the Saints and
professors of the Gospel: the text says, Act. 9.1. Act. 9.1. (...), etc.
He breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord:
his very breath was bloody. And he says, Galat. 1.13. Galat. 1.13. (...), etc.
that he persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it: he made havoc
and spoil of the Church and people of God. And thus David brings in the
Babylonians and the Edomites, and other enemies of Gods people speaking, Psalm.
74.8. Let us destroy them altogether: and Psalm. 63.4. Let us cut them off from
being a nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in remembrance. Thus the
holy Ghost discouers unto us in many places of the Scripture, that wicked
persons ever have been and are usually most bitterly and bloudily bent against
Gods children for their piety and religion, and nothing will satisfy them but
the blood of Gods children, and they make no more matter of shedding the blood
of Gods children and servants by any cruelty they can, then a butcher does of
cutting the throat of a sheep. And the stories of all ages show the same: the
cruel persecutions of the heathen Emperors in the primitive times of the
Church: the fires in England in the days of Queen Marie: the bloody massacre
in France in the days of Charles the ninth, show plainly that the shedding of
the blood of the professors of the Gospel is of no more reckoning with the
wicked enemies of the Church, then is the cutting the throat of a sheep, or
the cutting of a dogs neck. And why, the reasons and grounds of it are.



Herodias having conceived hatred and having a quarrel against John Baptist,
could never rest till she had his head, and she chose rather to have his head
in a platter then half a kingdom, as we read Mark. 6.19. to 29. And
therefore doubtless this is a certain truth, that wicked persons ever have
been and are at this day usually most bitterly and bloudily bent against Gods
children, for their piety and religion, yea so maliciously bent against them,
as nothing will satisfy them but the blood of Gods children, and they make no
more reckoning of shedding the blood of Gods children by any cruelty they
can, then a butcher does of cutting the throat

And for the use of this, first the consideration of this truth does evidence
and strongly prove to Gods children, that the religion they hold and profess
is not the invention and device of man, but indeed the holy religion of God, A
strong proof to Gods children that the religion they hold and profess is the
holy religion of God
and the eternal truth of God. If it were the device of man's brain, it would
fit the humors of men, and they would like it well enough, it would be
generally loved and embraced: but being the holy religion of God, and so
contrary to the corrupt humors of men, and condemning those ways and courses
which men best like of, it is opposed and hated of wicked men, and even for
that are wicked persons bitterly and bloudily bent against Gods children; and
their very opposing and setting themselves against it, and their bitterness
and bloody mindedness against Gods children the true professors of it,
proves it strongly to be the holy religion of the everliving God, and that Gods
divine truth is in it.

Again for a second use: is it so that wicked persons ever What Gods children
may look for from the hands of the wicked, and especially from the hands of
the Papists, discovered.
and that the enemies of the Church and people of God are so maliciously bent
against them, as nothing will satisfy them but the blood of Gods children, and
they make no more account of shedding their blood by any cruelty they can, then
a butcher does of cutting the throat of a sheep? Surely then on this ground
we may easily see what we may look for from the hands of the wicked, and
especially from the hands of the Papists, who are enemies to the grace of God,
and mortal enemies to the truth of God, and to his holy religion which we hold
and profess, and above all most deadly enemies to the soundness of religion,
and to the sincere professors of it: and what may we look for from them we
being such? Surely nothing but blood and violence, and cruel slaughter, and
cutting of our throats, if they have power in their hands; howsoever they may
for a time make fair weather, and make semblance of peace and quietness, and
that they mean us no harm, yet assuredly they are not to be trusted, they are
as the enemies of the Church and people of God have been in all ages, blood
thirsty and bloudily bent against us, nothing will satisfy them but the blood
of Gods Saints, as Revel. 17.6. they are ever plotting and contriuing some
bloody design against the Church and people of God, and they wait but for a
fit opportunity to put it in practice: yea they think and hold it
meritorious, by any cruelty they can to shed the blood of the true professors
of the Gospel, as those accursed limbs of the devil, the Jesuits and Friars
said to their followers in France at the beginning of the troubles there, That
now was the time for them to win heaven by cutting the throats of the
Protestants. And what then may we look for from their hands if they should
have power, but some bloody practice or massacre, and cutting of our throats?
and how soon they may come to have power we know not; in all likelihood they
look for a day against us, and without question in their malicious intention
we are but as sh^epe appointed to the slaughter. I know the Lord can keep us
out of their hands, yea if we were in their hands he can deliver us, he can
rescue out of the jaws of Lions, 2. Tim. 4.17. but we may justly fear in
regard of the sins of our Land, and of our unworthy walking of the Gospel
which we have enjoyed with much peace many years, that they may come to have
power against us; and if they have, assuredly we shall find nothing from them
but blood and violence, and all manner of cruelty. And yet if we should come
under their hands (which the Lord keep us from) let us endeavor to be constant
in the truth, and not to shrink from it either in judgment or in sound
practice of it for any terror of man: and herein comfort our selves, that we
so doing, They can but kill the body, as Matthew. 10.28. when they have shed the
blood of a child of God they have done their uttermost, they can go no further.
Yea remember we that sweet sentence put down by David, Psalm. 116.15. Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Every drop of blood spilt
by a true professor of the Gospel for the constant and sound prof^ssion of
it, is precious in the sight of God. If the Lord put the tears of his children
into his bottle, Psalm. 56.8. much more their blood, spilt for his truth, and
shed by their bloody minded enemies. Let then the consideration of these
things comfort us* if our wicked enemies should have power over us, and should
be able to effect that which their malice and bloody mindedness should carry
them to.

One thing yet remains to be spoken of in this complaint of the Church and
people of God, namely, the continuance of their suffering, that it was all day
long, that is, continually, (...). Psalm. 44 22. (...)
and without intermission: and hence we may note briefly.

That the wicked enemies of the Church and children of Wicked ene^ies of the
Churrh and children of God, having power over the^, they give them no rest, nor
intermissio^, nor breathing, but do follow them with one vexation and torment
after another without ceassing.
and with one breaking on another as Job complains, Job 16.14. And to this
purpose the Apostle says, He dyed daily, 1. Cor. 15.31. and 2. Cor. 11.23.
that he was often in death, yt is, in continual danger of death. And Christ
says to his followers, Luke 9.23. yt they must take up the cross daily, even
in this kind in suffering hard measure from the hands of cruel persecutours, if
the Lord call them to it: and the doctrine before delivered may be the ground
of this.

Because the wicked and the enemies of the Church and children of God are so
maliciously bent against them, as nothing will satisfy them but the blood of
Gods children, and they are stirred up by the devil against them, We are to be
strengthened with all might to al patience and long suffering.
if the Lord should be pleased to exercise us in this kind to give our enemies
power over us, and they having power should deal so with us, as to give us no
intermission of torment, but should lay on us vexation after vexation, and one
torment after another: we must labor to be constant in patience, and to
resolve with our selves patiently to bear one vexation and one torment after
another. And that we may so do, Note.
we are to consider that the Lord in his holy wisdom appoints the measure of
our trouble, and how far our enemies and persecutours shall proceed in
tormenting us, and the time how long we shall lie under any vexation, and that
he in his good time will deliver us and turn his hand on our enemies and
persecutours, and bring his judgment heavily on their head, as we find, Revel.
13.10. They that lead into captivity shall go into captivity: and that kill
with the sword, must be killed by a sword: here is the patience and the faith
of the Saints. Come we now to the 37. verse.

VERSE 37. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours
through him that has loved us.


IN this Verse our Apostle makes answer to his interrogation, propounded verse.
35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? And his
answer is negative, that none of those evils reckoned up by him can separate
true believers and Gods children from the love of Christ; and his negative
answer is not here put down in these express terms, but in the proof of it,
on this manner, Those things in which true believers are conquerours cannot
separate them from the love of Christ, but in the evils, troubles, and trials
mentioned they are conquerours, therefore they cannot separate them from the
love of Christ. The minor or second proposition which is here expressed by the
Apostle is amplified, first by the degree of the victory or conquest, that in
these evils true believers are great conquerours: Nevertheless in all these
things we are more then conquerours. Secondly, by the cause of the conquest,
the powerful assistance of God who loves them, Through him that has loved
us. So then we have here in general two things laid before us.

First, a victory or conquest that true believers and Gods children have in
all evils, troubles, and trials, and that a great victory, In all these things
we are more then conquerors.

And secondly the cause of it, Through him that has loved us.

Let us now a little search into the meaning of the words of this verse,
Interpretation.
that we may understand the purpose of the Apostle and of the holy Ghost in
them. Nevertheless, in all these things. The words in the original (...),
signify, but in all these things; and it has reference to the context in the
two verses foregoing, that true believers, Gods children, are now as in former
ages, liable to the evils and afflictions reckoned up, to tribulation, and
anguish, and persecution, and famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword:
and they are now as in times past of old, killed, and counted as sheep for the
slaughter, but in all these things they are more then conquerors. In all these
things, that is, in all the evils put down verse 35. In tribulation, in
anguish, in persecution, in famine, in nakedness, in peril and the sword, we
are more then conquerors. The exposition of these words given by some is more
curious then sound, the word is (...), superuincimus, we over and above
overcome, that is, even above measure, or exceeding gloriously we do overcome,
or we have the better by many degrees, and we carry away a most noble and
famous victory and conquest. Through him that loved us: these words are a
periphrasis, a description of God, and that a weighty one; a description of
God, containing in them the impulsive and moving cause which moves God to aid
and to help his children in their troubles and afflictions, namely his love to
them in Christ his Son; and so the Apostles meaning in them, is as if he had
said: We are more then conquerors, or exceeding great conquerors, through the
aid and help of God, who is pleased to aid and to help us out of his love
to us in Christ. Now then thus we are to conceive the purpose and meaning of
the Apostle in the words of this verse, as if he had said.

But in all those evils, troubles, trials, and afflictions reckoned up, in
tribulation and anguish, in persecution, in famine, in nakedness, in peril
and sword, we even above measure and exceeding gloriously do overcome, and we
carry away a most noble, and glorious, and famous victory and conquest, and
that through the aid and help of God, who is pleased to aid and to help us
out of his love to us in Christ his Son.

Come we to stand on the particulars of this verse more particularly, and first
on his proposition: In all these things we are more then conquerors. The words
being understood as we have heard them opened, do afford this conclusion.

Gods children are as co^querours in all the afflictions that befall them in
this world.
and in their particular evils troubles, and trials, be they never so bitter
and painful, or never so vile and shameful, Gods children get a most noble
and glorious victory and conquest, and that in this world: in tribulation,
anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, and sword, Gods children are
more then conquerors, even famous and renowned conquerors, and that in this
world, and they may say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.8.9. They are afflicted on
every side, yet are not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of
poverty: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but they perish not: yea
that they are so far from being overcome, as that they are ouercomers, not
only in heaven, but even here in this world. Not to rest in the general, I
hold it needful to show the truth of this conclusion more particularly, by
manifesting over what, and how Gods children are in all the afflictions that
befall them as great and glorious conquerours here in this world: for the word
conqueror, is a word of relation, it has respect to some persons or things
that are conquered, and to the manner of conquering, and therefore that the
point may be rightly and profitably conceived, I will endeavor to show what
the things or persons are over which Gods children are as great conquerours
here in this world, and how they are such conquerours in their particular
evils, trials, and troubles. Over what things or persons Gods children are as
conquerours here in this world, and how they are such conquerours. first over
the evils themselves in bearing them with patience
Know then that Gods children in all the afflictions that befall them, eue^ in
their particular evils, trials, and troubles, they are as great and glorious
conquerours, and that here in this world: first over the evils, trials,
troubles, and afflictions themselves, and that first in their bearing and
enduring of them, in that they bear them with patience and comfort, even the
sharpness and bitterness of them, yea sometimes in the midst of their bitter
sufferings, they rejoice and sing in the flames of fire, as we read of some.
And the Apostle says of himself and other true believers, Romans 5.3. We
rejoice in tribulation. And we find Acts 5.41. that the Apostles rejoiced when
they were beaten, In that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the
name of Christ: and to rejoice is the part of victors and conquerours. But may
some say, Jobs impatiencie, but accounted him as a patient man, yea as a
pattern of patience, Iam. 5.11. And so though Gods children be sometimes
overcome of the bitterness of their pains, it is only in their senses, and
not in the inward grace of their hearts, therein they are still conquerours.

Again, Gods children are as great and glorious conquerours over the evils,
troubles, and trials themselves, by some wonderful and strange deliverance, as
when they are wonderfully delivered out of them, Secondly, by some wonderful
and strange deliverance out of them.
either by the immediate hand and power of God, as the people of Israel were
out of the hands of the Egyptians at the red sea, Exodus 14. and the three
companions of Daniel out of the hot fiery furnace, Dan. 3.26. and Daniel
himself out of the Lions den, Dan. 6.22. and Peter out of prison, Act. 12.11.
or by some strange means, as Saul was, Act. 9.25. the text says, The
disciples took him by night, and put him through the wall, and let him down
in a basket, and so he escaped out of the hands of the Jews, who watched the
gates day and night to kill him.

Secondly, 2. Gods children are as conquerours here in this world over the
devil, and over wicked men that vex and trouble and persecute them.
Gods children in all the afflictions that befall them, even in their
particular evils, trials, and troubles, are as great and glorious conquerours,
and that here in this world, over the devil, and over wicked men, that vex,
and trouble, and persecute them, and deal most hardly and cruelly with them:
for what is the devils aim in the afflictions of Gods children? Surely as I
showed heretofore, to wrest from them their confidence in Gods love, to make
them murmr, blaspheme, and despair, and to make a breach between God and
them: now herein is the devil disappointed, Gods children in their particular
trials and troubles draw nearer to God, and cleave faster to him, their
afflictions bring forth patience, and their patience experience of Gods
gracious presence and assistance, as Romans 5.3.4. yea Gods children are stirred
up in their afflictions to be more fervent in prayer to God, as Paul was when
he was buffeted of Satan, 2. Cor. 12.8. And what is it that wicked men in their
vexing and troubling of Gods children, and in dealing most hardly with them
drive at? Surely to make them to deny Christ, and to shrink from their holy
profession and religion, but therein they fail of their porpose, Gods children
are thereby more strengthened and confirmed in their confession of the name of
Christ, and in their holy profession of the truth and Gospel of Christ, and
many times by their courage and constancy they do even daunt the minds of
their persecutours, and their very enemies stand amazed and wonder at them, and
say as the chief Priests and Scribes said, Act. 4.16. What shall we do to
these men? A speech worth the noting, they that had power to imprison the
Apostles, or to do with them what they would, stand amazed and know not what to
do, to poor, weak, unarmed, and friendlesse men: and thus we find that many
times the barbarous cruelttie of the persecuting Emperors was even altered
with the steadfastness of the Saints in suffering. And though Gods children
suffer grievous things, and die under the hands of their cruel tormentours,
yet in regard of their constancy they are conquerours, and go away with a
glorious victory. Thus then we see this truth cleared and confirmed
particularly, that Gods children in all the afflictions that befall them, even
in their particular evils and trials, are as great conquerours here in this
world, both over the evils and trials themselves, and also over the devil and
wicked men, that vex, and trouble, and persecute them, and deal most hardly
and cruelly with them.

Not to judge of Gods children according to sight and sense in the time of
their afflictions: We are not to judge of Gods children according to sight and
sense in time of their afflictions.
when they lie under heavy trials and troubles, vexations and afflictions,
torments and tortures, and in the eye of flesh and blood in man's judgment are
overcome, then are they victorious conquerors and triumphers. It is a singular
grace of God to judge rightly of others in the time of affliction: the world
and men of the world seeing Gods children troubled and persecuted, and hardly
dealt withal, are ready to judge them base underlings, and such as all crow
over, and are trodden underfoot of all, but the truth now delivered shows they
are deceived; even when Gods children bear away the blows, and men deal most
hardly with them, and they are killed by their enemies, then are they as noble
and victorious conquerours. This indeed is a paradoxe, and such a thing as
nature, reason, and the world understand not; but so it is, even then are they
as great conquerours in their courage, constancy, patience, and inward
comfort: yea when Gods children are in the extremity of pain, and their pain
makes them show forth strange behavior, even then are they invincible in their
faith, and their inward grace is impregnable, all the power of hell not able to
overcome it: and if we judge otherwise of them then of conquerours, surely we
judge amiss, and we sin against the generation of Gods children, as David
speaks, Psalm. 73.15. and let us take heed of so doing.

And for a second use: Is it so that true believers and Gods The happy and
comfortable state of Gods children and their sure and settled estate discovered.
even in their particular evils, trials, and troubles, are as great and
glorious conquerours over the evils, trials, and troubles themselves, and over
the devil, and over wicked men that vex and trouble them, and deal hardly
and cruelly with them? Surely then on this ground we may easily see, that a
child of God is in a most happy and comfortable state and condition, and is as
a rock in the sea, which being beaten with waves on every side, yet stands
firm and immovable; yea a child of God is endued with such strength of grace,
as that he is too strong for the devil and for all the power of hell, and the
devil and all his instruments are not able by all the evils and troubles they
can bring on him, to overcome his faith, and to get the victory over the grace
that is in him; though they may assault him and shake him, yet they can never
as it were throw him on his back and overcome him, they cannot do him that
mischief they intend against him. The persecutors and enemies of the Church
and children of God, may shed the blood of Gods children, and take away their
lives, yet when they so do, themselves go away vanquished, and Gods children
are the conquerours; and they do but as it were put a garland or crown of
victory on their heads whom they kill and murder, and think they have
overcome. Oh then happy and comfortable is the state of Gods children, they
are in a more sure and settled estate then the mightiest Monarch in the world.
Who can say, and that truly, though many thousands of armed soldiers
encompasse him for his defense, that he is in such a sure state, as that none
can overcome him? No, no, such is the state of every child of God, he is sure,
in all evils, tumults, trials, and afflictions that befall him, to stand fast,
and to go away with the victory. The consideration of this ought to stir us
up to labor to get into the number of Gods children: if thou be of that
number, thou art then in a most sure state and condition, the devil, and all
the power of hell, and all the instruments of the devil, cannot then by any
evil, trouble, or trial, they can bring on thee, overcome thy faith and that
grace that is in thee; and in the heat of trouble and violence of persecution,
thou may then laugh at thy persecutours, and set light by any thing they can
do to thee.

Come we now to a second general thing laid before us in this verse, the cause
of that great victory that Gods children have in all the evils that befall
them, the aid and help of God vouchsafed unto them out of his love to them in
Christ, in these words, Through him that has loved us, that is, (as we have
showed) through the aid and help of God, which he is pleased to vouchsafe
unto us in Christ his Son: and these words thus understood, do afford two
conclusions, two points of instruction, I will speak of them in order; first
this.

That true believers, Gods children, are as great and glorious Gods children
are as great conquerours in the particular evils, trials, and troubles that
befall them in this world, not by any power of their own, but only by the
powerful aid and assistance of God vouchasafed to them.
It is not of themselves, or by any power and strength in themselves, that Gods
children do stand fast in the evils, trials, and troubles that befall them, and
do go away with a glorious victory, both over the evils themselves, in bearing
them, and over Satan, disappointing him of his aim, and over wicked men that
vex and trouble them and deal hardly with them, defeating them of that they
drive at in their vexations and persecutions; but it is merely, wholly, and
only from the help and aid of God, upholding and strengthening of them. And
hence it is that the Apostle having said Philip. 4.11.12. That he could be
abased, and had learned to be hungry and to want: he could endure and
chearefully undergo any want or any abasement, and not shrink nor be overcome
by by it, and that he had learned in any state and condition to be content, he
presently subioynes verse 13. that he was thus enabled to all evils, trials,
troubles, and afflictions, not by any power of man, but only by the powerful
aid and help of Christ: I am able (says he) to do all things, through the
help of Christ which strengthens me. And 2. Cor. 12.9.10. he says, He
rejoiced in infirmities, and took pleasure in them, he was so far from being
overcome of them: and he reckons up particulars In reproaches, in necessities,
in persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake: and why? When he was weak, that
is, destitute of all help and strength of himself, then was he strong through
the power of Christ dwelling in him. And it is the prayer of the Apostle for
the Colossians, Colos. 1.11. that they might be strengthened with all might
through his glorious power, unto all patience, and long suffering with
ioyfulnesse: to all patience, and constancy in long continued afflictions,
even to long patience, as Iam. 5.7. But how? through any power or strength of
their own? No, but through the glorious power of the Lord Jesus: plainly
teaching the truth of the point in band, that it is not by any power of their
own that Gods children are as great and glorious conquerours in all
afflictions, in the particular evils, trials, and troubles that befall them
here in this world, but only by the powerful aid and assistance of God
vouchsafed to them. And it must needs be so, the reason and ground of it is
plain, namely this.

John says, 1. Ioh. 5.4. True faith is the victory that ouercometh the world:
it is true faith that ouercometh all things in the world, not only the lusts
of the flesh, but it ouercomes the opposition that is made against Gods
children in the world by wicked men and persecutours, as we find, Heb.
11.33.34. the faith of the godly in the times of old is thus commended, that by
it They stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle,
turned to flight the armies of the aliants: yet faith it self, and the grace
that is in the hearts of Gods children, is supported and vpheld by the working
power of God: and that the faith of Gods children stands fast, and is firm,
and stable and invincible, and does overcome in the greatest trials and
troubles that befall them, it is because it is supported, strengthened, and
guarded by the omnipotent working power of God. If the Lord do but a little
withdraw his helping hand from his children, their weakness presently
appears. Whilst Job had the power of God to support and strengthen him, he
was able in the greatest extremity to bless God, but when the Lord did a
little take away and pull back his hand from him, then did Jobs corruption and
weakness show it self, and cause him to break out into bitter and
unbeseeming terms. And therefore this undoubtedly is a truth of God, that it
is not by any power of their own that Gods children are as great and glorious
conquerours in all afflictions, in the particular evils, trials, and troubles
that befall them here in this world, but only by the powerful aid and
assistance of God vouchsafed to them, that supp^^^g and upholding them. Now
then to make use of this.

First this being a tru^^ it serves to discover an untruth A Popish error
touching the perfection of in herent holiness, confuted.
This they hold and teach, That a child of God may in this life have such
perfection of inherent grace as is sufficient to keep him from all formal
transgression of Gods Law, and from all deadly sin, as they call it. Now this
opinion of theirs is both unsound and rotten in the ground of it, supposing
perfection of grace inherent in this life, which cannot be attained to: and
besides that, it cannot stand with the truth now delivered, for out of all
question impatiencie is a formal trangression of Gods law, they will not be so
shameless as to deny that, it being a sin against the first Commandment of
the first table. And the power by which a child of God stands fast in evils,
trials, and troubles that befall him, and is not overcome of impatiencie, is
not any power of his own, no not any power and strength of his faith, and of
the grace that is in him, but it is only (as ye have heard) the powerful aid
and assistance of God vouchsafed to him, that is the thing that vpholds him,
yea that is the thing that vpholds his faith and inward grace that is in his
soul, whereby he becomes a great and glorious conqueror in the particular
evils, trials and troubles that befall him; and therefore it is not as the
Papists teach, that perfection of inherent grace keeps a child of God from all
formal trangression of Gods Law. No, it is not the strength either of man or
Angel that keeps him from sinning, but only the working power of God, and
the special grace of God upholding him. I leave that, and for a second use.

The constancy and patience we find in any trial and affliction must be
acknowledged to come only from the good hand of God, and he must have all the
glory for it.
Do thou find thy self able to b^^^e some great trial and affliction with
patience and with comfort? Art thou able to overcome the barbarous cruelty of
bloody minded persecutours by thy courage and constancy, in suffering the
torments and tortures they lay on thee? Do not thou ascribe that patience and
that courage and constancy of thine to any power in thy self, no not to the
power of thy faith, nor to the strength of grace that is in thee, though thou
have a great measure of grace, but ascribe it only to the powerful aid and
assistance of God vouchsafed to thee: and think not when thou see others
undergo great and bitter trials and afflictions patiently and comfortly, that
it is from the strength of their faith, and from the power of grace that is in
them that they so do, because they are stronger in faith, or have a greater
measure of grace then others, but acknowledge it to be only from the powerful
aid and assistance of God vouchsafed to them: and so learn thou on this
ground not to doubt of thy standing and of thy holding out in the time of some
great trial and affliction because thou art but weak in faith and weak in
grace: it is many times the complaint of a child of God: Alas, I find my self
so weak in faith, and I have such a poor measure of grace, as if the Lord
should bring me to some great trial, to the fiery trial, or such like, I
fear I should never be able to stand and to hold out. Oh but consider thou by
whose power the best of Gods children are as conquerours in the particular
evils, trials, and troubles that befall them, not by any power of their own,
not by any streng^h of grace in themselves, but only by the powerful aid and
help of God vouchsafed unto them: and is not he as able to strengthen thee,
and to make thee as a conqueror in the greatest trial that befalls thee?
assuredly he is. Note.
And is his help further from thee because thou art weak? no, it is nearer to
thee in that respect, God does commonly manifest his power in weakness, and
the weaker thou art, the more it is for the glory of God that he makes thee
able to stand and to hold out in some great trial, and thereby the Lord has
the greater glory. It was more for the honor of God that Iehoshaphat got the
victory over his enemies, when he had no strength to stand before them,
neither knew what to do, 2. Chron. 20.12. then if he had had a mighty army
able to confront them, and to encounter with them: so certainly it is more for
the glory of God, that thou of a poor weak Christian art made a conqueror
in the time of some great trial, then if thou had greater strength. And
therefore think not thus with thy self, If I had such a measure or such
strength of grace, then I were well, and then I would not doubt but I should be
able to bear the brunt of the greatest trial. If this be thy thought it is
not good: remember thou it is not by the power of grace it self be it never so
strong, that Gods children are as conquerours in the particular evils, trials,
and troubles that befall them, but only by the powerful aid and assistance
of God vouchsafed unto them: and though thou be but weak in grace, yet the
Lord is as able to make thee a conqueror in the greatest trial, as the
strongest of his children. And assuredly if he call thee to any great
suffering, he will manifest his power in thy weakness: and therefore doubt not
of thy standing and holding out in the time of trial, but in assured trust
depend on the Lord, and be strong in the power of his might, as Ephesians. 6.10.
Now a second conclusion that those words, Through him that loved us, understood
as they have been expounded do afford, is this: I will be brief in it.

In that Gods children have aid and assistance from God to uphold them in
their afflictions, it is out of Gods love to them: It is out of Gods love that
his children have aid and assistance from him in their afflictions.
from the love of God to his children comes the aid and assistance that God
vouchsafes to them, supporting, and strengthening, and making them as
conquerours in the particular evils, trials, and troubles that do befall them.
And hence it is that the Apostle Philip. 1.29. calls patience and strength to
suffer for the name of Christ, a special gift of God, and a privilege
vouchsafed only to them to whom God gives faith, and so a gift vouchsafed to
his children out of his love to them, To you it is given not only that ye
should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. And indeed not to enlarge
the point.

No worth or merit in Gods children moves God to vouchsafe aid and help to
the^ to strengthen them in time of trial and affliction.
nor yet for the good usage of the grace they have already received, but it is
merely out of his love, so to help and so to assist his children: and the
strength they have to stand in the time of affliction is from the mere free
grace and love of God to them. And on this How a man may comfortably conclude
that God loves him.
if he find that he gives him aid and assistance, supporting and
strengthening him, and making him as a conqueror in the particular evils and
afflictions that do befall him.

Do thou whosoever thou art, find aid and assistance from God, making thee
able to bear thy particular trial and affliction with patience and comfort,
and with cheerfulness? It is an evidence of Gods love unto thee, and therein
God seals up his love to thee, and offers himself to thee as to his child:
the text is clear, Hebr. 12.7. If ye endure chastening God offers himself
unto you as unto sons. Affliction of it own nature does press down the
heart, the hands, the eyes, and if God give thee patience and comfort, keeping
thy heart, hands, and eyes upwards, it is a manifest argument that the Spirit
of grace and strength does rest on thee, making thy faith to triumph over the
trial. And if in great troubles and afflictions thou find great patience, even
patience proportionable to thy suffering, then God makes good his promise to
thee, 1. Corinthians. 10.13. and therein he seals up his love to thee, and gives
thee good evidence that he loves thee in special manner: and that may be
matter of great comfort to thee, think on it to thy comfort. Come we now to
the 38. and 39. verses.

VERSE 38.39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


IN these two verses our Apostle goes on further to arm and strengthen the
believing Romans and other true believers, against the fear of being separated
from the love of God: and he here ascends higher then he did verse 35. to
greater and stronger enemies then tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine,
nakedness, peril, or sword, namely, to death, and life, Angels, and
principalities, and powers, things present, and things to come, and height, and
depth, and any other creature: and he shows, that no evils or enemies, be they
never so many or mighty, can possibly break off Gods love to his children,
and make him cease to love them. And the Apostle falls on this ground of
further comfort by way of preventing a doubt that might arise in the minds of
the believing Romans, for they might happily say, You tell us Paul that we are
sure to be as conquerours, yea more then conquerours in all afflictions, and in
the particular evils, trials, and troubles that befall us through the aid and
assistance of God vouchsafed to us out of his love. But what if Gods love to us
be changed or interue^ted, turned away, or kept from us by some strong enemy?
To this the Apostle answers by way of prevention, affirming confidently that no
creature, either in heaven, in earth, or in hell nothing that is or may be,
present or to come, no men nor Angels, good or bad, if they were all combined
in one, and all their force joined together, can separate Gods children from
his love to them in Christ Jesus. If any thing could so do, the things here
reckoned up, or some of them, were most likely to do it; but not any of these,
nor all these can do it, no nor any other creature whatsoever: and therefore
nothing can do it. In the words of these two verses we have these things in
general laid before us.

First this proposition; nothing can separate Gods children from Gods love.

Secondly, the amplification of that proposition.

The proposition the Apostle delivers not barely, but in the proof of it, and
he proves it by an induction or reckoning up of particulars, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth.

And then he uses a general comprehension of all things, that no other
creature can separate Gods children from the love of God.

And this proposition is amplified.

First by the certainty of it, which the Apostle puts down in his own
general persuasion: I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love
of God. And secondly, the cause and ground of it, that it is not grounded on
any thing in Gods children themselves, but on Christ Jesus, a sure foundation,
and a rock that can never be shaken, in the last words of the 39. verse, Which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And so we see the general drift of the Apostle in
these two verses, let us now examine the words of them touching the sense and
meaning.

For I am persuaded. That is, Interpretation.
I am fully and undoubtedly resolved of this as a certain truth, and I
persuade my self nothing is more sure then this, that neither death, nor life.
We know that the death of the body is a separation of the soul from the
body, and the life of the body is an union of soul and body together; but
the death of the body being of all things that befall the body most
dreadful, as Bildad calls it, Job 18.14. The king of fear: and life being most
sweet, and therefore the devil said, Job 2.4. Skin for skin, and all that
ever a man has he will give for his life: under death and life we are to
understand not only the death and the life of the body, but also all
exceeding great either adversity or prosperity, all terrors and pangs that
either go before or do accompany the death of the body, and all the
pleasures, profits, and honors of this life. Nor Angels. That is, neither bad
Angels, who are ready to do it, nor good Angels: for howsoever good Angels
will never attempt to separate Gods children from the love of God, yet they are
here to be understood ((...)) by way of supposition, suppose they should
attempt such a thing, yet they are never able to do it, as 1. Cor. 13.1. Though
I speak with the tongues of men and Angels that is, suppose Angels had tongues
to speak withal. Nor principalities, nor powers. Some would have these two
words principalities and powers to be only titles here given to Angels, but
that cannot be, they are distinct members of the Apostles induction, and by
them we are rather to understand humane excellencies, great commanders in the
world: as by principalities, those that are in most eminent place and
principal authority: and by powers, all secondarie powers sent from them, as
Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they be subject to the principalities
and powers. And 1. Pet. 2.13.14. Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king as to the superior, or
unto governors as unto them that are sent of him. Nor things present, nor
things to come. By things present and to come, we are to understand all both
good and evil things, which now or hereafter shall befall us. Nor height, nor
depth. There be diverse expositions of these words, some understanding them of
spirits in the air and in the deep, some of the depth and profunditie of
Satan; but as reverend Beza well observes, the Apostle here puts the abstract
for the concrete: and by height, is meant things on high: and by depth things
below: and herein (as I conceive) the Apostle had an eye to that division of
things in the second Commandment, Exodus 20.4. Things that are in heaven above,
or things in the earth beneath, or things in the water. Nor any other creature:
this the Apostle adds to make an end of his induction, because it had been
infinite to reckon up all creatures; as if he had said, nor any other thing
created of what sort soever, or how great soever. Shall be able to separate us
from the love of God. The love of God is here to be taken as before verse 35.
touching the love of Christ passiuely, for that love wherewith we are beloved
of God; and the meaning is, shall be able to keep back, or break off from us
who truly believe in Christ, that love wherewith God loves us. Which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord: that is, which God bears to us, which comes to us in
and through Christ Jesus. The Apostle adds our Lord: now Christ Jesus is Lord
of true believers after a special manner, and that by a double right: first,
by the right of free donation from his Father, Ioh. 17.9. I pray for them: I
pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine. Secondly, by the right of redemption, 1. Corinthians. 6.20. Ye are bought
for a price; therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirit, for
they are Gods. Now then thus conceive we the meaning of the words of these two
verses, as if the Apostle had said.

For I am fully and undoubtedly resolved of this as a most certain truth, that
neither the death of the body, nor the life of the body; no not the terrors
and pangs of the one, nor the pleasures, profits and honors that accompany
the other, nor bad Angels who are ready to do it, nor good Angels suppose they
should attempt such a thing, nor any humane excellencies, great Commanders, in
the world, whether they be in most eminent and principal authority, or
secondarie powers sent from them, nor things good or evil which now or
hereafter shall befall us, nor things on high, nor things below in heaven, in
earth, or under the earth, nor any other thing created, of what sort soever, or
how great soever, shall be able to keep back, or to break off from us that
truly believe in Christ, the love wherewith God loves us, and which he bears
to us, and comes to us in and through Christ Jesus, who is our Lord after a
special manner, both by right of free donation from his Father, and also by
right of redemption.

Come we to such things as are hence offered for our further instruction. First
on the Apostles particular persuasion; for though it be not the first thing in
order of nature, yet in the order of the words it is, and I will take it as it
lies. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. We see the Apostle here makes known
that he was persuaded, even fully and undoubtedly resolved of this as a most
certain truth, that nothing could separate him and other true beleeu^rs from
the love of God in Christ Jesus. Now the point hence offered in the first
place, is this.

That a Christian may be fully and undoubtedly persuaded A Christian may
infallibly know and be certainly persuaded of this, that God loves him in Jesus
Christ.
that he is beloved of God with a fatherly love, that God loves him as his
child. 1. Ioh. 4.16. says Saint John, speaking of himself and other true
Christians, We have known and believed the love that God has in us, or
bears toward us. 1. Cor. 2.12. says the Apostle, We have received not the
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are given to us of God. A Christian may have in him Gods Spirit,
not only working faith in him, but also a spiritual discerning of those
things which are given him of God, even a discerning of Gods love shed abroad
in his heart by the holy Ghost which is given unto him, Romans 5.5. and so may
have infallible knowledge, and a certain persuasion of Gods love to him in
Christ, and that in this world: and the grounds of this truth are these.

Whether Christ were in them or no. 2. Cor. 13.5. And he says, Know ye not
that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. And to bid men make search for
that which cannot be found, were ridiculous, and therefore a Christian may
infalliblie know, and be certainly persuaded, that he is in Christ, who is the
beloved Son of God, and in whom God loves his chosen, and cannot but love all
that are in him.

Gods love is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost given unto us: and 2.
Cor. 1.22. He has given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts: and also the
special effects of Gods sanctifying Spirit, Effectual faith, diligent love,
and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, as 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. And therefore
doubtless a Christian may in the time of this life infallibly know, and be
certainly persuaded of this, that God loves him in Christ with a fatherly love,
and that God loves him as his child: and therefore for the use.

That popish position confuted, that a Christian in the time of this life can
only come to a probable conjecture of Gods love to him in Christ.
they say a Christian may hope well of Gods love to him, but that he may be
infallibly persuaded of it, that they esteem as a presumptuous heresy. Now
the truth delivered does directly cross this position of theirs, and this very
text of the Apostle refutes them, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But here they seek
out shifts to elude the evidence of this text. Paul had a certain persuasion
of Gods love to him in Christ by a special revelation. A poor shift, the
Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12.4. 2. Cor. 12 4. (...).
Such things as he had by revelation, could not be uttered, they were (...),
things not to be spoken: but this persuasion of his he utters, and therefore
it is none of those secrets he had by special revelation. They say again, the
word here (...), signifies only a coniecturall persuasion,

And for a second use: Is it so that a Christian may in the time of this life
infallibly know, and be certainly persuaded of this, that God loves him in
Christ with a fatherly love, and that God loves him as his child? I might here
further We must labor to know it, and to be infallibly persuaded of it, that
God loves us in Christ with a fatherly love, and that in particular.
and too high a point, somewhat presumptuous, but I pass by that, and on this
ground we must learn to be stirred up to labor to attain this, even to know
it, and to be infallibly persuaded of it, that God loves us in Christ with a
fatherly love, and that he loves us in particular; and never to rest, till we
be in some measure so persuaded, I say to labor to get an infallible
persuasion of it in some measure. For indeed all Gods children have not this
persuasion in like measure, Note.
some have it in a greater measune, and some in a less: neither have Gods
children this persuasion at all times alike, sometimes by neglecting the
means, or by falling into some sin, or by secret desertion, or such like,
Gods children for a time lose this comfortable persuasion. But seeing it is a
thing that may be attained, and it is worth our labor and seeking after, let
us never rest till in some measure we come to know it infallibly, and to be
certainly persuaded of it, that we are beloved of God in Christ Jesus with a
fatherly love. How is that to be done, purifying thine heart, Acts 15.9. and to
have thy faith seconded with the fruits of true holiness in thine heart and
life, and showing forth the power and life of it in all good duties of love
toward God and toward men, and never rest till thou find that thou do love
God simply for himself, and all that bear his image for his sake, and that
thou do come out of the world, and renounce the vanities, and pleasures, and
profits, and honors of it, and do choose God for thy portion, and thereupon
thou may persuade thy self infallibly that God loves thee, 1. Ioh. 4.19. We
love him because he loved us first. God loves us first, and if we love him,
that is the seal and fruit of Gods love to us, and as it were the counterpane
of his love written in our hearts, by which we may be sure that he has loved
us first: Oh then never rest till thou find these two things in thine own
soul, true faith, and true holiness, and so thou may infallibly know, and
be certainly persuaded of this, that God loves thee in Jesus Christ with a
fatherly love, even as his own dear child, and finding that it will fill
thine heart with sound and true joy and rejoicing, and make thee truly and
heartily thankful to God for all mercies bestowed on thee, and also make thee
go on in an holy course of life with courage, and comfort, and cheerfulness.

Now in that the Apostle says, he was persuaded of this, that nothing could
separate him and other true believers from the love of God, and this persuasion
of his, in respect of himself was a persuasion of faith, as I have showed, it
was not an opinion or a bare conjecture, but a persuasion of heart, and so
certain and infallible; only note we thus much.

True saving faith is a distinct, certain and infallible knowledge.
so as a man cannot know what he holds or believes: but it is a distinct, a
certain, and infallible knowledge: Faith in the general nature of it is a
light of spiritual knowledge, and that knowledge is qualified with an
infallible certainty: it is an infallible knowledge, it makes a demonstration
in the mind of a believer, it may be truly said, Fides est vides, true faith is
as it were a sight of that which is believed: and the holy Ghost says, Heb.
11.1. Heb. 11.1. (...).
True faith is the evidence of things not seen, that is, an infallible
demonstration and certainty whereby the mind being convinced, not by reason or
sense, but by divine testimony, does most firmly embrace the promises of God:
and therefore for the use of this in a word.

It cannot be that implicit faith, Popish implicit faith no true faith.
they say it is sufficient for a Christian to believe as the Church believes,
and so indeed they destroy the nature of true faith, and make it a blockish
ignorance, and their doctrine tends to hold men in blindness and perpetual
ignorance; we are to renounce it, and to remember that true faith is a
distinct, certain, and infallible knowledge, and that every true believer
knows certainly what he holds and believes. Note.
Yet withal remember, that every true faith is not a full persuasion: true
faith has certainty joined with it, but not fullness of certainty, and
every true believer has a certain persuasion of Gods love to him in Christ,
yet not a full persuasion at the first: that follows on observation and much
experience of the mercy and favor of God, as I might show by the examples of
Abraham, of David, and of diverse other servants of God, but I pass from that.

Come we now to the proposition here laid down, which the Apostle puts down
by way of induction, reckoning up of particulars, Neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature. And first from this induction in
general, we are given to understand thus much.

That no creature in heaven, in earth, or in hell, can possibly No creature in
heaven, in earth, or in hell, can possibly break off or keep back Gods love
from his children.
not the power of the mightiest and strongest creatures that be, no not of
Angels good or bad, though they be exceeding mighty and potent, that can make
one who is beloved of God in special manner, not beloved of God, or less
beloved of him: it is not the power of heaven or of hell yt can do it. And for
this we have further evidence and testimony of Scripture, Isai. 54.10. says
the Lord, The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my
mercy or my love shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
peace fall away, says the Lord: as if he had said, though the whole world be
turned vp-side down, and heaven and earth come together and be removed out of
their places, yet shall not my love be removed from my children: in the
greatest confusion of things, my love, my mercy, and my compassion shall still
abide with them. Matthew. 16.18. Christ says, The gates of hell, the power of
hell, shall not prevail against the faith of his Church and of true believers:
all the cunning and strength of the devil and his Angels shall never be able
to overcome the faith of true believers; and if not the faith of true
believers, surely not the love of God to them, that being more firm and more
invincible: and indeed in the judgment of all it cannot be severed from such
as continue true believers. Ioh. 10.28.29. says Christ, I give my sheep
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out
of mine hand. My Father which gave them me is greater then all, and none is
able to take them out of my Fathers hand: as if he had said, the power of my
Father is such, as that no adversary power whatsoever is able to wrest my
sheep out of his hand, and so to break off his love from them. And hence it
is that the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have trusted, and I am
persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, that is, my
eternal salvation, which out of his love he has purposed to bestow on me, and
nothing can hinder his purpose, or break off his love from me, but he will
undoubtedly keep my salvation safe and sure against that day. And to these we
might add other testimonies further confirming the truth of the point in hand,
that no creature, in heaven, in earth or in hell, can possibly keep back, or
break off Gods love from his children, and no power of the mightiest and
strongest creatures that be, can make one who is beloved of God in special
manner, not to be beloved of him, or less beloved of him: and the reasons and
grounds of it are these.

First, God loves his children with the same love that he Thou have loved them
as thou have loved me, though not with the same degree of love: and nothing can
hinder or break off Gods love from Christ his Son, He and his Father being
one, Ioh. 10.30. Ioh. 10.30.


Again, God is infinite both in wisdom and power, and the

And for the use of this: first this ground of truth conuinceth The error of
the Papists Arminians, and Anabaptists, touching falling from grace, convinced.
which we have often had occasion to deal against in that they teach that such
as are in the state of grace and Gods special love, may lose it, and fall from
it, and may to day be loved of God, and to morrow be shaken out of his love. A
doctrine devilish, and most uncomfortable, and directly contrary to the truth
now delivered, and to the plain evidence of the holy word of God, which
teaches, that such as are beloved of God, they are so kept by him from evil,
as Christ prayed, Ioh. 17.15. even from that evil one the devil, and from all
his instruments, as that none of them can possibly shake them out of his love.
Oh but say the Arminians and Anabaptists, The holy fear of a child of God.
has cause still to fear with an holy fear, lest by sin he displease God
his loving Father, and provoke him to afflict him in his body, and in his
soul, lest by sin he lose the tokens of Gods love, peace of conscience
touching the secret feeling of it, joy in the Spirit, clearenesse of
understanding, and a feeling affection to good things and good duties, holy
boldness to draw near to the presence of God, and such like. Therefore it is
but a cavil, that the doctrine delivered leaves no place for fear, and that
Gods children have no cause to fear, the doctrine delivered being true, I
leave them, and come to a second use.

Great comfort to such as have good evidence of it, that they are beloved of
God in special manner.
thou having the special love and favor of God thou art an happy man or
woman; yea so long as thou art beloved of God, no manner of misery can make
thee miserable. As I said not long since, if thou were in hell, the deepest
gulf of all misery, and yet beloved of God (if it were possible) thou
should still be in a most happy state and condition. Now this adds to thy
happiness and comfort, that being beloved of God in special manner, thou
shall so continue for ever, it is not all the power and strength, or all the
wit, and skill, or cunning, or subtlety of all the creatures in heaven, in
earth, or in hell, if they should all join together, can possibly break off
or keep back Gods love from thee, or wind or wrest thee out of favor with
him. Thou may lose the favor of men, yea of thy dearest friends, either by
thine own desert, or be wrong out of it by the malicious practice of envious
men. Yea be it so that thou art in favor with the greatest, thou art a kings
favorite, yet either through thine own just desert thou may be cast off as
Haman was, Hest. 7. or the envy and malice of men may work thee out of his
favor; but thou being beloved of God in special manner, and being as it were
his darling, and his favorite, as indeed thou art thou being a child of God,
though never so poor or mean in the world, thou can not lose his favor by
any thing done by thy self, his love to thee being unchangeable; neither can
thou be wrested and wrong out of it by any adversary power whatsoever, God is
stronger then all, he is able to keep thee in his love, and he will keep thee
in it in despite of Satan and all the power of hell. Has God so far
manifested his love to thee, as to give his own dear Son to shed his blood
for thee, and to suffer the pains of hell for thee, and will he suffer the
power of hell to draw thee out of his love? no, no, assuredly he will not. Let
then the devil and all the enemies of thy good do what they can against thee,
and though the Lord suffer them to prevail far, to thrust thee out of house
and home, and to strip thee of health, of wealth, of liberty, and of all
outward good things and means of comfort, yet Gods love they cannot take from
thee, nor lessen and diminish his love toward thee, and make thee less
beloved of him, when they have done all the evil and mischief they can to
thee: and when thou art plonged into the deepest distress they can bring thee
into, thou art still beloved of God, and still as dear to him and as precious
in his sight as ever thou wast: and that may be a ground of sweet comfort to
thee, think on it to thy comfort.

Come we now to stand on the particulars here reckoned up by the Apostle by way
of induction: Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature: at least on some of these, for on every one of these
particulars we shall not need to stand severally, having touched them in some
doctrines before delivered.

Now the first particular here mentioned is death, and by death (as I showed)
we are to understand the death of the body, the separation of the soul from
the body, and the pains and the pangs that either go before it, or with it
and do accompany it: and the point hence offered lies plain before us, it is
this.

Neither the death of the body, whatsoever it be, not the pangs and pains of
it, can possibly break off o^ keep back Gods love from his children.
the separation of the soul from the body, whether it be natural and by the
course of nature, or violent, can possibly break off or keep back Gods love
from his children. Though the pangs of a natural death be most bitter and
painful, or the tortures of a violent death be most extreme, yet can they not
separate between Gods love and a child of his: and though death separate the
soul from the body, yet can it not separate either the soul or the body of a
child of God from God, and from Gods special love. And that this is a truth,
we have further evidence and testimony of Scripture. We read Hebr.
11.35.36.37. that the Saints and servants of God in times of old were most
cruelly dealt withal, They were racked* they were tried by mockings and
scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment, they were stoned, hewn asunder,
tempted, slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheep skins, and
in goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and grievously tormented: yet the
holy Ghost gives this testimony of them, verse 38. that even then they were
such as the world was not worthy of* they were then the Lords worthies, right
dear and precious in the sight o^ God: their cru^ll tortures and shedding of
their blood after a most cruel manner, did not break off or keep back Gods
love from them. And this the holy Martyr Stephen knew well, he knew that he was
beloved of God, and right dear and precious in his sight when the stones were
about his ears, and did batter, and bruise, and break his body, and beat out
his brains, and in confidence and assurance of Gods love to him did he then
commend his soul into the hands of the Lord Jesus. Act. 7.59. the text says,
his cruel and bloody minded persecutours ran on him violently and stoned
him, and he called and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: yea the text says,
verse 60. that his violent death was but as a sweet sleep, it was a falling
fast asleep in the hands of the Lord Jesus: and so indeed is the death of
every child of God, whether it be natural or violent, it is but a sleeping in
Jesus, as 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. And so the death of the body of what sort soever,
whether natural or violent, and after what manner soever it be, cannot
^ossibly break off or keep back Gods love from his children, and separate
either the soul or the body of a child of God from God and from Gods special
love: and the reason and ground of it is plain, namely this.

A child of God is united and knit to Christ with an inseparable union, and he
so remains for ever, Whether ye live or dye, we being true believers, we are
still the Lords both in our bodies and souls, and God is still the God both of
our bodies and souls. And therefore doubtless the death of the body, whether
natural or violent, or after what manner soever it be, cannot possibly break
off or keep back Gods love from his children, and separate either the soul
or the body of a child of God from God, and from Gods special love.

But happily some may object against this the words of Christ, Mat. 22.32. that
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.



A man or woman may be right dear to God, and in special favor with him, and
yet want the feeling of his love for a time.
and from his special love? Is the body of a child of God beloved of God,
when it is severed from the soul, when it lies dead and is void of sense and
feeling? Is it then dear to God when it is not sensible of any comfort? Surely
then it holds sound and good, that a man or a woman may be right dear to God,
and in special favor with God, and yet want the feeling of his love for a
time. And do not thou whosoever thou art, thou finding that God has done great
good things for thy soul, even that for thee which he has not done for
thousands in the world, he has given thee a sight of thy sins, an heart
truly humbled for them, a mind to know him, an heart to fear him, a care and
conscience to obey God: do not thou I say, perplex thy self, and disquiet
thine own soul, because happily for the present thou want the feeling of
Gods love to thee: consider with thy self, thou may be right dear to God,
and be loved of him in special manner, and yet for the present be as
insensible of his love, and have no more feeling of it then a dead body,
especially in the time of trouble and distress, and in the time of temptation.
And though the feeling of comfort from God in the time of distress be a fruit
and work of faith, yet a man or a woman may have faith that for the present
wants the sense and feeling of comfort. Indeed none are in a good state that
want faith, Note.
yet doubtless many are in a blessed state that want the feeling of comfort
for the present. And therefore do not herein wrong thy self, and so judge thy
self void of faith and out of Gods favor, because as yet thou have not a
lively sense and feeling of Gods love, the Lord will exercise thee with want of
feeling of it for a time, and when he has fitted thee for it he will give it
to thee.

Now for a second use: is it so that the death of body, of Sweet comfort to
all Gods children against the fear of death
the truth now delivered being mingled with faith in the hearts of Gods
children, it will arm and strengthen them against the fear of death, and
cheer up their hearts in the pains and pangs of death, of what kind soever it
be, be it never so bitter and painful. What though a child of God be under
some bitter and grinding disease of the stone, of a burning fever, and the
heat of it is so fierce and so violent and strong on him, as in his own sense
and feeling he seems to lie in flames of fire? What though a child of God be
taken away by a violent death, either suddenly by some strange accident, as he
falls from some high place, or from his horse, and his brains are dashed out, or
he is drowned, or such like, or his life is taken from him by his cruel
persecutours, and they put him to most woeful rack and tortures, and they cast
his body to be devoured of wild beasts, or to be meat to the fowls of the
air, as Psalm. 79.20. they drag his body through the streets, they hang him on
a gibbet, they burn him, and put him to death after a most cruel manner? yet
it is not the kind of death or manner of death whatsoever it be, that can
possibly break off or keep back Gods love from him, or separate either his
soul or body from Gods special love. Oh then let this ground of truth be
mingled with faith in our hearts, we being the children of God, and we shall
find it will stand by us and comfort us when we lie gasping for breath on our
death beds, and it will arm us against the fear of death, of what sort soever
it be. 1. Sam. 30.6. we find that when the people were ready to stone David,
and David saw nothing but present death before him, the text says, David
comforted himself in the Lord his God. The words are full of weight, together
with the apprehension of death, as David thought unavoidable, he apprehended
the mercy of God in the covenant, and he persuaded himself that death could
not sever him from his God, and from the love of God, and thereupon he cheered
up his heart, and was comforted. So doubtless if the truth now delivered be
settled in our hearts and mingled with faith, we shall find it will minister
matter of sweet comfort unto us in the bitterest pains that can befall us, and
it will strengthen us against the fear of death, of what kind soever it be,
and be it never so bitter and painful: Neither death, nor life (says the
Apostle) shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. By life (as I showed) we are to understand the life of the
body, and the pleasures, profits, and honors that do accompany it. Now the
point hence offered I need not stand on, for every one who knows things
aright, will confess that the life of the body and the good things of this
life, health, wealth, peace, plenty, honor, and such like, cannot possibly
break off or keep back Gods love from his children: for indeed both life it
self and the good things of this life, are blessings of God in themselves, and
to Gods children they are given as blessings in mercy, and Gods children have
right and title to them in Christ, and to the lawful use of them, and they are
given to them as pledges of Gods love, and faith sanctifies all outward good
things to Gods children; and therefore they cannot possibly break off or keep
back Gods love from his children: I will not therefore stand on it. But it may
seem strange why the Apostle should here reckon life among the things that
cannot separate Gods children from Gods love, meaning by life, as ye have
heard, the life of the body, and the good things of this life: surely herein
appears the wisdom The wisdom of God and the wisdom of the Apostle
appears in this, in arming Gods children against a special subtlety of Satan.
and the wisdom of the holy Spirit of God by whom he was guided. This
doubtless he did to arm Gods children against a special subtlety of Satan;
Satan is tampering with Gods children, not only on the left, but sometimes on
the right, and he sometimes labors to persuade a child of God that he is not
loved of God, because God vouchsafes him outward good things, and a freedom
from evils and afflictions that many of Gods children lie under: and that this
is so, no doubt some can witness out of their own experience. Have not some
at one time or other thus reasoned and thought with themselves, Surely God
gives me a good measure of health and strength, and a competent measure of
outward good things, and I am not in such affliction as I see other of Gods
children are, and am I a child of God? I doubt whether God love me or no. This
is sometimes the reasoning and thought of a child of God: and sure I am, I have
known a dear child of God thus to reason, and thus to think in respect of
inward trials, and in the time of sickness has thus spoken, I find my self
not buffeted by Satan, and so assaulted by him as I have known some of Gods
dear children in the time of their sickness, and when they have drawn near
to their end; my conscience is quiet, and I find peace in my soul, am I a
child of God? See the cunning of a subtle enemy: and thus doubtless it is
sometimes in respect of outward good things and freedom from evils. Now this
the holy Spirit of God here preuents, in that he says, that life, and the good
things of this life, cannot separate from the love of God: No man knows
whether God loves him or hates him by outward things good or evil.
but we are to look to the inward qualification of our souls, and if thou
find in thee the inward qualification of a child of God, thou find
sanctifying grace in thy soul, and true faith in thine heart, and withal the
Lord vouchsafes thee outward good things, and freedom from evils that other of
Gods children lie under, bless God for it, and use those good things to the
glory of God, and to the helping of thee forward in the way to heaven; and
trouble not thy self with this, that thou art not afflicted as other of Gods
children be, leave that to the wisdom of thy heavenly Father, who measures
out the afflictions of his children in wisdom, and as he sees meet and fit;
and be thou ready in the preparation of thine heart to undergo any affliction,
to lose health, wealth, liberty, and life it self for the name of Christ, and
for the profession of his Gospel, and for the keeping of faith and a good
conscience: and remember that life and the good things of this life, cannot
separate thee from the love of God in Christ.

Let us now go on to some other of the particulars here reckoned up by the
Apostle: and the next in order are Angels, principalities, and powers, of which
we shall not need to speak, they were comprehended in that doctrine, That no
creature in heaven, in earth, or in hell, can possibly break off or keep
back Gods love from his children; and likewise those particulars, height, and
depth: and therefore I will not stand on them severally, only I hold it fit to
note that the Apostle here reckons things to come, and a little to stand on
that particular branch of his induction, he says, Things to come cannot
separate Gods child^en from Gods love: and by things to come he means (as I
showed) both good and evil things that in time to come may befall Gods
children: and the point hence offered is this.

No event or coming to pass of things in this world, can possibly break off
or keep back Gods love from his children.
Though the things to come be unknown and uncertain what they shall be, yet
this is most certain and sure, whatsoever they be they cannot work a
separation of Gods children from God and from Gods special love. We read,
Isai. 46.3.4. the Lord says, he had borne the house of Iaacob and Israel, and
the remnant of the house of Iaacob and Israel from the womb, and brought them
up from the birth: and for the time to come he would still be the same to them,
even to old age, and to hoare hairs, and things to come should not separate
between him and them: and thus also Christ speaks, Ioh. 10.28. that for the
time to come such as are his sheep shall be kept from perishing, and from
being plucked out of his hand, and whatsoever comes to them and befalls them,
they shall not miscarrie, it shall not separate them from him. And to this
purpose is that of Jude verse 1. of his Epistle, that the called and sanctified
of God, true believers, and Gods children, Jude Epist. 1.
they are reserved to Jesus Christ, and things to come cannot sever them from
him, and from his love. It is but a cavil of the Arminians, that the
reservation or asseruation of the called of God there spoken of belongs to the
time past: for such as have been and are kept of God the Father to Jesus
Christ, shall be still kept of him to the end, as the Apostle says, Philip.
1.6. He that has begun to keep them, will perfect the good work he has
begun, and will keep them to the end; no event or thing to come whatsoever,
can possibly break off or keep back Gods love from them: and why, the
reasons of it are evident.

First, in Gods hand is the disposing of all things, of life it My times are in
thine hand, says David. And not only things present are disposed of by the
hand of God, but things to come also; for to him all things are present, and he
orders all things at his own good will and pleasure, and his will is
effectual for the good of his children in all things that befall them.

And again, there is a perpetuity even of the love of true shall never
utterly fall away, 1. Cor. 13.8. And the love of true believers toward God and
toward men begun in this life, shall continue for ever in the life to come,
and in heaven it shall be in full perfection: and much more is the love of God
to his children perpetual, and shall never fail, or be broken off by any
event whatsoever. And therefore doubtless this we may resolve on as a certain
truth, that no event, no falling out and coming to pass of things in this
world whatsoever, can possibly break off or keep back Gods love from his
children.

Now for the use of this: I might bend the force of this truth against that
erroneous conceit of some, that a child of God cannot be sure of his
continuance in the love of God. Some erring spirits say, that a child of God
may now for the present be assured of Gods love to him, but he cannot be so for
the time to come: they say God continues to love his children if they continue
to love him, but if they be diuerted and turned aside by some event from their
love to God, then God ceasseth to love them; a conceit directly contrary to
the plain evidence of the word of God, and to the truth now delivered: we have
often had occasion to deal against it, I pass by it, How Gods children may be
armed and strengthened against the fear of the variable events and falling out
of things here in this world.
this world is a place of continual alteration and changing, The face and
fashion of the world is variable, and goes away, 1. Cor. 7.31. The things in
the world are changeable, and the state of man's life is subject to continual
mutation and change, as one says well, the day is sometimes a mother, and
sometimes a stepmother, it sometimes brings forth good, and sometimes it
brings forth evil, a man is now well, and presently sick, now rich, and
suddenly poor, now in honor and high place, and presently debas^d and wheeled
down: and as Solomon says, Eccles. 7.2. The life of man is as a shadow that
is wavering and changeable, and never continuing in one stay, as Job 14.2. Now
in all alterations and changes that be in the world, here is the stay and
comfort of the child of God, that Gods love to him still abides with him, and
is never changed: and though it be with a child of God as with other men, he
cannot tell what shall befall him hereafter, as the common saying is, a man
knows his beginning, but he knows not his end, and things to come are
doubtful and uncertain, though witches, wizards, and such instruments of the
devil will take on them to foretell things to come; but I say, though a child
of God know not what shall come to him to morrow, and in the time to come, as
Paul said, Acts 20.22. I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what
things shall come unto me there: yet here is his comfort, he knows this, that
come what will come, or what can come, either in the world or in his own
particular person, no event whatsoever it be can possibly break off or keep
back Gods love from him: and though his state be changed, yet Gods love to him
is not changed, that is still the same; and what a comfort may this be to a
child of God? Who can say and say truly, that his state is such in regard of
his body and outward estate, as no event can change it, or remove him from it?
Surely none living on the face of the earth. David indeed said, Psalm. 30.6.
That he should never be removed: but he found it otherwise, as himself says,
verse 7. The Lord hid his face, and he was troubled, only the child of God is
in such a firm state and condition in respect of Gods love, as that nothing
that befalls him can remove him from that: things to come cannot possibly break
off or keep back Gods love from him. And that may be a ground of sweet
comfort to us, we being the children of God, and if we be able to mingle it
with faith in our hearts, we shall find it will comfort us amidst the hurly
burlies, and changes, and greatest alterations of things that fall out here in
this world.

Come we now to the last words of verse 39. which is, in Christ Jesus our Lord.
These words as heretofore I have made known, are a second amplification of the
Apostles proposition, that nothing can separate Gods children from the love of
God; and they contain the ground of Gods love to his children, that it is
grounded not on any thing in themselves, but on Christ Jesus: and the point
hence offered in the first place, is this.

That the ground of Gods love to his children is in Christ Jesus. God loves his
children most dearly, The ground of Gods love to his children is only in
Christ Jesus.
and the ground of his love to them is not in themselves, nor in any creature
in heaven or earth, but only in Christ. Indeed it is true, to prevent an
objection in the beginning, God loves his own image, the stamp of his grace,
and the work of his good Spirit, namely holiness and sanctification where he
finds it in his children, but the ground of that work is his love to them in
Christ his Son, he loves them in Christ, and out of that love of his to them
in Christ, he is pleased to work on their souls to their sanctification. So
the ground of his love to them is in Christ Jesus: and hence it is that the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.3. That God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things: and then he
subioynes in Christ, he makes Christ the ground of all spiritual blessings,
and of all the fruits of Gods love to his children. And 2. Pet. 1.2.3. the
Apostle says, We are blessed through the acknowledging of Christ with all
things that belong to life and godliness. And 1. Corinthians. 1.30. Christ is made
to us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
And so in many other places we find that Christ is the ground and foundation of
all good things that come from God to his chosen:

A discovery of it to be a wrong and preposterous course, to seek for the
ground of Gods love to us in our selves. Popish doctrine yields no true comfort
to the weary soul.
Now this for use first teaches us, that they take a wrong and a preposterous
course, who seek for the ground of Gods love to them in themselves: and thus
do the Papists, they make the ground of Gods love to them their own inherent
goodness and righteousness, and so doing, it is no marvel that their
doctrine can give no true comfort to the weary soul and to the troubled
conscience, nor can yield any certainty of salvation: they draw their
followers from the ground of true comfort Christ Jesus, and make them lean on
a rotten and sandy foundation, their one goodness: and therefore they cannot
possibly yield comfort to them. And for our selves, this being so, that the
ground of Gods love to his children is in Christ Jesus. We may hence gather and
conclude The state of those discovered to be most happy who are assured of
Gods love to them.
that we are in a most happy state if we be once assured of Gods love to us,
for that love of God to us is grounded and settled on a sure foundation, and
such as never can be shaken. How firm is that conjunction with God, which is
begun in such an head as Christ Jesus, who is God with God blessed for ever?
How firm and sure is Gods love to us, he loving us in Christ our head and
elder brother, who is his natural Son, from whom it is impossible that his
love should be removed? and his love being firm and sure to the head, can the
body or any member of it be forsaken? it is not possible: and therefore this
may cheer up and comfort thee whosoever thou art that art assured of Gods love
to thee, thou art in a most blessed state and condition.

Now as in these words the Apostle makes known to us that the ground of Gods
love to his children is in Christ, so also that Gods special love comes to
them in and through Christ Jesus: and the point hence offered in the next place
is this.

That Gods special love, Gods special love to his, comes to the^ in and
through Christ Jesus.
that love wherewith he loves his to their good and comfort here in this
world, and to their happiness in heaven, it comes to them only in and through
Christ Jesus. Whosoever are made partakers of Gods special love, and of the
tokens and fruits of that love, it comes to them only in and through Christ
Jesus. Gods love to his children is in God as the fountain, and from him it
flows out as from a fountain; and Christ Jesus is as it were the conduit or
pipe by which it is conuaid to them. And to this purpose is that, Ioh. 1.17.
Grace came by Jesus Christ: the free grace, love and favor of God, that comes
to men in and through Christ Jesus. And we read that at the birth of Christ
the Angels published. Gods love and his good will to men through him, through
Christ then borne, Luke 2.14. Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace
in earth, and toward men good will. Yea the Lord himself proclaims it from
heaven by his own immediate voice, that in and through Christ his Son he is
well pleased with all that believe in him, Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: and the Apostle says expressly, Ephesians. 1.6.
that we are accepted of God, and beloved of him in his beloved Son Christ
Jesus. And hence it is that the Apostles did usually in the beginning of their
Epistles pray for grace and peace to be given to them to whom they writ, from
God the Father as from the fountain, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
conduit or pipe to convey grace and peace to them: plainly noting out, that
Gods special love, that love of God wherewith he loves his, and which he
communicates and reaches out to them for their good here in this world, and
for their happiness in heaven, it comes to them only in and through Christ
Jesus, and only in and through him men come to be partakers of Gods special
love, and of the tokens and fruits of that love: and that this is so there be
good grounds of reason for it, as.



Even to the death of the cross, Philip. 2.8. as does give full satisfaction
to the justice of his Father, and reconcile him to his chosen, and make peace
between God and them, as 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled the
world to himself. Yea such obedience has Christ yielded to God his Father, as
does procure from the grace and love of God, every good thing to his chosen,
whether spiritual or temporal, and concerning their good in this life, and
their everlasting good in the life to come. And therefore it must needs be so,
that Gods special love, that love of God wherewith he loves his, and which he
does communicate to them for their good here in this world, and for their
happiness in heaven, it comes to them only in and through Christ Jesus, and
only in and through him men come to partake in Gods special love, and in the
tokens and fruits of that love.

Now then to make our use and profit of this, first this ground Such as be out
of Christ cannot possibly partake in Gods special love, nor in any token or
fruit of that love of God.
God may and does love them with his general and common love, as he loves all
his creatures, as they be his creatures and workmanship of his hands, but
undoubtedly he loves them not with his special love, and so long as they
remain out of Christ, they cannot possibly partake in that love of God which
he does communicate to his children, and what good thing soever they enjoy, it
is no token or fruit of Gods special love to them. Admit they have health,
and wealth, and abundance of the good things of this life, yea admit they have
grace in their souls, as the common gifts and graces of the Spirit they have
wit, learning, and knowledge, and that of heavenly things, yea they have power
to abstain from some gross sins, and such like, yet none of these things
are tokens and fruits of Gods special love to them. Indeed many that have no
evidence of their being in Christ, are ready to sooth up themselves in a
conceit of Gods special love to them in respect of these things, and they
stick not to say, that God has blessed them with health, and with wealth, and
with many good things, and they persuade themselves God loves them in special
manner. And if men and women be endued with civil honesty, if they live
ciuilly and orderly in the world, oh then they have a marvelous strong conceit
that they are highly beloved of God, and highly in the favor of God, and we
cannot drive them from that conceit. Poor souls, they deceive themselves,
there is no partaking in Gods special love nor in any token or fruit of his
love out of Christ. And know it whosoever thou art, and take it home to thee;
thou being out of Christ, thy health, thy wealth, and good things of this life
thou do enjoy, they are not given to thee in mercy, and as tokens and
fruits of Gods special love, and thou do from thence but falsely conclude
that thou art beloved of God in special manner. And know further, if thou have
no better evidence of thy being in Christ then thy civil honesty, surely thou
do but rest on a staff of reed, and I dare boldly tell thee, that as yet
thou art not in Christ, and being not in Christ, the grace that is in thy
soul, the power thou have to abstain from gross sins, and to do some good
duties, the good gifts that are bestowed on thee, as wit, memory, knowledge of
good things, learning, and such like, are not fruits of Gods special love to
thee, they are but such things as God may and does many times bestow on
reprobates, and such as shall be damned; they come to thee only from the hand
and providence of God, and not from his special love, and they can yield thee
no true comfort. And therefore do not thou so deceive thine own soul, as
thereupon to conclude that thou art beloved of God with his special love, and
with that love he bears to his children. And for a second use of this truth.

We must labor to find our selves in Christ, and one with him by the bond of
his Spirit, and by faith.
and which he communicates to them for their good here in this world, and for
their happiness and glory hereafter, it comes to them only in and through
Christ Jesus, and only in and through him men come to partake in Gods special
love, and in the tokens and fruits of it? Surely then on this ground we ought
to be stirred up to labor to find our selves in Christ, and never to rest till
we find that we are in him, and one with him by the bond of his Spirit, and by
true faith. We love to make our selves inward, if possibly we can, with them by
whom we may receive any benefit and profit: now only in Christ, and through
Christ does God communicate his special love, and the tokens and fruits of his
love to men, and in and through Christ alone we being in him, we shall come to
partake in every good thing, and we shall be sure the good things we do enjoy
are tokens and fruits of Gods special love to us; not only good things
spiritual, but even the good things of this life, our health, our strength,
our wealth, and such like. Oh then let this stir thee up whosoever thou art,
to labor to find thy self in Christ, and one with him: yea thou finding thy
self already in Christ, let this stir thee up further to grow up in him by
faith, and to strive to be more nearely united with him, and never rest till
thou have good evidence of it that thou art in Christ and one with him, that
thou do partake in the virtue of Christ his death mortifying sin in thee,
and in the virtue of his resurrection quickening thee to newness of life, and
that thou art able to say with the Apostle, Galat. 2.20. I live not, but Christ
lives in me: for that indeed will evidence to thee that thou art in Christ, and
one with him; and being so, thou art in an happy state and condition, God does
then through Christ communicate his special love to thee, and the tokens and
fruits of that love, and then the good things thou do enjoy in soul, in
body, or outward estate, are indeed tokens and fruits of Gods special love
to thee. And let the consideration of that work into thy soul the affection
of the blessed Apostle, Philip. 3.8.9. even to think all things loss that
thou may win Christ and be found in him: that is thy duty, let it be
thought on: and so much of that.

The Apostle adds, our Lord, In Christ Jesus our Lord, Hereby he teaches us
how we are further to conceive of Christ in respect of our selves: and the
point is this.

As many as acknowledge Christ their Jesus, their Savior, As many as
acknowledge Christ their Savior, must also acknowledge him their Lord, and
must submit themselves to his rule and government.
that is indeed right faith in Christ. We hold it an article of our faith that
we believe in Jesus Christ our Lord, and we are taught as much by Christ
himself, Matthew. 11.29. that such as come to him by faith, and find comfort in
him, must also take his yoke on them, and submit their necks to his yoke: and
there is reason for it.

Christ has redeemed them that believe in him, and bought them with his own
most precious blood, says. 1. Corinthians. 6.20. and they are to be commanded by
him, and to submit themselves to his rule and government.

They deceive themselves who will have Christ their redeemer but not their Lord.
they will have part in the redemption wrought by Christ, but their own lusts
must be their Lords, and they live as they are led by the devil, and follow
after drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, and all prophannesse, as they are led
by the cursed lusts of their own hearts: surely such persons are bewitched
with a strong delusion of the devil. And know it whosoever thou art, that
say thou beleeuest in Christ, and hold Christ thy Savior, and yet live
as thou art led by thine own vile lusts, and by the fashions, and customs,
and corrupt examples of the world, thou set up a Christ of thine own
framing, and thou beleeuest not in Christ as he is propounded and set forth in
the Gospel.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
An Alphebeticall table directing the Reader to the ready finding of the most
material things contained in this book.
A
AN answer to an Anabaptisticall cavil. page 10. and page 75 Particular
Application of the benefits and saving comforts in Christ must be joined to the
knowledge of them. p. 49 The best Act of corrupt nature is deadly and damnable.
p. 130 The best Act and exercise of corrupt nature is contrary to God and to
all goodness. page 153. and 164 An Anabaptisticall fancy confuted. p. 232 An
infallible evidence of Adoption. p. 331. 365 Assurance of Gods love, and that
infallible, may be had in this life. p. 390 The point of Adoption handled. p.
401. 402 How a true feeling Affection to the joys of heaven is discerned. p.
427 The bitter Afflictions of Gods children but of short continuance. p. 457 It
shall one day appear to men and Angels who be Gods children. p. 473 God has
Appointed his chosen to be like his own Son in holiness. page 666 No
Accusation for sin can hurt Gods chosen now believing in Christ. p. 776
Arminians confuted in some particulars. p. 795. 821. 826
B
TRue Believers having in them matter deserving condemnation, are yet free from
condemnation. page 7 Comfort to true Believers, both in respect of sin and of
the miseries that befall them. p. 9 Gods account of true Believers, though
sin still abide in them in part. p. 190 We are to be careful in well using
our Bodies. p. 261 The dead Bodies of Gods children raised from the dead shall
be altered and changed in quality. p. 203 Christ his Body raised from the
dead, still a visible body. p. 268. The Beginnings of saving grace in Gods
children are pledges of full perfection of grace, and of fullness of joy and
glory in heaven hereafter. p. 521. 544 The best of Gods children groan under
the burden of corruption and misery in this world. p. 535 The Bodies of Gods
children shall one day be fully freed from all corruption and misery. p. 545
True Believers are assured that all things work together for the best, both of
themselves and of all that truly love God. p. 615 All true Believers brethren
to Christ. p. 679 And they are Brethren one to another. p. 682 True Believers
cannot possibly be condemned for their sins. p. 786
C
THe poor weak Christians comfort. page 6. 48. The near conjunction of
Christ and true believers. p. 16 Constant holiness found in Gods children. p.
25 The course of life, the rule by which we are to judge of Gods Children. p.
27 Comfort in a constant course of holiness. p. 34 In the best of Gods
Children there is both flesh and spirit. p. 35 Such as are in Christ partake of
the most holy conception, and birth, and of the perfect purity of his most
holy nature. p. 40 In Christ is found absolute perfection of holiness and
purity. p. 43 Christ fulfiled not the Law to merit eternal happiness and
glory for himself. p. 45 The force of Christ his perfect holiness to
justification. p. 47 Our own Corruption makes the holy things of God
unprofitable to us p. 66 Our Calling must be from God. p. 73 How a man may know
that he is Called to the office of the ministry. p. 74 Christ is true and
very God. p. 76 745 Whence it is that Christ his blood is of infinite worth. p.
77. 752 Christ was true and very man, like to us in all things, sin only
excepted. p. 79 Christ his infinite love to Gods chosen manifested in his
incarnation. p. 81 Christ is both God and man in one person. p. 84 In Christ
our nature and the corruption of nature were severed asunder. p. 90 Christ is
powerful to abolish sin out of all his members. p. 92 The regenerate and
unregenerate are of contrary minds and affections. p. 110 Carnal persons
savor carnal things. p. 114 Who may be accounted carnal persons. p. 118
Concupiscence without consent of will evil and sinful. page 165 No
excellency or privilege can yield true Comfort to a man that wants the spirit
of grace and holiness. p. 208 Only the being of the Spirit of Christ in a man
by his true powerful working presence, gives him true comfort. p. 211 Civil
honest persons have no true ground of comfort that they belong to Christ. p.
215. 244. 291. 294 Comfort against fear of death. p. 238. 252. and in the
pangs of death. p. 250 Comfort to Gods children in their greatest extremities.
p. 255. 389. 424 Comfort here and happiness hereafter in heaven belongs only
to Gods children. p. 327 Comfort to poor sanctified souls. p. 399. 404 Gods
chosen believing in Christ highly advanced. p. 407 Gods Children are heirs. p.
414 The Cross must go before the crown. p. 439 God teaches excellent truths
from the creatures. p. 467 We are to learn some good from every Creature. p.
470 The dumb Creature has that in it in great measure, which many men have
not in them in any measure. page 471 It is Gods curse on the Creatures that
they serve not for man's good. page 483 They are forced to serve the wicked by
Gods mighty hand. p. 490 The visible Creatures in the world are under vanity
for man's sin. p. 488 They are in better Case then the reprobate. p. 493 Gods
children are much more then that they are by creation. p. 519 By the wise
disposing hand of God are all things ordered for the good of the spiritual
state of Gods Children. p. 618 A special qualification of such as have all
things working together for the best unto them is, that they are effectually
called. p. 639 Notes of effectual Calling. p. 642 Effectual Calling a free
calling. p. 650 It is also unchangeable. p. 653 Christ is to be preferred in
honor and dignity before all his members. page 677 Gods chosen shall be
effectually Called in time. p. 700 They only, and none but they, are or shall
be effectually called. p. 706 Comfort to such as are effectually called. p.
710. 716 Gods Children meet with opposition. p. 737 Neither men nor Angels
opposing them, can prevail against them to their hurt. p. 704 Christ and his
benefits cannot be severed. p 763 The best of Gods children are liable to be
accused as guilty of sin. p. 772
D
DIsagreement between the godly and wicked whence it is. page 111 All men good
and bad are subject to Death, and to the forerunners of death. p. 225 Sometimes
sore diseases and sudden and strange kinds of Death do befall wicked persons.
p. 234 Death had power over Christ for a time, and how. p. 251 Difference
between the testimony of Gods Spirit, and satanicall illusion and carnal
presumption discovered. p. 394 Difference between the godly and the wicked in
regard of their desire of death. p. 542 Christ his Death a sufficient expiation
of the sins of all Gods chosen. p. 792
E
THe regenerate and unregenerate cannot possibly meet together in their Ends.
page 128 Enimitie against God is deadly and damnable. p. 148 Enemies to God are
such are such as will not subject themselves to Gods Law. p. 159 Lukewarm
professors Enemies to God. p. 162 How Gods Elect are loved of God before their
calling. p. 178 How Gods children are to be esteemed of. p. 406 The godly
continually Expect the day of full deliverance from sin and misery. p. 540
Universal Election held by Anabaptists, confuted. p. 694
F
THe ground of Freedom from the curse of the Law and Gods wrath due to sin.
page 12 Only to those that are in Christ belongs that Freedom. p. 14 Proper
Fruits of true sanctifying faith. p. 51 Whence it is that the godly cannot
join in Fellowship with the wicked. p. 112 True Faith in Christ a
supernatural gift and grace of God. p. 169 Gods children may Fear Gods wrath,
and how. p. 298 Familists confuted. p. 299. 338 The Feeling of Gods love in
Christ only from the work of Gods Spirit. p. 362 God is Father of all true
beleuers, Jews and Gentiles. p. 380 We must Feel sin cleaving to our
souls, as an heavy burden. p. 588 We must have a Fellow feeling of one
another misery. p. 511
G
THe holy Ghost has his personal being from the Father and from the Son.
page 217 In what respects he is the Spirit of Christ. p. 217 The glory of Gods
children shall be one day manifest to men and Angels. p. 461 Men must be fitted
for the Glory of heaven before they come to enjoy it. p. 498 How men may know
that they have true saving Grace in them. p. 525 Gods children have in them in
this life so much grace as the Lord sees meet and fit for them. p. 527 Gods
children groan heartily for sin cleaving to them. p. 536 Only the good and
godly are such as have all things work for the best to them. p. 626
Glorification in heaven follows on justification in Gods sight. p. 724 God is
with his chosen, called and justified, after a special manner. p. 734 God had
a principal hand in the betraying of Christ, and in the crucifying of him, yet
none in the sin. p. 755 God will not withhold any good thing from true
believers. p. 761 The good things of this life that true believers do enjoy,
are Gods free gifts. p. 767 The Glory of Christ his manhood in heaven far
exceeds the glory of the most glorious creatures. p. 800
H
THe study and endeavor after Holiness leads Gods children to life and
salvation. page 136. and it brings true peace and true comfort in this life and
in the life to come. p. 139 How Hearers of the word must behave themselves when
they are justly reproved. p. 187 Good Hearers must be answerable to their
teaching. p. 276 Holiness of life how excellent in the account of our Church.
p. 317 Holiness of life how comfortable. p. 318 How we may lay claim to
heaven. p. 329 All Gods children are Heirs. p. 419 They are great Heirs. p.
425 Their great honor in that they are joint Heirs with Christ. p. 428 What
Hope makes not ashamed. p. 554 We must labor to maintain our Hope of heaven.
p. 555 What true saving Hope is. p. 556 Saving hope abolished after this life.
p. 559 It must be accompanied with patient waitnig for the good things Hoped
for. p. 561 How saving Hope may be strengthened. p. 564 True Holiness most
glorious. p. 721 True Holiness here begun, shall hereafter be made perfect. p.
723
I
Justification by Christ his righteousness imputed, a truth. page 17 The
Impurenesse of nature is enough to make men liable to death of body and death
of soul. p. 53 Why Infants dye in their infancy. p. 55 Justification in Gods
sight by the works of the Law confuted. p. 61 Impossibility in man's judgment
cannot hinder Gods working. p. 68 Ignorant persons have no good evidence that
they are Gods children. p. 333 Importunity in prayer needful. p. 380
Invocation of Saints departed, confuted. p. 598 Effectual calling and
justification are together in time. p. 712 Our Justification in Gods sight most
free. p. 715 Intercession of Angels and Saints departed, confuted. p. 807
K
HOw far the Saints shall Know one another in heaven. p. 476 God perfectly
Knows the secret thoughts, intents and purposes of men's minds. p. 592 And he
only Knows the meaning of the unutterable sighs and groans that are in the
hearts of his children in time of their great affliction, and regards them. p.
599
L
SVch as are in Christ, Live an holy sanctified life. p. 21 Gods unspeakable
Love manifested in sending his Son into the world. p. 72. Gods Law is of
absolute perfection. p. 99 The perfect fulfilling of Gods Law performed, the
person of Christ is truly and really theirs who believe in Christ, by
imputation. p. 103 How we truly fulfill the Law of God. p. 105 An holy Life a
due debt to God. p. 281 Every man in the world, either Lives a carnal life, or
an holy and spiritual life. p. 290 The certain fruit of a carnal Life, an
accursed death temporal, and also death eternal. p. 299 The certain
consequent of an holy Life, is a comfortable life here, and happiness
hereafter in heaven. p. 315 All that are Led by Gods Spirit are Gods children.
p. 330 How we may know that we are so Led. p. 336 The best of Gods children
have need so to be still Led. p. 339 Gods children are Led by Gods Spirit in a
special manner. p. 342 The expounding and applying of Gods Law needful. p.
348 God makes known his eternal Love to his chosen in this life. p. 387 God
Loves his chosen believing in Christ with a fatherly love. p. 403 Only the
Liberty of Gods children shall be glorious at the day of judgment. p. 502 A
special Lesson to be learned of all Gods children. p. 623 A special
qualification of such as have all things working together for the best, is that
they Love God. page 629 Notes of true Love to God. p. 631 Motives to stir up
to it. p. 635 True Love of God is found only in such as are effectually
called. p. 636 Gods Loving of his to life and salvation, begins not with their
conversion, but was before they had a being in the world. p. 658 Gods free Love
the cause of all good things coming from God to his chosen. p. 664 Gods chosen
shall one day be Like to Christ in heavenly glory. p. 675 Gods exceeding Love
to his chosen manifested in giving his Son for them. 742 Gods Love in Christ
cannot possibly be severed from true believers, nor they from it. p. 819 No
particular evil, trial, or affliction whatsoever it be, can possibly separate
or keep back Gods Love from true believers. p. 825 A Christian may know
infallibly that God Loves him in Christ. p. 865 How he may come to know it
infallibly. p. 868 No creature whatsoever can possibly break off or keep
back Gods Love from his children. p. 869 Neither the death of the body
whatsoever it be, nor the pangs and pains of it, can possibly break off or
keep back Gods Love from his children. p. 874 No event of things in this
world can possibly break off or keep back Gods Love from his children. p.
880 The ground of Gods Love to his children only in Christ Jesus. p. 883 Gods
special Love to his comes to them in and through Christ. page 885
M
GOds Mark on such as be in Christ. p. 24 Marks by which we may know that we
walk after the Spirit. p. 29 The Moral Law teaching perfect righteousness,
iustifies none in the sight of God. p. 61 It is impossible to fulfill the
Moral Law of God in time of this life. p. 63 The Moral Law of God requires
conformity to it, as well in man's nature as in his thoughts, words, and
actions p. 98 Merit of congruitie confuted. page 172 How Gods children Merit
salvation. p. 240 Ministers must evidence their love to their hearers. p. 279
Merit of good works confuted p. 282 The work of Mortification must be
continual. p. 307 The Mortified Christian, the right holy Christian. p. 311
How Men may know that they are truly mortified. p. 314 Sinful Motions and
lusts of the heart must be mortified. p. 320 How we shall know that they are
so. p. 321 Mortification of sin a work of Gods holy Spirit. p. 322
Meditation on good things heard and learned out of Gods word, needful. p. 731
Motives to that purpose. p. 734 The infinite Merit of Christ his death belongs
to every true believer. p. 758
N
PVre Naturals confuted. p. 157 A man in his Natural state may do that which
is good in it self, but he marres it in doing. p. 163 The mind and will of a
Natural man cannot of it self be subject to Gods Law. p. 165 The Number of
such as shall be saved is great. p. 686
O
THe fearful state of such as Oppose Gods truth, and the sincere profession
of it. p. 151 To what degree of excellency our holy Obedience to Gods will
reaches. p. 179 Gods children Owe no service at all to the corruption of their
nature. page 286
P
THe common excellent Privilege of all true believers. p. 4 Patience is to be
learned from Christ his example. p. 83 Promises of comfort and of good things
are propounded with a condition in Gods book. p. 222 Sensual Pleasures vain
and uncertain. p. 228 Preachers may threaten men with hell and damnation, to
drive them from sin. p. 294 Preachers may promise to such as live an holy
life, both a blessed life here, and happiness and glory hereafter in heaven.
p. 305 Terrors wrought in Gods chosen Preparatiues to their consolation and
comfort. p. 358 Prayer a fruit of the Spirit of Adoption. p. 363 The Spirit of
Prayer is in every child of God in some measure. p. 367 True Prayer is earnest
and fervent. p. 368 Wherein the feruencie of it is to be expressed. p. 370 A
set form of Prayer may be true prayer. p. 373 True Prayer is with holy
boldness. p. 375 The ground of that boldness. ibid. God alone to be Prayed
to. p. 378 Grounds of Perseverance in the state of grace. p. 396 Gods children
shall Partake with Christ in his everlasting inheritance. p. 430 The Patience
of Gods children, true patience. p. 576 The grace of Prayer, how powerful in
time of affliction. p. 578 Gods children sometimes know not how to Pray in time
of their great afflictions. p. 581 Yet then are they enabled by Gods Spirit to
Pray, at least by sighs and groans. p. 584 Sighs and groans of Gods children
in time of their great distresses, effectual Prayers to God. p. 586 Only the
Prayers of Gods Saints are accepted of the Lord. p. 601 Prayer a work of Gods
Spirit in the best of Gods children. p. 606 Only Prayers made according to
Gods will pleasing to God. p. 609 How they are so made p. 611 Perseverance in
grace may be certainly known. p. 616 Particular providence of God proved. p.
622 The cause of Gods Predestination to life and salvation, what it is. p. 661
All that shall Partake with Christ in glory, must also partake with him in his
sufferings. p. 669 Gods Predestination to life and glory in heaven not
universal. p. 692 Whom God has Predestinate to salvation, them has he also
appointed to be called, justified, and sanctified. p. 698
Q
A Needful Question propounded and answered. p. 354 Another Question, as
whether the light of nature being in the full force of it, bring men to a sight
of some sins or no, propounded and answered. p. 356 Gods children sometimes
Question their estate in time of some grievous affliction. p. 437
R
REgenerate persons mind and affect heavenly things. p. 120 How a man may
discern whether he be in the state of Regeneration or no. p. 123 And whether
he shall be saved or no. p. 244 Only the truly Religious are partakers of true
peace and true comfort. page 143 Who may certainly conclude, that they are
regenerate. p. 194 Revelations of the Spirit, besides the written word of God,
are mere illusions of Satan. p. 218 The R^ising up of Christ from the dead a
wonderful work of God. p. 254 The raising up of the dead, a work of divine
power. p. 256 The Resurrection of the body proved. p. 257 True hope of
Resurrection, with comfort to whom it belongs. p. 269 Why God sometimes defers
to grant the Requests of his children. p. 383 Redemption by Christ not
universal. p. 693 Only such as have Christ, have true spiritual Right to the
good things of this life. p. 764 Christ his Resurrection a manifestation of
full redemption wrought by his death. p. 796
S
HVmane satisfactions confuted. p 12 Sin is very hardly driven out of nature.
p. 86 Sin may be removed from the soul, and yet the soul remain entire in
all the powers and faculties of it. p. 94 Every Sin is deadly and damnable.
p. 149 Unrepentant Sinners are in a miserable state. p. 150 The Spirit of
discerning in the Prophets and Apostles extraordinarily. p. 188 Gods Spirit is
in Gods children in special manner. p. 195 How he is in them. p. 196. 206 Gods
Spirit is in Gods children as a continual indweller. p. 200 It is Sin that
makes all men, good and bad, subject to death, and to the forerunners of death.
p. 229 What is to be done in time of Sickness. p. 232 The Sanctified souls
of Gods children are immortal, death cannot touch them. p. 236 The Sanctified
soul of a child of God is sure to live the life of glory. p. 241 Gods holy
Spirit never forsakes the bodies of Gods children. p. 248 It is an usual
reasoning in Scripture, from a benefit to a duty. p. 277 The special working
of Gods Spirit one and the same in many persons. p. 337 Gods holy Spirit is to
all Gods chilchildren, first a spirit of bondage, and then a Spirit of
Adoption. p. 346 Gods Spirit makes both the Law and the Gospel preached
effectual. p. 350 Gods Spirit persuades none but sanctified persons that God
loves them. p. 397 Only Suffering with Christ truly comfortable. p. 445 Gods
children have Christ their companion in Suffering. p. 447 Their Sufferings
shall end in happiness and glory. p. 448 The greatest Sufferings in this life
not comparable to the glory of heaven. p. 454 Therefore not meritorious. p.
455 The heinousness of Sin discovered. p. 494 Perfect Salvation of Gods
children not in present possession, but in hope and expectation. p. 552 The
best of Gods children cannot Stand by their own strength in time of trial. p.
568 They stand only by the help and assistance of Gods Spirit. p. 572 Some
living on the face of the earth truly called Saints. p. 607 Signs of salvation
are in Gods children themselves, but the ground of it is out of themselves. p.
647 Though the Sufferings of Gods children be exceeding bitter and painful,
yet are they not equal to the suffering of Christ. p. 671 Sanctification ever
follows on justification. p. 717 Satan's chief aim in all temptations,
trials, crosses, and evils, that he brings on Gods children. p. 815 An
infallible note of Scripture to be the very word of God. p. 832. How well
acquainted we must be with Scripture. p. 833 Only Suffering for a good cause
truly comfortable. p. 840 A special Subtlety of Satan discovered. p. 879
T
HOw men may Try whether they be members of Christ or no. p. 23 The
distinction of the persons in the Trinity proved. p. 71 Popish
Transsubstantiation confuted. p. 224 Gods children have just Title to all good
things. p. 420 Their title to them is sure and certain. p. 423 The time shall
come when the visible creatures shall be free from corruption and change. p.
500
V
Unregenerate persons are altogether fleshly. p. 172 They can do nothing
pleasing to God. p. 174 Their miserable condition. p. 175 The union of Christ
and his members is mystical and spiritual. p. 223 Vbiquitaries confuted.
ibidem The whole frame of the Visible world subject to vanity and corruption.
p. 480 It shall be so till the end of the world. p. 514
W
WRong done to the poorest member of Christ reaches to Christ himself. p. 18
Walking after the flesh and after the Spirit cannot stand together at the same
time. p. 30 Pregnancie of Wit unsanctified is most dangerous. p. 133. 154
Wisdom is twofold, carnal and spiritual. p. 134 The Wisdom of the flesh
must be laid aside in matters of Religion. p. 155 The Wisdom of the flesh is
extremely opposite to God and to all goodness. p. 156 Freedom of Will taught
by Papists confuted. p. 167 The right manner of dividing the Word of God. p.
185. 275 It is dangerous to Wrong the poorest of Gods children. p. 199 A
different Working of Gods Spirit in the elect and in the reprobate. page 359 We
must know it from Gods word, that the creatures are under vanity and
corruption. p. 507 Gods children sigh for sin, and Wait also for deliverance
out of it. p. 538 Why God will have his word preached both to the elect and
reprobate. p. 708
FINIS.
Faults escaped to be thus amended.
Page 3. line 27. read being knit. p. 5. l. 12. read precious faith. p. 17.
l. 21. read This truth. p. 22. l. 22. read the virtue of his death. p. 74. l.
22. read When Saul. p. 90. l. 3. read we may. p. 138. l. 17. read they gain
p. 148. l. 11. read can he know. l. 20 read pulls. p. 161. l. 29. read they
resist the holy Ghost. p. 170. l. 20. to be is superfluous. p. 263. l. 3. read
ground of truth. p. 291. l. 23. read against the stomach. p. 303. l. 8. read
and think. p 308. l. 7. read have buried. p. 310. l. 12. read beating down.
p. 326. l. 18. read condition soever they be. p. 346. l. 21. read Now of. p.
392. l. 19. read Romans 5.2.5. p. 499. l. 5. read Their corruptible. p. 629 l.
31. read we grow. p. 644. l. 17. read his hand. p. 667. l. 21. read the end,
p. 674. l. 34. read their pains. p. 697. l. 3. read their assertions. p 717.
l. 20. read there making. p. 719. l. 2. read morefully. p. 775. l. 23. read
aguish fits. p. 787. l. 16. read his one. p. 875. l. 27. read we live. p.
879. l. 5. read left hand.


