THE PASSAGE of our most drad Sovereign Lady Queen Elyzabeth through the city
of London to westminster the day before her coronacion.

Anno. 1558.

Cum priuilegio

The receiving of the Queen's majesty
Upon Saturday, which was the xiiii. day of Ianuarye in the year of our Lord
God.1558. about.ii. of the clock at after noone, the most noble and Christian
princess, our most dradde sovereign Lady Elyzabeth by the grace of god
Queen of England France and Irelande, defendour of the faith. etc. marched
from the tower to pass through the city of London toward Westminster,
richely furnished, and most honorably accompanied, as well with gentilmen,
Barons, and other the nobilite of this realm, as also with a notable train of
goodly and beawtifull ladies, richly appointed. And entryng the city was of
the people received marvelous entierly, as appeared by thassemblie, prayers,
wishes, welcomminges, cries, tender words, and all other signs, which argue
a wonderful earnest love of most obedient subjects toward their sovereign.
And on the other side her grace by holding up her hands, and merry countenance
to such as stood far of, and most tender and gentle language to those that
stood nigh to her grace, did declare her self no less thankefullye to receive
her peoples good will, than they lovingly offered it unto her. To all that wyshed
her grace well, she gave hearty thanks, and to such as bade God save her
grace, she said again god save them all, and thanked them with all her heart.
So that on either side there was nothing but gladness, nothing but prayer:
nothing but comfort. The Queen's majesty reioysed marueilously to see, yt, so
exceadingly showed toward her grace, which all good princes have ever desired,
I mean so earnest love of subjects, so evidently declared even to her graces
own person being carried in the midst of them. The people again were
wonderfully ravished with the loving answers and gestures of their princess,
like to the which they had before tried at her first coming to the tower from
Hatfield. This her graces loving behavior preconceiued in the peoples heads
upon these consideracions was then thoroughly confirmed, and in deed emplanted a
wonderful hope in them touching her worthy government in the rest of her
reygne. For in all her passage she did not only show her most gracious love
toward the people in general, but also privately if the baser personages had
either offered her grace any flowers or such like, as a signification of their
good will, or moved to her any suit, she most gently, to the common rejoicing
of all the lookers on, and private comfort of the party, staid her chariot,
and heard their requests. So that if a man should say well, he could not
better term the city of London that time, than a stage wherein was showed the
wonderful spectacle, of a noble hearted princess toward her most loving
people, and the peoples exceeding comfort in beholding so worthy a sovereign,
and hearing so princelike a voice which could not but have set thenemie on
fire, since the virtue is in thenemie always commended, much more could not but
inflame her natural, obedient, and most loving people, whose wea^e leans
only upon her grace, and her government. Thus therefore the Queens majesty
passed from the Tower, till she came to Fanchurche, the people on each side
ioyously beholding the view of so gracious a Lady their queen, and her grace
no less gladly notyng and observing the same. Nere unto Fanchurch was erected
a scaffolde richely furnished, whereon stood a noyes of instruments, and a
child in costly apparel, which was appointed to welcome the queens majesty
in the hole cities behalf. Against which place when her grace came, of her
own will she commanded the chariot to be stayde, and that the noyes might be
appeased till the child had uttered his welcomming oration, which hespake in
English meter as here follows. O pereles soueraygne queen, behold what this
thy town
Has thee presented with at thy first entrance here:
Behold with how rich hope she ledeth thee to thy crown
Behold with what two gifts she comfort thy chere.
The first is blessing tongues, which many a welcome say
Which pray thou may do well, which praise the to the sky
Which wish to the long life, which bless this happy day
Which to thy kingdom heaps, all that in tongues can lie.
The second is true hertes, which love thee from their root
Whose suit is tryumphe now, and rules all the game.
Which faithfulness have wo^ne, and al untruth driven out,
Which skip for joy, when as they hear thy happy name.
Welcome therefore O queen, as much as heart can think,
Welcome again O queen, as much as tongue can tell:
Welcome to joyous tongues, and hearts that will not shrink,
God the preserve we pray, and wish thee ever well.
At which words of the last line the hole people gave a great shout, wishing
with one assent as the child had said. And the Queen's majesty thanked most
heartily both the city for this her gentle receiving at the first, and also the
people for confirming the same. Here was noted in the Queens majesty's
countenance, during the time that the child spoke, besides a perpetual
atte^tiuenes in her face, a marvelous change in look, as the childs words
touched either her person or the peoples tongues and hertes. So that she with
reioysyng visage did evidently declare that the words took no less place in
her mind, than they were most heartely pronounced by the child, as from all
the hearts of her most hearty citizeins. The same verses were fastened up in a
table upon the scaffolde, and the latin thereof likewise in latin verses in
another table as hereafter ensues.

Vrbs tua quae ingressu dederit tibi munera primo,
O Regina parem non habitura, vide.
Ad diadema tuum, te spe quam diuite mittat,
Quae duo letitiae det tibi dona, vide.
Munus habes primu^, linguas bona multa preca^tes,
Quae te quum laudant, tum ^ia vota sonant,
Foelicemque diem hunc dicunt, tibi secula longa
Optant, et quicquid denique lingua potest.
Altera dona feres, vera, et tui amantia corda,
Quorum gens ludum iam regit vna tuum:
In quibus est infracta fides, falsumque perosa,
Quaeque tuo audito nomine laeta salit
Grata venis igitur, quantum cor concipit vllum,
Quantum lingua potest dicere, grata venis.
Cordibus infractis, linguisque per omnia laetis
Grata venis: saluam te velit esse deus.
Now when the child had pronounced his oration, and the Queen's highness so
thankefully had received it, she marched forward toward gracious streate,
where at the upper end, before the sign of the Egle, the city had erected a
gorgeous and sumptuous arc as here follows.

A stage was made which extended from the one side of the streate to the other,
rychely vawted with batlementes containing three ports, and over the
middlemost was auaunced.iii. several stages in degrees. Upon the lowest stage
was made one seat royal, wherein were placed two personages representyng king
Henry the seventh and Elyzabeth his wife daughter of king Edward the fourth,
either of these two princes sitting under one cloth of estate in their seats,
no otherwise divided, but that those of them which was king Henry the seventh
proceeding out of the house of Lancastre, was enclosed in a read rose, and
the other which was Queen Elizabeth being heir to the house of York enclosed
with a white rose, each of them royally crowned, and decently apparailled as
apperteineth to princes, with Sceptours in their hands, and one vawt
surmou^ting their heads, wherein aptly were placed two tables, each co^teining
ye title of those two princes. And these personages were so set, yt the one of
the^ joined hands with the other, with ye ring of matrimony perceived on ye
finger. Out of the which two roses sprang two branches gathered into one,
which were directed upward to the second stage or degree, wherein was placed one,
representing the valiant and noble prince king Henry theight which sprung out
of the former stock, crowned with a crown imperial, and by him sat one
represe^ting ye right worthy lady queen Anne, wife to the said king Henry
the^ght, and mother to our most soueraign lady queen Elizabeth that now is,
both apparelled with Sceptours and diademes, and other furniture due to the
state of a king and Queen, and ii. tables surmounting their heads, wherein
were written their names and titles. From their ^eate also proceaded vpwardes
one brau^che directed to the third and uppermost stage or degree, wherein
likewise was planted a seat royal, in the which was set one representyng
the Queens most excellent majesty Elizabeth now our most dradde sovereign
Lady, crowned and apparelled as the other princes were. Out of the foreparte of
this pageaunt was made a standing for a child, which at the Queen's majesty's
coming declared unto her y^ hole meaning of the said pageaunt. The two sides
of the same were filled with loud noyses of music.

And all empty places thereof were furnished with sententces concerning
unity. And the hole pageant garnished with red roses and white and in the
forefront of the same pageant in a fair wreathe was written the name, and
title of the same, which was. The uniting of the two howses of Lancastre and
York. This pageant was grounded upon the Queens majesty's name. For like as
the long war between the two houses of York and Lancastre then ended, when
Elizabeth daughter to Edward the fourth matched in marriage with Henrye the
seuenthe heir to the house of Lancastre: so since that the Queens maiesti^s
name was Elizabeth, and for so much as she is the only heir of Henrye the
eight, which came of both the howses as the k^itting up of concord, it was
devised that like as Elizabeth was the first occasion of concord, so she
another Elizabeth might maintain the same among her sub^ectes, so that unity
was the end whereat the whole devise shot, as the Queens majesty's names
moved the first ground. This pageant now against the Queen's majesty's
coming was addressed with children representing the forenamed personages, with
all furniture dew unto the setting forth of such a matter well meant, as the
argument declared, costly and sumptuouslye set forth as the beholders can bear
witness. Now the Queen's majesty drew near unto the said pageaunt, and
forsomuche as the noise was great by reason of the prease of people, so that
she could skarce hear the child which did enterprete y^ said pageaunt, and
her chariot was passed so far forward that she could not well v^ew the
personages representing the kings and Queen^s abouenamed: she required to have
the matter opened unto her, and what they signified, with the end of unity,
and gro^id of her name, according as is before expressed. For the fight whereof,
her grace caused her chariot to be removed back, and yet hardly could she see,
because y^ children were set somewhat with the farthest in.

But after that her grace had understood y^ meaning thereof, she thanked the
city, praised y^ fairenes of the work, and promised that she would do her
whole endeavor for the continual preseruacion of concord, as the pageant did
emport.

The child appointed in the standing abouenamed to open the meaning of the
said pageant, spoke these words unto her grace.

The two princes that sit under one cloth of state,
The man in the redd rose, the woman in the white:
Henry the.vii. And Queen Elizabeth his mate,
By ring of marriage as man and wife unite.
Both heirs to both their bloodes, to Lancaster the king
The Queen to York, in one the two howses did knit,
Of whom as heir to both, Henry the eight did spring,
In whose seat his true heir thou queen Elsabeth do sit
Therefore as civil war, and shede of blood did cease
When these two houses were united into one
So now that ^arre shall sti^t, and quietne^ increase,
We trust, O noble Queen, thou will be cause alone.
The which also were written in latin verses, and both ^rawen in two tables upon
the forefront of the said pageant as hereafter follows.

Hii quos iungit idem solium quos annulus idem:
Haec albente nitens, ille rubente Rosa:
Septimus Henricus Rex, Regina Elizabetha,
Scilicet Haeredes genti: vterque suae.
Haec Eboracensis, Lancastrius ille dederunt
Connubio e, geminis quo foret vna domus
Excipit ^os haeres Henricus copula regum
Octauus, magni Regis imago potens
Regibus hinc succedis auis Regique parenti
Patris iusta haeres Elizabetha tui.
Sentences placed therein concerning unity.
Nullae concordes animos vires domant.
Qui iuncti terrent, deiuncti timent.
Discordes animi soluunt, concordes ligant.
Augentur parua pace, magna bello cadunt.
Coniunctae manus fortius tollunt onus.
Regno pro moenibus aeneis ciuium concordia.
Qui diu pugnant diutius lugent.
Discidentes principes subditorum lues.
Princeps ad pacem natus non ad arma datur
Filia concordiae copia, neptis quies.
Dissentiens respublica hostibus patet.
Qui idem tenent, diutius tenent.
Regnum diuisum facile dissoluitur.
Ciuitas concors armis frustra tentatur.
Omnium gentium consensus firmat fidem etc.
These verses and other pretty sentences were drawn in void places of this
pageant, all tending to one end that quietness might be mainteyned, and all
dissension displaced, and that by the Queen's majesty, heir to agreement, and
agreing in name with her, which tofore had joined those houses, which had been
thoccasyon of much debate and civil war within this realm, as may appear to
such as will search cronicles, but be not to be touched in this treatise only
declaring her graces passage through the city, and what prouisyon the city
made therefore. And ere the Queen's majesty came within hearing of this
pageaunt, she sent certain as also at all the other pageauntes to require the
people to be silent. For her majesty was disposed to hear all that should be
said unto her.

When the Queens majesty had heard the chyldes oration, and understood the
meaning of the pageant at large, she marched forward toward Cornehill, always
received with like rejoicing of the people, and there as her grace passed by
the conduit which was curiously trimmed against that time with rich banners
adourned, and a noise of loud instruments upon the top thereof, she espied the
second pageant, and because she feared for the peoples noise, that she should
not hear the child which did expound the same, she enquired what that pageant
was ere that she came to it. And there understood, that there was a child
representing her majesty's person, placed in a seat o^ government, supported
by certain virtues, which suppressed their contrary vices under their feet.
and so forth, as in the description of the said pageant shall herafter appear.

This pageant standing in the nether end of Cornehill, was extended from
the one side of the streate to the other, and in the same pageant was devised
three gates all open, and over the middle part thereof was erected one chair,
or seat royal with clothe of estate to the same apperteynyng, wherein was
placed a child representinge the Queens highness, with consideracion had for
place convenient for a table which contained her name and title. And in a
comely wreathe artificially and well devised with perfect sight and
understanding to the people. In the fro^t of the same page at was written the
name and title thereof, which is The seat of worthy governance, which seat
was made in such artificial manner, as to the apperance of the lookers on, the
forparte seemed to have no stay, and therefore of force was stayed by lively
personages, which personages were in number four, standing and staieng the
forefronte of the same seat royal, each having his face to the Queen and
people, whereof every one had a table to express their effects, which are
virtues namely. Pure religion, Love of subjects, VVisdome and Justice, which
did tread their contrary vices under their feet, that is to wit, Pure
religion, did tread upon Superstition and Ignorance, Love of subjects, did
tread upon Rebellion and insolency, VVisdome did tread upon Folly and Vain
glory, Justice did tread upon Adulacion and Bribery. Each of these personages
according to their proper names and properties had not only their names in
plain and perfect writing set upon their breasts easily to be read of all, but
also every of them was aptly and properly apparelled, so that his apparel and
name did agree to express the same person, that in ^^tie he represented. This
part of the pageant was thus appointed and furnished. The two sides over the
two side ports had in them placed a noise of instruments, which immediatlye,
after the chyldes speech gave an heavenly melody. Upon the top or uppermost
part of y^ said pagea^t stood the arms of England ro^ally portratured with y^
proper beasts to uphold the same. One representing the Queen's highness, sat in
this seat crowned with an Imperial crown, and before her seat, was a
convenient place appointed for one child which did interpret and apply the
said pageant as hereafter shall be declared. Every void place was furnyshed
with proper sentences commendyng the seat supported by virtues, and defacing
the vices, to the vtterextirpacion of rebellion, and to everlasting
continuance of quyetnes and peace. The Queen's majesty approaching nyghe unto
this pageaunt thus beawtifyed and furnyshed in all points, caused her chariot
to be drawn nyghe thereunto, that her grace might hear the chyldes oration,
which was this.

While that religion true, shall ignorance suppress,
And with her weightye foot, break superstitions head,
While love of subjects, shall rebellion distress
And with zeal to the prince, insolency down tread.
While justice, can flattering tongues and bribery deface,
While folly and vayngtorie to wisdom yield their hands:
So long shall government, not swar^e from her right race
But wrong decays still, and rightwisenes up stands.
Now all thy subjects hertes, O prince of pereles fame
Do trust these virtues shall maintayn up thy throne,
And vice be kept down still, the wicked put to shame,
that good with good may joy, and naught with naught may moan
Which verses were painted upon the right side of the same pageant, and the
latin thereof on the left side in an other table, which were these.

Quae subnixa alte solio regina superbo est,
Effigiam sanc^t^e principis alma refert,.
Quam ciuilis amor fulcit, sapientia firmat,
Iustitia illustrat, Relligioque beat
V^na superstitio ^ crassae ignorantia frontis
Pressae sub pura relligione iacent.
Regis amor domat effraenos, arimosque rebels
Iustus adulantes, Doniuorosque ^erit.
Cum regit imperium sapiens, sine luce sedebunt
Stultitia atque ^uius numen manis honor.
Beside these verses there were placed in every void rome of the pageant both
in English and latin such sentences as aduannced the seat of governance
vpholden by virtue. The ground of this pageant was, that like as by virtues
(which do abundantly appear in her grace) the Queens majesty was
established in the seat of government: so she should sit fast in the same
so long, as she embraced virtue and held vice under foot. For if vice once
got up the head, it would put the seat of government in peril of ^alli^g.

The Queens majesty when she had heard the child and understood the pageant
at full, gave the city also thanks there, and most graciously promised her
good endeavor for the maintenance of the said virtues, and suppression of
vices, and so marched on till she came against the great conduite in cheap,
which was bewtified with pictures and sentences accordinglye against her graces
coming thither*

Against Soper la^es end was extended from the one side of the streate to
the other, a pageant which had three gates all open. Over the middlemoste whereof
were erected three several stages, whereon sat eight children, as hereafter
follows. On the uppermost one child, on the middle three, on the lowest.iiii.
each having the proper name of the blessing, that they did represent, written
in a Table and placed abouetheir heads. In the forefront of this pageant
before the children which did represent the blessings, was a convenient
standing cast out for a child to stand, which did expownd the said pageant
unto the Queen's majesty, as was done in the other tofore. Every of these
children were appointed and apparelled according unto the blessing which he did
represent. And on the forepart of the said pageant was written in fair
letters the name of the said pageant in this manner following.

The eight beatitudes expressed in the.v. chapter of the gospel of.S, Matthew,
applied to our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

Over the two side ports was placed a noyes of instruments. And all void
places in the pagea^t were furnished with pretty sayings, commending and
touching y^ meaning of the said pageant, which was the promises and blessings
of almighty god made to his people. Before yt the queen's highness came unto
this pageant, she required y^ matter somewhat to be opened unto her, yt her
grace might the better understand, what should afterward by the child be said
unto her. Which so was, yt the city had there erected the pageant with.vi^i.
children, representing theyght blessings touched in the.v. Chapter of S.
Matthew. Whereof, every one upon just consideracions was applied unto her
high^es, and that the people thereby put her grace in mind, yt as her good
doings before had given just occasion, why that these blessings might fall
upon her, yt so if her grace did continue in her goodness as she had entered, she
should hope for the fruit of these promises due unto them, y^ do exercise
themselves in the blessings, which her grace heard merueilous graciously, and
required that the chariot might be removed toward the pageaunt, that she
might perceive the chyldes words, which were these, the Queen's majesty
giving most attentive ear, and requiring that the peoples noise might be
stayde.

Thou have been.viii. times blessed, ^ queen of worthy fame
By me^enes of thy spirit, when care did thee besette
By mourning in thy grief, by mildnes in thy blame
By hunger and by thyrst, and justice could none get.
By mercy showed, not felt, by cleanes of thine heart
By seking peace always, by persecucion wrong.
Therefore trust thou in god, since he has helped thy smart
That as his promis is, so he will make thee strong.
When these words were spoken, all the people wished, that as the child had
spoken, so god would strengthen her grace against all her adversaries, whom ye
Queen's majesty did most gently thank for their so loving wish. These verses
were painted on the left side of the said pageant, and other in laten on the other
side, which were these.

Qui lugent hilares fient, qui mitia gestant
Pectora, multa soli iugera culta metent
Iustitiam esuriens sitiensue replebitur, ipsum.
Fas homini puro cord videre deum
Que^ alterius miseret, dominus miserebitur huius,
Pacificus quisquis, filius ille Dei est.
Propter iustitiam quisquis patietur habetque
Demissam mentem, caelica regna capit.
Huic hominum generi terram, mare, sidera vouit
Omnipotens, horum quisque beatus erit.
Besides these, every void place in ye pageant was furnished with sentences
touching the matter and ground of the said pageant. When all yt was to be said
in this pageant was ended, the Queen's majesty passed on forward in Chepe side.

At the standarde in Cheap which was dressed fair against the time, was
placed a noise of Trumpettes, with banners and other furniture. The Cross
likewise was also made fair and well trimmed. And near unto the same, upon
the porthe of Saint Peter's church door, stood the waits of the city, which
did give a pleasant noise with their instruments as the Queen's majesty did
pass by, which on every side cast her countenance, and wished well to all
her most loving people. Sone after that her grace passed the cross, she had
espied the pageant erected at the little conduit in cheap, and incontinent
required to know what it might signifye. And it was told her grace, that there
was placed Time. Tyme^quod she, and Time has brought me hither. And so forth
the hole matter was opened to her grace, as hereafter shall be declared in the
descripcion of the pageaunt. But in the opening, when her grace understood that
the Bible in English should be delivered unto her by Truth, which was
therein represented by a child: she thanked the city for that gift, and said
that she would oftentimes read over that book, commanding sir John Parrat,
one of the knights which held up her canapy* to go before and to receive the
book. But learning that it should be delivered unto her grace down by a
silken lace, she caused him to stay, and so passed forward till she came
against the Aldermen in the high end of Cheap tofore the little conduite,
where the companies of the city ended, which began at Fanchurche, and
stood along the streates, one by another enclosed with rayles, hanged with
clothes, and themselves well opparelled with many rich furs, and their
livery whodes upon their shoulders in comely and semely manner, having before
the^ sundry persons wellapparelled in silks and ^haines of gold, as wyflers
and garders of the said companies, beside a number of rich hanginges, as well
of Tapistrie, Arras, clothes of gold, silver velvet, damask, Satin, and
other silks plentifullye hanged all the way as the Queens highness passed from
the Tower through the city. Out at the windows and penthouses of every house,
did hang a number of rich and costlye banners and streamers, till her grace
came to the upper end of Cheap. And there by appointment, the right
worshipful master Ranulph Cholmeley Recorder of the city, presented to the
Queen's majesty a purse of crimeson satti^ richely wrought with gold, wherein
the city gave unto the Queen's majesty a thousand marks in gold, as master
Recorder did declare briefly unto the Queens majesty, whose words tended
to this end, that the Lord mayor his brethren, and comminaltie of the city,
to declare their gladness and good will toward the Queen's majesty, did
present her grace with that gold, desyering her grace to continue their good
and gracious Queen, and not to esteem the value of the gift, but the mind of
the geuers. The Queen's majesty with both her hands took the purse, and
answered to him again merueylous pithilie, and so pithilie, that the standers
by, as they embraced entierly her gracious answer, so they meruailed at y^
cowching thereof, which was in words truly reported these. I thank my lord
mayor, his brethren, and you all. And whereas your request is that I should
continue your good lady and queen, be ye ensured, that I will be as good unto
you, as ever queen was to her people. No will in me can lack, neither do I
trust shall there lack any power. And persuade your selves, that for the
safety and quietness of you all, I will not spare, if need be to spend my
blood, God thank you all. Which answer of so noble an hearted pryncesse, if
it moved a meruaylous showte and rejoicing, it is nothing to be meruayled at,
since both the heartines thereof was so wonderful, and the words so jointly
knytte. When her grace had thus answered the Recorder, she marched toward
the little conduit, where was erected a pageaunt with square proporcion,
standing directlye before the same conduite, with battlementes accordynglye.
And in the same pageaunt was advanced two hills or mountains of convenient
heyghte. The one of them being on the North side of the same pageaunt, was made
cragged, barreyn, and stonye, in the which was erected one tree, artificiallye
made, all withered and dea^^e, with branches accordinglye. And under the same
tree at the foot thereof, sat one in homely and rude apparel crokedlye, and
in mournyng manner, having over his headde in a table, written in Laten and
English, his name, which was Ruinosa Respublica, A decayed common weal. And
upon the same withered tree ware fixed certain Tables, wherein were written
proper sentences, expressing the causes of the decay of a commonweal. The
other hylle on the South side was made fair, fresh, grene, and beawtifull,
the ground thereof full of flowers and beawtie, and on the same was erected
also one tree very fresh and fair, under the which, stood vprighte one
fresh personage well apparaylled and appointed, whose name also was written
both in English and in Laten, which was, Respublica been instituta. A
florishyng commonweal. And upon the same tree also, were fi^ed certain Tables
containing sentences, which expressed the causes of a flourishing common weal.
In the middle between the said hills, was made artificiallye one hollow
place or cave, with door and lock enclosed, out of the which, a little
before the Queens hyghnes coming thither, issued one personage whose name
was Time, apparaylled as an old man with a Sithe in his hand, having wings
artificiallye made, leadinge a personage of lesser stature then himself,
which was fynely and well apparaylled, all cladde in white silk, and
directlye over her head was set her name and title in latin and English,
Temporis filia, the daughter of Time. Which two so appointed, went forward,
toward the South side of the pageant. And on her breast was written her propre
name, which was Veritas. Truth who held a book in her hand upon the which
was written, verbum veritatis, the word of truth. And out of the South side
of the pageaunt* was cast a standing for a child which should enterprete
the same pageant. Against whom, when the Queen's majesty came, he spoke unto her
grace these words.

This old man with the sithe, old father time they call,
And her his daughter Truth, which holds yonder book
Whom he out of his rock has brought forth to us all,
From whence this many years she durst not once out look.
The ruthful wight that sits under the barren tree,
Resembles to us the form, when commonweals decay
But when they be in state tryumphant, you may see
By him in fresh attire that sits under the baye.
Now si^ce y^ Time again his daughter truth has brought,
We trust O worthy queen, thou will this truth embrace
And since thou vnderstandste the good estate and naught
We trust wealth thou will plant, and barrennes displace.
But for to heal the sore, and cure that is not seen,
which thing ye book of truth does teach in writi^g plain:
She does present to thee the same, O worthy Queen,
For that, that words do fly, but writing does remayn.
When the child had thus ended his speech, he reached his book toward the
Queen's majesty, which a little before, Truth had let down unto him from the
hill, which by sir John Parrat was received, and delivered unto the Queen. But
she as soon as she had received the book, kissed it, and with both her hands
held up the same, and so laid it upon her breast, with great thanks to the city
therefore. And so went forward towar^s Paul's churchyard. The former matter
which was rehearsed unto the Queens majesty was written in two tables, on
either side the pageant eight verses, and in the midst, these in laten.

Ille, vides falcem laeua qui sustinet vncam,
Tempus is est, cui stat filia vera comes
Hanc pater exesa deductam rupe repo^it
In lucem, quam non viderat ante di^
Qui sedet a laeua cultu male tristis inepto
Quem duris crescens cautibus orbis obit
Nos monet effigy, qua sit respublica quand^
Corruit, at contra quando beata viget
Ille docet iuuenis forma spectandus amictu
Scitus, et aeterna laurea fronde virens.
The sentences written in latin and english upon both the trees, declaring the
causes of both estates, were these.

Causes of a ruinous common weal are these.
VVa^t of the fear of god Disobedience to rulers. Blindness of guides. Briberie
in maiestrats Rebellion in subjects. Civil disagrement. Flattring of princes.
Unmercifulness in rulers Unthankfulness in subjects
Causes of a flourishing common weal.
Fear of god. A wise prince. Learned rulers. Obedience to officers Obedient
subjects. Lovers of the common weal Virtue rewarded Vice chastened.
The matter of this pagea^t depends of them y^ went before. For as the first
declared her grace to come out of y^ house of unity, y^ second y^ she is
placed in y^ seat of government stayed with virtue to the suppressio^ of vice,
and therefore in the third the eight blessings of almighty god might well be
applied unto her: so this fourth now is, to put her grace in remembrance of the
state of the common weal, which Time with Truth his daughter does reuele,
which Truth also her grace has received, and therefore cannot but be merciful
and caref^l for y^ good government thereof. From thence the Queen's majesty
passed toward Paul's churchyard, and when she came over against Paul's scole,
a child appointed by the scolemaster thereof pronounced a certain oration in
latin, and certain verses which also were there written as follows.

Philosophus ille diuinus Plato inter multa preclare ac sapienter dicta, hoc
posteris proditu^ reliquit, Rempub^ illa^ faelicissima^fore, cui pri^ceps
sophiae studiosa, virtutibusque ornata co^tigerit* Quem si vere dixisse
censeamus (vt quide^ verissime) cur non terra Britannica plauderet? cur non
populus gaudium atque laetitiam agitaret? immo, cur no^ hunc diem albo (quod
aiunt) lapillo notaret? quo princeps talis nobis adest, qualem priores non
videru^t, qualemque posteritas haud facile cernere poterit, dotibus quu^ animi,
tum corporis vndique faelicissima. Castiquidem corporis dotes ita apertae sunt,
vt oratione non egeant. Animi vero tot tantaeque, vt ne verbis quidem exprimi
possint. Haec nempe Regibus summis orta, morum atque animi nobilitate genus
exuperat. Huius pectus Christi religionis amore flagrat. Haec gentem
Britannicam virtutibus illustrabit, clipeoque iustitiae teget. Haec literis
graecis etlati^is eximia, ingenioque prepolle^s est. Hac imperante pietas
vigebit, Anglia florebit, aurea secula redibunt. Vos igitur Angli tot commoda
accepturi Elizabetham Reginam nostram celeberrima^ ab ipso Christo huius regni
imperio destinatam, honor debito prosequimini. Huius imperiis ai^o
libentissimo subditiestote, vosque tali pri^cipe dignos prebete. Et quoniam
pueri non viribus sed precibus. officiu^ prestare possu^t, nos Alumni huius
scholae ab ipso Coleto olim Templi Paulini Decano, extructae teneras palmas ad
caelum tendentes Christum Opt: Maxi: precaturi sumus vt tuam cel^itudine^ annos
Nestoreos summo cu^ honor Anglis imperitare faciat, matremque pignoribus
charis beata^ reddat. Ame^.

Anglia nunc tandem plaudas, laetare, resulta,
Presto iam vita est, praesidiumque tibi
En tua spes venit tua gloria, lux, decus omne
Venit iam solidam quae tibi prestat opem.
Succurretque tuis rebus quae pessum obiere*
Perdita quae fuerant haec reparare volet
Omnia florebunt, redeunt nunc aurea secla.
In melius surgent quae cecidere bona.
Debes ergo illi totam te reddere fidam
Cuius in accessu commoda tot capies.
Salve igitur dicas, imo de pectore summo.
Elizabeth Regni non dubitanda salus,
Virgo venit, veniatque optes comitata deinceps.
Pignoribus charis, laeta parens veniat
Hoc deus omnipotens ex alto donet olympo.
Qui caelum and terram condidit atque regit.
Which the Queens majesty most attentiulye harkened unto. And when the child
had pro^ounced he did kiss the oration which he had there fair written in
paper, and de^iueredit unto the Queen's majesty, which most ge^tly received
the same. And when the Queen's majesty had heard all y^ was there offered to be
spoken, the^ her grace marched toward Ludgate, where she was received with a
noise of instruments, the forefront of y^ gate being finely trimmed up
against her majesty's coming. From thence by the way as she went down toward
fletebridge, one about her grace noted the cities charge, that there was no
cost spared. Her grace answered that she did well consider the same, and that
it should be remembered. In honorable answer, worthy a noble prince, which
may comfort all her subjects, considering there can be no point of gentleness,
or obedient love showed toward her grace, which she does not most renderlie
accept, and graciously way. In this manner, the people on either side
rejoicing, her grace went forward, toward the conduite in Fleetestrete,
where was the fifte and last pageaunt erected in form following. From the
conduite which was bewtified with painting, unto the Northside of the street,
was erected a stage embattelled with four towers and in the same a square
platte rising with degrees, and upon the^ uppermost degree was placed a
chair, or seat royal, and behind the same seat in curious and artificial
manner, was erected a tree of reasonable height and so far advanced above the
seat as it did well and semelye shadow the same, without endomaging the sight
of any part of the pageant, and the same tree was bewtified with leaves as
green as art could devise being of a convenient greatness and co^teining
thereupon the fruit of the date, and on the top of the same tree in a table
was set the name thereof which was A palm tee, and in the aforesaid seat or
chair was placed a semel^e and mete personage richly apparelled in parliament
robes, with a scepter in her hand, as a Queen crowned with an open crown,
whose name and title was in a table fixed over her head, in this sort. Debora
the judge and restorer of the house of Israel. Iudic. 4. and the other degrees
on either side were furnished with.vi. personages, two representing the
nobilite, two the clergy, and two the co^minaltye. And before these personages
was written in a table Debora with her estates consulting for the good
government of Israel. At the feet of these and the lowest part of the pageant
was ordained a convenient rome for a child to open the meaning of the pageant.
When the Queens majesty drew nere unto this pagea^t, and perceived, as in the
other, the child ready to speak, her grace required silence, and commanded
her chariot to be removed nigher, that she might plainly hear the child
speak, which said as hereafter follows.

Iaben of Canaan king had long by force of arms
Oppressed the Isralites, which for gods people went
But god mind^ng at last for to redress their harms,
The worthy Debora as judge among them sent.
In war she, through gods aid, did put her foes to flight,
And with the dint of tworde the band of bondage brast.
In peace she, through gods aid, did always maintain right
And judged Israel till forty years were past.
A worthy president, O worthy Queen, thou have,
A worthy woman judge, a woman sent for stay.
And that the like to us endure always thou may
Thy loving subjects will with true hearts and tongues pray.
Which verses were written upon the pageant, and the same in latin also.

Quando dei populum, Canaan rex pressit Iaben,
Mittitur a magno Debora magna deo:
Quae populum eriperet, sanctum seruaret Iudan,
Milite quae patrio frangeret hostis opes.
Haec domino mandante deo lectissima fecit
Faemina, et aduersos contudit ense viros.
Haec quater denos populum correxerat annos
Iudicio, bello strenua, pace grauis.
Sic, O sic populum belloque et pace guberna,
Debora sis Anglis Elizabetha tuis.
The void places of the pageant were filled with pretty sentences concerning
the same matter. This ground of this last pagea^t was, yt for so much as the next
pageant before had set before her graces eyes the flourishing and desolate
states of a common weal, she might by this be put in remembrance to co^sult
for the worthy government of her people, considering god oftimes sent women
nobly to rule among men, as Debora which governed Israel in peace the space
of.xl. years: and that it behooves both men and women so ruling to use advise
of good counsel. When y^ Queen's majesty had passed this pagea^t, she marched
toward Te^plebarre. But at S. Dunstones church where y^ children of thospitall
were appointed to stand with their governors, her grace perceiui^g a child
offered to make an oracion unto her, stayed her chariot, and did cast up her
eyes to heaven, as who should say, I here see this merciful work toward the
poor whom I must in the midst of my royalty needs remember, and so turned
her face toward the child, which in latin pronounced an oracion to this
effect, that after the Queens hyghnes had passed through the city and had
seen so sumptuous, rich, and notable sepectacles of the citiezens which
declared their most hearty receiving and joyous welcomming of her grace into
the same: this one spectacle yet rested and remained, which was the everlasting
spectacle of mercy unto the poor members of almighty God, furthered by that
famous and most noble prince king Henry the eight, her graces father, erected
by the city of London, and advanced by the most godly verteous and gracious
prince king Edward she.vi. her graces dear and loving brother doubting nothing
of the mercy of the Queens most gracious clemency by the which they may not
only be releued and helped, but also stayed and defended, and therefore
ince^^auntly they would pray and cry unto almighty God for the long life and
reign of her highness with most prosperous victory against her enemies.

The child after he had ended his oracion, kissed the paper wherein the same
was written, and reachedit to the Queen's majesty which received it graciouslye
both with words and countenance, declaring her gracious mind toward their
relief. From thence her grace came to Temple bar, which was dressed fynelye
with the two images of Gotmagot the Al^ione, and Corineus the Briton, two
gya^tes big in stature fur^ished accordingly, which held in their hands eue^
above y^ gate, a table, wherein was written in latin verses, theffect of all the
pageantes wh^^h the city before had erected, which verses were these.

Ecce sub aspectu iam contemplaberis vno.
O princeps populi sola columna tui.
Quicquid in immensa passim perspexeris vrbe
Quae cepere omnes vnus hic arcus habet:
Primus tesolio regni donauit (...),
Haeras quippe tui vera parentis ^ras.
Suppress^^ vitiis, domina virtute, Secundus
Firma^it sed^m r^gia virgo tuam.
Tertius ex omni posuit te part beatam
Si, qua caepisti pergere velle, velis
Quarto quid verum, respublica lapsa quid esse^
Quae florens staret te docuere tui
Quinto magna loco (...)
Caelitus in regni gaudia (...)
Perge ergo, regina, tuae spes (...) gentis,
Haec postrema vrbis sus cip^ vota tuae.
Viue diu, regnaque diu, virtutibus orna
Rem patriam, et populi spem tueare tui.
Sic o sic petitur caelum Sic itur in astra
Hoc virtutis opus, caetera mortis erunt.
Which versis were also written in English meter in a less table as hereafter
follows.

Behold here in one view, thou may see all that plain
O princess to this thy people the only stay:
What echewhere thou have seen in this wide town, again
This one arche whatsoever the rest conteynd, does say.
The first arche as true ^eyre unto thy father dear,
Did set thee in the th^one where thy graund father satte,
The second did confirm thy seat as princess here,
Uertues now bearing swaye, and vices (...) down flat.
The third, if that thou would go on as thou began,
Declared thee to be blessed on every side,
The fourth did open Truth, and also caught thee when
The commo^weale stood well, and when it did thence slide.
The fifth as Debora declared thee to be sent
From heaven, a long comfort to us thy subjects all,
Therefore go on O Queen, on whom our hope is bent,
And take with thee this wish of thy town as final.
Live long, and as long raygne, adourning thy country
With virtues, and maintain thy peoples hope of thee,
For thus, thus heaven is won, thus must y^ pearce y^ sky,
This is by virtue wrought, all other must needs dye.
On the South side was appointed by the city a noise of singing children, and
one child richely attyred as a Poet, which gave the queen's majesty her fare
well in the name of the hole city, by these words.

As at thine entrance first, O prince of high renown,
Thou wast presented with tongues and hearts for thy fair,
So now since thou must needs depart our of this town,
This city sends thee firm hope and earnest prayer.
For all men hope in thee, that all virtues shall reygne,
For all men hope that thou, none error wilt support,
For all men hope that thou will truth restore again,
And mend that is amiss, to all good men's comfort.
And for this hope they pray, thou may continue long,
Our Queen amongst us here, all vice for to supplant,
And for this hope they pray, y^ God may make the strong,
As by his grace puissant, so in his truth constant.
Farewell O worthy Queen, and as our hope is sure,
That into errors place, thou will now truth restore,
So trust we y^ thou will our sovereign Queen endure,
And loving Lady stand, from hencefurth evermore.
While these words were in saying, and certain wishes therein repeted for
maintenance of truth and rooting out of error, she now and then held up her
hands to heauenwarde and willed the people to say, Amen.

When the child had ended, she said, be ye well assured, I will stand your
good queen. At which saying her grace departed forth through temple bar
toward Westminster, with no less shoutyng and crying of the people, then she
entered the city with a noise of ordinance which the tower shot of at her
graces entrance first into tower streate.

The childs saying was also in latin verses written in a table which was
hanged up there.

O Regina potens, Cum prima^ vrbem ingredereris,
Dona tibi, linguas, fidaque corda dedit.
Discedenti etiam tibi nunc duo munera mittit,
Omina plena spei, votaque plena precum*
Quippe tuis spes est, in te quod prouida virtus
Rexerit, errori nec locus vllus erit
Quippe tuis spes est, quod tu verum omne reduces
Solatura bonas, dum mala tollis, opes
Hac (...) orant, longu^ vt Reg^^^ gubernes,
Et regni excindas, crimina cuncta tui.
Ha^ (...) freti orant, diuina vt gratia fortem,
Et verae fidei te velit esse basin.
Iam Regina vale, et sicut nos spes tenet vna,
Quod vero inducto (...) ditus error erit.
Sic (...) speramus quod eris Regina be^igna
Nobis per regni tempora longa tui
Thus the Queens highness passed through the city, which without any
forreyne person, of it self beawtifyes it self, and received her grace at
all places as has been before mentioned, with most tender obedience and love,
due to so gracious a queen and sovereign lady. And her grace likewise of her
side in all her graces passage showed her self generally an image of a
woorthye Lady and Governor, but privately these especial points were noted
in her grace, as signs of a most princelyke courage, whereby her loving
subjects may ground a sure hope forth rest of her gracious doings hereafter.

Certain notes of the queen's majesty's great mercy, clemency, and wisdom used
in this passage

About the nether end of Cornehyll toward Cheap, one of the knights about
her grace had espied an ancient citizen, which wept, and turned his head
back, and therewith said this gentleman, yonder is an Alderman (for so he
termed him) which wepeth and turns his face backward. How may it be
interpreted that he so does, for sorrow, or for gladness? The queen's majesty
heard him, and said, I warrant you it is for gladness. A gracious interpretation
of a noble courage, which would turn the doutefull to the best. And yet it was
well known that as her grace did confirm the same, the parties cheer was moved
for very pure gladness for the sight of her majesty's person, at ye beholding
whereof, he took such comfort, that with tears he expressed the same.

In Cheapeside her grace smiled, and being thereof demanded the cause,
answered, for that she had heard one say, Remember old king Henry ^heyght. A
natural child, which at the very remembrance of her fathers name took so
great a joy, yt all men may well think, that as she reioysed at his name whom
this realm does hold of so worthy memory: so in her doings she will
resemble the same.

When the cities charge without parcialitie and only the city was mentioned
unto her grace, she, said it should not be forgotten. Which saying might
move all Englishemen heartely^ to show due obedience and entiernes, to their
so good a Queen which will in no point forgeat any parcel of duty lovingly
showed unto her.

The answer which her grace made unto master Recorder of London, as the
hearers know it to be true, and with melting hearts heard the same: so may the
reader thereof conceive what kind of stomach and courage pronounced the same.

What more famous thing do we read in ancient histories of old time, then
that mighty princes have gentlye received presents offered them by base and
low personages. If that be to be wondered at (as it is passingly) let me se any
writer that in any one princes life is able to recounte so many presidentes of
this virtue, as her grace showed in yt one passage through the city. How many
nosegayes did her grace receive at poor women's hands? How ofttimes stayed she
her chariot, when she saw any simple body offer to speak to her grace? A
bra^che of Rosemary given to her grace with a supplication by a poor woman
about flete bridge, was seen in her chariot til her grace came to westminster,
not without the merueylous wondering of such as knew the presenter, and noted
the Queens most gracious receiving and keeping the same.

What hope the poor and nedy may look for at her graces hand, she as in all
her journey continuallye, so in her harkenyng to the poor children of Christ's
hospital with eyes cast up into heaven, did fullye declare, as that neither
the welthier estate could stand without consideracion had to the poverty,
neither the poverty be duelye considered, unless they were remembered, as
commended to us by gods own mouth.

As at her first entrance she as it were declared, her self prepared to pass
through a city that most entierly loved her, so she at her last departing, as
it were, bownde her self by promise to continue good Lady and governor unto
that city which by outward declaracion did open their love, to their so
loving and noble prince in such wise, as she her self wondered thereat.

But because princes be set in their seat by gods appoynting and therefore they
must first and chiefly tender the glory of him, from whom their glory issues,
it is to be noted in her grace, that for so much as god has so wonderfully
placed her in the seat of government over this realm, she in all doings does
show her self most myndfull of his goodness and mercy showed unto her, and
amongst all other, two pryncipall signs thereof were noted in this passage.
First in the Tower, where her grace before she entered her chariot, lifted up
her eyes to heaven and said.

O Lord, almighty and everlasting God, I give thee most hearty thanks that
thou have been so merciful unto me as to spare me to behold this joyful
day. And I acknowledge that thou have dealt as wonderfully and as mercifully
with me, as thou did with thy true and faithful servant Daniel thy prophet
whom thou deliueredst out of the den from the cruelty of the gredy and
rageing Lions: even so was I overwhelmed, and only by the delivered. To thee
therefore only be thanks, honor, and praise, forever. Amen.

The second was the receiving of the Bible at the little conduit in cheap. For
when her grace had learned that the Bible in English should there be offered,
she thanked the city therefore, promised the reading thereof most diligently,
and incontinent commanded, that it should be brought. At the receipt whereof,
how reverently did she with both her hands take it, kiss it, and lay it upon
her breast ^^ the great comfort of the lookers on. God will vndou^tedly
prese^^e so worthy a prince, which at ^^s honor ^^ (...) takes her beginning
(...) this saying is true, and written in the book of Truth, He that first
seeks the kingdom of God, shall have all other things cast unto him.

Now therefore all English hertes, and her natural people must needs praise
Gods mercy, which has sent them so worthy a prince, and pray for her graces
long continuance amongst us.

Imprinted at London in fletestrete within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard ^ottill, the.xxiii. day of January.


