THE COMPLAINT OF A SANCTIFIED SINNER ANSWERED: OR An Explanation of the
seventh Chapter of the Epistle of Saint PAVL to the ROMANS, delivered in diverse
SERMONS.

Preached by EDWARD ELTON, Bachelour in Divinity, and Preacher of GODS Word at
Saint MARY MAGDALENS Barmondsey near LONDON.

And now by him published, intending the common good and profit of GODS CHVRCH.

ISAIAH 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips to be peace, peace unto them that
are far off, and to them that are near, says the Lord, for I will heal them.

LONDON Printed by W. STANSBY, for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir WILLIAM GARDENER, Knight, Grace and peace be
multiplied.
TRVE it is (Right Worshipful) that there is not the like efficacy and force
in the same things, written and read in private, as there is in them being
uttered by lively voice in public, breathing instructions are most effectual
and moving, Gods own quickening Spirit putting life into them according to his
promise of more special blessing thereunto made; yet things written have this
advantage, they give men leave to consider and to pause upon them, and
oftentimes to reuiew them, and they reach further then things spoken: he that
speaks in the public Ministry of the Word, being thereunto called, and
dividing the Word of Truth aright, 1. Cor. 14.3.
speaks to edifying, to exhortation, and to the comfort of those that hear
him: but he that writes profitable and comfortable things, reaches out the
profit and comfort of them to many more. This being thought on and considered
by me, and thereunto adjoined a serious and due consideration of mine own
inability, to profit the Church of God (as I am bound and as I desire) by
speaking, and especially that part of Gods Church to which I stand in special
relation as an unworthy Ouer-seer, and to which my good will is to deal not
only the Gospel of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
but mine own soul for the good of it, has moved me now again to put pen to
paper, and to offer these my poor and simple labors to public view by
writing, that in that kind (if God be pleased to add a blessing thereunto
which J heartily desire and pray for) I may be more profitable, not, as though
I were able in that or in any other kind to profit Gods Church, as others of
far greater worth and sufficiency, stretching my self beyond my measure, 2.
Cor. 10. verse. 14.
but as willing and desirous to use the best means of doing all the good I
can, according to the measure of grace given unto me. In the examples of holy
and sanctified believers, especially such Worthies as the blessed Apostle PAVL
was, the Church of God has sensible evidence of the comfort of Gods holy
Truth; and no Truth of God, in my slender judgment, is of more special use
and consequence, and more needful to be discovered and known, then that which
may yield comfort to poor weary souls, right dear and precious unto God,
cumbred with their inward and hidden corruptions, and complaining of them, and
panting and groaning under the burden of their own sinful infirmities; this
Truth is fully and excellently exemplified in the Apostle himself in this
Chapter, which through Gods gracious and special assistance I have passed
through, in my ordinary course of preaching to my particular Congregation, all
praise and glory be to his holy Majesty for the same; My shallow brain is not
able to reach the depth of that comfort that herein is comprised; I have only
diued as deep into it as I was able, and thence fetched out what sweetness
and comfort it pleased God to communicate unto me. And now (Right Worshipful)
being willing to make these my poor labors more common, I am emboldened upon
your special and undeserved love and kindness toward me, euidenced by many
infallible testimonies, to shroud them under your favorable countenance and
protection, entreating that you will take in good part this poor token of my
thankfulness; not that it can answer that which I owe unto you, but showing
what I would if I were better able. Pardon (I pray you) my boldness, and let
it please you to afford me the continuance of your wonted love and kindness,
and accept of that which here out of an heart unfeignedly desiring to be
thankful, I offer and present unto you. And so, I commend you to God, and to
the Word of his grace. The Lord Almighty multiply the blessed fruits of his
holy Spirit upon you, and grant you and yours all true peace and prosperity
both temporal and eternal in the Lord Jesus, Amen.

Barmondsey near London, May VI. 1618. Your Worships in all Christian duties
to be commanded, EDWARD ELTON.

THE COMPLAINT OF A SANCTIFIED SINNER.
ROMANS 7. VERSE. 1. 1. Know ye not, Brethren, (For I speak to them that know
the Law:) that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives?


IN this seventh Chapter the Apostle bends his force against an aspersion and
foul imputation, The general purpose and drift of the Apostle in this Chapter.
that some either wicked, or weak, either did, or might cast upon him (namely)
this; That he should vilify and abase the Law of GOD, too much and more then
was meet.

In that he said Chap. 5.20. that the Law did increase sin: That the Law
entering, sin abounded, upon occasion of that speech of the Apostle, some
happily thought, and it may be some did not stick to utter it, that the Apostle
did wrong the Law, and did too much abase it: and therefore in this Chapter he
cleeres himself, from doing any wrong at all to the Law, and shows how his
speech may be understood, and how it may receive a right and good construction,
and not be in any sort prejudicial to the Law. The general matter of this
Chapter.
And in this Chapter, for the general argument and matter of it: the Apostle
shows how true Believers are freed and delivered from the Law, and upon
occasion of that, he meets with some cauils and calumnies that might be brought
against the Law: commending it, and showing the true use of it, and withal
sets forth in his own example, the combat and fight that is between the Flesh
and the Spirit, in such as are truly regenerate. In these things stands the
sum and substance of this seventh Chapter.

Now the parts of it are these three. The parts of this Chapter.


The first,

The second, verse. 7. to the 14.

The third and last, verse. 14. to the end of the Chapter.

Now then to come to the first part of the Chapter: The first part of it
showing how true Believers are freed from the Law; we must know that it has
respect to that which the Apostle had said verse. 14. of the former Chapter,
That true Believers are not under the Law, but under Grace. For from that Verse
to the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle has been busied in refuting a
certain Objection that some might bring against that Proposition of his, and
having removed that Objection, The sum of the first part.
he returns to that he there propounded, and does here prove that true
Believers are freed from the Law: showing how they are freed from it.

His argument to that purpose is, from the state and condition of true
Believers, namely, this:

That true Believers are dead to the Law, and thus the Apostle reasons; Dead
men are not held under the Law, they are freed and they are delivered from it.
But such are you, and such are we, as many as truly believe in Christ are
dead to the Law: and therefore we are freed and delivered from it.

The first Proposition of this Argument is in the first Verse, not in express
terms, but easy to be gathered from thence.

The second Proposition is in Verse 4. and these two Propositions being
conceived, the Conclusion must needs follow upon them.

Now both the first and second Proposition of this Argument, The amplification
of it by a similitude, wherein are three proportions.
are further set forth by a similitude taken from the Law of Matrimony, wherein
there be three proportions, as,

First,

Secondly, as her husband being dead,

And the third,

Then follows the reddition and correspondent parts answerable to these
three, Verse 4. that so true Believers are, first, dead to the Law; and,
secondly, that they are married to Christ; and, thirdly, that they may bring
forth fruit to him.

And that third correspondency is further amplified in the 5. and 6. Verses, by
a comparison a paribus. That as when true Believers were under the Law, and as
it were married to the Law, they brought forth fruit to death: So now, being
freed from the Law, and married to Christ, they should bring forth fruit to God.

And so we briefly see the general scope of the Apostle in the first six
Verses of this Chapter.

Come we to the handling of them in order.

VERSE. 1. Know ye not, Brethren, (for I speak to them that know the Law) that
the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives?


IN this first Verse, The general matter of the first Verse.
as you see, the Apostle affirms thus much: That a man is under the Law, and
the Law has power and dominion over a man, so long as he lives, and no longer:
thereby implying, that when a man is dead, he is freed from the Law, and so the
general Proposition is thereby employed, That dead men are freed from the Law.

Now touching the truth of this, that the Law has dominion over a man so long
as he lives, the Apostle appeals to the Romans themselves, and to their own
knowledge: affirming that they knew it to be a truth, delivering his mind to
them by way of interrogation, which is more emphaticall: and affirming the
thing more strongly, and using a kind and loving term, a compellation of love
and good affection toward them, and implying the like good affection from them
to him again (Brethren.)

Know ye not, Brethren? ANd then before he deliver the thing it self, he
inserts a proof of it: that the thing he affirms was well known to them,
namely this, that they were not ignorant of the Law, but had knowledge of it,
and were well acquainted with it: For, says he, I speak to them that know the
Law, that the Law has dominion over a man so long as he lives.

So then, The particulars of this Verse.
in this Verse we have these particulars laid before us.

First, the thing the Apostle affirms, namely this, that while a man lives,
the Law has dominion over him.

Secondly, this is not only affirmed as a truth, but as a known truth, even a
truth known to them to whom he writ, whom he styles by the name (Brethren,)
Know ye not, Brethren?

And thirdly, we have the proof of that, that the thing affirmed was known to
them, because they were well acquainted with the Law, in these words: (For I
speak to them that know the Law.) Interpretation


Let us now a little examine the words of this Verse, touching the sense and
meaning of them; Know ye not, Brethren? This interrogation or question is as
much as an earnest affirmation, as if the Apostle had said, Certaynely you know
it, I make no question of it, but you do know it, and it is a thing well
known to you. Brethren, first, beloved in the Lord, whom I affect in the Lord,
and respect, as those that are conjoined with me, by one band of one Truth, one
Faith, one hope of salvation, and by the band of the same Spirit of Jesus
Christ, for I speak to them that know the Law, that is, I speak to them that
are well acquainted with the Law.

No doubt, the Apostle meant chiefly the Christian Jews that were among the
Romans, the Jews converted to the faith of Christ. And by the Law we are to
understand the Moral Law of God, as appears plainly by that instance the
Apostle gives afterward, Verse 7. Thou shall not lust. That the Law has
dominion, etc. for the right understanding of these words we must know, that
the moral Law of God in the force and strength of it, and as it is in it self
considered, is an hard Lord or Master, it requires exact, and perfect, and
perpetual obedience to it, and it binds over to the curse for the least breach
of it, and through the corruption of nature, it stirs up to sin, as the
Apostle shows afterward in this Chapter.

When therefore the Apostle says, The Law has dominion over a man; his
meaning is, that the Law has power over a man, as an hard Lord or Master, to
require of him exact, perfect, and perpetual obedience to it, and to accuse,
and to condemn him, and to bind him over to the curse for the least breach of
it: and through the corruption of his own nature to stir him up to sin (as
long as he lives.) The word (lives) is not here to be taken at large, as if
the meaning were, as long as a man lives in this world, but with relation to
the Law, as it is said Verse 4. Dead to the Law, so here (as I take it) the
Apostle means, lives to the Law (that is) so long as a man is a living man to
the Law, so long as a man lives under the Law, and is not freed from it by
Christ. Thus then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words
of this Verse, as if he had said,

My beloved in the Lord, whom I affect in the Lord, and respect as those that
profess the same Truth, the same Faith, and hope of Salvation with me, and are
knit to me by the bond of the same Spirit of Christ: you certaynely know this
to be a truth that I affirm, it is a thing well known to you; for I am sure,
I speak to such as are well acquainted with the Law, even with the moral Law
of God: that the moral Law of God has power over a man to require of him
exact, perfect, and perpetual obedience, and to accuse, and to condemn him,
and to bind him over to the curse for the least breach of it: and through the
corruption of his own heart, to stir him up to sin so long as he is a living
man to the Law, and lives under the Law, and is not freed from the power of it
by Christ.

Come we now to such things as are hence offered for our instruction.

First, observe we that the Apostle delivering this Position,

That the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives, he does not barely
affirm it, but he delivers it as a known truth, as a truth certainly known
to them, to whom he writ. And he says to them, Know ye not? which is as
much as if he had said, Certainly you do know it to be a truth, it is a thing
well known to you, that the Law has dominion over a man so long as he lives.

Now, the Apostle setting down this as a thing known to them, to whom he writ,
they being such as had lived under the Law in former times, he gives us to
understand thus much:

That we are to be well acquainted with the Doctrine we live under, Men are to
be familiarly acquainted with that doctrine of the Word of God, that is taught
amongst them.
that doctrine of the Word of God that is taught amongst us, and delivered to
us, must not be strange to us, but it ought to be familiar and well known to
us, and we are to be well acquainted with it.

As the Apostle said here to them, who not long before lived under the Law, You
know the extent, the reach and power of the Law, that the Law has dominion
over a man so long as he lives; so it must be with us now living under the
Gospel: We must be so well acquainted with the doctrine of the Gospel, even
with the extent and reach of the Gospel, and with all points of saving
knowledge, expressed and made known in the doctrine of the Gospel, as that
the Ministers of the Gospel in teaching and preaching, may be able to say to
us and that truly, You know this, or you know that point of saving knowledge,
and this or that point of saving knowledge is a thing well known to you.

And for this, we have not only evidence and ground in this Text, but in other
places of Scripture. 1. Cor. 10.15. says the Apostle, I speak as to them
which have understanding, judge ye what I say: as if he had said, That which I
deliver to you concerning the Sacrament, (for of that he speaks in the next
Verse) I speak it, as to those that are well acquainted with the doctrine of
the Sacrament, even with that high and heavenly mystery of the Gospel; and I
refer my self even to your own judgment, I doubt not, but you are able to
judge and discern of the truth I deliver to you; you are well acquainted with
it. And indeed this is the thing that was promised and foretold, Ierem. 31.34.
that in the time of the new Testament, men should not teach one another,
saying, Know the Lord, but there should be such a plentiful measure of
knowledge in them, that should live under the Gospel, as that all should know
it, every one should be acquainted with the doctrine of the Gospel. And to
this purpose are those exhortations, 1. Cor. 14.20.
That we should not be children in understanding; Heb. 13.9.
That we should not be carried about with diverse strange doctrines. And to
this end the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.8. That Christ ascending up on high, led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. Verse. 11. some to be Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: then Verse.
14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, that we should be of a riper
age in the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel: that we should be well
acquainted with the doctrine of the Gospel, and with the mysteries of
Salvation.

And therefore certainly this is a duty incumbent, Reproof of such as are
now ignorant of the principles and grounds of the Gospel.
and lying on every one of us, now in the time of the Gospel, the doctrine of
the Gospel taught amongst us must not be strange to us, but it ought to be
familiar and well known to us, we are to be well acquainted with it: but alas,
I must needs here break out into a complaint, it is far otherwise with too
many amongst us: How many have we that are ignorant of the very first
principles and grounds of the Gospel! they know not God as he has revealed
himself in the face of Jesus Christ.

Some are so grossly ignorant, as they know not what Christ is, they are not
able distinctly to speak of the natures of Christ, of his Office, and of his
work of Mediation, these are strange things to some, as the Prophet Hosea
says, Hesea 8.12.

They know not how they may be made partakers of the benefits of Christ; what
Faith is, what Repentance is, what belongs to Mortification and to
Sanctification, nor how they may be saved by Christ: which indeed is gross and
palpable ignorance, and a fault that cannot be sufficiently taxed now in these
days and times, wherein the Gospel shines most clearly, and especially where
there has been, and now be means of instruction; that men should be so
grossly ignorant, it is a monstrous shame, yea it is a sin that one day
(without repentance) shall press men down to the bottomless pit of hell:
and shall much increase their condemnation and torment in hell.

For certainly, where the means of saving knowledge have been greater, and
not a profiting by them in a measure answerable to the greatness of them;
there judgment shall be greater, and condemnation deeper; and know it for a
truth, it is the Word of God uttered by the Apostle, Romans 2.16. Thou that now
live under the Gospel, shall one day come to be judged by the Gospel, and
if thou be found ignorant of things revealed in the Gospel, and that thou have
not profited by the doctrine of the Gospel, which has been preached in thy
nearing, even the Gospel and Doctrine of saving comfort that thou have heard,
shall be a bill of indictment against thee, and shall condemn thee: For thou
being ignorant of the doctrine of salvation, which thou ought to know, and
might have known if thou had been careful to learn it, how can thou
look to be saved? yea, consider yet further what the Apostle says, 2. Cor.
4.3. If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that be lost: if now in the
clear shining light of the Gospel thou see not that light, but be blind and
ignorant of the mysteries of salvation, thou have cause to fear that it brands
thee out for a reprobate, that thou art as it were marked out for a castaway,
and one that without speedy amendment shall be damned in hell: ignorance of the
doctrine of the Gospel in such as ought to know it, and might have known it,
is a fearful sin, it shows not only want of grace, and want of
sanctification, but that God even now sits in judgment upon such persons, and
has begun to make known to them their reprobation and final perdition, which
he will certainly execute upon them, unless they speedily repent.

Oh, let these things be duly considered, and let them stir up every one that
is ignorant, never to rest till he come to a measure of sound knowledge of the
doctrine of the Gospel, that alone will yield him comfort in life and in
death: yea when he comes to stand before the judgment Scate of Jesus Christ.

In the next place, the name and title of love, the kind and loving
compellation here used by the Apostle, is to be observed, the word (Brethren.)

The Apostle styles them, to whom he writ, Brethren: thereby signifying (as I
showed you) his own kind and loving affection toward them, that he did
tenderly and dearly affect them in the Lord, and respect them, as those that
were conjoined with him, by the bond of one Truth, one Faith, and one hope of
Salvation: Thereby also implying the like loving affection in them toward him
again: the point hence is this:

There ought to be a special and mutual love and good affection, A special
and mutual love and good affection is required between the Teachers of the
Word and Gods People.
between the Teachers of the Word and Gods People: the Teachers of the Word
are to love and affect Gods People, with a brotherlike affections, and to
tender their good, and to show it forth that they do tender it, by all good
means to the uttermost of their power: and the people of God are to take
notice of that love where it is, and to acknowledge it, and to answer it with
like love and good affection again. 2. Cor. 6.11. says the Apostle, O
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you: our heart is made large. And then
Verse. 13. he requires the like love of them again. Now (says he) for the
same recompense, even in liew of my love again, Be ye also enlarged. And the
Apostle in many places testifies his love to the Church and People of God: as,
Philip. 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 3. from Verse. 5. to the end of the Chapter; and he
requires like love again from Gods People to their Teachers as appears, Romans
15.30. where he entreats the help of their prayers as a testimony of their
love. And, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. says the Apostle, We beseech you, Brethren,
that ye know them, which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you; Verse. 12. That ye have them in singular love for their works
sake. Not to enlarge the point; the reason of this, that there ought to be a
special and mutual love between the Teachers of the Word and Gods People, is
this:

It is a love to Gods People, of the Word careful, and conscionable, and
faithful, in the discharge of their duty: and it is love again from Gods
People to their Teachers that makes them profit by them, when they know and
acknowledge the Word of their Teachers: whether they be the words of
instruction, of comfort, or reproof, or the like, not to be words of course,
but of conscience, and to proceed out of a love and tender care over them for
their good. Oh, it makes them to esteem highly of them, and to take profit by
them. And therefore for the use of this.

Hence it is that men profit not by the teaching of the Word, Whence it is that
men profit not by the teaching of the Word, as they ought and might.
as they ought, and might do; because indeed they acknowledge not the love of
their Teachers, and their tender care over them for their good: and especially
when they justly tax and reprove them for their sins, then they quarrel with
the affection of their Teacher, and then they think he speaks out of spleen
or malice, and then they think he loves them not, and so they hinder their
own profiting by his teaching.

We must therefore take notice of this duty, and as we see and discern a
love and good affection in our Teachers toward us, and that they have a tender
care over us for our good, and do show it forth in instructing, in comforting,
in admonishing, and in reproving us justly for our sins: so we are to take
notice of that love and tender care, and to answer it again with like love
and good affection; yea, even when they do justly reprove us for our sins,
and show us the judgments of God due unto us for the same.

And let such as will not now acknowledge the love and care of such as labor
with them, to do them good, by reproving them for their sins, and seek to
draw them out of their sins to amendment of life, know, that the Lord by his
ouer-ruling hand will so bring it to pass, that in their extremities they
shall be forced to acknowledge it, and then they shall justify the love of
such as did formerly reprove them, yea happily then they shall wish for their
prayers, as Pharaoh did for the prayers of Moses and Aaron, when the hand of
God was on him, Exodus 8.8. and as the stubborn Israelites did, the prayers of
Samuel, whom not long before they neglected, 1. Sam. 12.19. Yea, wicked
Jeroboam in case of extremity sends to the Prophet, whose doctrine he would
not follow, and no worse a messenger then his own Wife, 1. King. 14. And we
may observe it, that many (who at other times) regard not what the Ministers of
the Word say to them, in tender care over them for their good, yet in time of
extremity are forced by the powerful hand of God, to send and to seek to
them for comfort, and happily then, by the just judgment of God can find no
comfort from them, but are left in their misery.

Let us therefore now take notice of the love and tender care of our Teachers
over us for our good, and learn to answer it with like love and good
affection again: and let us have them in singular love for their works sake.

The next thing here to be observed, is the proof the Apostle brings, that
they to whom he writ, knew the thing affirmed by him to be a truth, in these
words, For I speak to them that know the Law.

The Apostle makes this a proof, that they knew the thing he affirmed to be
true, That the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives. has dominion
over a man as long as he lives. You know the doctrine of the Law, therefore
you cannot be ignorant of this particular touching the Law, but you must needs
know it that the Law has this particular use, to exercise dominion over a man
as long as he lives, the Apostle thus reasoning, gives us to understand thus
much.

That sound knowledge of the Law, Sound knowledge of any part of Gods Word, is
not only a knowledge of the truth and substance of it, but a knowledge also of
the particular use of it.
or of any other part of the Word of God, does necessarily infer a knowledge of
the use of the Law, or of that other part of the Word. Such as are thoroughly
informed in the doctrine of the Law, or of any other part of the Word of God,
and are well acquainted with it, they know the particular use of the Law, or of
that part of the Word, wherewith they are so acquainted, if men knew the will
of God revealed in his Word, as they ought to know it, either commanding duty,
promising mercy, or threatening judgment, they know not only the substance and
truth, but they know also the particular use of that commandment, of that
promise, and of that threatening denounced in the Word of God; there is not
only a knowledge of the truth and substance of it, but a knowledge also of the
particular use of it. And hence it is that the Apostle exhorts, Romans 12.2. that
the Romans should be changed by the renewing of their mind, that they might
prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect. His meaning
was that they should labor not only to be enlightened and to have knowledge of
the good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God, but that they should labor
also that they might acknowledge it, approve and embrace it, in the right and
holy use of it, and in the use of it pleasing to God. We find that the Apostle
thus prayed for the Colossians, Col. 1.9. that they might be fulfilled with
knowledge of the will of God, and then he subjoynes and adds further, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, as if he had said: I pray for you, not
only that you may be fulfilled with knowledge, and have a great measure of
knowledge of the will of God, and may know it in the truth and substance of it,
but that ye may also rightly and wisely know and understand it, that you may
wisely conceive the truth of the Word of God, and may wisely discern the right
and true use of it in every particular. These places, not to add any more, do
sufficiently clear and prove that if men know the will of God revealed in his
Word as they ought, in the commandments, in the threatenings, and in the
promises of it: they know the particular use of those commandments, of those
threatenings, and of those promises. And where there is sound knowledge of any
part of the Word of God, there is knowledge both of the truth and substance,
and of the particular use of it. And the reason of it is this:

We must needs hold this for a truth,

Let no man deceive himself, Admonition to such, as rest only in the
knowledge of the truth and substance of the Word of God.
fancy not to himself as many do, that thou know the doctrine of the Word
in any part of it, as thou ought to know it, because happily thou know the
truth, and substance, and matter of it, if thou rest in that knowledge thou
deceiuest thy self, thou know not the doctrine of the Word as thou ought
to know it. If thou would have sound knowledge of any commandment, of any
promise or comfort recorded in the Book of God, thou must seek to know it,
not only in the matter and substance of it, but in the particular use of it.
That is the thing thou art to labor for, if thou would soundly know it.

Happily some may say;

I answer, Eliphas said, Job 5.27. If thou have experience of it in thine own
particular; for example, thou not only know what the commandments of God
forbid, or what they require, but thou art thereby brought to a knowledge and
sight of thine own particular sins; and thou know then for thine own
particular direction, and thou not only know the curse of the Law due for
sin, but thou art thereby truly humbled through a sight of thine own
misery: and thou not only see and understand the goodness of God, but
thou do even taste and feel the sweetness of his mercy, Psalm. 34.8. as it
is made known in his promises.

If it be thus with thee, certainly then thou art come to the knowledge of the
particular use of the commandments, of the promises, and of the threatenings
found in the Book of God, and thou may be sure thou know the particular
use of them, and that is the thing thou art to labor for; and to stir thee
up and to help thee forward in this, consider with me only thus much.

Though a man know the things that are revealed in the Word of God exceeding
well, yea if he have such a measure of knowledge touching the truth and
substance of the commandments and promises found in the Word of God, as he is
able to speak of them to good purpose, even to inform others in the truth and
substance of them, yet if he know not the particular use of them, he is nothing
better for his knowledge. A man is nothing better for his knowledge of the
truth of the sweetest promises of the Gospel, if he know not the particular
use of them; nay, he is much worse for that knowledge, for that knowledge, if
he rest in it and go no further, shall much increase his condemnation. We
will easily yield that the knowledge of the death of Christ is a singular
knowledge, it is the ground of singular comfort; yet I dare be bold to say,
that even that knowledge, not seconded with a knowledge of the particular use
of his death for the remission of sins and sanctification, brings a singular
judgment, even a great increase of condemnation.

Oh then labor we not only to know the truth and substance of the
Commandments of God, and the truth and substance of his Promises, but labor
we also to know the partlcular use of them, and to that end, let us never rest
till we know them for our selves, and have experience of the truth of them in
our selves, and that we are able to say with DAVID, Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word
is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path: thy Word does not only
inlighten me, but it is a guide and direction to my particular steps.

If it be thus with thee, then thou know the particular use of the doctrine
of Gods Word, and that knowledge will be truly profitable and truly
comfortable to thee.

Now we are come to that the Apostle affirms in this Verse, namely this: (That
the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives) and the point hence
offered is this:

That so long as any man is as a living man to the Law of God, A man under the
moral Law of God, is under the power and dominion of the Law.
so long as a man is under the moral Law of God, so long is he under the
power and under the dominion of the Law, the Law has power over him, to
require of him exact, and perfect, and perpetual obedience, and to accuse, and
to condemn, and to bind him over to the curse of the Law for the least breach
of it, and through the corruption of his own nature to stir him up to sin.

Thus is every one that is under the Law, under the power of it, he is under
the rigor of the Law, and under the curse of it, and under the Law to be
stirred up by it to sin through his own corruption.

This we see clear from this Text, it is the very Proposition of the Apostle:
I will no further stand to prove it, but rather show who they be that are under
the Law, for it may be demanded who those be that are under the Law? We now
live in the time of the Gospel, and under the preaching of the Gospel, it may
seem that no man amongst us is under the Law, and therefore I say the question
may be,

Who are they that are under the Law?

To this I answer, Galat. 4. verse. 4, 5. The Apostle there says, Christ was
made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the Law, that
we might receive the adoption of the Sons: whence we may easily gather,
that those that are justified by Christ, and adopted to be the children of God,
they are redeemed, and they are set free by Christ from under the Law. And such
as are not justified by Christ, and adopted to be Gods children, they are still
under the Law. Ephesians. 2.3. The Apostle says, that all men are borne the
children of wrath, that is, are naturally under the malediction and curse of
the Law, and therefore so long as they are in their natural state and
condition, they are under the Law. 1. Tim. 1.9. the Apostle says, the Law is
not given to a righteous man (that is) one that is justified by Christ, and
just also by a measure of inherent holiness, though imperfect: but it is given
to the lawless and disobedient, to the ungodly, and to sinners, to the unholy
and to the profane. These testimonies of Scripture do sufficiently clear the
point, That as many as are not justified by Christ, as many as are not
acquitted and discharged from the rigor and curse of the Law by Christ, even
as many as are yet in their natural state and condition, they are under the
Law, they are under the rigor and curse of it.

For the use of this point, The fearful condition of such as are in their
natural state and condition discovered.
take notice of their fearful condition, so long as they are in that state,
they are under the Law, the Law has power over them to require of them exact
and personal obedience to it, and to accuse and condemn them for the least
breach of it, and they have no whither to fly for succor and for relief,
they cannot hide themselves under the wings of the Gospel, for they are under
the Law, and not under the Gospel, neither can they go to God with any hope
of relief from him, for (being under the Law) they come to God as to an angry
Judge, clothed with Justice and Judgment, and ready to power down his wrath,
and to execute his vengeance upon them. Few there be that see, or at least
consider this fearful condition in which they are, being in their natural
state and condition: Nay, blind and ignorant people think themselves in very
good case being of that state, and they like it well, and delight to be under
the Law, and they commonly thus plead for themselves, That they say their
prayers duly and truly, they mean well to Godward, and they deal truly with
all men, and therefore they hope God will have mercy on them, and hold them
excused for their offenses. Poor souls! they see not in what a miserable
state and condition they are, thou may do all these things and yet be in
thy natural condition, and so long as thou art in thy natural state and
condition, thou art under the Law, thou art under the rigor and curse of the
Law, and though thou live under the Doctrine of the Gospel, yet the promises
of the Gospel as yet belong not unto thee, thou have nothing to do with them
as yet, and if thou die and be taken out of this life in that state, thou must
look for nothing but judgment without mercy, for the Law is merciless, it
does neither promise nor reveal mercy: and therefore take notice of thy
fearful estate and condition, and hasten out of it. Come we now to the
second Verse.

VERSE. 2. For the Woman which is in subjection to a Man, is bound by the Law to
the Man while he lives: but if the Man be dead, she is delivered from the Law
of the Man.


IN this Verse and in the Verses following (as before I have showed) the
Apostle does amplify his Argument, by which he proves that true Believers are
freed from the Law, by a similitude taken from the Law of Marriage, the
several proportions of it I have laid forth heretofore, I will not now stand
to remember them. As this second Verse has respect to the Verse foregoing, it
contaynes an illustration of that Proposition: That the Law has dominion over
a man as long as he lives; from the example of a married woman; the Apostle
having said, that the Law has dominion over a man so long as he lives. In
this Verse he does illustrate and set that forth by the example of a woman that
is married to an husband, namely thus, as it is with a wife, as a wife is under
the power of the Law of Marriage, and by the Law of Marriage is bound to her
husband, during the life of her husband, even so long as her husband lives: so
it is with a man that is under the Law, he is as it were married to the moral
Law of God, he is under the power of the Law so long as he lives.

Now whereas this example may seem not answerable to the Apostles Proposition,
his Proposition being this, That a man is under the dominion of the Law so long
as he lives, and this example runs thus, That a wife is under the Law of
Marriage not so long as she lives, but so long as her husband lives, that
scruple is easily answered, if we consider the drift and purpose of the
Apostle, which is this, to show that death sets a man free from the Law of God,
(in what sense we shall see afterward) as death sets a wife free from the Law
of Marriage, that is the purpose of the Apostle, whether it be by the death of
the wife or by the death of the husband it skils not, that purpose is still
held and kept.

Now in this Verse considered by it self, we have more particularly two
things offered to our consideration.

First, that a wife is bound to her husband so long as he lives, and this the
Apostle propounds with a description by her condition, as she is a wife, that
she is a woman in subjection to a man: and withal he shows how she is
bound to her husband, as that she is under a Law, and bound to him by a Law.
The woman (says the Apostle) which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the
Law to the man while he lives.

The second thing is this, that a wife is freed from her husband when her
husband is dead. And that the Apostle sets down in the proof of it, thus:
That her husband being dead, she is set free from that Law that binds her to
her husband, and therefore then she is freed from him. But (says the Apostle)
if the man be dead, she is delivered from the Law of the Man: and so we see
the general matter and substance of this Verse.

For the Woman which is in subjection to a Man. THese words are a description
of a wife, Interpretation
and the meaning is, for the married woman the wife, as the Apostle speaks
clearly. 1. Cor. 7.39. The wife is bound to her husband (is bound by the Law
to the man) the word (Law) is not here used in a large sense, for the moral
Law of God (though indeed for a branch of it) but more strictly for the
special and particular Law of Marriage, even for that perpetual Law made by
God himself concerning Marriage, whereof we read, Genesis 2.24. by which the
husband and wife are bound one to another most nearly and most strictly, so as
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7.4. The wife has not the power of her own body,
but the husband: and the husband has not the power of his own body, but the
wife; and neither may the husband give his body to another woman, nor the wife
give her body to another man. That is the special Law of Marriage, by which
God has bound the husband and wife each to other most nearly and most
strictly. So then the Apostles meaning is this: The woman that is married to a
man, is bound by the special and perpetual Law of Marriage to that man alone
(while he lives) that is, during his natural life, so long as that man is
alive, but if the man be dead, these words are plain; if that man be dead,
that is, if his natural life be taken away and determined by any means
whatsoever, she is delivered, she is set free from the Law of Marriage, from
that particular Law of Marriage strictly binding her to that man alone, she is
then set free from that man, and the Law of Marriage does not any longer bind
her to him. Thus then we may briefly take up the sense of the words of this
Verse, as if the Apostle had said.

For the woman that is married to a man, Meaning.
the wife is bound by the special Law of Marriage, even by that perpetual Law
made by God himself concerning Marriage, to that man alone to whom she is
married, to her husband, and may not give her self to any other man during the
natural life of that man, but if that man's life be taken away and determined,
then she is set free from that particular Law of Marriage, and the Law of
Marriage does not any longer bind her to that man.

Here first, the main and principal thing intended by the Apostle in this
Verse, comes to be considered, and that is the illustration of his former
Proposition, by the example of a married woman: That as a married woman, a wife
is under the special Law of Marriage, and by that Law is bound to her husband
during the life of her husband: So is every one that is under the Law, under
the power of the Law. Hence then we see the condition of such as are under the
Law, further set forth to us, and the point hence is this:

That such as are under the Law, He that is under the Law, is as strictly bound
to the rigor and curse of the Law, as a married woman is bound to her husband,
during his life.
as a married woman is under the power of the special Law of Marriage: a man
that is under the Law, is as strictly bound to the Law, to the rigor and to
the curse of it, as a married woman is bound to her husband during the life of
her husband, and he can no more exempt himself from the power of the Law, nor
wind himself from under the power of it, then a wife can justly exempt her
self from the lawful power and authority of her husband, and as a wife is to
keep her self only to her husband, so is he that is under the Law to keep
himself only to the Law, and as yet he is to have no meddling with the
Gospel: and hence is the Law called by the Apostle, a yoke of bondage. Gal.
5.1. Be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, as if he had said, with
that which is as a yoke and binds you most strictly to it self. And, Coloss.
2.14. the Apostle calls it an handwriting, an Obligation, a Bond. And putting
out the handwriting writing of Ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us: in which comparison is notably set out, how strictly men that
are under the Law are bound to the rigor of the Law, and to the curse of it,
the Law is as a Bond, and they are as it were parties named within the Bond,
and they are most firmly and strongly bound to the condition of that Bond,
that is, to the rigor and curse of the Law.

The reason and ground of this truth,

This for the use of it, The miserable state and condition of all such as are
under the Law discovered.
even of all such as are yet in their natural state and condition, they (as I
have showed) are under the Law, they are in a most wretched and fearful
condition, they are as strictly bound to the rigor and to the curse of the
Law, as a wife is bound to her husband, during the life of her husband, and
they can no more exempt themselves from that power of the Law, nor wind
themselves from under the rigor and curse of the Law, then a wife can wind
her self from under the lawful power of her husband, during the life of her
husband, which is a fearful condition. Let all those consider it that are yet
in their natural state, and such are all they, whosoever they are, that
willingly and wittingly go on in any known sin, as in Pride, in Drunkenness,
in Malice, in Covetousness, in Swearing, in Sabbath-breaking, or the like.

It is a common thing among men at this time, wherein we keep the memory of
Christ his Nativity, to power out themselves to all manner of disorder, to
Riot, Excess, to Surfeiting and Drunkenness, to Carding and Dicing; well,
know it, whosoever thou art, that give thy self to such disorder, and though
thou have warning to the contrary, yet thou will go on in those wicked and
damnable courses, it is a plain evidence thou art a carnal and sensual man
or woman, and thou art yet in thy natural state and condition, and being so,
take notice of thy fearful condition, thou art under the Law, and thou art
bound to the rigor of the Law, and to the curse of it, even to the bitter
wrath of God in this life and for ever: some think it is too much strictness
to forbear those wicked and deuillish exercises, that men commonly give
themselves to at this time, and they think they may take more liberty to
themselves: they take liberty indeed, but it is such a liberty as the Lord
proclaimed, Ier. 34.17 a liberty binding them over to all the plagues and
judgments of God in this life, and without repentance to eternal woe and
misery in the life to come. Take notice of it whosoever thou art, that give
thy self over to the lust of thine own heart, and go on in thy known
sins wittingly and willingly, thou art in thy natural state and condition,
and being so, thou art under the Law, yea the Law is as thine husband, thou art
as strictly bound to the rigor of the Law, and to the curse of the Law, as a
wife is to her husband, and so thy case is fearful: yea certainly, so long
as thou art in that state, there is but a step between thee and hell, there is
no other difference between thee and those that now lie frying in the fire of
hell, but this, They are past recovery, and thou in the great patience and long
sufferance of God, art yet suffered for a time, how short or how long thou
know not, to see if thou will accept of grace and salvation offered: which
is a thing to be thought on with trembling.

In the next place the Apostle (as we see) here describes a Wife in these
terms,

That the condition of a Wife is subjection to her Husband, The condition of a
Wife, is subjection to her Husband.
a Wife ought to be a Woman subject to her Husband, that is the thing that
chiefly concerns her, and on this runs the whole Scripture in every place
where the duty of the Wife is expressed or urged, as Genesis 3.16. Thy desire
shall be subject to thy Husband, and he shall rule over thee. 1. Cor. 14.34.
Let your women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not permitted unto them
to speak: but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the
Law. Ephesians. 5.22. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto
the Lord. Colos. 3.18. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it
is fit in the Lord, and so in many other places. To handle this point at large,
would require much time. Only take we notice in general, that this subjection
the Wife is to yield to her Husband, stands chiefly in two things.

In Reverence both inward and outward, Wherein the subjection of the Wife to her
Husband stands.
and in Obedience. The Wife is to think reverently of her Husband, and to
carry in her heart a reverent awe and fear toward her Husband, and to show it
forth by reverent speeches and gestures, and she is to yield obedience unto him
in all things honest and lawful, and agreeable to the will of God. Thus did
Sara, 1. Pet. 3.6. Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord.

Now if Wives duly examine themselves touching these things, Reproof of such
Wives as yield not subjection to their Husbands.
many will be found exceeding defective, and far short of that duty they owe
to their Husbands, yea, many will be found such as Michal was, 2. Sam. 6.16.
even such as despise their Husbands in their hearts, yea, some show it forth in
their speeches and gestures by scoffing and mocking, by tushing and puffing at
their Husbands, yea, some stick not to break out into gross and bitter
terms against their Husbands, yea (which is most fearful) sometimes to curse
and to ban their Husbands, whom they ought to reverence and fear. And as for
obedience, Oh, how far short are many Wives, in that some stick not to utter
it in plain terms, that they will not do this or that the Husband inioynes
them, though it be a thing honest and lawful, if he would never so feign! for
Example, they will not leave off this or that apparel, happily too fine for the
matter, or too garish for the fashion; let the Husband say or do what he will
or can, they will wear it.

Thus and many other ways are Wives wanting in their subjection unto their
Husbands, and they are hardly persuaded to it, because they are so nearly knit
to their Husbands, even one flesh with them, and they are their yoke-fellowes,
and therefore they think it is unreasonable, and that too much is laid on them,
that they are enjoined to yield subjection to their Husbands.

Now then, Arguments to persuade Wives to yield subjection to their Husbands.
First, if they refuse to yield subjection unto their Husbands, they pervert
the order of Nature, it is all one, as if the body should refuse to be guided
by the Head.

Secondly, they violate the Ordinance of God, for God has ordained,

Thirdly,

Last of all, if she seem religious, by denying subjection to her Husband,
she makes the name and word of God to be ill spoken of, Tit. 2.5. and she
has but a show and shadow of Religion, she denies the power of it, she has
no truth nor soundness of Religion in her, her Religion will yield her no
comfort.

Oh then think on these things, thou wife, whosoever thou art, and be stirred
up to yield subjection to thy husband, and lay aside all reasonings of the
flesh, and labor thou to subdue all thy rebellious thoughts, that rise up in
thine heart to the contrary, and never rest till thou show thy self reverent
toward thine husband, and obedient to him in all things, honest, lawful, and
agreeable to the will of God.

The next thing offered to our consideration,

That the wife is bound to her husband, The husband and wife are bound each to
other, so long as they live in this world.
even so long as her husband lives; and it is true also of the husband, that he
is likewise bound to his wife, during the life of his wife, and so long as his
wife lives.

The Law of Marriage binds the husband and the wife each to other, so long as
they live together in this world: and with this agrees that of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 7.39. he there delivers the selfsame Proposition, that the wife is bound
by the Law as long as her husband lives: but if her husband be dead, she is
at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord. And Matthew. 19. we
read, that the Pharisees coming to Christ, tempting him and demanding, Verse.
3. whether it were lawful for a man to put away his wife for every fault,
Christ brings them back to the first institution of Marriage, and says to
them, Verse. 4. Have ye not read, that He which made them at the beginning,
made them Male and Female. Verse 5. and said, For this cause shall a man leave
Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.
Verse. 7. They reply and say to him, Why then did Moses command to give a Bill
of diuorcement, and to put her away? Christ answers again, Verse. 8. That
Moses, because of the harndesse of your heart, suffered you to put away your
wives, but (says he) from the beginning it was not so. Where we see that
Christ shows that God has so nearly conjoined Man and Wife together, as that
they are no more twain but one flesh: and though Moses, for the hardness of
their hearts, suffered them to give a Bill of diuorcement; yet it was not so
either by the first institution of Marriage, or in the practice of the first
Age of the World: it was not so with Adam, with Seth, with Noah, with Abraham,
with Isaac, and with Iaacob, they put not away their wives for every fault, but
having taken wives, they kept them till death, as God had ordained, even
according to the first institution of Marriage. And from the words of Christ we
may take the reason and ground of this truth:

That the husband and wife are bound each to other,

Parents are to be wise and wary in disposing their children in marriage.
Parents are to be wise in disposing their children in marriage, and unmarried
persons are to be wise in making their choice.
And unmarried persons are also to be wise and wary in their choice, for as
the saying is, Dici deliberandum, quod semel statuendum; great advice and
deliberation is to be used in doing that which is but once to be done, and men
are to be very careful and very deliberate in doing that which is to be done
once and no more during life. Now, thus stands the case in that weighty
business of marriage: a man that marries a wife, is bound to his wife, so long
as she lives: and a woman that gives her self in marriage to a man, is bound
to that man so long as he lives: though there prove to be difference and
disagreement in their several dispositions and natures, and one of them proves
a great and heavy cross to the other, yet being married, they are bound one to
the other, not for a day, a week, a year, or for a certain limited time, but
for term of life, even so long as they live together in this world, and
therefore doubtless great care, and great advice, and deliberation ought to be
used, both by Parents in disposing their children in marriage, and by persons
unmarried in making their choice.

Parents are to endeavor so to dispose their children in that state of life,
and unmarried persons are to be careful so to make their choice, as they may
look for the blessing of God on their match, and both the husband may find
comfort in his wife, and the wife may find comfort in her husband, and to that
end special care must be had, Wherein that wisdom stands.
that the parties come together in the fear of God; Parents are to provide as
much as possibly they may, how to match their Son or their Daughter with one
that fears God, and is truly religious, and parties that are to enter into
that state of life, are to use the like care, that their choice be in the Lord,
that they choose one to match withal in whom they discern piety and
soundness of Religion, and the true fear of God, and that they come together
by good means, as seeking to God to direct them in their coming together, and
with consent of Parents; for certainly it is the chief bond of love, when
both hearts are knit together in God: How can there be true agreeing love,
where there is no true faith? and it is a secret poison that destroys virtue,
and nothing destroys it more speedily, then when the religious are unequally
yoked with irreligious and profane. How soon was Solomon turned from the Lord
to worship Idols, by means of his idolatrous wives. We read that Ahab was a
most wicked man of himself, he sold himself to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, 1. King. 21.25. 1. King. 21.25.
but a wicked wife made him far worse: it is there said, Iezabel his wife
provoked him. Iehoram the King forsook the way of the Lord, and wrought all
wickedness in full measure: and why? because, faith the Text, the Daughter of
Ahab was his wife, 2. Chrn. 21.6. and many other examples we have of this
kind. Oh, then it behoues Parents to look to it aforehand, how they dispose
their children in marriage, and unmarried persons are to be wise and wary in
their choice, that the match may be in the fear of God, and with such as are
godly; it is the common fashion of the World to look after beauty, wealth,
and such like: and if Parents can match their children richly, and where there
is a great portion of outward things, though not a dram of piety and Religion,
they care not; nay, then they think they have done maruailous well, and they
have performed a good office: and so it comes to pass many times by the just
judgment of God, that they match their children to sorrow and shame; the Lord
does justly punish such, meeting together in marriage, with much trouble,
grief, and bitter vexation, yea many times with unfaithfulness of one toward
the other, and a wife so chosen does often make her husband ashamed, as Solomon
speaks, Pro. 12.4. and is as rottenness in his bones, that is, a torment and
corrosiue to his heart as grievous as the ach of the bones, or corruption of
the marrow, which is more painful and more incurable then any outward ulcer or
sore in the flesh.

Oh, then let Parents be wise, and let unmarried persons be wary in their
choice. Do thou wish well to thy Son or to thy Daughter, and would thou
not bring on thy Son or Daughter a remediless evil? look then to the
disposing of them in marriage: if once thou have given thy Daughter in
marriage, prove her husband never so great a cross to her, and let her woe and
her sorrow from him be never so great, there is no remedy, she is bound to
him, so long as they live together, and she must endure it: if thou dispose of
thy child in any calling or service, if after a time some great cross befall
thy child in that calling or service, thou may alter the calling or service:
yea, though thy child be bound apprentice, and the apprenticeship prove hard
and such as cannot be endured, yet thou may by one means or other get the
Indenture out of the hands of his Master; but if thou take a wife to thy Son,
or give thy Daughter to a husband, thy Son is bound to his wife so long as
she lives, or thy Daughter is bound to her husband so long as he lives,
thou can not then dissolve or unloose the knot, and therefore be wise in
disposing of thy child beforehand, labor to take a religious wife to thy
Son, and a woman truly fearing God, and let thy chief care likewise be to
give thy Daughter to a religious husband, and one truly fearing God, and then
thou may justly look for a blessing from God on the match, and the husband
no doubt shall find comfort in his wife, and the wife shall find comfort in
her husband all the time they live together in this world.

Now further, whereas the Apostle says in this Verse, that the wife is bound
to her husband while he lives, but if he be dead, she is delivered from the
Law of the man: The question may be, Whether nothing but death dissolve the
marriage knot.
whether only the death either of the husband, or the death of the wife, do
dissolve the Marriage knot, and nothing but death? that may be the question
occasioned from the words of the Apostle.

Now if the Papists answer to this question, The Popish answer.
they will tell you, that indeed nothing but death sets a wife free from her
husband, or a husband free from his wife: Though (say they) for fornication one
may depart from another company, the husband may depart from his wife, and the
wife may depart from her husband, yet nothing but death dissolues the bond
betwixt man and wife: these be their very words, and this is their note on this
place.

Now this is false and erroneous, that nothing but death dissolues the knot of
Marriage knit: for we are taught by the Word of God, that in two other cases,
besides death, the Marriage bond is dissolved: as, first, The true answer.
by Adultery, as appears, Matthew. 5.32. and Matthew. 19.9. And secondly, by
wilful and malicious desertion of the unbelieving husband, or the unbelieving
wife. 1. Cor. 7.15. If the unbelieving depart, let him depart, a brother or a
sister is not in subjection in such things, but God has called us in peace.

Oh but say they (they stick to the words of the Apostle) A wife is bound to
her husband while he lives,

I answer,

Again, the Apostle had here no occasion to speak of the dissolution of
Marriage by any other thing but by death, and therefore he says not, that
nothing dissolues the bond of Marriage but death, but that though the bond hold
during life, yet by death it is dissolved, that is the meaning of the Apostle
in this place, and so his words will not bear out that Popish conceit, against
the plain evidence of the Word of God, in other places: That nothing but death
dissolues the bond of Marriage.

This I note to this purpose, Note by what spirit the Papists are led.
to discover to us by what spirit the Papists our adversaries are led, even by
the spirit of error and contradiction, yea by the spirit of Antichrist and of
the Devil: they deny that any thing dissolues the bond of Marriage but death,
and yet we find that they allow of separation between man and wife in many
cases, which the Word of God does not allow.

VERSE. 3. So then, if while the man lives, she take another man, she shall
be called an Adulteress: but if the man be dead, she is free from the Law, so
that she is not an Adulteress, though she take another man.


THe general matter of this Verse is briefly this: That a wife is at liberty
when her husband is dead, and may then lawfully marry with another man: but
more particularly we have here offered to our consideration,

First, a consequent, which the Apostle inferres on that which he had before
delivered: for having said in the Verse before, that the wife is bound to her
husband, while her husband lives: here he inferres on it, That if therefore
the wife take another man, while her husband lives, she is an Adulteress,
yea, he says, she shall be so called.

And then he delivers by way of opposition to this, the Proposition chiefly
intended by him in this Verse, namely this: That the husband being dead, the
wise is at liberty, and may lawfully marry with another man, and that in so
doing she is no Adulteress. And this the Apostle sets down in the proof of
it: thus,

That the husband being dead, the wife is freed from the Law that binds her to
her husband, and therefore then she is freed from him, and though then she
take another man, she is no Adulteress. But (says the Apostle) if the man be
dead, she is free from the Law, so that she is not an Adulteress, though
she take another man. And so we see the general matter of this Verse. The
words need not long to be stood on touching the sense of them: I will briefly
clear them.

So then, or so therefore, If while the man lives, Interpretation
she take another man, that is, if while the husband is alive, she join her
self to another man, and marry another man, she shall be called an
Adulteress, the word (called) here signifies thus much, she shall be held an
Adulteress, and that by the voice and consent of all men, all men that know
her shall so repute her, so speak of her, and so call her: we have the same
word, Act. 11.26. Act. 11.26.
It is there said, that the Disciples were first called Christians in
Antiochia, that is, they were so named, not by the device of man, but by divine
Oracle, and that by a common consent. ( An Adulteress, a breaker of Wedlock, a
transgressor of the seventh Commandment.) (But if the man be dead she is free
from the Law) These words we had in the Verse before, and I showed this to be
the meaning of them: if the husbands natural life be taken away and
determined, she is free from the special and perpetual Law of Marriage,
binding her to her husband, so that she is no Adulteress though she take
another man, that is, so that then she is no Wedlock-breaker, nor transgressor
of the Commandment of God, though she join her self in marriage to another
man. So then the meaning of the words of this Verse is, as if the Apostle had
said,

So then, or so therefore, if while the husband is alive in this world, the
wife join her self to another, and marry another man, she is a
Wedlocke-breaker, and a transgressor of the Law of God, and that by the voice
and consent of all that know her, all that know her shall so speak of her, and
so call her, and may justly call her an Adulteress: but if her husbands
natural life be taken away, she is free from that special and perpetual Law
of Marriage, binding her to her husband, so that then she is no
Wedlock-breaker, nor Adulteress, though she join her self in marriage to
another man.

In that the Apostle having before said, that the wife is bound by the Law to
the man while he lives; does here infer on that:

That if therefore the wife take another man while her husband lives,

That Polygamie is utterly unlawful: Polygamie is utterly unlawful.
or for an husband to have more then one wife at one and the same time, it is a
sin, and it is a breach of the Commandment of God, and it is directly
against the ordinance of God in the first institution of Marriage, as it
appears, Genesis 2.24.
Genesis 2.24. God there says, that a man shall leave his Father and Mother, and
shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh, not to his wives, but
to his wife, and they shall be one flesh, which place Christ himself cites,
Matthew. 19.5.
and makes yet more plain to this purpose. Matthew. 19.5. where he says: For
this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and cleave unto his wife, and
they twain shall be one flesh: see, he brings it to one husband and one wife,
they twain shall be one flesh: and to this first institution of marriage had
the Prophet respect. Malac. 2.15. when he said: Malac. 2.15.
And did not he make one? yet had he abundance of Spirit: and wherefore one?
because he sought a godly seed. And we find a flat prohibition of Polygamie, of
having two wives or more at one time. Leuit. 18.18. Thou shall not take a wife
with her sister, during her life, to vex her, that is, as the phrase there
used signifies, two wives one to another. That is the meaning of that form of
speech, a wife to another, as might be showed if it were needful: but not to
stand on this.

It discouers what we are to think of the Polygamie of the Patriarchs and
godly Fathers, The Polygamie of the Patriarchs was a sin.
in the time of the old Testament, that indeed howsoever the Lord, having
promised to make Abraham's seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand
which is upon the Seashore, Genesis 22.17. Genesis 22.17.
was pleased to suffer variety of wives for a time, as a means to increase
that posterity, and so it might in some sort be excused, yet certainly it was
a fault and a failing in them, and cannot be justified and defended as a thing
simply lawful, and void of sin.

Now here happily some may move this question: Seeing it is unlawful for a woman
to have more then one husband at one time, and for an husband to have more then
one wife at one time:

Whether after lawful divorce for Adultery,

The answer of Divines, which I hold sound and good,

It will be said,

I answer, No: For after lawful divorce,

Of some then it may further be demanded; after manifest and known Adultery,
by which the bond of Marriage is broken, the party innocent may take the
party delinquent, the party that has sinned, upon Repentance, without a new
contract and a new Marriage.

I answer, 1. Sam. 25.44.
1. Sam. 25.44. We read that Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife,
to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim. And 2. 2. Sam. 3.14, 15.
Sam. 3.14, 15. it is said that David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth Saul's
son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I married for an hundred
foreskins of the Philistims, verse 15. And Ish. bosheth sent and took her from
her husband Phaltiel the son of Laish. And thus may the innocent party do
without a new contract, and a new Marriage.

The next thing obseruable in this Verse is this:

That Adultery is a foul and fearful sin, Adultery is a foul sin, the
light of nature condemns it, Gene. 20.9.
and is able to condemn, and to cry shame on, yea, the very Heathen by the
light of nature were able to take notice of it, Genesis 20.9. And we find that the
Heathen did sharply punish the sin of Adultery: but that the greatness of
this sin may yet further appear, consider that Adultery is not only a
breach of that Commandment of God, Thou shall not commit Adultery, but it is
a breach of the particular covenant of Marriage, which Solomon, Proverb. 2.17.
calls Gods covenant, Prou. 2.17.
which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her
God, even that solemn covenant that was made at the time of her contract and
Marriage, both before God, and before the Angels of God, and before the people
of God.

Again, Adultery defiles the body, in more special manner then other sins:
whence it is that men or women are counted dishonest, if not only, yet chiefly
for the sin of fornication and adultery. Add to these the fearful effects
and fruits of this sin, which serve also to set out the greatness of it: it
brings forth an ill name and a poor estate, and a diseased body; the Lord in
his just judgment sends an adulterer and an adulteress, filthy and loathsome
and rotten diseases, though they escape the censure of men, and being presented
to the Courts of men, they can shift it out by money, yet the Lord suffers them
not to escape his punishing hand, but many times sends on them visible
judgments in this life; yea, Adultery brings smart on the posterity, it is a
means to root out posterity. Job. 31.12. Job 31.12.
It is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all mine
increase. And which is yet worse, it brings a dullness and deadness of heart,
it makes a man or a woman incapable of any good, it is like the sin of
drunkenness which takes away the heart, they are joined together in this
effect, Hose. 4.11. Whoredom, Hosea. 4.11.
and Wine, and new Wine take away the heart. And yet further, Adultery makes
both body and soul liable to the curse of God, it shuts us out of the Kingdom
of heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9. yea, not only the body and soul of one, 1. Cor. 6.9.
but of two at once, even two at one time, by that sin are enwrapped within
the compass of Gods curse, and whoremongers are ranked with dogs and
sorcerers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie, that shall be without the holy City, Apoc. 22.15. Revel. 22.15.
and shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
Revel. 21.8.
which is the second death, Revel. 21.8.

Let us then take notice of the greatness of this sin, We are to take
notice of the greatness of the sin of Adultery.
yea, some esteem it a matter to laugh at, and make but a jest of it, and many
are come to that height of impudency, that they can even glory and boast of
it. Are there not some that stick not to say in plain terms, they will love
another man's wife, meaning indeed, they will lust after her? and are there not
some that shame not to go to the Tavern with other men's wives, and those
wives are not ashamed to be seen so to do, and there to be at unseasonable
times, and to spend whole nights in dancing and wantonness? Oh, these things
are too common in the world: such persons full little consider the greatness
of the sin of Adultery, they will say, Can you charge us with Adultery? I
take not on me so to do, yet certainly these are foul presumptions, and a
man may almost necessarily conclude, that the act of Adultery follows on
these things, and howsoever thou may carry the matter closely and bleare the
eyes of men, yet remember what has been said, that Adultery is a breach of
the covenant made in the sight of God; and know thou that though thou break
covenant with God, yet God will not break his word with thee. Heb. 13.4.
He has said, Heb. 13.4. that whoremongers and adulterers he will judge; and
he will certainly judge thee for that sin of thine, his hand will find thee
out, and thou shall find his punishing hand on thy name, on thy estate, and on
thy body in filthy and rotten diseases, and which is more fearful, thou shall
find his hand on thy Soul, giving thee up to dullness and deadness of heart.
That sin of thine, through the just judgment of God, shall make thee
incapable of any thing that is truly good: and thou shall go on in the way to
perdition, as thou shall hardly get out of that way: woeful experience shows
this to be true. Some are so besotted with that sin of Adultery, as they
go on in it against knowledge, against conscience, and against all good
motions to the contrary. And as the Prophet complained in his time, Ier. 7.9,
10, 19. Ier. 7.9, 10, 19.
They commit Adultery, and then come and stand before the Lord in the public
assembly, and say, We are delivered, and think all is well, though they be
guilty of that foul abomination; they are so benumbed with that filthy sin.

Oh then take we notice of the greatness and fearfulness of the sin of
Adultery, and learn to avoid it. Now the means that serve to that purpose,
are these especially.

First, get the fear of God into thine heart, Means to avoid the sin of
Adultery.
Marriage is a means to avoid the act of filthiness, yet will it not kill
lust where the fear of God is wanting, that has the promise. Eccles. 7.28.
Eccles. 7.28.
I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands. He that is good before God, shall be delivered from
her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

Secondly, Pro. 2.10.
That is a special means to keep out lust. Pro. 2.10. Solomon says, When
wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy soul, Then,
Verse. 16. it shall deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger
which flattereth with her lips.

Thirdly, earnestly seek to God by prayer,

And lastly,

And if thou carefully use these means, no doubt thou shall find thine heart
purged from filthy lusts, and thou shall be enabled to avoid that foul and
fearful sin of Adultery.

Now in that the Apostle says,

From the latter part of the Verse, we may gather the lawfulness of second
marriage, that it is lawful for a man (his wife being dead) to marry another.
And so of the wife; and to this purpose the Apostle speaks plainly, 1. Cor.
7.39. And he wills younger widows to marry, 1. Tim. 5.14.

VERSE. 4. So ye, my Brethren, are dead also to the Law by the body of Christ,
that ye should be unto another, even unto him that is raised up from the dead,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God.


IN this Verse the Apostle makes the assumption of that Argument of his, by
which he proves that true Believers are freed from the Law: his Mayor or first
Proposition which is employed in the words of the first Verse, being this, That
dead men are not under the Law, but are freed from it in the first words of
this Verse, he assumes on this manner:

That true Believers are dead to the Law, directing his speech in particular to
the believing Romans, and to other true believers that were amongst them, whom
he styles by the name of Brethren. So ye, my Brethren (says he) are dead
also to the Law by the body of Christ, etc. so stands this Verse in relation to
the Apostles Argument, as the assumption of it.

Now as this Verse has respect to the two Verses foregoing; it contaynes the
reddition or application of that comparison or similitude the Apostle takes
from the Law of Marriage, wherein we have three correspondent parts, three
parts answering to the parts of the similitude: So ye, my Brethren, are dead
also to the Law. To which the Apostle subioynes how true Believers are dead to
the Law, namely, by the body of Christ. Even unto him that is raised up from
the dead. Then follows the last correspondency, That as a wife, her husband
being dead, and she being married to another man, may bear children to that
other man, (which is not expressed, but employed in the former similitude) so
true Believers being freed from the Law, and married to another husband, may
bring forth fruit unto that husband, and that is also set down as the end of
their being married to another husband, in the rest of the words of this Verse;
That we should bring forth fruit unto God: and thus we see what part of the
Apostles Argument this Verse contaynes, and how it answers to the foregoing
similitude: and so we have the general matter of it. Come we to the several
parts of this Verse.

The first part of it, answers to the first part of the foregoing similitude,
and is (as ye have heard) in these words: So ye, my Brethren, are dead to the
Law by the body of Christ.

So ye my Brethren] or, Interpretation
wherefore my Brethren, or, now my Brethren; the Apostle uses these words
only as a passage to the application of his foregoing similitude; and where he
says, my Brethren, his meaning is (as if he had said) my beloved, whom I
respect as those that profess the same truth with me, and are knit to me by
the bond of love: Are dead also to the Law; this phrase and form of speech
dead to the Law, is afterward expounded, Verse. 6. where the Apostle says, We
are delivered from the Law, being dead unto it: whence we may gather, that to
be dead to the Law, is to be freed from it by death; to be set free from the
Law, as a wife is set free from the Law of Marriage, by the death of her
husband.

Now, this freedom from the Law (understanding by the Law, the moral Law) is
not to be conceived as a freedom from all obedience to the Law, as an
exemption from the Law, as it is the rule of good life. Adam before his fall
was not so freed from the Law, and the Angels and Saints in heaven are not now
freed from it in that respect, none yield more obedience to the Law then they;
but we are to conceive this freedom from the Law to be in three other
respects, namely, In respect of the rigor of the Law; Of the curse of the Law;
And of the power of it to stir up to sin through the corruption of nature.

By the body of Christ.] To omit the diverse acceptions of these words, The body
of Christ, some expounding them of the accomplishment of the figures of the
Law: some of the Incarnation of Christ, etc. we are therefore to understand the
Passion of Christ, the suffering of Christ in his humane nature, for so was
Christ offered up in sacrifice. Heb. 10.10.
Heb. 10.10. By the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made. 1. Pet.
2.24. The Apostle says, 1. Pet. 2.24.
He bare our sins in his body on the Tree. So then, true Believers are dead
to the Law by the body Christ, that is, by the death and passion of Christ, by
his suffering in his humane nature, Gal. 3.13.
when he in his humane nature was made a curse for them, to redeem them from
the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the
Apostle in these words: So ye, my Brethren, etc. As if he had said:

Now then, my beloved in the Lord, whom I respect as those that profess the
same truth with me, and are knit to me by the bond of love: As a wife is set
free from the Law of Marriage by the death of her husband, so it is with you,
you in like manner are set free by death from the rigor and curse of the Law,
and from the power it has to stir you up to sin, even by the death and
passion of Christ, by his suffering in his humane nature, when he was made a
curse for you, to redeem you from the curse of the Law.

Passing by that kind compellation here used by the Apostle (Brethren) having
stood on that Verse 1,

In the first place observe we how the Apostle does here apply his foregoing
similitude, namely thus:

That true Believers are as free from the Law, True believers are as free from
the rigor and curse of the Law, as a wife is free from ber husband, when he is
dead.
but from the rigor and curse of it, as a wife is free from her husband, when
her husband is dead: true Believers are no more under the rigor and curse of
the Law, then a wife is under the power of the special Law of Marriage, when
her husband is dead. Further proof of this we huue, Gal. 3.13. The Apostle
says there, That Christ has redeemed Gods chosen, as many as truly believe in
him, and set them free from the curse of the Law: Gal. 4.4, 5.
and, Gal. 4.4. he says, That Christ became subject to the Law, that he might
redeem them that were under the Law, that is, under the bondage and curse of
it, that he might set them free from that bondage and curse of the Law: and
therefore certainly, true Believers are as free from the rigor and curse of
the Law, as a wise is free from her husband, when her husband is dead, and they
are no more under the rigor and curse of the Law, then a wife is under the
power of her husband, when her husband is dead: and the reason of this is,

True Believers are freed from the justice of God,

This discovers to us the error of the Papists, A Popish error discovered
that cannot be, for then true believers, such as are in Christ, should not
only be freed from the Law, but also from the Gospel. Now that we find not in
any place of Scripture, that true believers are freed from the Gospel, and
therefore that is but a fancy of the Papists, that the Law and Gospel are all
one for substance. Secondly:

Is it so that true Believers are as free from the rigor and curse of the Law,
Comfort for all true believers.
as a wife is free from her husband, when her husband is dead: here is then a
ground of sweet comfort for all true believers, this may cheer up their hearts
in regard of their many weaknesses and imperfections, in doing of good duties,
and in avoiding of evil, they find that they fail in doing good things, and
come short of that they ought to do, and that they cast not off all evil
fully as they desire: let them herein comfort themselves, that they are freed
from the rigor of the Law, and therefore the Lord will not examine their
actions according to the strict rule of his Law, they carrying in their hearts
an holy purpose to please God in all things, and walking before him in truth
and sincerity, their weaknesses, their imperfections, and their failings,
besides their purpose, shall never be laid to their charge; that is an
excellent comfort. Men commonly please themselves much in this, that they so
carry themselves amongst men, that howsoever they fail, yet the Law of man can
take no hold of them, the Law of man cannot touch them: much more then may true
believers comfort themselves in this, that though they fail in many things,
yet the Law of God, in regard of the rigor of it, is as a dead letter to them,
it lies not against them, they are as free from the rigor of it, as a wife is
free from her husband, when her husband is dead.

Again, this being so, that true believers are as free from the curse of the
Law, as a wife is from her husband when he is dead; it may teach as many as
truly believe in Christ, not to fear any evil overmuch, as reuilings and
cursings of ill tongues, witchcraft, plague, pestilence, famine, sword, or
death it self: for why? the curse which makes all these things hurtful, is
removed from them that are in Christ: and therefore let not them fear these
things before they come, nor be discouraged when they fall on them: What though
thou be taken away by a common calamity, as by dearth, by pestilence, by
sword, or the like? yet remember this, if thou be in Christ, the venom and
sting of those things is removed from thee, and they fall not on thee as a
curse, and let that be thy comfort and cheer up thine heart.

Now further, By the body of Christ, that true believers are dead to the Law)
(by the body of Christ) that is, by the death and passion of Christ, we are
given to understand thus much,

That Christ his death, his suffering, his blood on the Cross, Only by the
death of Christ is the rigor and curse of the Law removed from true believers
Coloss. 2.14.
is the only means and meritorious cause of the removing of the rigor and
curse of the Law from Gods chosen: only by the death of Christ is the rigor
and curse of the Law removed and taken away from true believers. The Apostle
says, Coloss. 2.14. That Christ putting out the handwriting of Ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the
way, and fastened it upon the Cross. And indeed Christ on the Cross, stood in
the stead of Gods chosen, Heb. 7.22.
He was their surety, Heb. 7.22. And when he stood on the Cross, then only
did he under go the curse for them. Gal. 3.13.
Gal. 3.13. The Apostle says, Christ redeemed them from the curse, when he
was made a curse for them: and when was that? Surely, when he hung on the
Cross: for so it follows in the proof of the Apostle in the words following,
Deuteronomy. 21.23.
For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on tree, which is a plain
proof of this. That only by the death of Christ is the rigor and curse of the
Law removed from true believers. We shall never find in any place of Scripture,
that remission of sins and remouall of the curse of the Law, is ascribed to
Christ his active obedience, but ever to his death and passion.

Oh then the intolerable pride of the Papists! The pride of Papists discovered.
yea for things done by them, for which they have no warrant in the Word of
God; as, they dare challenge pardon of sins for their Pilgrimages, wilful
Poverty, single Life, and such like: and herein appears their monstrous
pride. Jesus Christ the righteous did not purchase remission of sins, and
remouall of the curse of the Law, by his perfect fulfilling of the Law, and yet
the proud Papist dare challenge remission of sins and temouall of the curse
of the Law, for his will worship and devised obedience, which is most hateful
and most abominable pride and presumption. To leave them: for the use of the
point to our selves.

It being so, that only by the death of Christ, Whither we are to go to find
deliverance from the venom and sting of any trouble.
Hence we learn whither to go to find deliverance, from the venom and sting
of any trouble or distress, that befalls us, namely, to the Cross of JESUS
CHRIST, when thou art sick, or in any trouble whatsoever; if thou desire to
have the bitterness and curse of that trouble removed, then seek thou to the
Cross of Christ.

How is this to be done, may some say?

I answer, Pharaoh, so shall it be with thee, one trouble shall follow after
another, till thou be destroyed. Learn then in the time of thy distress to
go to the Cross of Jesus Christ for ease and comfort, and never rest till
thou find ease and comfort derived to thee from thence, and thou shall be sure,
whether it be continuance of thy distress, Such as would be freed from the
curse of the Law, must look that they have part in the death of Christ.


There is yet some further use to be made of this doctrine, that only by the
death of Christ, the curse of the Law is removed and taken away from true
Believers. This moreover we must know, that if we look for freedom from the
curse of the Law, it must be by having part in the death of Christ: if we
would be freed from the curse of the Law, we must look that we have our part
in the death of Christ; and so far forth as we have part in the death of
Christ, so far are we freed from the curse of the Law.

Now we come to have part in the death of Christ, by faith in his death; by
faith in Christ crucified, we come to be partakers of the merit of his death,
for the taking away of the guilt of sins, and the punishment due to us for
our sins: and that we deceive not our selves in this point; for herein every
one will be ready to flatter and soothe up himself, and to think he has
faith in the blood of Christ, for the washing away of his sins, and thereupon
presume to come to the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, wherein faith
is specially directed to the death and passion of Christ; that we therefore
deceive not our selves: Let us know this for a truth, that we can never have
true faith in the blood of Christ, unless we be further enlightened, then by
the light of nature, or then nature can afford, and be made to see the sins
of our hearts and lives, yea to see our particular sins: the vilest wretch
that lives, can in general say he is a sinner; but our sight of sin must be
more special, we must see our particular sins, and we must see them
together with the curse and judgments of God attending on them, that we may be
humbled for them, and find our selves stand in need of the blood of Christ, for
the pardon of them; Many men's hearts and consciences can tell them of their
particular sins, and yet they are not humbled for them; and what is the
cause? Surely, because they see them not together with the curse of God due to
them; they bless themselves in their hearts and say, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
they shall have peace, as it is Deuteronomy. 29.19. Men naturally say in their
hearts, The curses of the Law are foolishness; and deride the judgments of
God threatened against them for their sins.

Oh then, labor thou to see thy particular sins, and to see them together
with the curse of God due to them, that so thou may be humbled, and find thy
self stand in need of the blood of Christ; this is to make way for faith, and
to make thine heart ready and fit for the work of faith. And if thine heart
be thus prepared and humbled, no doubt, the Lord will then work faith in thee,
to apprehend the merit of Christ his death for the pardon of thy sins, and
thou shall be freed from the curse of the Law, and then thou coming to the
Sacrament, shall find thy faith strengthened and confirmed in the blood of
Christ: And the Sacrament shall be to thee a seal of that righteousness that
is by faith in Jesus Christ.

One thing yet remaynes to be gathered from these words of the Apostle: In that
he says, True believers are dead to the Law, that is, freed not only from the
rigor and curse of the Law, but also from the power of the Law, even that
power it has to stir them up to sin through their own corruption, and that
by the body, that is, by the death of Christ. Hence we may further gather thus
much:

That it is only part in the death of Christ that sets us free from the power
of the Law, Only part in Christ his death sets men free from the power the Law
has to stir them up to sin, by reason of their own corruption. Heb. 2.14.
even from the power it has to stir us up to sin through our own
corruption, the Law has power to stir up to sin through our corruption, as
afterward we shall see, and we are freed from that power, by having part in
the death of Christ; yea, by having part in the death of Christ, we are
enabled to withstand and to repel the temptations of Satan, and to overcome
them. For why? Christ by his death has destroyed the Devil, Heb. 2.14. And
has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and stripped them of their power,
Coloss. 2.15. And therefore from the death of Christ, we shall have power
against the allurements and prouocations of Satan stirring us up to sin, and
indeed, as many as truly believe in Christ, are made partakers, not only of the
merit of Christ his death, but also of the power of it, and by that power, the
strength of their own corruption is weakened and abated, and they are thereby
enabled to withstand the force of it; and so we may resolve on this as a
certain truth, that having part in the death of Christ, is that, that sets us
free from that power the Law has to stir us up to sin through our own
corruption, yea, it makes us able to withstand the temptations of Satan, and to
overcome them.

Hence then learn we how we may get strength against the corruption of our
own hearts, How we may get strength against our own corruption, and against
Satan's temptations.
and may be enabled to overcome the temptations of Satan alluring and stirring
us up to sin; it must be by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ. Christ by his
death has freed as many as truly believe in him, from the power of the Law,
stirring them up to sin through their own corruption, and from his death must
we fetch power against the strength of our own corruption, and Christ by his
death has overcome Satan, and stripped him of his power, and thence must we
derive power to withstand his temptations, and to overcome them; and if we
would be armed to get victory over the Devil, it must be by faith in the
death of Christ. And hence it is (no doubt) that most men are easily foiled,
and do soon yield to the least allurements and temptations of Satan, he
tempting and stirring them up to sin, because they want faith in the blood of
Christ.

Ye shall hear a man or a woman sometimes say, Oh, I would feign leave this
or that sin, I would feign leave my Swearing, I would feign put away my rash
Anger, and the like; but alas, I am such a weak and forgetful creature, that
I cannot do it. Do thou, whosoever thou art, speak in good earnest? would
thou indeed leave thy sin, and of weak, be made strong to overcome it?
Learn then how thou may be so, from the mouth of the holy Ghost, Heb. 11.34.
he has taught thee, Heb. 11.34. By faith in Christ, of weak, thou may be
made strong. They are the very words of the holy Ghost in that place. And, 1.
Ioh. 5.4. 1. John 5.4.
This is our victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. By faith in
Christ, we shall be able to overcome the World, yea, the Prince of this world,
the Devil, and to withstand his temptations. Labor then to get faith in the
death of Christ, and thou shall thence derive, not only comfort, but strength
against thine own corruption, and against Satan stirring thee up to sin: and
know it for a truth, that though thou be one of Gods chosen, and one that
do belong to Gods election, and Christ by his death has taken away the
power of the Devil, yet to thee it is not effectual, till thou come to have
faith in his death; Till then, the Devil has power to tempt thee, and to
overcome thee: and therefore never rest till thou find that thou have faith in
the blood of Christ, and assurance that thy sins are washed away in his
blood, and then thou shall be sure to find strength against Sin, Satan, and
all the enemies of thy salvation.

Come we to the second part of this Verse, in the next words, That ye should
be to another, even unto him that is vaysed up from the dead. These words are
easy to be understood, I need not much to stand on the opening of them. That
ye should be to another, that is, Interpretation
as the new Translation has it, That ye should be married to another, even
unto him, that is, unto Christ, whom the Apostle thus describes, That he is
raised up from the dead, which is as if he had said, Who in his body was dead,
but now is raised up from death to life again.

Now here observe we, that the Apostle says,

That true Believers are not altogether at liberty, though they be freed from
the Law; True believers are in special manner under Christ his government and
guidance.
no, they are still under a Governor, under an Head, and under a Guide, yea,
they are in special manner under an head and a guide, as a wife is under the
government and guidance of her husband: so are they under the government and
guidance of Christ their husband, and he is in special manner a guide to
them, he guides them by his Word, and by his Spirit, Ephesians. 1.22.
in special manner. Ephesians. 1.22. The Apostle says, that all things whatsoever
are in subjection, and are made subject to Christ. But how? under his feet,
that is the manner of their subjection: but his Church and the members of it,
they are subject to him after a more special manner, namely, as the body is
subject to the head, and has made all things subject under his feet, and has
appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church. Ephesians. 5.23, 24.
And, Ephesians. 5.23, 24. says the Apostle, The husband is the wives head, even
as Christ is the head of the Church. And therefore as the Church is in
subjection to Christ, even so let wives be to their husbands in every thing. A
plain Text to this purpose, directly showing that the Church and the members
of it, all true believers, though they be freed from the Law, yet they are not
altogether at liberty, but they are still under a government, they are under
an head and a guide; as a wife is under the government of her husband, so are
they under the special government of Christ, and he guides them by his Word
and Spirit in special manner: and the reason and ground of this Truth, is this:

Christ having vouchsafed to join true believers so nearly to himself, them
after a special manner: and therefore, this we may resolve on as a certain
truth,

That howsoever true believers are freed from the Law, yet they are not
altogether at liberty, they are still under a guide; and as a wife is under
the government of her husband, so are they under the special government of
Christ, and he guides them by his Word and by his Spirit in special manner.

Let this be thought on as a ground of trial to every one of us; hereby try
thy self, Trial who be true believers
whether thou be a true believer, and consequently freed from the rigor and
curse of the Law, or no:

Do thou find, that though thou art freed from the rigor and curse of the
Law, yet thou art not altogether at liberty, but thou art still under a guide,
even under Christ thine head, and thou art guided by his Word and Spirit in
special manner, thou find his Word and Spirit guiding thee in all thy
thoughts, words, and actions? Then comfort thy self, thou art then a true
believer, and thou art freed from the rigor and curse of the Law.

But on the other side, if thou find it thus with thee, that thou think thou
art freed by Christ from the curse of the Law, and yet thou find not thy
self under the government of Christ, and that in special manner thou art
guided by his Word and Spirit: Deceive not thy self, thou art not freed from
the Law, thou art yet under the curse of the Law, and thou art liable to it in
this life, and for ever, after this life is ended. And herein thousands deceive
themselves; many think, and they stick not to speak it, that Christ dyed for
them, and they are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and so set free from the
curse of the Law, yet they are so far from finding themselves under the
special government of Christ, as indeed they turn Gods grace into
wantonness, and the doctrine of grace and of freedom, from the rigor and
curse of the Law, into a pernicious indulgence, and license to sin; and
thereupon they take liberty to themselves to go on in all manner of
profaneness; and a man may read impiety and profaneness in their faces,
in their fore-tops and newfangled attire, and their mouths utter it forth in
cursings, in raylings, and in blasphemous oaths, and they are openly profane
in their lives. Oh, such persons exceedingly deceive themselves, and they are
maruellously blinded by the Devil.

If thou would be sure that thou art a true Believer, and that thou art
freed from the rigor and curse of the Law, thou must find thy self under the
government of Christ, and that thou art guided by his Word and Spirit, in
special manner: and if thou find it not thus with thee, certainly thou art
not freed from the Law, thou art under the curse of the Law; and take this for
a certain truth, that true Believers find themselves under Christ as their
head and guide, and that they are guided by him in special manner, and such as
have not Christ their head and giude in this life, shall have him their Judge
and Condemner in the life to come.

In the next place, we are to observe, who it is that the Apostle says, the
true believing Romans and other true Believers should be married unto; and
that is expressed in these words (even to, him.) He says, the true believing
Romans, and other true Believers, were freed from the Law their former
husband, that they should be unto another, even unto him that is raised up
from the dead (that is) unto Christ. Hence we are given to understand thus much

That Christ is the husband of the Church; Christ is the head and husband of
true Believers. Hosea 2.19.
and Christ is their head and their husband, and there is that relation and
that near union and conjunction between Christ and the Church, that there is
between the husband and the wife. Hosea 2.19, 20. The Lord says to his
Church, I will marry thee unto me for ever: yea, I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion. 20. I will
even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. John 3.
We read, that when John's Disciples came to him, and told him that Christ
baptized, and that all men came to him, thinking that, that was a great
disparagement to their Master, John says to them, Verse 28. Ye your selves are
my witnesses, John 3.28.
that I said I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. And then he
subioynes Verse 29. He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom.

And this Epithet and Title of being Bridegroom of the Church, is given to
Christ, and he takes it to himself, Mat. 9.15. Mat. 9.15.
Can the children of the marriage Chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is
with them? And Mat. 25.5. Now while the Bridegroom tarryed long. Mat.
25.5.6.10.
Verse 6.10. and Luke 5.34. Can ye make the children of the wedding Chamber to
fast, as long as the Bridegroom is with them? And Ephesians. 5.30. Ephesians. 5.30.
The Apostle speaking of the near spiritual union that is betwixt Christ and
his Church, says, We are members of his body, and of his flesh, and of his
bones: and, For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. And then he adds Verse
32. This is a great secret, but I speak concerning Christ, and concerning the
Church. Plainly showing this to be a truth, that there is that relation
between Christ and his Church, that there is between the husband and the
wife, and that near union and conjunction between him and his Church, or
rather indeed a more near and more strict union and agreement between him and
his Church, then there is between a man and his wife: and to this purpose we
might cite many more testimonies of Scripture: the whole Book of the Canticles
drives to this purpose, and shows this to be a truth, that Christ is the
husband of the Church, and true Believers are married to Christ, and he is
their head and their husband: and the ground of this truth is this,

There is the same neerenesse between Christ and the Church, Adam and Eua; for
as Eua was framed and made of the rib that was taken out of Adams side, Genesis
2.22.
Genesis 2.22. So the Church is framed and made of the blood issuing and streaming
out of the side of Christ crucified; out of the side of Christ crucified came
blood and water, John 19.34.
John 19.34. by which the Church and the members of it are washed from their
sins, and cleansed and made new creatures, even flesh of the flesh of Christ,
and bone of his bone: and so there being that neerenesse between Christ and
the Church, there is the same relation between them that there was between
Adam and Eua; and as Adam was the husband of Eua, so is Christ the husband of
the Church, and true Believers are married to Christ, and he is their head and
their husband.

Now before we come to make use of this, a question is to be answered: for
happily some may desire to be further informed touching this point, and may
demand,

How CHRIST comes to be the husband of the Church?

To this I answer, Isai. 9.6.
Isai. 9.6. Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a Son is given. Romans
8.32. Romans 8.32.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all, says the Apostle. And

Again, God gives the Church to Christ, as Christ himself says, John 17.2.
John 17.2.
As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to all them that thou have given him. And there is also a mutual consent
between Christ and the Church: God works Faith in the hearts of his Chosen,
by which they acknowledge Christ, embrace Christ, and receive him, and subject
themselves to him, and Christ cannot, but will, that which his Father wills; and
so he on the other side consents, and takes the Church for his Spouse; and to
this purpose we have a plain Text, Ioh. 6.37. John 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes, I cast
not away.

In that Text we may observe a threefold consent; (All that the Father gives
me) there is the consent of the Father, (shall come) there is the consent of
the Church, (And him that comes to me, I cast not away) there is the consent
of Christ. And by this threefold consent is the Spiritual Marriage made
between Christ and the Church: and so we see how Christ comes to be the
husband of the Church, namely thus: God the Father freely gives Christ to the
Church, and the Church to Christ, The Church, and the members of it, by faith
wrought in them, receive Christ, and subject themselves to him, and Christ
willing the same thing that his Father does, consents and takes the Church for
his Spouse: and so all true believers are married to Christ, True believers may
be assured, that Christ and all his benefits and merits are theirs.
and there is that relation and that near union between Christ and the
Church, that there is between the husband and the wife.

Now this may in the first place serve to strengthen the faith of all true
believers, touching their interest and title to Christ, and to all his saving
graces, for why? Christ is their husband, and has given himself to them, and
therefore they may undoubtedly assure themselves, that all his graces, benefits
and merits are theirs, and do truly belong to them; and it is not, as the
Papists say, a fancy of an idle brain, that the righteousness of Christ and
his merits are made ours, we truly believing in Christ: the Papists say it is a
fancy, and all one as if we should say, One man lives by the soul of another.
It is not so; Christ being our Christ, and he being our head and husband, we
may build on it, and we may be sure that all his graces, benefits and merits
are truly ours, and do truly belong to us.

Again is it so, And they may be assured of Christ his love toward them, and
of his care over them for their good.
that there is between the husband and the wife? Surely then, as many as
truly believe in Christ, on this ground may assure themselves of the love of
Christ toward them, and of his care over them for their good, and that he will
certainly protect them against all that seek to violence them, and to wrong
them any way. A kind and loving husband will not suffer his wife to be wronged,
if he be able to right it; nay, his love is so strong, as he will rather
suffer and sustain wrong himself, then he will suffer his wife to be wronged,
if he be able to right it: much less will Christ Jesus suffer his Church, or
any member of it to be wronged; his love to his Church far surpasses the
love of the kindest husband in the World to his wife; there is no comparison
between them, and he is most able to defend his Church and the members of it,
he being God of infinite power, Mat. 28.18.
and all power being given to him, both in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. And
though he do suffer thee sometimes to be wronged, for causes best known to
himself, yet be thou sure of this, thou that art a true Believer, thou may
go to him boldly, and power out thy complaint into his bosom, and he will
hear it, and take notice of thy wrong, and he will uphold thee, that thou
faint not under it altogether, and he will one day pay them home that do
wrong thee, when he comes to put on his garment dipped in blood, Revel. 19.13.
Revel. 19.13. Woe be to them that have wronged the least and poorest member
of his Church; yea, take this with thee for thy farther comfort, thou that art
a true Believer, thou have Christ thine head and husband, and he is such an
head and husband, as is able to take notice, and does take notice of the wrongs
that are only intended against thee, even of the secret mischief that the
wicked instruments of the Devil do plot and devise against thee in the depth
of their hearts, he being not only man, but God also, he is able to take notice
of them, full little do the wicked Imps of the Devil, such as wish ill to
Sion and to the members of the Church, think on this, they think if they can
cover their malice, and though they carry in their breasts cankered hearts,
hearts full of rancor and mischief intended against Gods Children, waiting for
an opportunity to practice it, yet if they can smooth it over with a fair
countenance, all is well. Alas, poor souls, they deceive themselves; true
Believers have an head and husband, that is able, and does take notice of that
mischife, that is only hatched and conceived in the brain against them, and
his love to them is so strong, as he will not suffer that to go unpunished,
but will one day plague thee for thy purpose of evil against any of his,
though it never break out into action. An excellent comfort to all true
Believers.

Now further on this ground, The duty of true Believers toward Christ their
head and Husband.
that there is between the husband and the wife, true Believers must learn
their duty, hereupon they must learn to love Christ as their husband, they
must give to him the chief affection of their hearts, their love, their joy,
their delight, and they must yield their bodies and souls wholly to him.

Do thou persuade thy self that Christ is thine husband? Oh let him have
the chief love of thine heart. Herein many in the World are exceeding faulty,
they think they have Christ their head and husband, and yet the chief love of
their hearts is not given to him; no, no, they set their love and delight
chiefly on the World and the things of it, on the profits, pleasures and
vanities of the World, and will not be driven from the love and liking of
those things.

Do thou persuade thy self, thou that art a covetous worldling, or thou
that art a sensual person, that Christ is thine husband? Certainly then, thou
art no better then a Strumpet, and a filthy Whore. Some think they put off the
matter handsomely, when being justly reproved for their worldliness, for
their garishnesse in apparel or the like, they can say to the Reproouer, What
need you to be so hot? why? I hope I am neither Whore nor Thief. But indeed
and truth they are both; they steal away their hearts from Christ, to whom
they belong (as they think) and they go a whoring after the profits and
pleasures of the World. The Holy Ghost has taught me thus to speak; Iam. 4.4.
mark what James says, Iam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not,
that the amity of the World is the Enmity of God? Whosoever therefore will be
a friend of the World, makes himself the Enemy of God.

If thou that make profession of the faith of Christ, and think that thou
art a true Believer, do bestow the chief love of thine heart, on any thing
but on Christ, thou go a whoring from Christ, and thou art no better then an
Adulteress and a filthy Strumpet.

Happily thou will say,

Thou may easily know it, her then all the men in the world besides: yea, as
Elkana said to Hannah, 1. Sam. 1.8. 1. Sam. 1.8.
he was better to her then ten Sons, she delights in him and in his company
above all others, and she is never well, or at the least, not so well, as when
she is in his company, yea, she delights to see the lively Image and
resemblance of her husband in his children, in his friends and kindred, and
she loves them the better, because they are like to her husband.

Now thus it is with thee in respect of Christ, if he have the chief love of
thine heart; if Christ be he whom thy soul chiefly loves, then thou make
more account of him, then of all riches and treasures in the world, yea thou
hold all things loss and dung in respect of him, thou delightest in his
presence and company; it is the joy of thine heart, and the rejoicing of thy
soul, to be where thou may see the face and glorious beauty of thy Beloved,
Jesus Christ, even to come to the house of God, to the Word and Sacraments,
where Christ is set before thee in lively manner. Gal. 3.1. yea, Gal. 3.1.
thou delightest in those that bear the Image of Christ, in the Saints and
Children of God, thou love them the better, because they are like to Christ:
and thou desire with the Apostle, Philip. 1.23.
Phil. 1.23. to be loosed, and to be with Christ, even fully to enjoy his
presence, and thou art able out of the earnest and fervent desire of thine
heart, to say with the Bride, Revel. 22.17. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Revel. 22.17.


Hereby try thy self; if it be thus with thee, then indeed Christ has the
chief love of thine heart, and thou may assure thy self, that thou have his
love, and that he will certainly protect and defend thee against all thine
enemies, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against thee.

But if thou love not the Lord Jesus, then consider what a fearful doom the
Apostle has thundered out against thee, 1. Cor. 16.22. If any love not the Lord
Jesus, 1. Cor. 16.22.
let him be had in execration, yea, excommunicate to death.

One thing yet remaynes to be observed in this second part of the Verse. We are
to mark that the Apostle says not, That ye should be to another, even to
Christ, in plain terms; though that is his meaning: but he speaks of Christ
by way of Periphrasis, by way of description, and he sets him out thus, Even to
him that is raised up from the dead, that is, unto Christ, who in his body was
dead, but now is raised up from the dead, and now lives an immortal life, even
for ever. Hence we are further given to understand thus much:

That Christ is not only the husband of the Church, Christ is the everliving
husband of his Church.
that true believers are married to Christ, but that he is such an husband, as
being raised from the dead, ever lives, he is an everliving husband; true
believers are married to Christ, and he is their head and their husband, and he
is such an husband as is raised up from the dead, and now lives an immortal
life, and shall continue their husband for ever: for why?

As the Apostle says, Romans 6.9. Christ being raised, he dies no more: Death
has no more dominion over him. Therefore doubtless when the Apostle here
says, that the true believing Romans, and other true believers should be
married to another, namely, to Christ, and to him raised up from the dead, he
intends, and would have us to understand thus much, that Christ is the husband
of the Church: yea, that he is an everliving husband, and that he is such an
husband, as being raised from the dead, is no more subject to death, but now
lives an immortal life, and shall remain the husband of the Church, and of
all true believers for ever: and to this purpose the Text is plain, Hose. 2.19.
Hosea 2.19. I will marry thee to me (says the Lord to his Church) for ever.

I will be an husband to thee for ever, Ierem. 32.40.
Ier. 32.40. The Lord said, he would make an everlasting covenant with his
people, and that he would never turn away from them to do them good: as if
he had said, Having once entered into covenant with them, and as it were,
married them to himself, Heb. 7.25.
he would continue to be their husband for ever. Heb. 7.25. The holy Ghost
says, He is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. Revel. 1.18. says Christ, I am
alive, but I was dead: and behold, I am alive for evermore.

These and many other places that might be brought, do make this a clear
point, that Christ is not only the husband of the Church, but he is such an
husband as lives for ever, he being raised from the dead, he is no more
subject to death, but now lives an immortal life, and shall certainly continue
the husband of the Church, and of all true believers for ever; the reason and
ground of this truth is this:

Christ being raised from the dead,

This, in the first place may serve to discover to us, that, That Popish error,
that true believers may be divorced from Christ, discovered and confuted.
held and maintained by some, either Papists or Popishly affected, that true
believers may be quite cut off from the Church, that there may be a separation
and a divorce between Christ and some that are true believers, that a true
believer, one that is now a member of Christ, may hereafter become no member of
Christ. That cannot stand with the truth now delivered and proved to us out of
the Word of God: For, if Christ be an everliving husband, if he continue the
husband of the Church, and of all true believers for ever, it is not possible
that there should be a divorce between Christ and any one that truly believes
in him, and that any true believer should ever be quite cut off and separated
from Christ: for indeed who is able to make a separation between Christ and
any one that truly belongs to him? Surely, not all the power of Hell is able
to do it. No, no, Christ himself says, Ioh. Ioh. 10.28.
20.28. That he gives eternal life to those that are his, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hands.

Some object that place, Cor. 6.15. where the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6.15.
Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot?
God forbid: and they think they have ground from thence, that true believers
may be quite separated and divorced from Christ, that a true believing member
of Christ may become no member of Christ, being made the member of an Harlot.

But indeed they pervert the purpose of the Apostle,

And that that is the purpose of the Apostle, appears plainly by his words,
Know ye not (says he) that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God
forbid. As if he had said? Fie on it, far be it from every one of you that
bold your selves to be members of Christ, that you should so abase your bodies,
as to make them members of an Harlot. So that place makes nothing for the
upholding of that error, that a true believer may be quite separated and
divorced from Christ. For a second use of the point.

Is it so, that Christ being the husband of the Church, Comfort for true
believers in their greatest troubles and distresses.
and continues the husband of the Church and of all true believers for ever?
Then here is a ground of sweet and of excellent comfort, for all that truly
believe in Jesus Christ; hereupon they may cheer up their hearts, and they may
comfort themselves in their greatest troubles and distresses: for what though
their troubles be great, and lie heavy upon them? yet there is no trouble, no
affliction, no distress whatsoever that can make a separation and a divorce
between them and Christ their head and husband, he still continues their
head, and he is still their husband, even when they are plunged into their
deepest distress: and that may be a great comfort to them.

We know it is a comfort to a wise in the time of some great loss, that her
husband is yet living, though her goods be taken away and lost by fire, by
water, or the like; though she have lost her children, and her dearest and her
nearest friends are taken away from her, yet this is a stay to her fainting
heart, and this cheeres her up, that her kind and loving husband is yet alive,
and she has him still with her; for she is sure that he will bear part with
her, in her distress and trouble, and that he will be a guide and comfort, and
an help to her in any thing for her good, so far as he is able. This she
is sure of, and this comforts her. Oh much more may true believers comfort
themselves and cheer up their hearts in their greatest troubles, crosses and
losses whatsoever they be, I say, much more may they comfort themselves with
this; that their head and husband Christ Jesus is yet alive; for he is an
husband all-sufficient, able to succor help and comfort them, and they may be
sure that he will relieve and comfort them, yea, that he will even bear part
with them in their troubles: They may assure themselves of this, there is not
any affliction they suffer, but Jesus Christ their head and husband bears part
with them, and he suffers with them.

Oh then, think on this in thy greatest affliction, thou that art a true
believer; what though it be so, that thou have lost thy goods, thy outward
liberty, thy wife, thy children, thy dearest friends, yea, thou being a wife,
have lost a kind, a loving, and dear husband? Yet remember this to thy
comfort, there is no loss, no affliction, that can turn away Gods love from
thee, and make a divorce between thee and Christ Jesus thine head and husband:
No, no, he is an everliving husband, he is still thine husband, and shall so
continue for ever. Yea, remember yet further to thy comfort, thou that art a
true believer, though thy affliction be so great, as that thy very life is
taken away from thee, yet there is no divorce made between thee and Christ
Jesus: Death may separate thy body and soul asunder, but it cannot divide thee
from thy God, and make a divorce between thee and Christ Jesus thine head and
husband: No, no, he is still thine, and thou art still his. Romans 14.8.
Romans 14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die
unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords. Death which
is the King of fear to the wicked, it ioynes thee nearer to Christ thine
husband; and though thy body be severed from thy soul, and laid up in the
earth, yet it shall be so but for a time and in the mean time it is not
divided from the Lord Jesus; No, no, though thy body rot, and be turned into
dust in the grave, yet that very dust is within the covenant, and knit to
Christ Jesus, and thou art still his both in body and soul, and he is still
thine head and husband; and that is an excellent comfort: and let all true
believers lay it up in their hearts, and let none but true believers meddle
with it, it belongs not to any other; but thou that art a true believer, lay up
this ground of comfort in thine heart, that Christ is thine head and husband,
and shall so continue for ever, and thou shall find it will comfort thee in thy
greatest affliction, yea, when the very pangs of death are upon thee.

Now to the third and last part of this Verse: That we should bring forth
fruit unto God. We see here, the Apostle says, the true believing Romans, and
other true believers should be married to Christ, and to him, raised up from
the dead: to this end, or that this might follow on it, that they should bring
forth fruit unto God. Hence we may easily gather thus much:

That it is by virtue of Christ his Resurrection, Ioh. 15.4. Ioh. 15.4.
Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. Verse. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing.

Christ is not only the giver of spiritual life and quickening, but he is also
the root of it, and from him it comes, He is the Lord of life, Act. 3.15. Act.
3.15.
He is a quickening Spirit, 1. Cor. 15.45. 1. Cor. 15.45.
and therefore from him it comes, even from the power and virtue of his
Resurrection, that men are able to bring forth fruit unto God.

Now this first discouers to us the error of the Papists, touching their works
of Preparation; Works of Preparation overthrown.
they say, that a man in his mere natural state before his conversion, may do
some good things, even things truly good and holy, and may prepare himself to
receive grace. This is a foul and gross error, and it is met withal by the
truth now delivered: For before a man be married to Christ, and to him raised
up from the dead, and so quickened by the virtue of his Resurrection; he is not
able to bring forth any fruit to God.

And again, Men in their natural state can do nothing truly good and
pleasing to God.
that howsoever men in their natural state, may do things good in themselves,
yet they cannot do any thing truly good and holy, they cannot bring forth fruit
to God, they may build Hospitals, Colleges, and the like, and do many great
works, good in themselves, but they cannot do any thing truly good and
pleasing to God; and therefore we should never rest, till we find our selves
married to Christ, and made one with him, even with him raised up from the
dead, and made partakers of the power and virtue of his Resurrection, that so
we may be able to bring forth fruit to God, and may do good duties, pleasing
to God, and comfortable to our own consciences.

In this third and last part of the Verse, the Apostle sets down the last
correspondency to his foregoing similitude, taken from marriage; and thus it
stands: That as a wise, her husband being dead, and she being married to
another, may lawfully bear children to that other man: so the true believing
Romans, and other true believers, being freed from the Law, and married to
Christ, they may bring forth fruit to him; yea, he sets it down as a duty,
they are bound unto that; they are therefore married to Christ, and to him
raised up from the dead, that they should bring forth fruit to him.

(That we) the Apostle here changes the person. Interpretation
He said before, So ye, my Brethren, are dead also to the Law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be unto another, In the second person; but here he
speaks in the first person, and says, That we should bring forth fruit unto
God. His meaning is this, That you and I, and all true believers, both of Jews
and Gentiles, whatsoever we be, should bring forth fruit and fructify, and as
it were, bear and bring forth children to God, according to the phrase of the
Hebrews, who call children, The fruit of the womb, as Psalm. 127.3. Behold,
Psalm. 127.3. (...) Psalm. 128.3.
children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the * fruit of the womb, his
reward. Psalm. 128.3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful Vine on the sides of
thine house, and thy children like the O live plants round about thy table. Now
this phrase and form of speech here used by the Apostle, signifies two things:

First, that we should bring forth both in mind and heart, and also in word
and deed, such things as are as it were begotten of God, and come from God, and
from Christ, Who is God over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. Romans 9.5.
that we should bring forth holy, heavenly, and divine, and spiritual things,
such thoughts, such affections, such words, and such deeds, as come from
Christ, and from the Spirit of Christ, and have the Spirit of Christ the worker
of them, and so are called by the Apostle, the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, Gal. 5.22.
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith.

Secondly, such things both in heart and life, as are as sweet fruits to God,
even such thoughts, affections, words and works, as are pleasing to God through
Christ, and such as he of his mercy will crown with no less then the reward
of eternal life and glory, as the holy Ghost says, Heb. 13.15. Heb. 13.15.
that praise and thanksgiving to God, which is the fruit of the lips (for so he
calls it) is a pleasing sacrifice to God through Christ: And he subioynes,
Verse. 16. To do good, and to distribute forget not: for with such sacrifices
God is pleased.

These two things then are signified and intended by the Apostle in this phrase
of bringing forth fruit to God, namely, A bringing forth of such thoughts,
affections, words and deeds, as come from God, and are pleasing to God through
Christ.

Thus then we are to conceive the Apostles meaning in these words:

That you and I, and all true Believers, both of the Jews and Gentiles, should
bring forth such thoughts, such affections, such words and deeds, as are holy,
heavenly, divine, and spiritual, and as it were begotten of God, that we
should even think, speak, and do such things as come from Christ, and from
the Spirit of Christ, and have the Spirit of Christ the worker of them, and are
also pleasing to God through Christ, and such as he in his mercy will crown
with the reward of eternal life.

First here observe we the change of the person. So ye, my Brethren, are dead
also to the Law, by the body of Christ, that ye should be unto another: Here
he says, that we should bring forth fruit unto God: thereby (no doubt)
intimating thus much, that not only the believing Romans, and other true
believers, amongst them who were newly converted and brought to believe in
Christ, and as it were newly married to Christ, but that himself and others
also that were of longer standing in Christ, and had been longer married to
Him, ought to bring forth good and holy fruits both in their hearts and lives:
hence note we in a word,

That none of those that hold themselves married to Christ, They that have
been longest married to Christ, must be still childbearing to Christ.
are to think themselves at any time exempted from bringing forth fruit to
Christ: even such as are most holy, and most regenerate, and have been longest
married to Christ, must still be as it were childbearing to Christ, and must
still bring forth good and holy fruits, yea, the longer men are married to
Christ, the more fruitful must they be to Him, and the more must they abound
in holy, heavenly and divine thoughts and affections, words and actions. Psalm.
84.7. Psalm. 84.7.
it is said of the people of God, that they go from strength to strength, till
every one appear before God in Zion. And Psalm. 92.14. Psalm. 92.14.
that such as be planted in the house of God, they flourish, and they still
bring forth fruit, yea, in their old age. Philip. 19.11.
And the Apostle thus prayed for the Philippians, Philip. 1.9. that their love
might abound more and more. And then Verse 11. That they might be filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and
glory of God, (that is) such holy fruits as are brought forth by the power and
working of his Spirit; and indeed there is no time, wherein such as are married
to Christ, are past childbearing to Christ, and past bringing forth of fruit
to him: it is not with them as it is with women, Genesis 18.11. when they are old
and stricken in age, when they are past children: no, no, there is no such time
with them that are married to Christ, they are never past fruitfulness and
childbearing to Christ, and therefore they are not to cease to bear and to
bring forth fruit to him: but the elder they grow, the more are they to abound
in good and holy fruits, the more fruitful are they to be in every good
thought and affection, and in every good word and work.

But alas, how far from this are many in the world, Reproof of such as
grow worse and worse in their old age.
as it were childbearing to Christ? do they, the elder they grow, the more
increase, and the more abound in good and holy fruits? Oh no, many there be,
that the more they grow in years, the colder and the more backward they become
to every good and holy duty. May we not observe a general decay and
declining and going backward in good things? Where is that Zeal, that love to
Religion, that earnestness and that forwardness in good things, that we have
heard of, or have known to be in men and women heretofore? Nay, be there not
some that we can remember, who have been heretofore, or at the least seemed to
be forward in Religion, and zealous in good things, that were wont to be
careful to sanctify the Sabbath, to keep good order in their houses, to
instruct their families, to use Prayer constantly, that now are not only not so
well affected to Religion, and not so forward in good things as they have
been, but are even quite fallen from them, and are now carried away with the
sway and with the evil examples of the time?

Well, to them I say no more but this: In a word, let them know that their case
is fearful, and that I may not only say it, 2. Pet. 2.20.
but prove it to them, let them look, 2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. says the
Apostle, If after they have escaped from the filthiness of the World, through
the knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled
again therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning. For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment given unto them: but it is come unto them according to the true
Proverb, The Dog is returned to his own vomit; and the Sow that was washed,
to the wallowing in the mire. Yea certainly, such as in their old days grow
cold in good things, and in good duties, and in bringing forth good fruits to
God, do give more then a probable sign, and it is more then probable, that
they were never married to Christ, and never made one with him. For, is it old
age that can hinder his working? No, no: deceive not thy self, if thou be
married to Christ, thou shall find thy self quickened by him, and made able to
bring forth fruit to God, yea, to bring forth more and more good and holy fruit
in thine old age. And if it be not thus with thee, it is a fearful sign
that thou wast never married to Christ.

Now further, and he subioynes to it that they should bring forth fruit to God,
we may easily conclude, and gather thus much,

That the state of a true believer is no barren state; True believers are not
barren and fruitless.
but being married to Christ, they are fruitful, and they are, as it were,
childbearing to Christ, and they bring forth good thoughts, affections, words
and actions, as children to Christ their husband, and as fruits to God, it is
the end of their being married to Christ, and doubtless they make not the end
of their marriage frustrate: and hence it is that they are compared to
fruit-bearing trees, Psalm. 1.3. They are said to be trees planted by the Rivers
of waters, which bring forth fruit in their season. Yea, they are said to be so
planted, as that in respect of their rooting, they feel not when the heat
comes, the year of drought cannot make them cease yielding fruit. Ierem.
17.8. Isai. 61.3. Cant. 4.16.
Iere. 17.8. and Isai. 61.3. Trees of righteousness: and the planting of the
Lord. And Cant. 4.16. the Church is said to be as a Garden, yielding pleasant
fruit. And to these I might add many like testimonies, all pointing to this
Truth, that true believers are fruitful, and do bring forth good and holy
fruits, and being married to Christ, they are, as it were, child bearing to
Christ, and do bring forth good thoughts, affections, words, and actions, as
children to Christ. And indeed this cannot be otherwise. The reason and ground
of this truth is this;

True believers being married to Christ,

Now this may serve as a ground of trial to every one of us, Trial of our
fellowship and communion with Christ.
touching our fellowship and communion with Christ Jesus: Do thou persuade
thy self, that thou art married to Christ, that he is thine husband, and that
thou have heavenly fellowship with him? Certainly, then thou art not barren,
but thou art childbearing to Christ, thou art partaker of the Spirit of
Christ, and of the life of Christ, and thou bring forth good and holy
fruits, thy mind is full of good thoughts, thy heart full of holy and beauenly
affections, thy mouth full of good and gracious speeches, thy life abounds with
good and holyactions of piety, of equity, of justice, of love, and of mercy:
and if it be thus with thee, thou may with comfort assure thy self, that
thou have Christ to thine husband, and that thou have sweet and heavenly
fellowship with Him.

But on the other side, if thou sinde it not thus with thee, but that thou art
barren of all good thoughts, affections, words and deeds, and that rather thine
head is full of wicked thoughts, thine heart full of wicked lusts, and thy
mouth runs over with cursing, swearing, and the like, and thy life abounds
with many foul and gross sins; deceive not thy self, if thou think that
Christ is thine husband, and that thou have fellowship with him, it is but a
fancy; and if thou say so, thou art no better then a liar, the holy Ghost has
given thee the lie, 1. Ioh. 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, that is, in ignorance and sin, we lie, and do not
truly, we deceive our selves. And herein many deceive themselves. How many be
there that are altogether barren of those holy fruits the Apostle reckons up,
Gal. 5.22, 23. Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meckenesse, temperance? Nay, how many be there, that abound with the contrary
fruits? In stead of love to God and Men, they abound with contempt of God, of
his Word and Ordinances, and with hatred of his Children. In stead of
spiritual joy, they abound with carnal joy, rejoicing in sin and in the
works of the flesh: and so we might instance in the rest. In stead of
temperancy and moderation in meat, drink, apparel, and other outward things,
how do many abound in the contrary fruits! they give themselves to surfeiting
and drunkenness, to pride in apparel, never more then in these days; yea,
the more this sin of pride in apparel is spoken against, the more it
abounds. Can such persons persuade themselves that Christ is their husband? If
they do; certainly they deceive themselves: Do but in reason consider it;
Do thou think Christ is thine husband, and yet thou bring forth fruit,
not to Him, but to the Devil, and to the lust of thine own heart? Surely,
then thou playest the Whore and the filthy Strumpet; and if thou will needs
say that Christ is thine husband, and thou will thrust thy self under his
name, and he shall bear thy name, and thou will bear the name of a Christian,
then know that thou can look for no comfort by him, or from him, he is a
jealous husband, he will one day come and take thee tardie, even playing the
Whore with his utter enemy, and then the fire of his wrath and jealousy shall
burn thee down to the bottomless pit of hell.

If thou would be sure that Christ is thine husband, thou must find thy self
childbearing to him, and that thou bring forth fruit to him, even good and
holy thoughts, affections, words and actions. And if it be thus with thee, then
thou have heavenly fellowship with Christ in this life, and shall have eternal
fellowship with him in the life to come.

Note we further, that good thoughts, affections,

The consideration of this may be an excellent motive, to stir us up to have
our hearts and minds abounding with good thoughts and affections, and our lives
with good words and actions: for why? the Lord is as well pleased with them
through Christ, as with his own begotten children; they are as sweet fruits to
him, and most pleasing to him in Christ, and he will reward the least good
action of ours, coming from the root of a lively faith in Jesus Christ, with
no less then the reward of eternal life and glory. Come we to the fifth and
sixth Verses.

VERSE. 5.6. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by
the Law, had force in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.

But now we are delivered from the Law, being dead unto it, wherein we were
holden, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of
the Letter.


Our Apostle having before made known, that the true believing Romans, and
other true Believers, were freed from the Law their former husband, and married
to Christ, and being married to Christ, that they should bring forth fruit to
him, that they should be, as it were, childbearing to Christ: In these two
Verses he does farther amplify that particular of bringing forth fruit to
Christ, by a comparison a paribus, and further shows, that it was meet and fit
that himself and other true believers, being married to Christ, should bring
forth fruit to him: and thus be reasons (for the fifth Verse is inferred as a
reason on the former) as appears in the word (For.) As when we were under the
Law, and married to the Law, we brought forth fruit answerable to that
condition: So now, being freed from the Law, and married to Christ, it is very
meet, equal and fit, that we should bring forth fruit to him, in all equity
and reason we are bound so to do. That is the general drift and purpose of
the Apostle in these two Verses.

Now more particularly in Verse 5. is laid down the first part of the Apostles
comparison, and that not barely propounded, but set forth on this manner:

First, (in the flesh) He says, When ye were in the flesh; and consequently,
Under the Law, and married to the Law.

And then he says not barely, The motions of sins which were by the Law.
And then he makes known the power and working of those motions, together with
the subject wherein they wrought, as that they had force and working in their
members; had force in our members.

And last of all, The motions of sins (says the Apostle) which were by the
Law, had force in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. So we see the
particular things that are laid down in this fifth Verse: I will not now enter
on the other part of the Apostles comparison laid down Verse 6. till we come
to the handling of it.

For when we were in the flesh.] Interpretation
The word Flesh has many acceptions in Scripture; here it is put for the
corruption of nature, even for that corruption and sin, in which men are
conceived and borne, as Psalm. 51.5. Psalm. 51.5.
I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my Mother conceived me. And so the
Apostles meaning is this, When we were in the corruption of nature, in our
natural state and condition, not regenerate, not partakers of the Spirit, and
of the life of grace, for these two are opposed and set one against the other,
Romans 8.9. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. So that to be in the
flesh, is to be unregenerate, and to be altogether fleshly. Jude Epist. verse.
19. These are fleshly, having not the Spirit, (the motions of sins) or as it is
in the Original, the passions or sufferings of sins.

Now by these passions or sufferings of sins, the Apostle understands those
evil motions, that are continually stirred up by in-borne corruption in the
heart and mind, even those evil stirrings that do continually arise from the
corruption of nature in the heart and mind, and do incite and stir up a man,
and as it were follicite him to sin, and they are called passions or
sufferings of sin, by a Metonymie, because they do molest and trouble a man,
and affect his mind, (in deed with his will) he being willing to be so troubled
so long as he is in his natural state and condition; yet (I say) they do
continually trouble him, and they give him no rest, they will not suffer him at
any time to rest, but are ever pricking him forward, drawing, egging and
enticing him to sin, as Iam. 1.14. Every man (says the Apostle) is tempted,
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence and is enticed; therefore they
are called passions or sufferings of sin, (which were by the Law) that is,
which were occasioned by the Law, the corruption of nature taking occasion by
the commandment; Romans 7.8.
as Verse. 8. to send forth those evil motions; (had force) that is, had power,
and as it is in the new Translation, did work, or bad a powerful and
effectual working: for so the words following signify, (in our members.) By
members in this place, we are to understand not only the parts and members of
the body, but by a Synechdoche, the powers and faculties of the soul; (to
bring forth fruit unto death.) To bring forth deadly fruit: the meaning is
this: To bring forth all manner of sins, which indeed are deadly, and of
themselves bring death and destruction both to body and soul, Romans 6.21. The
wages of sin is death. Thus then conceive we the Apostles meaning in this
Verse, as if he had said:

For when we were in the corruption of our nature, in our natural state and
condition, when we were unregenerate, then the evil motions that did
continually arise in our hearts and minds, from our in-borne corruption, and
evermore solicit and stir us up to sin, and were occasioned by the Law,
had power and full working in the powers of our souls, and in the parts and
members of our bodies, even to the bringing forth of all manner of sins,
which of themselves bring death and everlasting destruction both of body and
soul.

Observe with me the reason here used by the Apostle, being married to Christ,
and to him raised from the dead, should bring forth fruit to God; thus he
reasons; When we were under the Law, and married to the Law, we brought forth
fruit answerable to our condition; therefore now being freed from the Law, and
married to Christ, it is fit, and it is very meet and equal, that we should
bring forth fruit to him: hence note we thus much:

That true Believers, True believers are to bring forth fruits answerable to
their holy condition
are to bring forth fruits answerable to that holy and excellent condition, as
heretofore when they were in their natural state, they brought forth fruit
suitable to that state, so now being set out of that state, and set into the
state of grace, and married to Christ, they are to bring forth fruit fitting
and agreeing to that excellent condition.

And to this purpose we find many exhortations in the Book of God. Ephesians. 4.1.
I pray you, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.1.
that ye walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. Verse. 17. This
I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind, Having their cogitations
darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in them, because of the hardness of their heart: Which being past feeling,
have given themselves unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with
greediness. Verse. 20. Ye have not so learned Christ. Phil. 1.27.
Philip. 1.27. Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.
And to these we might add many like exhortations, all making this manifest,
that true believers being called, justified and sanctified, and espoused and
married to Christ, are to bring forth fruit answerable to that holy and
excellent condition; and there is reason for it, namely this:

To this end they have fellowship with Christ,

Do thou then persuade thy self, Reproof of such Christians as do not
bring forth fruit answerable to their holy condition 1. Pet 2.9.
and that thou have heavenly fellowship with him? Then remember that thou art
to bring forth fruit answerable to that holy and that excellent condition, thou
art to show forth the virtues of him that has called thee out of darkness
into his maruailous light, 1. Pet. 2.9. Far be it from thee to conform thy
self to the lust of thy former ignorance, and to think, speak or do as thou
did, when thou wast in thy natural state and condition. And herein some are
justly to be taxed, even such as I am persuaded are married to Christ, they
yield too much to the corruption of their own hearts, and they too much follow
the fashion of the World. Oh consider that these are not fruits answerable to
thine holy condition, and thus think with thy self, when thou art set on by
Satan, and when thine own corruption is stirring (as in the best it will be
stirring) and enticing thee to any known sin, think thou with thy self, Is
this a fruit answerable to my holy condition? shall I that am sanctified, and
made partaker of the life of grace, carry my self as those that are profane,
and as yet in their natural state? shall I that am married to Christ the Lord
of life and glory, think, speak, and do as those that are wedded to the
lusts of their own hearts? No, no; far be it from me: thus meditate, and
thus think with thy self, and withal remember that thou yielding to the
corruption of thine own heart, and thou being overtaken with pride,
covetousness, or the like, it is a wound to thy conscience, it brings dishonor
to God, it is a disgrace to thy holy condition, it is a scandal to the weak,
it hardens others in a wicked course, and it opens the mouths of the enemies
of the Gospel: Think on these things, and take heed of yielding to the lusts
of thine own heart, labor thou to express that life of grace that is in
thee, in the fruits of it, and to bring forth fruits answerable to thine holy
condition; for certainly if thou do not, the wicked that express the former
course of life, shall stand up and be a witness against thee, at the day of
judgment.

In the next place observe with me, When we were in the flesh; for the best of
Gods children have flesh and corruption in them: but to be in the flesh, is
far more, as to say, that a man is in drink or wine, is more then to say,
that wine or drink is in him; for that may be in the best and in the most
sober: so indeed to be in the flesh, is to be altogether fleshly, and to be
nothing but flesh and corruption. Hence then we are taught to see, what is the
state of such as be yet unbelievers, and as yet unregenerate, namely this:

They are altogether fleshly, lump of flesh, Unregenerate persons are
altogether fleshly.
even a lump of sin and of corruption, they are drenched in sin, and, as it
were, over head and ears in the mire and filthy puddle of sin, their minds,
their wills, their affections, all the powers of their souls, and all the
parts of their bodies, are altogether fleshly, and thorowout defiled with
sin. And thus the Lord speaks of Jerusalem, Ezech. 16.6.
Ezech. 16.6. When thou wast in thy blood, not when blood was in thee: and thus
Peter spoke of Simon Magus, Act. 8.23.
Act. 8.23. Thou art in the gall of bitterness, thou art even overwhelmed in
sin. And hence it is that the Apostle says, that the Ephesians before their
conversion, were darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. And of the Colossians, Col. 1.21.
Chap. 1.21. he says, That their minds were in evil works. And many like
testimonies clearly show the truth of this point, that unbelievers and
unregenerate persons, are nothing but a lump of flesh, a lump of sin and of
corruption; Ioh. 3.6.
and the reason is given, Ioh. 3.6.

That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: it is nothing but flesh, and a
lump of corruption, and it cannot be otherwise; Job 14.4.
for as Job says, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness?

Now this being so, The fearful state of natural men discovered.
it serves first to discover to natural men and women, their fearful state
and condition; for why? are they nothing but a lump of sin? certainly, then
nothing can come from them but sin, they can do nothing but provoke Gods
wrath against them in every thing they do, even their best actions, their
hearing of the Word, their Prayers, and the like, are sins to them. Men
commonly please themselves much in this, that they live ciuilly, deal justly
and truly in the world, hear the Word of God, and the like. Alas, this they
may do, and yet be in the flesh: and so long as they are in the flesh, they
can do nothing pleasing to God, Romans 8.8.
Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God, Pro. 15.8.
And, Pro. 15.8. it is said, that the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to
the Lord.

Again, this being so, that unregenerate persons, are nothing but a lump of
sin, it may serve to pull down the pride of many that look big, and carry
their heads aloft, and show forth the pride of their hearts in their speech, in
theri gesture, in their apparel, and the like: if they well consider it, they
have cause to hang down their heads, and to cover their faces for shame; for,
what are they? Nothing but a lump of sin, and a dunghill of corruption; why
then should they make themselves as painted Sepulchers? what cause has the
Leper to be proud, or the poor Lazer, who is full of botches and byles from
top to toe, to set out himself in goodly apparel and in rich array? Such is
thy case, thou that art unregenerate, and as yet in thy natural state and
condition, thou art full of filthiness, and full of corruption in all the
powers of thy soul, and in all the parts and members of thy body; and
therefore thou have no cause to set out thy self in thy vain and garish
attire. Such as stand for the maintenance of pride, say, You know not what to
prescribe, and how we are to attire our selves. Why, thine own corruption and
filthiness may teach thee how thou art to attire thy self.

The next thing we are to mark, is this, the Apostle having said that himself
and other true believers when they were in their natural state, they were in
the flesh, he says not barely, that then they brought forth fruit answerable
to that state and condition, but he discouers the cause and root whence such
fruit came, as that it came from the motions of sin that then were powerful,
and had an effectual working in them. He says, When we were in the flesh, the
motions of sins which were by the Law, had force in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death. Hence we are given to understand thus much:

That the cause of all sin is in our selves, The cause of all sin is in our
selves.
come from a root within themselves, that men break out by swearing, and
lying, and killing, Hos 4.2.
and stealing, and whoring, as it is Hos. 4.2. and by all sorts of sins. It
comes from those motions of sins that arise in their hearts and minds from
their own corruption; this we see clear from this Text, and for this we have
further plain evidence of Scripture. Matthew. 15.18. says Christ, The things
which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart, and they defile the man:
and then he subioynes, Verse. 19. For out of the heart come evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, slanders. As if
he had said, All defilement of man by sin, whatsoever it is, it comes from
within, it comes from the inward lust and corruption stirring up evil motions
in the heart and mind, that is the very root of all sins. Iam. 1.13.
Iam. 1.13. says the Apostle, Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted
of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Then
Verse. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
concupiscence, and is entised. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin, when it is finished, Isai. 59.
brings forth death. Isai. 59. from the beginning the Prophet complaining of
the great and grievous sins of the wicked of his time, as that their works were
works of iniquity, and the work of cruelty was in their hands, Verse. Ver. 7.
he adds this as the cause and root of all, that their thoughts were wicked
thoughts. And so, Genesis 6.6. it is said, that the wickedness of man was great
in the earth. And this is assigned as the cause of it, Genesis 6.5.
that all the imaginations and thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually: there were evil motions continually stirred up in the hearts and
minds of men; and thence it was that they became so monstrously wicked, and
broke out into most fearful and horrible sins, and indeed that the cause of
all sin is in our selves, may be further confirmed by this, as the reason and
ground of it:

It is the corruption of our nature, Matthew. 4.8, 9. Matthew. 4.8, 9.
that the Devil took him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him
all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them, and said to him, All
these will I give thee: and yet he could not fasten any sin upon him, and
why? Surely, because there was no corruption in him, there was no thing in him,
to give matter and being to sin, as himself says, Ioh. 14.30. Ioh. 14.30.
The Prince of this world (that is, the Devil) comes, and has naught in me:
has no matter to work on me. This makes it clear, that were it not for the
corruption of nature, neither the Devil nor the World could draw us to any
sin.

And hence it is that Satan fits his temptations to the natural disposition
and temper, to the natural inclination; as Cain being malicious, he tempted
him to murder; Judas being covetous, to sell his Master. And,

This being so, that the corruption of nature gives matter and being to every
sin, and that the Devil and the World could not draw us to any sin, were
it not for our own in-borne corruption; it must needs follow, that the cause
of all sin is in our selves, and that all manner of sins that men commit,
come from a root within themselves, even from the evil motions that are
stirred up in their hearts.

This first serves to teach us, Where the blame of sin ought to be laid.
when we break out into any sin whatsoever, that brings Gods punishing hand
on us, and we feel the smart of it on our souls, or bodies, or both, we must
learn to lay the fault and cause of that sin, where it ought to lie: we are
not to seek for the cause of it, or to lay the blame of it on any thing out of
our selves; In our selves, even in our own bowels is the cause of that sin;
It is the fashion of most men to post off the fault and blame of their sins
from themselves, and to lay it on some thing out of themselves, as on the times
in which they live, on their callings and conditions of life, on the
prouocations of others, on the command or example of others, on their
destinies, as they use to speak, on the Devil and the like; as say some, Oh,
the times are such, and we live in such a time, as unless we do as the time
serves, unless we frame our selves according to the course of the Age and Time
in which we live, we should be accounted no body, or there were no living for
us in the world, or our callings and conditions are such, as we cannot do
otherwise then we do: we are Chaundlers, Victualers, or the like, and we must
needs sell our commodities upon the Sabbath day to our Customers, or else we
should lose their custom, and so ouerturne our trading, and beggar our selves.
Alas, we have wives and children, and many that depend upon us. Some again
say, They are provoked by others to this or that sin; as you shall hear a
quarrellous and troublesome person lay the fault of his fretting, and chafing,
and breaking out into cursing, swearing, and railing, and the like, on others
that provoke him to it: Oh, he abused me, and such dealing would anger a Saint,
and stir up any man to speak. And do not Thieves and other Malefactors,
when they are brought to some open shame or punishment for their faults,
usually cry out and say, Oh, woe worth such a man or such a woman, that ever I
knew them! had I not fallen into their company, had not they drawn me to do
evil, I had never come to this. And so some lay the blame of their sin, on
the command of others; as a servant thinks he is free from blame, if he lie or
swear, or coozen, and the like, because his Master bids him do so. And some
having committed some foul sin, Oh, say they, it was my destiny, I was
ordained to it, or the Devil ought me a shame, and now has paid me. Thus and
many other ways do men post off the fault and blame of their sins from
themselves: but alas, they deceive themselves; we must take notice of it, that
the cause of every sin we commit, is in our selves.

I grant that the age and time in which thou live, thy calling, thy
condition, the provocation of others, and the like may be some occasion of thy
sin: but certainly thine one corruption, the evil motions that are stirring
in thine own heart, are the cause of it; and the cause of thy sin rests in
thine own bosom; and therefore blame not the time, thy calling, the
provocation or commandment of others, or any other thing but thy self: no,
no, lay not the fault on the Devil himself, howsoever, as James says, Iam.
3.6. James 3.6.
thy tongue be set on fire of hell (that is) of the Devil, yet know this for a
truth, that the Devil could not use thy tongue, or any other part of thy body,
as an instrument of sin, were it not for the corruption that is within thee;
that is both the fire and suell of sin, and that gives matter and being to
every sin thou committest. And therefore learn thou to lay the fault where
it ought to lie, even on the wickedness of thine own heart, and the evil
motions that arise in thine heart, and be humbled for them.

Again, is it so, things, We must chiefly look to the purging of our hearts.
we must look to the purging of our hearts from sinful motions and lusts.
Would thou purge out the lust or pride that is in thine eye? Thou must labor
then to purge out the lust that is in thine heart; for that fills thine eye with
lust: it is but in vain and to no purpose, and it is but a prepostrous course,
to go about to purge thine hands, thy feet, thy tongue, etc. from sin, so
long as thine heart abounds with evil motions and lusts. For example, it is
but in vain for thee to seek to hold thine hand from violence and fraud, if
thine heart be like Ahabs heart, if there be in thee a secret liking of thy
Neighbors goods, tickling and delighting thine heart, and causing thee to
wish, Oh, would such an house, or such a plot of ground were mine! for that
evil motion, and that root of covetousness will at one time or other send
forth bitter fruits. Oh then, labor thou not only to cleanse thine hand, but
to purge thine heart thereof, as wheat, James 4.8.
Iam. 4.8. Labor to stock up the root of sin, even to mortify and kill the
evil motions and lusts that are stirring in thine heart, and when thou do
humble thy self for sin, and do bewail any particular sin wherein thou
have lived and lain, look thou go down to the root of that and of all thy
other sins, even the corruption of thy nature, and the evil motions stirring
in thine heart, and be humbled for them especially. Psalm. 51. we read, that
when David bewailed his foul sins of Adultery and Murder, he did not rest
in bewailing of them only, but he went down to the root of them, and of all
his other sins, and cried out Verse. 5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and
in sin has my Mother conceived me. As if he had said, Alas, here is the
cause of these foul sins of mine, even the corruption of my nature, and the
evil motions and lusts of mine own heart.

Thus must thou do in bewailing any known sin; thou must go down to the
root of that, and of all other thy sins, and bewail that: for otherwise
thou may bewail some gross actual transgression through self-love, fear
of shame or punishment; and so deceive thy self: and therefore remember thou,
in bewayling any known actual sin, to go down to the root of that, and
all thy other sins, thy corruption of nature, and thy evil motions that are
in thine heart, and be chiefly humbled for them, and then through Gods mercy
thou shall find place to true repentance, even such repentance as is joined
with true faith, apprehending the merit of Christ his death, for the pardon of
all thy sins.

Before we leave this, an objection is to be answered.

For answer to this; corrupt heart, and from a galled conscience:) but if they
come only from the violence and from the extremity of the disease, as they
do in Gods children, certainly then they are not their sins, but the sins
of their disease, and they shall never be laid to their charge.

And again, if evil thoughts, thoughts of blasphemy, be conuaid into the
mind of man or woman, only from the Devil, assuredly they are not their
sins, but the Devils sins, and he shall answer for them; they are their
crosses, not their sins, and they shall never be laid to their charge,
unless they entertayne them, and give consent to them. And so the objection
made, does not overthrow the general truth of this Position, That the cause of
all sin is in our selves, if it be rightly understood, namely, of such sins
as we commit and are our sins, and without Gods mercy shall be charged upon
us: because the sins mentioned either come only from the disease, and so are
not our sins, but the sins of the disease, or come only from the Devil;
and so are not our sins, but the sins of the Devil, and he shall answer
for them.

The next thing to be observed in this Verse, is this, that the Apostle here
calls the evil motions that are stirring in the hearts and minds of such as be
in the flesh, Passions of sins, or perturbations of sins; for so the words
signify. Hence we may gather and conclude the troubled state of unregenerate
persons.

That such as are yet in their natural state and condition, Unregenerate
persons are continually troubled with evil motions stirring in their hearts.
are continually troubled and molested with evil motions stirring in their
hearts and minds; an unregenerate person is never at quiet, but continually
haled and pulled this way or that way, by his own passions and the evil
motions of heart and mind, they give him no rest, but are ever pricking him
forward, and stirring him up to sin: and hence it is that the Apostle James,
Chap. Iam. 4.1.
4.1. says, that the evil motions and lusts that are stirring in the hearts
and minds of men, do sight in their members: they are ever fighting, and
warring, and troubling, and molesting them. Whence, says he, are wars and
contentions amongst you? Even of your lusts that fight in your members. 1. Pet.
2.11. says the Apostle, Dearly beloved, 1. Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul, which trouble and disturb the peace of the soul, and
disquiet them, and will not suffer them to be at rest. 2. Tim. 3.6. 2. Tim. 3.6.
The Apostle describing simple women, that are carried away as a prey, by
hypocritical and cunning Seducers, Cornercreepers, he thus speaks of them,
that they are laden with sins: and he adds further, that they are led with
diverse lusts, or as the word signifies, They are acted and moved, they are
impelled and driven this way and that way, by many evil motions and lusts.
These places do sufficiently clear and confirm the truth of this Conclusion,
that unregenerate persons are never at quiet, but continually haled and pulled
this way and that way by their own passions; as by Lust, by Anger, by Envy, by
Covetousness, by Pride, and the like, and by the evil motions of their own
hearts and minds: and the reason of this is,

The corruption of nature being in full force and strength, as it is in the
unregenerate,

And therefore it must needs be, that such as be in the flesh, and be yet
unregenerate, they are continually pulled and drawn this way, and that way
(though willingly of their own accord) by their own passions, and the
euill-motions of their own hearts and minds give them no rest at all. The
miserable condition of unregenerate persons, in regard of their unruly passio^n.


Here then take we notice of the miserable condition of unregenerate persons,
even of such as yet are in their natural state and condition; they are in a
miserable taking. If a man were so troubled and vexed in his body, that he
could take no rest night nor day, but that his body were continually molested,
tumbled, and tossed up and down, and as it were continually on the rack, and
that whether he sit, or stand, or lie down, all were one, he could find no
ease, no intermission of his trouble and vexation, that man would hold
himself, and that justly, in a pitiful plight, and a miserable taking. Now
thus it is with an unregenerate person, in regard of his soul; his soul is
never at rest, his soul is continually without any intermission haled and
pulled, tugged and drawn this way and that way, by his own passions and
perturbations, his soul is continually troubled either with lust, or envy, or
anger, or fear, or carnal love, or carnal joy, or with one unruly passion or
other, and is never at quiet; and that is a miserable condition if men had eyes
to see it: indeed unregenerate persons see not their misery in this respect,
their unruly passions and distempered affections blinding their minds, and
dazeling and dimming their judgments; but therein is their misery doubled on
them and their danger is far greater in that respect: for thence it comes
that they willingly embrace their own trouble, and go on in it with pleasure.
Unregenerate persons may please themselves, because they enjoy outward peace
and prosperity, and have all things at will, and that heart can wish in the
world: but alas, what is that, so long as there is within, even in their
souls, a seed-plot of trouble and disquietnesse, and their souls are never at
rest, but are continually haled and pulled this way and that way, by their own
unruly passions? and as the Lord says by his Prophet, Isai. 57.20.
Isai. 57.20. They are like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast
up mire and dirt continually. Oh, so long as they be in that case, they are in
a miserable taking, and if they had eyes opened to see it, they would so
think, and so judge of themselves. And indeed for a second use of the point:

In this respect, Gods children, Gods children are bound to magnify Gods
mercy, in freeing them from unruly passions.
such as are truly regenerate, are exceedingly bound to magnify Gods mercy,
that he of his mercy has vouchsafed to set them out of that miserable
condition; to have the heart and mind continually tugged and drawn this way
and that way with unruly passions, and with the motions of sins, is a most
miserable thing. Now this Gods children are freed from; Iam. 5.17.
indeed they have sometimes unruly passions in their souls, as Iam. 5.17. it
is said, HELIAS was a man subject to like passions as we are: but they are not
continually troubled with them, as the unregenerate are; unruly passions are as
strangers, that now and then come; not as home-dwellers; they have no
continual residence and abode in their hearts. And let all Gods children be
mindful to bless God, as for other mercies, so for this as a special mercy,
that they are freed from the continual trouble of their own unruly passions.

Now here we see, that the Apostle calls these motions: he speaks of the
motions of sins; his meaning is, A Popish error discovered
and hence it is clear against the Papists (I will but only name it) That the
first motions that arise in our minds from the corruption of our nature, are
evil, and are sins, though consent of will do not follow: and all sins
are not voluntary, as the Papists teach: for there may be some motions in the
mind, that want conformity with the Law of God; and being such, certainly
they are sins, whether they be with consent of will or no, and though we give
no consent to them, yet they are sins. I will not further stand on that.

The next thing to be observed is this; the Apostle adds (which were by the
Law) not meaning that those motions of sins had their being from the Law, as
if the Law had given being to them, as some ancient Heretics thought,
misconceiuing the Apostles meaning: but that they were occasioned by the Law,
as Verse. 8. he says, Sin took occasion by the commandment. How sin was
occasioned by the Law afterward.

But we see, the Apostle expounds himself in this very Chapter, what he means
by this, that the motions of sins which were by the Law, had force in our
members to bring forth fruit unto death: and that I will note hence is this:

That what thing soever being needful to be known, That which is in one place
of Scripture obscurely delivered, being needful to be known, is in another
place more plainly expressed. Genesis 17.10, 11. Exo. 12.10, 11, 27
is in one place of Scripture obscurely delivered, the same is in another place
more plainly expressed. The Scripture is sufficient in it self for the
answering and resolving of all necessary doubts. For example, to insist in
some particulars, Genesis 17.10. Circumcision is called the Covenant: and, Verse.
11. the sign of the Covenant. Exodus 12.10, 11. The Paschall Lamb is called
the Passover: and, Verse. 27. The sacrifice of the Lords Passover: and so that
form of speech used by Christ in the institution of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which the Papists so much abuse and pervert, to prove the real
presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament after a corporal
manner, is plainly expounded both by Christ himself and by the Apostle Paul:
for when Christ says, Do this in remembrance of me: 1. Cor. 11.26.
and the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.26. As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come: they do plainly show,
that that phrase of speech is thus to be understood, that the Bread and Wine in
the Sacrament are visible signs, and representations of the Body and Blood of
Christ. I might insist in many more particulars, showing this to be the truth:
That what thing soever is needful to be known, is in one place of Scripture
obscurely delivered, the same is in another place more plainly expressed, and
the reason of this is given by the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3.15.
2. Tim. 3.15.

The Scripture is able to make wise to salvation, all necessary doubts. And it
being so, that what in one place of Scripture is obscurely delivered, being
needful to be known, is in another place more plainly expressed, it must
needs be granted,

That the Scripture is the best expounder of Scripture, Scripture is the best
expounder of Scripture, and it is to be applied by Scripture.
and the best way to expound Scripture, is by Scripture it self, and we for
our parts must learn to apply Scripture with Scripture, we must so apply one
place of Scripture, as that we forget not another that may help us in the
right application of it: for this is that wherein the Devil and their own
corrupt hearts deceive many; they apply one place of Scripture, not considering
of another that may teach them rightly to apply it. For example, many hale and
pull to themselves the comfort of such places of Scripture as set forth Gods
mercy, and make known that God is rich in grace, and abundant in pity and
compassion, when happily they turn the grace of God into wantonnesses, and are
such as walk after the stubbornness of their own hearts, and go on with an
high hand and stiff neck in a course of sin, adding drunkenness to thirst,
yet they persuade themselves they shall find mercy from the Lord: and why?
God is rich in mercy, never remembering, Psalm. 25.10.
that Gods mercy and truth go together, Psalm. 25.10. and to apply those
places of Scripture that sound forth Gods mercy, with that speech of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 29.20. Deuteronomy. 29.20.
that God will not be merciful to such, but the wrath of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against them, and every curse that is written in the
book of God shall light upon them: never thinking on that rule of the Apostle,
Gal. 6.16. teaching them to whom mercy belongs (namely) to such as walk after
the Apostles rule. So some in another case take hold of that sentence, Mat.
20.15. Math. 20.15.
Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? (which indeed is a
peculiar privilege belonging only to God) to bolster out their abuse of the
good things they enjoy, and think they may use them as they list, never
remembering what they are taught in other places of Scripture, that they have
nothing simply their own, but that which they have, they have received of the
Lord, and must be accomptant to him even for every bit of bread they put into
their mouths. Thus and many other ways do men apply one place of Scripture,
not remembering another that might help them in the right application of it; and
so indeed they miss to apply Scripture; that Scripture to them, is not the
Word of God, but their own conceit, and they profane the holy Word of God,
and make themselves guilty of a foul and fearful sin, even of taking the
Name of the Lord in vain, for which he says, he will not hold them guiltless
in the third Commandment.

Learn we then to apply Scripture with Scripture, even so to apply one place
of Scripture, as that we forget not another that may help us in the right
understanding of it; for then only shall we find the Word of God as it is in
it self, a Word of sweetness, and sound comfort. It follows, (had force in
our members to bring forth fruit unto death.)

In these words the Apostle makes known the power and working of evil motions
that were in himself and other true believers,

That the evil motions, Evil motions in the hearts and minds of unregenerate
persons, are strong, powerful, and prevailing.
that are stirring in the hearts and minds of unregenerate persons, are no
weak and feeble motions, but they are strong, and powerful, and prevailing
motions, they are energeticall and working motions, and they do strongly
prevail, even to the bringing forth of evil fruits in their souls and
bodies, in all the powers of the one, and in all the parts and members of the
other. If an evil motion, a stirring to sin, arise in the heart of an
unregenerate person from his own corruption, it carries him as with Wind and
Tide, even with violence to sin, 2. Pet. 2.14.
it will not rest till it have brought forth sin. 2. Pet. 2.14. the Apostle
describing false Teachers, and Seducers, who no doubt are unregenerate, he
says of them, ver. 14. that they have eyes full of adultery: the lust that is
stirring in their hearts, is so strong and so preuayling, as it fills their eyes
full of adultery; yea, he adds, that their eyes are so filled with lust, that
they cannot cease to sin, and the lust of their hearts is so powerful, and
has such a working in them, as it gives their eyes no rest, but makes them
sin in lust and wantonness incessantly and without intermission. Pro. 4.16,
17 The holy man of God setting forth the manners of the wicked, he says, They
cannot sleep, except they have done evil, and their sleep departs, except
they cause some to fall. And, They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink
the wine of violence. The motions and stirrings to sin that are in their
hearts and minds, are so strong and so powerful, as they give them no rest,
but make them break their sleep to do evil, and to hunger and thirst after
it, as after meat and drink, when they are hungry and thirsty: we may see
the truth of this in many examples; in Cain, in Achitophel, in Ahab, in Judas,
and in many others.

Cain having a motion of malice and envy stirring in his heart against his
brother, it was so strong and so powerful in him, that it would never let him
rest, till he had imbrued his hands in the blood of his brother, Genesis Genesis 4.8.
4.8. Achitophels heart being taken up with the motions of pride, and with an
high conceit of his own wisdom, they were so strong and so powerful in him,
as it made him rather lay violent hands on himself, then he would endure that
his counsel should be neglected, 2. Sam. 17.23. 2. Sam. 17.23. 1. King. 21.4.
And we read of Ahab, 1. King. 21.4. that his covetous humor, his longing
desire after Naboths Vineyard, was so strong and so preuayling in him, as upon
Naboths refusal to let him have it, it made him sick and sullen, and he would
eat no bread. And we know how strong the motion of covetousness was in the
heart of Judas, it gave him no rest, till he had most wickedly sold his
Master, the Lord Jesus.

We might instance in many other examples of this kind; yea, common experience
shows the truth of this point; we see in common experience, that the motions
of sins that are stirring in the hearts of unregenerate persons, are so
strong and so powerful in them, as they make them mad on sin. Do we not
see, that motions to pride, stirring in the hearts of some, make them mad on
new-fangles? and do not the motions of covetousness make some even mad on the
World? and if they be never so little crossed, oh! they fret and storm and
take on exceedingly. And how does the lust of uncleanness prevail with some?
Job 24.15.
does it not make them, as it is, Job 24.15. wait for the twilight, and say,
None eye shall see them, and disguise their faces, and seek all occasions for
the fulfilling of their lust? And is it not thus with such as are stirred up to
swilling and excessive drinking? does not that evil motion stirring in their
hearts, prevail more with them to draw them to the sin of drunkenness, then
the voice of God in his Word, or any admonition to keep them from it? do they
not run mad on that sin, and will not be turned from it? Woeful experience
shows this to be most true. The reason and ground of this truth is this:

Such as be unregenerate, them. And hereupon we may certainly conclude, that
the evil motions that are stirring in the hearts of unregenerate persons, are
not weak and feeble motions, but they are strong and powerful, and do
strongly prevail to the bringing forth of evil fruit in their souls and
bodies.

This may serve first to discover to many, Many discovered to be unregenerate
persons.
that they are unregenerate, and that they are yet in their natural state and
condition; for why? are there not many that can witness against themselves,
that the evil motions that are stirring in their hearts, are no weak and
feeble motions, but are strong and powerful, and do carry them even with
violence to sin, and do make them seek all occasions to practice it? and
they run even mad on sin? And to insist in some particular, are there not
some, whose hearts being stirred up to pride, do find the motions to that
sin most strong and powerful in them, and that they are carried with
violence to the practice of it? and they will not be turned from it by any
means, they will follow the fashion, and they will set out the vanity and
pride of their hearts, in their garish and newfangled apparel, whatsoever can
be said to the contrary? and some being stirred up to malice and envy, do they
not find malicious murders boiling in their hearts? and are they not carried
with violence to malicious practizes, and their malice gives them no rest, but
makes them break out into railing, and bitter terms, and vile practizes
against their Brethren, and if they durst, they would lay violent hands on
them, and take away their lives? and so some being stirred up to drunkenness,
oh! how violently and with what eagerness do they follow after that sin?
Certainly such persons are in their natural state and condition; and so long
as they are in that state, they are in a fearful state, they can find no
true comfort in any thing, their best works are abominable in the sight of God,
they can have no true peace in their own souls.

Again, That a man can at his own time and pleasure subdue the evil motions
of his own heart, is but a fancy.
is it so, that the evil motions that are stirring in the hearts of
unregenerate persons, are no weak and feeble motions, but strong and
powerful, and do strongly prevail in them, to the bringing forth of sin in
their souls and bodies?

Then let no man fancy to himself, that he can at his own time and pleasure
subdue the evil motions of his own heart, and mortify and kill them, and
turn the course of his heart another way when he will. It is a conceit that
runs in the minds of most men, helped forward by strong delusion of the
Devil, that when they will, they can subdue the evil motions of their own
hearts: but alas, they deceive themselves; evil motions stirring in their
hearts, are no weak and feeble motions, but they are strong and powerful, and
the longer they continue, the stronger they grow, and by continuance they
become more powerful and more preuayling; for then they have not only the
Devil continually to help them forward, but they have also nature and
custom, strength of wit, strength of body, yea happily wealth, and honor, and
all on their side. And hence it is that the most witty, learned, strong, noble,
and rich, are commonly the most notorious wicked ones that live on the face of
the earth, and become the most vile monsters in all outrage of sin.

Let no man then fancy to himself, that he can at his own time and pleasure
vanquish and subdue the evil motions that are stirring in his heart, and so
neglect the timely use of the means that serve to subdue them, but let every
one of us learn betimes, to use the means that serve to that purpose, namely,
a diligent hearing, reading and meditating in the Word of God, and let us apply
the threatenings of it, that are directly against our evil motions, and labor
to get faith into our hearts, whereby we may draw virtue from the death of
Christ, to mortify, kill and crucify the flesh, with the evil affections and
lusts of it, and let us be careful to avoid all occasions that may stir up
evil motions in our hearts, and be earnest and frequent in calling on God,
that he would give us strength of grace against all our evil motions and
stirrings to sin. And hereupon Parents, Masters, and such as have the
government of youth, are to learn their duty, namely this, they may discern
to what sin their children and such as be under their charge be inclined, by
their carriage, and what evil motions be stirring in their hearts; and they
are to labor by instruction, by admonition, by reproof, by moderate and
seasonable correction, to subdue them. Pro. 22.15. Pro. 22.15.
There is a bundle of folly in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction
will drive it out. If Parents suffer corruption and evil motions that be in
their children, to grow to an head, they will in time become incurable.

The next thing that comes to be considered, is the subject wherein the motions
of sins had force in the Apostle himself, and in other true believers, when
they were in the flesh, and that is expressed in these words, In our members,
that is, in the powers of our souls, and in the parts and members of our
bodies. Hence note we in a word,

That the motions of sins that are stirring in the hearts and minds of
unregenerate persons,

They hold and teach, Freedom of will confuted.
has a power in it self to will that which is truly good, which is a gross
and foul error: and if we had no more but this very Text, it were sufficient
to confute it: For if the motions of sins be powerful and preuayling in all
the powers of the soul, and in all the parts and members of the body in such
as be unregenerate, it cannot be, that the will of an unregenerate man has any
power in it self to will that which is truly good, it is not possible; but
let it suffice to have named this. The point here offered, I will stand on, is
this; hence we are further given to understand thus much:

That the corruption of nature shows forth the power and working of it, The
corruption of nature shows forth the powerful working of it in the evil
motions of it, in the powers of the soul, and in the parts and members of the
body.
in the evil motions of it, in the powers of the soul, and in the parts and
members of the body; these evil motions and stirrings to sin, as we have
heard, are strong and powerful in unregenerate persons, and they exercise
their power and working in the powers of the soul, and in the parts and
members of their bodies, and they show themselves preuayling, in that they
bring forth sin ordinarily in the faculties of their souls, and in the parts
and members of their bodies. The force of evil motions that are stirring in
the hearts and minds of unregenerate persons, appears in this, that they
break out into sin ordinarily in the powers of their souls, and in the parts
and members of their bodies. As some corrupt and poisonous humor in the body,
shows the poison and strength of it, in breaking out into Byles, and Blisters,
and Ulcers in the outward parts of the body: So evil motions that are stirring
within, in the heart and mind, show forth the force and poison of them, in
breaking out, and in bringing forth sin ordinarily in the powers of the
soul, and in the parts and members of the body. And therefore we find, that
the Apostle, setting forth the corruption of nature in the full force and
strength of it, Cap. 3. of this Epistle, he shows, that it has a powerful
working in the several powers of the soul, and in the several parts and
members of the body, Verse. 13, 14, 15. Romans 3.13, 14, 15
speaking of men in their natural state, he says: Their throat is an open
Sepulcher, and they have used their tongues to deceit. As if he had said, The
corruption of nature in the evil motions and working of it, shows forth the
power, strength, and force of it, that it is indeed strong and preuayling in
the heart and mind, in that it breaks out and shows it self, both in
bringing forth sin usually in the powers of the soul, and in the parts and
members of the body.

We may observe, that the Apostle sometimes exhorts, that the corruptions and
evil motions that are stirring in the heart, should be suppressed, and kept
from breaking out by the parts and members of the body, Ephesians. 4.29. Ephesians.
4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths. Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication, and all uncleanness, Ephesians. 5.3.
and covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as it becomes
Saints. Coloss. 3.8. Put away filthy speaking out of your mouth. As if he had
said, Howsoever it cannot be, but that sometimes unclean conceits will be
either cast into your hearts by Satan, or arise from your own corruption, yet
suffer them not to break out of your mouths; let not your mouths utter the
filthiness that happily is conceived in your hearts; as much as possibly you
can, keep your hearts clean and free from all filthy thoughts: but if the
heart conceive filthiness, yet let not the mouth utter it. That is the purpose
of the Apostle, in so exhorting, Let no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouths: and, Put away filthy speaking out of your mouth.

Now the Apostle thus exhorting, no doubt, he would have us to know, that
unclean conceits and evil motions that are stirring in the heart, then show
themselves most strong, powerful and prevailing, when they break out and
bring forth sin by the parts and members of the body; and so he confirms the
point in hand.

That the evil motions that are stirring in the hearts and minds of
unregenerate persons, show themselves powerful and prevailing in this, that
they break out and bring forth sin ordinarily in the powers of their souls,
and in the parts and members of their bodies; and it must needs be so, the
reason of it is plain:

For then the inward corruption does manifest the power and strength of it,

This being a truth, A vain and foolish excuse that some plead for their
sins removed.
and is rife and common in the mouths of many; You shall hear some, whose
mouths are full of bitterness, they swear ordinarily, and they commonly
talk idely, and vainly, and the like: yet when they hear of these things, and
are justly reproved for them, thus they seek to put by the reproof; Indeed,
say they, it is true; it is ill we do: but yet we would have you know, that
our hearts are good, and we have as good hearts as the best.

The Doctrine now delivered, shows this to be a most foolish and vain shift.
Is thine heart good, and yet thy mouth runs over with folly and sin? Can
there be a good heart within, and yet the eyes, ears, hands and mouth are full
of wickedness without? is that possible? No, no, deceive not thy self: the
motions of sins show themselves strong, and powerful, and prevailing in thee,
in that they ordinarily break out, and bring forth sin in the powers of thy
soul, and in the parts and members of thy body. Mat. 12.34.
Christ says, Mat. 12.34. Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
And indeed the mouth abounding with oaths, and running over with cursed
speeches, it is a plain evidence that there is abundance of sin in the
heart, If the tongue, as James speaks, I am. 3.6, 8. be an unruly evil, and
a world of wickedness, what is then in the heart? And as one says well, If
there be a beam of wickedness in the eye, there is a great stake in the
heart: and therefore talk not of a clean heart, when thou have a foul mouth;
without question, thine heart is full of filthiness; so long as thy mouth
abounds with folly and sin, a man may judge of thine heart. When a man sees
abundance of smoke coming out of the top of a Chimney, he may say certainly,
There is much fire on the hearth: and so when a man sees abundance of sin
breaking out by the parts and members of the body, he may boldly say, There is
much corruption in the heart: Proverbs 6.12, 13. Solomon having said, that a
wicked man walks with a froward mouth, and makes a sign with his eyes, he
signifies with his feet, he instructs with his fingers; he concludes, that
certainly lewd things are in his heart. And thus indeed a man may safely judge
of thee, when he sees sin breaking out by the parts and members of the body.

And therefore deceive not thy self, sooth not up thy self, with a conceit of
a good heart, when thou have a soul mouth, if thy tongue, thine eyes, thy
mouth, thy hands, and thy feet be used as instruments of the common practice
of sin, certainly the motions of sins are strong, powerful and prevailing
in thine heart, and sin is strong in thee, and thou art yet under the bondage
of it, yea thou art then under the bondage of the Devil, and he holds up his
scepter in thine heart, and thou art in a fearful condition.

The Apostle adds in the last place, To bring forth fruit unto death, that is,
as I showed, to bring forth all manner of sins, which are deadly, and of
themselves bring death and destruction both on body and soul: the point hence
is this:

That every sin, of it self, be it never so small, Every sin of it self
is deadly and damnable.
and death of soul: and this we have heretofore stood on, and proved by this
reason:

Every sin, be it never so small, Law of God, or it wants conformity with
it; and being so, Gal. 3.10.
it has the curse of the Law belonging to it, Gal. 3.10 Cursed is every man
that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to
do them. And what the curse of the Law is, Christ has plainly taught, Matthew.
Matthew. 25.41.
25.41. Even hell fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Other proofs
were added: I will not now stand to remember them.

But before I come to the use of this, an objection is to be answered. 1. Ioh.
5.16.
Some may say, We read, 1. Ioh. 5.16, 17. That there is a sin not to death:
If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, let him ask,
and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin
unto death: I say not, That thou should pray for it. All unrighteousness is
sin, but there is a sin not unto death.

Therefore it may seem not to be generally true,

To this I answer, John in that place, is not to teach, that any sin of it
self deserves not death of body and soul; for that were to contradict other
places of Scripture: but to note a difference between the sin against the
holy Ghost, and all other sins, and to show, that howsoever every other sin
of it self deserves death, yet it is pardonable, and pardon may be obtained
for it through Gods mercy; but that the sin against the holy Ghost is
unpardonable, and that that sin brings certain death, and that we are not
to pray for such as fall into that sin; that is the meaning of that place,
and so it makes not against this truth, That every sin of it self, be it
never so small, is deadly, and damnable, and deserves death of body, and death
of soul. I will not meddle with the use that has been made of this Doctrine,
either of confutation or otherwise, but I will add some further use of it, and
that shall be only an earnest entreaty, that every one of us would suffer the
truth now delivered, to sink into our hearts, and that we would be persuaded
of this truth,

That every sin, of it self, be it never so small, We are to be persuaded
of this truth, that every sin is deadly and damnable.
and makes us liable to all plagues and judgments of God in this life, and to
everlasting perdition in the life to come. Rebellious and hard-hearted sinners
are hardly persuaded of this, it will hardly sink into their heads and hearts,
that their sins are so foul and heinous as Preachers would make them, and
that every sin, of it self, deserves death and destruction both of body and
soul.

If they were persuaded of these things, durst they live as they do, in
Whoredom, in Drunkenness, in Pride, and in other known sins? Durst they
continue in Malice and Envy? Durst they Lie, Slander, Curse, Swear, Rail, and
Revile, and break the Sabbath, and run, as commonly they do, into many
fearful abominations? Surely, their living and continuance in these, and the
like sins, is a plain evidence, they are not persuaded that every one of
their sins deserves all the plagues and judgments of God in this life, and
everlasting perdition in the life to come: and hence it is that they are not
moved, they tremble not, when the judgments of God are justly denounced
against their sins.

Let an outcry be made, and one run through the streets and cry, Fire, fire;
and our hearts are presently smitten with a sudden fear. But let the Minister
cry, Fire, fire, yea, the fire of Gods vengeance, and let him justly denounce
the fire of hell against pride, garishnesse in apparel, against whoredom,
against drunkenness; and whose heart amongst us trembles? who almost is any
thing thereby moved? This shows plainly, that we are not persuaded that every
one of our sins is deadly and damnable of it self, and makes us liable to
all the plagues and judgments of God in this life, and to everlasting
perdition in the life to come.

Well, let us in the fear of God learn to be persuaded of this truth, and
withal remember, that if thou go on in thy known sins, with an high hand
and stiff neck, thou shall not always escape the punishing hand of God; at
one time or other his judgments and his punishing hand will find thee out, and
light on thee. Paradise could not shelter our first Parents from the hand of
God, when they had sinned against him; and heaven it self, a place of greatest
safety and security, could not keep the reprobate Angels from the punishing
hand of God, having sinned against him. Think on these things.

VERSE. 6. But now we are delivered from the Law, being dead unto it, wherein we
were holden, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the Letter.


THe scope and drift of the Apostle, as heretofore I have showed in these two
Verses 5, 6. is this; by a comparison to amplify that part, that himself and
other true Believers should bring forth fruit to Christ; and thus he reasons:
As when we were under the Law, and married to the Law, we brought forth fruits
answerable to that condition: so now, being freed from the Law, and married to
Christ, it is fit and meet we should bring forth fruit to him; so reasons the
Apostle in these two Verses.

The first part of this comparison is laid down Verse. 5. which we have
already handled; In this sixth Verse the Apostle comes to the other part of
it, namely this, That himself and other true believers, being now delivered
from the Law, they ought, and they were bound in lieu of that mercy, to bring
forth fruit to Christ, and to serve the Lord; that is the general matter of
this sixth Verse.

The particulars of it are these: First, But now we are delivered from the Law.
As if he had said, We were heretofore in the flesh, and consequently under
the Law; but now we are in a contrary state and condition, now we are delivered
from the Law.

Secondly, he sets down the proof of that, That being dead, wherein we were
holden.

And then in the next place he lays down the end of their deliverance, Not
in the oldnesse of the Letter.

We see the relation this Verse has to the foregoing matter, the general
matter of it, and several branches of it. Interpretation
(But now we) by the persons in this place under the word (we) the Apostle
means (as before I showed) himself and all other true Believers both of Jews
and Gentiles: and what it is to be delivered from the Law, I likewise made
known before, namely this, not to be freed from al obedience to the Law, but
to be freed from the rigor of the Law, and from the curse of the Law, and from
the power of it, to stir up to sin through the corruption of our nature,
and so these words, But now we are delivered from the Law, carry this sense:
But now both I and you and all true Believers are freed from the rigor, and
from the curse of the Law, and from the power of it. (Being dead unto it) or
rather as the new Translation has it, That being dead, wherein we were held:
that I take to be the better reading, the word ((...)) being supplied in the
original, and in our English, the word (it) or (that.) Now these words (That
being dead) some would have to be referred to the Law; and the meaning to be
this, We are delivered from the Law, the Law being dead. But (as reverend Beza
says well) the Apostle would not so say, that phrase, That the Law of God is
dead, is not found in any of his Epistles: but these words (That being dead)
are rather put down absolutely, as if the reading were thus (that thing being
dead.)

And if any demand what is then meant by that thing? I answer in a word, that
sin, that corruption, that is in us by nature, or rather indeed the force,
the power and the strong working of that corruption, as we may easily gather
from the context: for in the Verse before, the Apostle says, When we were in
the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the Law, had force, had a strong
and powerful working in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death: and then
here he subioynes, But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead
wherein we were held. And what can we understand by that thing, as best
agreeing to the context and purpose of the Apostle, but even that force, that
power and working of sin before spoken of, which it had in the Apostle and
other true believers, when they were in the flesh?

(Being dead unto it) that is, being broken, and as it were, dead, and not able
to bring forth cursed and bitter fruits as it was wont. (Wherein we were
holden) the word rendered (holden) properly signifies forcibly and tyrannically
holden. Romans 1.18.
The same word is used, Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is reueiled from
heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men which withold,
that is, unjustly and forcibly withold the truth in righteousness. And so
the meaning of these words is this; Which did strongly, forcibly, and as
a^yrant hold us in bondage under the Law. That we should serve, that is, that
we should serve God, that we should yield sound and sincere obedience to the
will of God revealed in his Word. (In newness of Spirit.) To pass by the
variety of Interpretations by newness of Spirit, we are here to understand
true holiness both of heart and life, wrought in true Believers by the Spirit
of Christ, and coming from them as they are regenerate, even from their souls
renewed by the Spirit of grace, and therefore called newness of Spirit. (Not in
the oldnesse of the Letter) that is, not in holiness which is only by the
ministry of the Law, which of it self is a dead letter, 2. Cor. 3.6, 7. 2.
Cor. 3.6, 7. Gal. 3.2.
and is not able to give the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. and so is only external and
outward, and such as may come from men in their natural state and condition.

In which state GODS Children and true Believers were before their new birth in
Christ, and therefore called the oldnesse of the Letter. And this Exposition
may further be confirmed by that, Romans 2.29. Romans 2.29.
where the Apostle says, True circumcision is inward, of the heart, and then
subioynes in the Spirit, not in the Letter. Thus then are we to conceive the
meaning of the Apostle in the words of this Verse, as if he had said:

But now both I and you and all true believers are freed from the rigor of the
Law, and from the curse of it, and from the power of it to stir us up to
sin, and the force, power, and strong working of that corruption that is in
us by nature being broken, and as it were, dead, and not able to bring forth
cursed and bitter fruits as it was wont, which in former times did strongly and
forcibly, even as a Tyrant, hold us in bondage under the Law, that now we
should yield sound and sincere obedience to the will of God reueiled in his
Word, in true holiness both of heart and life, wrought in us by the Spirit of
Christ, and coming from our souls, renewed by the Spirit of grace, and not
only in external and outward holiness, such as is by the ministry of the
Law, and may come from such as are yet in their natural state and condition,
and in their old corruption.

To pass by that which is offered unto us from the first words of this Verse,
But now we are delivered from the Law, namely this,

That true Believers are freed from the rigor and curse of the Law, and from
the power of it stirring up to sin. Of that we have spoken heretofore;
therefore I pass by it.

In the first place consider we the general matter of this Verse. The Apostle
makes known in this Verse in general thus much,

That himself and other true believers being delivered from the Law, they
ought, and they are bound in lieu of that deliverance, to bring forth fruit to
Christ, and to serve the Lord, that is the general drift of this Verse; hence
we are taught,

That our freedom and deliverance from the rigor and curse of the Law,
Freedom and deliverance from any yoke of bondage, binds strongly to the
service of God.
binds us strongly to the service of God; yea, the point is general, our
freedom and deliverance from any yoke of bondage, either from sin, or from the
consequence of sin, that which follows on sin, any misery or trouble
whatsoever, is a strong bond binding us to serve the Lord, to glorify him, and
to walk before him in all holy obedience: when we are delivered from sin, or
from any misery or trouble of body or mind, temporal or spiritual, we are
bound, in lieu of that mercy, to walk before the Lord in all good conscience,
even studying and endeavoring to please him in all things: the Scripture is
plentiful in the proof of this. Luke 1.74, 75.
Luke 1.74, 75. says old ZACHARY, That we being delivered out of the hands of
our enemies, should serve him without fear all the days of our life, in
holiness and righteousness before him. Exodus 20.2.
Exodus 20. verse. 2. the Lord sets this as a strong Argument and motive to
stir up his People to serve him, and to bind them to yield obedience to his
Laws and Commandments: That he is the Lord their God, which brought them out
of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. I am (says he) the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. Therefore, Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

And this bond of obedience is again remembered, Micha. 6. verse. 3, 4, 5.
Micha. 6.3, 4, 5.
The Lord there complaynes by his Prophet, of the want of obedience, that the
people did not serve him, and yield obedience to him as they ought to have
done: he presses this very Argument against them, to show the greatness of
their unthankfulness and disobedience: O my people, (says he) what have I
done to thee, or wherein have I grieved thee? testify against me. Surely, I
have brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the
house of servants, and I have sent before thee MOSES, AARON, and MIRIAM. O my
people, remember now what BALAK King of Moab had devised, and what BALAAM the
son of BEOR answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lord. Matt. 11.28. Christ calls all to him that are weary
and laden, clogged with the yoke and burden of their sins, promising ease and
refreshing to them; but withal he subioynes by way of restipulation or
indenting with them again, Verse. 29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me,
that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
As if he had said, I vouchsafing this mercy to you, freeing you from the yoke
and burden of your sins, pressing your souls as low as hell with discomfort,
oh, you are bound in lieu of this mercy, to yield this fruit to me again; you
are to deny your selves, and your own reason, will, and affections, and to
submit your wills to the obedience of the Gospel. And to this I might add many
other testimonies of Scripture clearing and confirming this truth, That our
freedom from any yoke of bondage, from sin, or that which follows on sin,
any misery or trouble, is a strong bond strictly binding us to serve the Lord,
and to walk before him in all holy obedience; the reason of it is this:

Our freedom from any yoke of bondage,

Now our thankful acknowledgement and remembrance of the mercy and power of
God in our deliverance, is expressed in walking worthy of that mercy in some
measure of holy obedience; and therefore this must needs be held as a certain
truth, that our freedom from any yoke of bondage, is a strong bond strictly
binding us to serve the Lord, and to walk before him in all holy obedience.

Let no man then imagine, Freedom from the rigor and curse of the Law, gives
no liberty in men to live as they list
and therefore he may live as he list, and that he is therefore at liberty
to follow the lusts of his own heart. Has the Lord freed thee from hell,
death and damnation? Has he done so great things for thee, that thou should
serve the Devil, and serve the lusts of thine own heart? No, no; If thou so
think, thou deceiuest thy self, thy freedom from sin, and from the curse
of the Law, binds thee strongly to all holy obedience; and if thou yield it not
to the Lord, thou art the most unthankful wretch that lives on the face of
the earth; it may be said to thee as Moses says to the People, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Thou foolish and unwise person, do thou so reward the Lord?

And to descend to some particulars: Has the Lord freed thee from some
special danger, from sickness from some particular trouble of body or mind,
besides deliverance from common troubles and dangers vouchsafed to thee, and
do thou forget it? Do thou forget to be thankful, and to express thy
thankfulness in some measure of holy obedience? Certainly then thou may
justly look for plagues seuen-fold more, as it is Leuit. Leuit. 26.24, 28.
26.24, 28. and thou may justly look for a worse thing to come on thee, as
Christ said to the man healed of his disease, Ioh. 5.14. Thou art made whole:
sin no more, Ioh. 5.14.
lest a worse thing come unto thee. If thou would not provoke the Lord after
sickness, or some other trouble removed from thee, to send a greater plague
and judgment on thee, remember this, that thy deliverance from that trouble,
sickness, and such like, binds thee strongly to all holy obedience, and thou
art to have thine heart enlarged, and thy mouth opened in magnifying and
praising the Lord for that mercy: yea, thou art to express thy thankfulness
in heart, in tongue, and in life and conversation, and so to walk before the
Lord, with greater care to please him: and therefore labor thou to be able to
say with David, Psalm. 119.71. Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been sick, or in this or that trouble, and now
am delivered: for I find my self thereby humbled, and that now there is
wrought in me a greater care to please the Lord, and to walk humbly before
the Lord. This thou must find after deliverance from trouble either of body or
mind; and if it be not thus with thee, but after deliverance out of sickness
or other trouble of body or mind, thou art either more careless, or at least
not better then thou wast before; but proud before, proud still; covetous
before, covetous still; a drunkard before, and a drunkard still, which indeed
is the case of too many; and some there be, who in time of sickness, the hand
of God being on them, have cried out against pride and the vanities of this
world, and some have complained of their ignorance and unprofitableness, and
have promised amendment; yet being delivered, have turned back again to their
old byas, and become as bad or worse in their evil courses, then ever before:
and if it be thus with thee, certainly that forgetfulness and that
unthankfulness of thine, is a judgment of God on thee, and it seals up the
wrath of God against thee; and that affliction or trouble, out of which thou
have been delivered, is but a forerunner of a greater and more fearful
judgment of God to come upon thee.

In the next place we are to observe, how the Apostle here proves that himself
and other true believers were delivered from the law. Thus he proves it, that
the force, the power and the strong working of the corruption of nature, was
broken, and as it were, dead in them, and not able to bring forth the cursed
fruit of it, as it was wont, and therefore they were delivered; so reasons the
Apostle. Hence we are given to understand thus much, That the power and force
of sin being weakened and broken in us, and as it were, dead, and not able to
bring forth the cursed fruits of it, as in former times it was wont, it is an
Argument, and a plain evidence and proof of this, That we are freed from the
Law, even from the rigor and curse of the Law.

If a man find the force of sin broken in himself, The power and force of
sin being weakened in men, it proves that they are freed from the rigor and
curse of the Law.
and that now the corruption of his nature has not that strong, powerful, and
violent working in him as it has had in times past, and that the evil motions
of it have not force in his members to bring forth fruit unto death, he may
certainly conclude, that he is freed from the rigor of the Law, and from the
curse of it: and for this, we have further evidence, Romans 8. v. 1. says the
Apostle, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And then he
subioynes, Which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: thereby
noting who they be that are and may assure themselves that they are freed from
condemnation. As if he had said, In whom the grace of the Spirit is so
powerful, as to subdue the corruption of their nature, and to bring it under;
so as now the force of it is weakened, and broken, and now they walk not after
the lusts of the flesh, but after the Spirit. Certainly they are in Christ,
and they may conclude, that they being freed from the curse of the Law, and
from condemnation, they are not under either the rigor or curse of the Law.

And to this purpose the Apostle speaks plainly, Gal. 5.18. If ye be led by
the Spirit, ye are not under the Law: If the power and strong working of sin
be broken in you, and that ye are now guided and led by the Spirit of grace,
ye are not under the Law, ye are freed from the rigor of the Law, and from
the curse of it. 1. Tim. 1.9. the Apostle says, Knowing this, or, We know
this, It is a thing well known to us, that the Law is not given, or the Law
lies not against a just man, against a man that is just and holy, both by
righteousness imputed and inherent in him, and is sanctified by grace, and so
has the force and power of sin broken in him, the Law lies not against such
a man, he is freed from it, in respect of the rigor and curse of it.

These places (not to add any more) do sufficiently clear and confirm this
truth: That if a man find the force of sin broken in himself, and that now
the corruption of his nature has not that strong and violent working in him as
it has had in former times, he may certainly conclude, that he is freed
from the rigor of the Law, and from the curse of it; and the reason and ground
of it is this:

and broken only by the power of the Spirit, and none have sin weakened and
subdued in them, but only such as have the Spirit of grace and sanctification;
and he that has the Spirit, certainly has Christ, and having Christ, he
has all the benefits of Christ, and so must needs have freedom from the
rigor of the Law, and from the curse of it.

This truth serves to make known to us, How men may know that they are freed
from the rigor and curse of the Law.
and from the curse of the Law. Every one has a good conceit of himself,
every one is ready to assume and take this to himself, that he is freed from
the rigor and from the curse of the Law: that howsoever he is a sinner, yet
Christ has dyed for him, and that Christ has freed him from the desert of
sin, from hell, death and damnation: this the Devil will suffer any one to
say. But would thou prove it; and would thou have such proof of it, as may
comfort thine own soul in the time of trial, and silence the Devil himself
opposing against it? then labor thou to find this in thy self:

That the force of sin is broken in thee, and that now it has not that
strong and powerful working in thee it was wont to have: and from thence thou
may certainly gather and conclude thy freedom from the rigor and from the
curse of the Law. If thou think thou art freed from the curse of the Law, and
that thou art not liable to those plagues and judgments that are due to thy
sins, but that Christ has freed thee from them, and yet sin is as strong,
as powerful, and as preuayling in thee as ever it was, and thou art carried
with as violent a stream, to the committing of sin as ever heretofore,
certainly thou deceiuest thy self. If thou would be sure and on a good
ground, assure thy self that thou art freed from the rigor and curse of the
Law: then never rest till thou find that the force and strong working of sin
is broken in thee, and that now the corruption of thy nature is not able to
bring forth the cursed and bitter fruits of it, as it was wont to do; and from
thence thou may certainly and infallibly conclude, that thou art freed from
the rigor and from the curse of the Law.

Happily thou will say,

I answer, thou may know it by this;

Again, for a second use of this point. Is it so, Comfort for all that find
the power and force of sin broken in themselves.
that if a man find the force and strong working of sin weakened and broken
in himself, he may thence certainly conclude, that he is freed from the
rigor and from the curse of the Law? Here is then a ground of sweet and
excellent comfort, for all those that find the power and force of sin broken in
themselves. Do thou find that howsoever sin still remaynes in thee, yet the
strength of it is weakened and abated, and now it is not able to bring forth
the cursed and bitter fruits of it as it was wont? Is it thus with thee? Then
comfort thy self, here is a ground of sound and sweet comfort indeed, hereupon
thou may certainly conclude, to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou
art freed from the rigor of the Law, and from the curse of it; hereupon thou
may assure thy self, that thou setting thy self to please the Lord, and to
walk before him in truth of heart in all holy obedience, though thou fail and
come short of that thou ought to do, yet even thy weak, thy imperfect, and
thy defective obedience is accepted of the Lord, and that which is wanting on
thy part, is supplied through Christ, and thy obedience is made pleasing to
God: And again, thou may assure thy self, that the curse of the Law is
removed from thee, that Gods wrath is turned from thee, that the nature of his
threatenings are altogether changed in respect of thee, and that neither sin,
nor the Devil, nor his instruments, nor all the power of hell can do any
thing to thy hurt. And that is a sweet comfort to thee: and let all such as
find the force and strong working of sin broken in them, take notice of it,
and think on it to their comfort.

(That being dead wherein we were holden.) A Popish collection confuted.
The Papists from this place gather and conclude, that sin has no life at
all in the regenerate, but is thoroughly dead, and that original corruption is
not only not imputed, but not alive, or having any being in the righteous. So
they teach. But indeed in this very Chapter, to go no further, their opinion
is sufficiently confuted. The Apostle shows in his own example, that in the
most regenerate there is sin remaining, Verse. 20. Sin that dwells in me.
Verse. 21. Evil is present with me. And Verse. 23. I see another Law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the
Law of sin which is in my members. And therefore sin still remaynes in the
most regenerate, yet weakened and wounded even with a deadly wound, so as it is
not able to exercise the power and force of it as it was wont: and the Lord
will have sin still in part remaining in the regenerate, to exercise them in
striving against it, to humble them, and that his mercy may more appear in
freeing them from the strength and power of it, and that they may be more
thankful to him for the same.

We are further to mark, that the Apostle says, That being dead wherein we
were holden. He says not, That being dead that was in us, the force, the
power, and strong working of sin being dead that was in us; but that wherein
we were held, that is, which did strongly, and forcibly, and as a Tyrant, hold
us in bondage under the Law. This phrase and manner of speech is to be
observed. Hence we may gather,

That sin carries a great sway in unregenerate persons, Sin is a Tyrant in
unregenerate persons.
the corruption of nature is a Tyrant in them that are yet in their natural
state and condition, and it holds them in a miserable slavery and bondage; it
holds them under the rigor of the Law, and under the curse of it, and under
the power of it, they are ready to be stirred up to sin, even by the Law,
through the corruption that is in them, and that is a miserable bondage: and
hence it is that unregenerate persons are said to walk after their own lusts,
Iud. Epist. verse. 18. yea, Iud. Epist. v. 18.
to run into all excess of riot, and to think it strange, 1. Pet. 4.4.
that others run not with them into the same; and because they do not,
therefore they reproach them, 1. Pet. 4.4.

To this purpose I might cite many testimonies; but the point was in part
handled before. I showed in the Verse before, That the motions of sins that
arise from the corruption of nature, in the hearts of unregenerate persons, are
strong, powerful, and preuayling, they make men break their sleep to do
evil, and to hunger and thirst after it, as after their appointed food, Ierem.
9.5.
and to take great pains to do wickedly, Ierem. 9.5. Our own woeful
experience shows this to be most true. Oh then, No easy matter to be
delivered from the bondage of sin.
think not that thou can at thine own time and pleasure rid and deliver thy
self from under the bondage of thine own tyrannizing corruption, suffer not
thine heart to be puffed up with such a deceiving thought: if thou so think,
thou deceiuest thy self exceedingly, and thou art even running on in the way
to thine own everlasting perdition, thy corruption is strong and powerful in
thee, and holds thee in a miserable bondage, and thou going on with this
conceit, that thou can, at thine own time and pleasure, wind thy self from
under the power of it; thy corruption gathers more strength, and holds thee
faster under the power of it, for custom and continuance in sin adds
strength to it; It duls the mind, it hardens the heart, Ier. 13.23.
and as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 13.23. It is as easy for the black More to
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, as for one to do good, that is
accustomed to do evil. And therefore deceive not thy self, fancy not to thy
self that thou can, at thine own time, get thy self from under the power
of thine own tyrannizing corruption, and so neglect the timely use of the
means that serve to that purpose; hearing, reading, and meditating in the Word
of God, Prayer, and other holy means that serve for thy calling and
conversion, and for thy deliverance from under the bondage of finne.

Come we now to the last part of the Verse, That we should serve in newness
of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. In these words the Apostle
puts down the end of deliverance from the Law, and makes known, that himself
and other true believers were delivered from it to this end, that they should
serve the Lord in newness of Spirit, even in true holiness wrought in them by
the Spirit, and coming from them as they were sanctified, and not in outward
holiness, and such as is only taught by the ministry of the Law, and may
come from men that are yet in their old corruption: that is the purpose of the
Apostle in these words.

In the first place note we, that the Apostle here uses this word (serve) the
Original is (...), and he says, that we should serve in Newness of Spirit,
that we should serve the Lord in true holiness. Hence it is clear,

That divine, religious, and holy service belongs to the Lord, not only divine
worship, Divine, religious, holy service belongs to the Lord.
but also divine and religious service is due to the Lord, yea, it is due to
him alone, and to no other, either Saint or Angel. The Papists make this
distinction of religious worship; they say there be two degrees of it; one an
higher, which they call (...), worship, whereby God himself is worshipped; and
another lower, which they call (...), service, whereby the Angels and Saints
are to be worshipped, who (say they) being glorified in heaven, are in
special favor with God; and so they give to them adoration, and invocation.

This distinction is absurd and foolish; A Popish distinction confuted.
for though there be a worship proper to God above, and incommunicable to any
creature, yet (...) does not always signify that, neither does (...) so
properly agree to creatures, as that it is never given to God: for the Apostle
commonly calls himself (...), a servant of Jesus Christ. And here he
teaches us to yield to God (...), service. And Romans 14.18. the Apostle says,
Whosoever in these things serves Christ, is acceptable unto God, and approved
of men. The same original word is there used that here we have: and therefore
that Popish distinction between worship and service, cannot stand with the
truth and plain evidence of the Word of God.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle says not barely, that we
should serve the Lord, but he further expresses wherein, namely, in newness
of Spirit, that is, in true holiness, True believers are to serve the Lord in
true and spiritual holiness both of heart and life.
and coming from them as they have in them the Spirit of grace. Hence we are
given to understand,

That true believers, even as many as hold themselves freed from the rigor and
curse of the Law, they are to serve the Lord, and to yield obedience to him in
true holiness both of heart and life, even in true and spiritual holiness,
such as comes from a renewed heart and sanctified soul are they to serve the
Lord; they are to yield to the Lord new obedience and spiritual service both
in heart and life, even new and spiritual thoughts, words, and actions. For
this we have further evidence and testimony of Scripture. Ezech. 36.26.27
Ezech. 36.26, 27. the Lord says, He would give his people a new heart and a
new Spirit: he would put his Spirit within them, and take away the stony heart
out of their body, and give them a heart of flesh, and cause them to walk in
his Statutes, and keep this Judgments, and do them. As if he had said, Having
given you a new heart, and having renewed you by my Spirit, you shall then yield
to me new obedience, and spiritual service, both in heart and life. Romans
12.1. The Apostle thus exhorts the true believing Romans, I beseech you,
Brethren, by the sweet mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which (says he) is your reasonable
and spiritual serving of God.

And hence it is that true believers are often called on in Scripture, and
exhorted to a new course of life, and to yield to the Lord new thoughts, new
words, and new actions, as 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a
new creature. And Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. the Apostle thus exhorts the Ephesians,
That they should cast off, concerning the conversation in times past, the old
man, which is corrupt through the deceiuable lusts, Verse. 23. And be renewed in
the Spirit of your mind, Verse. 24. And put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. And to this purpose I might cite
many more testimonies, all driving to this issue, and urging this duty on true
believers, that they are to yield to the Lord, new obedience and spiritual
service, both in heart and life: and the reason of this is given by Christ,
Ioh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and he must have worship and service, suitable and
agreeable to his nature, true worshippers, and such as truly serve God, must
worship and serve him in Spirit and Truth. They must yield to him spiritual
worship and service.

And therefore this must needs be held to be a duty of all true believers,
even of as many as would serve the Lord as they ought, that they are to yield
to him new obedience, and spiritual service both in heart and life.

Before I come to make use of this, I hold it needful to stand a little
further on it, that we may better conceive it, and that it may be more
profitable to us: I will therefore,

First,

Secondly, what it is.

Thirdly, the kinds of it,

For the first. The ground of true spiritual service of God.
The ground of true spiritual service of God, is a true knowledge of God, as
he has revealed himself in his Word, to know God to be infinite in power,
wisdom, justice, mercy, holiness, goodness, etc. and that he is a Beholder
and a Judge of all secrets, and will render to every man according to his
works. This is the very root and ground of all sound, hearty, and sincere
affection in the service of God. We read, Dan. 9.4. Daniel thus prayed, O Lord
God (says he) which art great and fearful, and keep covenant and mercy
toward them which love thee, and toward them which keep thy Commandments.

Where we may observe, that Daniel first rightly conceiues the greatness and
goodness of God, and from thence proceeds an hearty and humble confession of
his sins, and the sins of the people: and indeed, God cannot be served in
Spirit and Truth, of them of whom he is not known in some measure by the
light of his Word. It is not possible that a man should either trust or hope in
God, or love him, or fear, or serve him as he ought, when he knows him not.
It is his mercy, love, goodness, truth, power, justice, and such like, that
causes men to trust, hope, love, fear and serve God as they ought: therefore
to know God truly, as he is set forth in his Word, is the ground of the true,
sound, and spiritual service of God.

Now what true spiritual service of God is, What the true spiritual service
of God is.
thus we are to conceive it. It is a true acknowledgement of Gods power,
justice, mercy and goodness, with an inward and sincere affection in some
proportion agreeable to that acknowledgement: for as we know by the light of
the Word, that God is just, good, and omnipotent: so must we in his service,
in our hearts acknowledge him so to be, and be affected toward him accordingly
in all duties of Gods service: with the outward work, must go inward and good
affections, and then we serve God with spiritual service; and this is that
the Lord in all times has called for: Thorowout the Book of God we are
taught, to serve God in pureness of Spirit, in simplicity and soundness of
heart; and that is spiritual service of God.

Now in the third place, The kinds of the service of God.
for the kinds of this service: they are two; either it is such as is
immediately performed to God, as in all actions of religious worship, in
hearing, in speaking the Word of God, in Prayer, in receiving the Sacraments,
and the like. Or such as is mediately offered up to God, as in the duties of
love, mercy, equity, and justice to men; for therein also we serve God.
Coloss. 3.24. the Apostle says, that Servants in doing service to their
Masters in singleness of heart, they serve the Lord Christ. Thus then conceive
we the doctrine.

True believers are to yield to the Lord new obedience and spiritual service,
both in heart and life, that is, they are to know and acknowledge God as he is
made known in his Word, even a God of infinite power, goodness, mercy, truth
and justice, and to serve him in truth of heart and inward affection answerable
to that acknowledgement, both in every action of his divine worship, and in
every duty of love, mercy, equity, and justice, they perform to their
Brethren.

This being a truth, Opus operatum. The Papists teach, The Popish doctrine of
Opus operatum, ouerturned.
that the very work done in any kind of Gods service, is sufficient that a
man may truly serve God, if he do a duty commanded of God, though he never
think of God, nor have any good motion in his mind, in the act and time of
doing it; that is their doctrine: which is a foul and gross error, and cannot
stand with the truth now delivered. I leave it, and for use of the point, to
our selves.

Is it so, that true Believers are to yield to the Lord, That many come far
short of yielding that true service to the Lord, which they owe unto him,
discovered.
both in heart and life, they are to know and acknowledge God as he himself
is made known in his Word, to serve him in truth and soundness of heart, both
in the duties of piety toward God, and in the duties of love toward men. Oh
then, how far short are many in the world, that would be held true believers,
from that true service they owe to the Lord? Do not many content themselves
with a formal service of God? Do they not think they do God high service,
if they come to the Church, hear the Word and pray?

And will they not brag of it, and say they serve God duly and truly every
day Morning and Evening? They say their prayers, though (God knows) without
inward touch of heart, without any reverence of the great and glorious Majesty
of GOD, never acknowledging him to be a God of infinite power, goodness,
mercy, truth and justice. And is it not thus with most men in doing the duties
of love, mercy, equity, and justice to their Brethren? Do they perform those
duties to men in conscience to God, knowing him to be a God of infinite
wisdom, power, justice, mercy, and goodness, and acknowledging him so to be,
and doing those good things in truth of heart and soundness of inward
affection, answerable to that acknowledgement? Nay, do not men content
themselves in living ciuilly with others, and please themselves exceedingly, in
that they perform duties of love, mercy, equity, and justice to their
Brethren after a civil honest fashion? Yea, do they not stand on it, that
they are religious, and they are Gods servants, and who dare say nay to it?

Will you say that they are not religious, and that they are not Gods servants,
because they are not so precise as happily you are? They will needs be held
religious and Gods servants, and yet many of them are such devout and religious
persons, Act. 13.50.
as those Women were, Act. 13. verse. 50. who raised persecution against Paul
and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts.

Too many such religious persons there be in the world, that raise trouble
against their Ministers, vex them, and grieve them, and do what they can to
dishearten them, and to weary them out of their lives, such persons thinking
that they are Gods servants, deceive themselves, they are far short of that
Religion, and that spiritual service they owe to the Lord.

And know it for a truth, thou that seruest God for fashion, thou that art
ignorant, and know not God, as he has reueyled himself in his Word; or at
least do not acknowledge him to be a GOD of infinite wisdom, power,
goodness, mercy, and justice, and so live only a civil honest life, and
do good duties only of form and fashion, that an hypocrite, whose portion is
hell fire, is as good a servant of God as thou yet art, and shall as soon go
to heaven as thou shall, unless thou alter thy course; and therefore deceive
not thy self. If thou hold thy self a true servant of God, thou must yield to
him new obedience and spiritual service. And let every one take notice of the
duty now delivered: and if thou persuade thy self thou art a true servant of
God, then learn thy duty: Thou art to serve the LORD in Spirit and Truth;
thou art to know God as he has made himself known in his Word, Pro. 3.6.
and thou art to acknowledge him in all thy ways, Pro. 3. verse. 6. Thou art to
acknowledge him to be a God of infinite power, wisdom, goodness, mercy,
truth and justice, and to serve him in truth of heart and soundness of inward
affection, answerable to that acknowledgement, in all the duties of piety
toward his holy Majesty, and in all the duties of love, mercy, equity, and
justice toward men. If thou so serve the Lord, then do thou serve him in
newness of Spirit, even in true spiritual holiness; and that will be
pleasing to the Lord, and that alone will bring comfort and peace to thine own
soul.

In the next place observe we, (In newness of Spirit:) he says not in
newness of life, or in true spiritual holiness, but in newness of Spirit:
thereby giving us to know whence new obedience, and true spiritual holiness
that true believers are to yield to the Lord, comes, as namely, that it comes
from the Spirit of grace and sanctification; and the point hence further
offered, is this:

That new obedience and true holiness comes from the Spirit of God, New
obedience and true holiness is the work of Gods Spirit in men.
it proceeds from the Spirit of grace and sanctification, that men yield to
the Lord new obedience and true holiness, it is the work of his Spirit in
them; and so far forth as men are wrought on, and renewed by the Spirit of
God, so far they yield to the Lord new obedience and true holiness, and what
good soever is in men, and whatsoever comes from them, that is truly good and
holy, it comes from the Spirit of God. This truth is clear in many places of
Scripture, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
says the Apostle, is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: every good affection and every good
and holy action is a fruit of the Spirit: Ezech. 36.27.
And to this purpose that place in Ezech. 36.27. is clear. The Lord says, I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments, 2. Cor. 3.18.
and do them. 2. Cor. 3.18. the Apostle says, We are changed into the Image
of God, from glory to glory, and that by the Spirit of the Lord, clearing and
confirming this truth,

That new obedience and true holiness comes from the Spirit of God, and that
men have any dram of true holiness in them, or are able to practice it in any
measure, it is only of the Spirit of grace and sanctification. And the ground
of this is that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.5.
Cor. 3.5. Of our selves we are not able to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. Men know not God with holy knowledge, but as
they are enlightened by the Spirit of God. 1. Cor. 12.3. The Apostle says, No
man can say that Jesus is the Lord, no man can acknowledge Jesus Christ to be
the Lord of life and glory, but by the holy Ghost. Let a man have never so
good a wit, and be endued with never so excellent parts of nature, yet he
knows not God, neither can know him, nor the things of God, but as he is
enlightened by the Spirit; much less can he love God, or yield obedience and
true spiritual service to him, unless he be wrought on by the Spirit of God.
Therefore new obedience and true holiness comes only from the Spirit of God.
If men have any goodness or holiness in them, or be able to practice it in
any measure, it is only the work of the Spirit of grace and sanctification.

Let us take notice of this to this purpose. None but such as have the Spirit
of grace can yield new obedience to God.
First, this makes known to us, that none but such as have the Spirit of grace
and sanctification, can possibly yield new obedience and true holiness to the
Lord; a man that is yet in his natural state and condition, may have a show of
holiness, and may do things good in themselves, and may please himself in
the doing of them; but as they are done by him, they are no part of true and
holy obedience, and in doing of them he does not please the Lord; it is no
true holiness, nor pleasing to God, that has not the stamp of the Spirit on
it, and comes not from the Spirit of grace and sanctification.

Again, We are to give the praise and glory of that goodness and holiness
we have in us, to the Lord.
this truth must teach us in the second place thus much: if we have any
goodness, any true holiness in us, we are to give the glory and praise of
that to whom it belongs, namely, to the Lord, and to the working of his Spirit.
Have thou thy mind framed to good thoughts, and to good and holy meditations,
and thine heart to good affections and holy desires, and art thou able to
practice the duties of holiness in some measure? Give the whole praise and
glory of that work to the Lord, and to the working of his holy Spirit. By
nature thou have no better thoughts, affections, nor actions, then other men;
and if now thy mind and heart be taken up with new and holy thoughts, bless
the Lord for it, and acknowledge the gracious and good work of his Spirit in
thee, and take heed that in this case thou give not too much to the outward
instruments, gaze not too much on the excellency of the gifts of any that has
been a means to do thee good, and to work grace and goodness in thee, lest
so thou give part of the glory to the instrument; but ever have an eye on the
Lord who has vouchsafed to thee the working of his Spirit, whose only work
it has been, and remember that Paul or Apollos, such or such Ministers, are
but Ministers of GOD, by whom thou have been wrought on, 1. Cor. 3.5. 1. Cor.
3.5.
bless God for them, but give him alone all the glory, and all the praise of
that work; to him of right it belongs.

Further observe we, that the Apostle here makes an opposition between
newness of Spirit, and the oldnesse of the Letter: he says, That we should
serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter. He opposes
new holiness and old, namely, such as may come from men as yet in their old
corruption. Hence note we,

That new holiness and old cannot stand together, New obedience and old cannot
stand together.
new obedience that savors of a new heart and a sanctified soul, and old
obedience, that is, such as savors of the old man, and of the corruption of
nature, and comes only from that corruption. These two cannot sort and settle
together. And if this be a truth, as it were easy to make it good by plain
evidence of Scripture, surely then it cannot be that they serve God,

That they are the servants of God, They that follow the fashions of the world
are not the servants of God.
Romans 12.1. the Apostle says, Give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God: and, Verse. 2. he subioynes, Fashion not your selves like
unto this world, but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect.

In the last place observe we,

That the Law of God, The whole Word of God is but a dead Letter, without the
work of the Spirit. Psalm. 119.33, 34
without the Spirit, is but a dead Letter. The ministry and preaching of man,
not accompanied with the work of the Spirit of God, is but a dead Letter, it
is not able to work grace and faith, or any true holiness at al: and
therefore, Psalm. 119. David often prayed to the Lord, that he would teach him,
and give him understanding. Ver. 33, 34. and that he would open his eyes, that
he might see the wonders of his Law, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. The Apostle thus prayed
for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
That the Spirit of wisdom and revelation might be given unto them, and that
the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened: and 2. 2. Cor. 4.6.
Cor. 4.6. the Apostle says, that God by the same Almighty power, by which he
brought light out of darkness at first, by the same power he shines in the
hearts of true believers, and gives them light and true saving knowledge in the
face of Jesus Christ, clearing and confirming this truth. That the ministry
and preaching of the Word, being not accompanied by the work of the Spirit, is
but a dead Letter, and not able to work grace and true holiness: and the
reason is this,

The Lord has reserved that as a Prerogative proper and peculiar to himself,
to make men understand, Cor. 3.7. PAVL may plant, APOLLOS may water, but GOD
alone gives the increase: he alone makes the doctrine of his Word profitable.

We read, that the Word of God it self conuerts,

The Word of God (indeed) conuerts, in lightens,

And first this may serve to arm and strengthen us against offense, in regard
of this, It ought not to offend us, that men profit not by the Word of God,
truly and faithfully taught.
that men are not wrought on by the plain evidence and truth of the Word of
God; we are not to stumble at this, that where the Word is truly and
faithfully preached, there some continue in their hardness and sins, and are
vile and notorious sinners, unreformed in their hearts and lives, yea make a
mock at the Judgments of God, denounced justly against them for their sins;
we must remember, that grace and holiness are things that God must give, and
they are wrought only by the power of the Spirit, working together with the
Word. Were it not for this, the Ministers of the Word could have small
comfort. But indeed Paul may wish himself separated from Christ for the
winning of men's souls; yet shall no more be won to Christ, then it pleases
the Father to draw, Ioh. 6.44. The Spirit blows where he lists; and
therefore in this respect we are not to be offended.

Again, How we are to come to the hearing of the Word of God.
is a dead Letter. Surely then we are to come to the hearing of the Word with
humble hearts, we are to lay aside all high conceit of our own wit and
understanding: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: yea,
we are not to rest in our reading of the Word of God, or in that we hear or
learn of our Teachers, but we must be earnest with the Lord, that he would be
pleased inwardly to teach us, by his Spirit; and the Lord vouchsafing to
accompany the ministry of his Word to us with the inward working of his
Spirit, we are to be thankful for that mercy: that is a mercy not bestowed on
many. How many do we see lost in ignorance, and in hardness of heart, and
unreformed in their hearts and lives, who live in the same place with us, and
frequent the same means of salvation that we do! It is a blessing of God to
have the Word preached to us faithfully and truly; but a double blessing is
it, to have understanding hearts given us, even hearts yielding to the truth of
the Word, and to come to the saving knowledge, and comfort of the Word, that
is a blessing that cannot be sufficiently prized, and in respect of that we are
to break out with David, and say, Lord, what am I, that thou should show me
such mercy! I was borne and brought forth in sin, and I have lived in sin,
and yet thou have vouchsafed mercy to me above many thousands. Thus are we to
meditate of the mercy of God in this respect.

VERSE. 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay, I knew not
sin, but by the Law: For I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou
shall not lust.


THe Apostle having finished the first part of this Chapter in the Verses
foregoing, and showed how true believers are freed and delivered from the Law:
In this verse he enters on the second part of it, wherein he cleeres the Law
from some foul blots that some might happily cast on it, and commends it, and
shows the true use of it; and this he does from this 7. Verse to Verse 14.

The blots the Apostle wipes away from the Law, are two. First, that the Law
should be the cause of sin; and this he propounds and takes away, Verse. 7.
and withal he shows, that not the Law, but Sin taking occasion by the Law,
wrought Concupiscence revived in him, deceived him, and slew him, for of all
these he gives instance in his own person, Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. And then he
shows, that the Law in it self is just and holy, Verse. 12. The second blot
the Apostle wipes away from the Law, is this, that the Law should be the cause
of death, which he propounds and answers, Verse. 13.

To come to this 7. Verse. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid.
Nay, I knew not sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not lust. The Apostle having said, Verse. 5. That the
motions of sins had force in the members of true believers, to bring forth
fruit to death; hereupon some were ready to charge the Law to be evil, and
to lay this blot on it, that therefore the Law was sin, or the cause of
sin: This foul calumny and this gross conclusion the Apostle disclaymes:
he meets with it in this Verse, on this manner. First, knowing the former
Position to be sound and good, he prouokes those that were like to cavil and
to pervert that Position, to tell him what they could thereupon conclude in the
first words of the Verse, What shall we say then? what follows on this? what
shall we hereupon infer. And then secondly, he puts down that conclusion,
that they in likelihood might, or, it may be, did infer by way of
interrogation likewise, Is the Law sin? Shall we thus conclude, does this
Conclusion follow on my former Position, that therefore the Law is sin? To
this he answers negatiuely, and generally no, and that in a phrase of
detestation, as abhorring such a foul Conclusion: God forbid. And then to this
general answer he subioynes a further refutation of that absurd Conclusion,
by an Argument from a right and proper use of the Law: that the Law is so far
from being the cause of sin, that one right use of it is, to discover sin and
to make it known, insisting in his own example. Is the Law sin? God forbid,
says the Apostle. Nay, says he, I my self knew not sin, but by the Law:
and that he further confirms by a particular instance of his knowledge of
Lust, that he himself came to the knowledge of Lust by the Law, and that he
had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. And so we
see the general drift of the Apostle in this Verse.

What shall we say then? Interpretation
These words, as I have showed, have respect to that the Apostle said, Verse. 5.
that the motions of sins which were by the Law, had force in our members to
bring forth fruit unto death: and they are thus to be conceived, as if he had
said, What then? What follows on that? What Conclusion shall we thereupon
infer? Is the Law sin? by a Metonymie of the effect.

The Apostles meaning is this: Is the Law the cause of sin? Does this
Conclusion follow on the former Position, that the Law is the cause of sin?

God forbid: that is a phrase of abhorring and detestation, as if the Apostle
had said, Far be it from us so to think; fie on it, it is a very absurd and
gross thing so to think; nay, or nay rather, I knew not sin, but by the
Law. That phrase (I knew not sin) implies two things: First, this; I was
ignorant of some things to be sins, which yet are sins, I knew them not, or
I took no notice of them to be sins. And secondly, this; I was ignorant of
the greatness of sin; such things as I knew to be evil by the light of
nature, I did not soundly and thoroughly know to be so evil as indeed they are,
but by the Law, that is, by any other means but only by the Law. The word
(Law) here signifies the moral Law of God, published by Moses in the ten
Commandments, as appears by the instance following; For I had not known
lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust: that is, I had never come
to know lust to be sin, but that looking into the Law of God, I found it
there expressly forbidden and condemned, the Lord in the ten Commandments
saying directly, Thou shall not covet, or, Thou shall not lust. And by Lust in
this place, we are to understand both the rebellion of nature, the inclination
to evil, and those first motions whereby we are stirred up to evil, and do
with delight think any thing contrary to the love of God or our Neighbor,
though we never give consent of will to commit that evil: for the Apostle
having but the use of reason, could not be ignorant that Concupiscence with
consent of Will was sin, which the Heathen by the light of Nature did know
and confess.

Thus then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this
Verse, as if he had said,

What then? what follows on that Position, that the motions of sins which
were by the Law, had force in our members to bring forth fruit unto death? What
shall we thereupon infer? Does this conclusion follow on it, That the Law is
the cause of sin? Oh, no: far be it from us so to think; it were very
absurd and gross so to imagine, nay rather, this is a truth: I speak but of
mine own experience, I my self was ignorant of some things to be sins,
which yet were sins, and the things I knew to be evil by the light of
Nature, I did not soundly know to be so evil, as indeed they are, by any other
means but only by the moral Law of God. For example, I had never come to
know that Lust, the rebellion, the inclination to evil, and those motions
whereby we are stirred up to evil, and do with delight think of any thing
contrary to the love of God or our neighbor, though we yield not consent of
will to commit that evil, were sins, but that looking into the Law of God, I
found them there expressly forbidden, the Lord in the tenth Commandment
saying directly, Thou shall not covet, or, Thou shall not lust.

Come we now to such things as are hence to be observed. What shall we say
then? Is the Law sin? We see, the Apostle is forced to prevent an absurd
conclusion, that some were ready to infer on his former doctrine. He having
delivered that the motions of sins which were by the Law, had force in our
members, to bring forth fruit unto death; some were ready thereupon to
conclude, that therefore the Law was the cause of sin. This the Apostle is
forced to prevent and to say, What shall we say then? is the Law sin? Is the
Law the cause of sin? God forbid. Whence we see clearly,

That the holy Truth of God is subject to be perverted, The holy Truth of God
is subject to be perverted.
and to have absurd conclusions urged from it. It is no new thing, that some
draw from the holy Truth of God absurd and gross conclusions; We are not to
marvel that some force from the Truth of God absurd conclusions.
as here we see Chap. 3. of this Epistle; and thus it has been, is now, and
will be to the end of the World: and therefore we are not to marvel at this,
that some pervert the holy Truth of God, and force from it absurd and gross
conclusions. For example: That one Child of God may infallibly know another,
and that Repentance goes before Faith, and the like; this is no strange thing,
thus it has been in all ages, and will be to the end of the World. The
Papists they lay it as a reproach on the Truth taught in our Church, that many
absurd opinions do spring up together with it. Surely they might as well, in
this respect, reproach the Truth taught by the Apostle, and by the Lord
himself. Is it not the Truth of God, because some do force from it absurd and
gross conclusions? Nay rather, we are to acknowledge it to be the same Truth
that was taught by the Apostle, seeing the Devil seeks to pervert it, as he
did in old time: the Devil is still like himself, and he labors now as much
as ever, nay, more, because he is nearer to his end, to corrupt men, to sow
errors, and to force from the holy Truth of God many absurd and gross
conclusions. And the consideration of this may strengthen us against offense,
in regard of many damnable errors and heresies that sprout up together with the
preaching of the sound and holy Truth of God.

Now in that the Apostle confutes that absurd conclusion, That the Law should
be the cause of sin, and says, What shall we say then? is the Law sin?
is the Law the cause of sin? God forbid: Note we briefly,

That the Law is not the cause of sin: The Law is not the cause of sin.
and to break out: but yet it is a wrong to the Law, and an imputation falsely
cast upon it, to say that it is the proper cause of sin: and so is it a wrong
to the Gospel, How the Papists wrong the Doctrine of the Gospel.
that it is a Doctrine dispossessing men's hearts of all true love of God and
men, and setting open a gappe to all looseness of life; for so they charge the
Doctrine of Gods free Grace and free Justification of a sinner to be. This is a
mere slander. Indeed, so great is the corruption of man's degenerate nature,
that many turn the Grace of God into wantonness: but that is but an
accidental event, no proper effect of Gods free Grace.

In the next place observe we, Nay, I knew not sin, but by the Law. I knew
not some things to be sins, but only by the Law. Hence we are given to
understand thus much,

That by the Law of God only, Men come to sound knowledge of sin, only by the
Law of God. Romans 3.20. Gal. 3.19.
men come to sound knowledge of sin, men come to know that to be sin, which
indeed is sin, and sin to be so foul and heinous as it is, only by the
Law of God: And to this purpose the Apostle speaks plainly, Romans 3.20. By the
Law comes the knowledge of sin: and, Gal. 3.19. he says, The Law was
added, meaning the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, because of transgression.
That Law serves to discover sin, and the punishment of it, and for the sound
conuincing of men, touching their sins, and that Law only does this: for
howsoever the Law of Nature do sometimes discover sin, Genesis 20.9.
as we see in Abimelech, Genesis 20.9. and we have example of it in other of the
Heathen, yet that Law being much weakened by the corruption of nature, it
cannot thoroughly discover sin nor the wrath of God due to sin, only the
Moral Law of God does soundly and thoroughly discover sin, and men come to the
sound and thorow-knowledge of sin, only by that Law. And the reason is this.

That Law only is the perfect rule of righteousness, in it self it is pure
and perfect, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
Psalm. 19.7, 8. and therefore it does perfectly discover sin, and men come to
the sound and thorow-knowledge of sin, only by that Law.

Now this first serves to prove, The knowledge of Gods Law is necessary.
it is needful that the Law of God be taught, and made known to us, and it is
needful that we learn the Law of God, and that we should come to the
knowledge of it: for why? It is the Law of God only, that gives us a true
sight of sin, and by that alone we come to a sound and thorow-knowledge of
sin; and therefore it is needful that we learn and know it, and to that end
we are carefully to attend on the means that may bring us to the
understanding and knowledge of it; and we are with David to pray to the Lord,
that he would teach us, and give us understanding, and open our eyes, that we
may see the wonders of his Law.

Again, is it so, We are to judge of sin only by the Word of God.
Surely then, if we would soundly and thoroughly know sin, if we would know
what things are sins, and how foul, ugly, and monstrous a thing sin is, we
must look into the Book of God, and not rest in our own sense and
understanding; we must not judge of sin, by the crooked rule of our own
reason: for this is that which deceiues many, they judge of sin by their own
corrupt sense and reason. For example; they think it is nothing to take the
Name of God into their mouths at every turn, and to say, Oh God! O Lord! O
Jesus! Gods sonty! and the like. They think their words are but wind, and
that it is nothing to open their mouths against such as fear God, and to
revile and to reproach them, and they think it nothing to lie for advantage,
and to swear by faith or troth, and that it is a sign of a base mind to put
up an injury, Which indeed is a man's glory, Pro. 19.11. Pro. 19.11.
with a thousand like. And hence it is that men put fair names on foul
sins, and call Covetousness, Good husbandry; Pride, Comeliness; and
Drunkenness, Good fellowship, and such like.

Thus men deceive themselves, in judging of sin by their own sense and
reason. We must learn, not to rest in our own sense and reason, touching
sin; but we are to look into the Book of God, and to examine our hearts
and lives by the Law of God published in his Word, the sum whereof we have in
the ten Commandments; and we shall thereby find thousands of things to be
sins, which we never thought to be so, yea, thereby we shall find out our
special sins; and secret sins, and that every swaruing from the Law of
God, though it be but in the least want of that the Law requires, to be sin,
1. Ioh. 3.4.
1. Ioh. 3.4. And therefore by that we are to examine our selves, and
especially by the first and last Commandments of the Law. The first, showing
the first motions of our hearts against God. And the last showing the first
motions of our hearts against our Neighbor, (though we yield not consent of
will to them) to be evil.

We are further to mark, Is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay, the Law discouers
sin, or sin is made known by the Law: but he gives instance in himself,
and he says, I knew not sin, but by the Law. As if he had said, That I
speak, I speak out of mine own experience, even I my self knew not sin, but
by the Law, that is, I my self came to the knowledge of sin by the Law. From
this manner of speaking, the Apostle thus insisting in his own example, and
speaking out of his own experience, two things are offered to our
consideration; I will speak of them in order.

The first is this: He is the best Teacher, that can speak out of his own
experience.
and touching matters of faith and salvation; he is the best Teacher, that is
able to speak of those things out of his own experience; he is the fittest to
admonish, to reprove, and to comfort others, that can deliver the Word of
Instruction, Admonition and Comfort, out of his own experience. Read Psalm.
51.12, 13. Psalm. 51.12, 13.
We there find, that David desired the Lord to restore to him the joy of his
salvation, and to stablish him with his free Spirit, and then he would teach
others the way to find the like comfort and heavenly joy: Then (says he)
shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. Heb. 5.2. It is said, that the high Priest under the Law, Heb. 5.2.
having experience of infirmities in himself, was fitter to have compassion on
the people, and thereby was able sufficiently to have compassion on them that
were ignorant, and were out of the way, because that he also is compassed with
infirmities. Mat. 5.19. says Christ, Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall observe and teach the Commandments of God, the same shall be
called great in the Kingdom of heaven. Where we see, that he puts observing
or doing, before teaching, by that order of the words plainly pointing out this
Truth: That he is the fittest to teach others, who himself is a doer of that
he teaches, and can teach out of experience. The reasons of this truth are
these:

First, experience of the efficacy, power,

Again, deliver the Truth of God, and not his own conceit. And secondly, that
he deliver it in wisdom, with due consideration of necessary circumstances of
time, place, and person. He that so delivers the holy Truth of God out of his
own experience, without question is the best Teacher.

This ought to stir up all Ministers of the Word, Ministers are to labor for
experience of that they teach to others in themselves.
which indeed are excellent things, and of special use in teaching, and are
not to be held, as some foolishly think, Antichristian, or needless, they are
of special good use, and are to be sought after, to make Ministers fit for
their calling. But I say, howsoever they are to seek for such helps, yet
especially are they to labor for experience of that in themselves, which they
teach to others, even to labor to have a true feeling of that Truth, and of
those comforts of the Word in themselves, in their own souls, which they
publish and make known to others: So they may be fitter to deliver the Truth
of God, and the sweet and heavenly comforts of the Word, with profit to the
People of God.

Yea, The word of Counsel, Admonition, Instruction, and Comfort, is most
effectual, coming from experience.
Would thou that art a private person, be most fit to counsel, to admonish,
to instruct, and comfort others, as occasion is offered? Then labor thou to
speak the word of Counsel, of Instruction, of Admonition, of Comfort, out of
thine own feeling, and out of thine own experience: and if thou so speak, no
doubt, thy speech will be more effectual, and do more good then the most
eloquent that can be, not coming from experience. Those that reprove
eloquently, they pierce not the heart, and those that comfort with fine
eloquent speeches, comfort little or nothing, when their speeches come not from
a feeling and experience of that they speak in their own hearts.

If thou be able to comfort others with the comforts wherewith thy self have
been comforted of God, 2. Cor. 1.4. 2. Cor. 1 4. Psalm. 66.16.
and can truly use the words of David, Psalm. 66.16. Come and hearken, all
ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done to my soul, to my
poor soul; I my self was thus or thus distressed, and this course I took,
and the Lord vouchsafed me this comfort; no doubt thy speech will find better
entrance, and prevail more then the most witty and eloquent Oration of the
best Orator wanting experience.

And therefore if thou would be a most fit Counselor, a most fit Instructor,
a most fit Comforter of others, labor thou to speak out of thine own
experience, and to feel the power and fruit of that thou speak in thine
own soul.

The second thing offered from this manner of speech the Apostle here uses, I
knew not sin but by the Law: I came to know sin by the Law: The Law brought
me, even my felfe, to the knowledge of sin, is this,

That men must come to the knowledge of sin in themselves, by the Law of God,
They only profitably hear or read the Word of God discovering sin, that are
thereby brought to a true sight of their own sins.
and by the Word of God: and they only profitably hear or read the Word of
God discovering sin, that are thereby brought to a knowledge of their own
sins, and the greatness of them, and what they have deserved by them, and to
acknowledge them; we have the examples of many to this purpose in the Word of
God, who have been brought to a knowledge and sight of their own particular
sins, by hearing or reading the Word of God. 2. Sam. 12. we read, that Nathan
coming to David, and doing the office of a Prophet, and delivering to him the
Word of the Lord, and that message the Lord had put into his mouth, David was
thereby brought to the knowledge and sight of his particular sins, and to an
acknowledgement of them, Verse 13. 2. Sam. 12.13.
Then DAVID said unto NATHAN, I have sinned against the Lord. And so the Jews,
Act. Act. 2.37.
2. Peter preaching unto them, and applying the Word close to their hearts,
the Text says, Verse 37. When they heard it, they were pricked in their
hearts, they were brought to a true sight, and to a true and lively sense of
their particular sins, and they cried out, Men and brethren, 2. King. 22.11.
what shall we do? 2. King. 22.11. we read, that when good King Josiah heard
the Word of God read before him he rent his Clothes: and Verse 19. it is
testified of him, that his heart did melt, and he humbled himself before the
Lord. And to this purpose we have the example of the Ninevites in Jonah 3. who
at the preaching of Jonah were brought to a sight of their sins, and to an
acknowledgement of them.

These examples do sufficiently clear the point: That men must come to the
knowledge of sin in themselves, by the Law, and by the Word of God; and then
only they profitably hear or read the Word of God discovering sin, when
they thereby are brought to a sight and knowledge of their particular sins.

The reasons of this truth are first,

Again,

And this being a Truth, it discovers to us, That many are unprofitable
hearers of the Word of God discovered.


How many, I beseech you, be there that are far from profiting by the Word
of God in this manner? how many be there that take no notice of their own
particular sins by the Word discovering sin? Nay, are there not many, that
though their sins be never so plainly discovered before them, by the
ministry of the Word, yet they take no notice of them at all, much less are
brought to acknowledge them; as Garishnesse in apparel, how often has it
been made known to be a foul and grievous sin; and yet where is any that
are guilty of that sin that take notice of it, and acknowledge it to be a
sin in themselves? So I might insist in Drunkenness, in Whoredom, in
Sabbath-breaking, and in Common swearing: these sins have been often
discovered by the ministry of the Word; and yet where is almost any that take
notice of them, and are brought to acknowledge them in themselves? Nay, do not
many, as we use to speak, set a good face on the matter, and outface the
ministry of the Word? and if at any time they take some little notice of these
sins in themselves, yet then they seek to extenuate them, and to justify
them, and to stand out in defense of them, yea, to quarrel with the affection
of the Teacher; that he speaks not out of love; that he is too rigorous, and
speaks of nothing but damnation, and the like.

Surely such persons are far from profiting by the Word discovering sin,
nay, they show themselves to be graceless, and that they have no dram of grace
or goodness in them, they are like wicked Ahab, of whom we read, 1. King.
21. and Chap. 22. That he professed he took Eliah and Michaiah the holy
Prophets of the Lord for his enemies. And so they profess they take the
Ministers of the Word for their enemies, and they wish ill to them, because
they tell them of their sins, and lay their sins before them.

It is a note of a good heart, to be willing to hear of sin, and to be
justly reproved for it, as DAVID said, Psalm. 141. verse. 5. Let the righteous
smite me, for that is a benefit: and let him reprove me, and it shall be a
precious oil that shall not break mine head. And a good man or woman likes
those Sermons best, that bring them to the knowledge, sense and feeling of sin
in themselves; and if thou be so far from taking notice of thine own sin
by the ministry of the Word discovering sin, as that thou do wrangle and
quarrel with those that lay thy sins before thee, it is a note of a wicked
and graceless heart, and that thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity.

Learn we then our duty, learn we to take notice of sin in our selves, by
the Word of God discovering sin. Then only we hear or read the Word of
God discovering sin, with profit, when we take notice of sin in our
selves, and are thereby brought to a sight of our own particular sins. And
know we thus much further, That the first step to grace, and the beginning of
true conversion, is to see thine own sins in particular, and the ugliness
of them, and what thou have deserved by them: and till thou see that, thou
shall never come to be truly humbled for them.

And again, if thou be not brought to a sight of thine own particular sins,
by the Word of God discovering sin, certainly the Lord will one day bring
thee to a sight of them, by his punishing hand, he will one day reprove thee,
and set thy sins in order before thee, Psalm. 50.21. And then thou shall find
that the Devil will rore against thee, he will then set before thee the
greatness of thy sins, and the curse of the Law, and the horror of Gods
judgments, and a thousand to one plunge thy soul into the gulf of fearful
desperation.

If then thou would make it good to the comfort of thine own soul, that
thou art entered into the way of grace and salvation; and if thou would not,
by deferring to take notice of thy particular sins by the Word of God
discovering sin, provoke the Lord to come against thee with his punishing
hand, and so to awake thy dead heart and seared conscience, and to set thy
sins in order before thee, and suffer the Devil to rore against thee, to set
before thee the greatness of thy sins, and the curse of the Law, the horror
of Gods Judgment, and to plunge thy soul into the gulf of fearful
desperation; then learn thou by the ministry of the Word, now sounding in
thine ears, and discovering sin, to take notice of sin in thy self, and to
come to the knowledge of thine own particular sins, that so thou may be
truly humbled for them, and find mercy, pardon and forgiveness of them at the
hands of the Lord.

Come we now to the last words of this Verse, I had not known lust, except
the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. In which words (as before I showed) the
Apostle confirms it, that he knew not sin, but by the Law, by particular
instance of his knowledge of Lust, as that he knew not Lust to be sin, but
by the Law, that he had never come to know the rebellion of his nature, and the
first motions rising thence in his mind, to be sins, had not the Law made
them known to him to be so.

Now then observe we, who it was that was thus ignorant touching Lust, who it
was that knew not Lust to be sin, till he came to look into the Law of God,
there to find it forbidden and condemned; even the holy Apostle Paul, a man of
excellent knowledge and gifts, a learned Pharise, and one that, before his
conversion, was brought up at the feet of GAMALIEL, and instructed according to
the perfect manner of the Fathers, and was zealous toward God, as himself
witnesses, Act. 22.3. Act. 22.3.
and yet he says, He know not Lust to be sin, but by the Law. Hence then
we are given to understand,

That men are exceeding blind touching sin, Men of great knowledge and
learning, are of themselves ignorant of many gross corruptions that lurk in
their hearts.
and of great understanding in other matters, and men of great learning, are
notwithstanding of themselves marvelous ignorant in respect of sin, and are
as blind as Beetles, in respect of the concupiscence of nature, and the foul
and cursed fruits of that corruption that is within the heart and in the soul,
they are not able to take notice of them, they see not many foul gross
corruptions, that lurk in their hearts, to be sins, they are altogether
ignorant of them. And to this purpose we have not only the example of the
Apostle in this place, but we have also the example of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the great Rabbines and Doctors of the Law; though they were men
of great knowledge and understanding, yet we find they knew not many inward
lusts of the heart to be sins, and therefore they thought that an outward
observance and keeping of some Commandments, of themselves was sufficient, as
appears plainly, Matthew. 5.21.
Matthew. 5. in many Verses of it. Our Savior labors there to reduce them and
others to a better understanding of the Law; he says, Verse 21. Ye have heard
that it was said to them of the old time, Thou shall not kill: for whosoever
kills, shall be culpable of judgment. Verse. But I say unto you, Whosoever is
angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment, and
whosoever says unto his brother, Raca, shall be worthy to be punished by the
Council: and whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with
hell fire. Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not
commit adultery. But I say, Verse. 28. unto you, That whosoever looks on a
woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his
heart. Verse. 33. Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord. But
I say unto you, Verse. 34. Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is the
Throne of God, Verse. 35. Nor yet by the earth: for it is his foote-stoole,
Neither by Jerusalem: for it is the City of the great King. Verse. 36. Neither
shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make one hair white or
black. Verse. 37. But let your communication be Yea, yea, Nay, nay: for
whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil.

And not to add any more examples, common experience shows it to be a truth,
that men of great knowledge and learning, men that are expert and skillful and
very wise in other matters, yet of themselves they are blind and ignorant, in
respect of the corruption of nature, and they see not many foul corruptions
and lusts that are in their hearts to be sins.

And the reason of this truth is, that we find, Ier. 17.9. The heart of man is
deceitful and wicked above all things; who can know it? The heart of man has
in it an hidden and bottomless depth of self love and of selfe-deceit; and
therefore though men have excellent reaching wits, yea, though they be men of
great understanding and skill in other matters, yet of themselves they are not
able to sound the depth of their wicked and deceitful hearts, they are not
able to see their hearts to be so foul and so filthy as indeed they are.

When Hazael was told by the Prophet Elisha. 2. King. 8.12. what evil he
should do to the children of Israel, as that he should set their Cities on
fire, and slay their yong-men with the sword, and dash their Infants against
the stones, and rent in pieces their women with child: What, says he, Verse.
13. is thy servant a Dog, that I should do this great thing? He spoke it with
indignation, as if he had said, What do thou think of me? Do thou think
that I am of so dogged a nature? Do thou think that I have such a vile and
monstrous heart within me, that I can find in mine heart to do such things as
thou tellest me? No, no: certainly I have not such a wicked heart within me.
He could not of himself see the wickedness and corruption of his own heart,
nay, he would not take notice of it, though it were told him by the Prophet.

The holy Apostle Peter, a man truly sanctified, could not believe his Lord
and Master, the Lord Jesus, who knew his heart, and could not deceive him; yet
(I say) he could not believe him, when he foretold him of his threefold
denial, he could not be persuaded there was so much wickedness in his heart.
Matthew. 26.35. PETER said to him, Though I should die with thee, yet I would not
deny thee.

Now then the heart of man being thus deceitful, that men being not able to
see their hearts to be so foul as indeed they are, we may resolve on this as
a certain truth, that men of great knowledge and judgment, men that are very
wise and understanding in other matters, yet of themselves they are blind and
ignorant in respect of the corruption of nature, and they see not many foul
corruptions and finnes that are in their own hearts, to be sins.

Let no man then deceive himself, It is no easy matter to spy out the
lurking sins of our own hearts.
and especially the lurking sins and corruptions of our hearts. If we so
think, we deceive our selves; if men of great knowledge and understanding; if
men of great learning, and of deepest insight in other matters, be blind in
respect of the corruption of nature, and be not able of themselves to see many
foul corruptions that are in their own hearts, to be sins; shall we think
it an easy thing, to spy out the lurking sins of our hearts? No, no: our
own hearts will deceive us, and tell us, they are not so foul within as they
are, and the Devil will soothe us up, and make us believe we are not such
sinners as indeed we are.

And hence it is that ignorant persons please themselves in a conceit, that
they love God with all their hearts, and they love their Neighbor as
themselves: and is it not the speech of many that if they had lived in the
days of Christ, they would have been far from dealing with him as the Jews
did? and if they had lived in the days of Queen Mary, they would have been
far from having their hands in the blood of the holy Martyrs: nay, they would
rather have taken part with them against Bonner and Gardener, and the rest?
Will not many tell you thus, who notwithstanding show themselves most spiteful
and malicious against them that profess the same truth the holy Martyrs did,
and in whom appears the like piety and zeal?

And will not they tell you thus, that traduce them that truly fear God, and
rail on them, and revile them, and give them all manner of opprobrious names,
and hold them base and vile? Poor souls! They see not the corruption of their
own hearts, and what is within them.

Assuredly, thou that art a malicious wretch, and do carry thy self
spitefully against them that truly fear God, if thou had lived in the days
of Christ, thou would have been ready to have driven the first nail into
him. And if thou had lived in the days of Queen Mary, thou would have
been as forward as any to have put fire to the Martyrs. And therefore let none
of us deceive our selves; let us not think it an easy matter to find our the
lurking sins and corruptions of our own hearts. Men of great knowledge and
understanding are ignorant of the corruptions of their own hearts, and do
thou think to be easily acquainted with the wickedness of thine heart? No,
no: deceive not thy self; search thine heart diligently, to find out the
hidden corruptions of it: it is hard for them that use the greatest care and
diligence, to find out a quarter of that corruption that is in their own
hearts: and therefore David said, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his faults?
cleanse me from secret faults.

Oh then, take thou pains with thine own heart, be continually sounding and
gaging the depth of it, and spying out the secret and hidden corruption of it,
and to that end bring thine heart to the rule, even to the Law of God and the
Light of his Word, and often call on the Lord, that he would more and more
discover to thee the hidden corruptions of thine own heart.

In the next place; In that the Apostle says, I had not known lust but by the
Law, I had not known lust to be a sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall
not lust; we are plainly taught,

That Lust or Concupiscence is sin, A thought that is contrary to the Law of
God or Man is sin, though consent of will follow not.
as after meat or drink, or the like; for those were in man before the fall:
Nor yet spiritual lust or desire after heavenly things, which the Apostle
calls The lust of the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. But by Lust, I understand that
rebellion of nature, the first motions that arise from thence, whereby we are
stirred up to do evil, and do with delight think on any thing contrary to
the Will of God, though consent of our hearts do not follow. These (I say) are
sins, and we find them condemned in the Word of God; and this kind of lust
and concupiscence is sin.

Saint John says, 1. Epist. 2.16. The lust of flesh is not of the Father; it
is evil and sinful. And hence it is that Moses commanded the children of
Israel to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, even to pare off the
corruption of their hearts, and that indeed the very thought of any thing
contrary to the love of God or Man, though consent of will follow not, is a
sin, it is clear by this reason:

Such a thought is directly against the Law of God, Luke 10.27. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy thought, and thy Neighbor as thy self. It is a
fruit of corruption; for we should never have had such a thought if we had
continued in the state of innocence. And therefore it must needs be held, and
that justly, to be evil, and to be a sin, yea, such a thought in them that be
truly regenerate, is properly a sin: and therefore the Apostle opposes it to
the lust of the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other.

Now then this being a truth, Confutation of the opinion of the Papists, that
the first motions to evil in the heart, not gayning consent of will, are no
sins.
that the first motions that arise in the mind or heart, whereby we are stirred
up to do evil, if they gain not consent of will, they are no sins: which
is directly opposite to the truth now delivered. Oh but, say the Papists (among
other objections of less weight) they object that, Iam. 1.15. say they, We
there read, that when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and
therefore lust it self is no sin, but only brings forth sin. Answ. It is
no good consequent, Lust brings forth sin; therefore it is no sin. Indeed
it is not that sin which it brings forth, but yet one sin may bring forth
another, and we may rather thus conclude, Lust brings forth sin; therefore it
is sin: for the proper cause and mother of evil must needs be evil it
self; and therefore notwithstanding this and other cauils of the Papists, it
remaynes a truth, That the first motions that arise in the mind, whereby we are
stirred up to evil, though consent of will follow not, are sins.

Secondly, this truth plainly shows us, We have great cause to be humbled.
for why? though it were possible (which indeed cannot be) but though it were
possible for us to be free from wicked words and deeds, yet even the evil
thoughts that arise in our minds, to which we give no consent at all, but snib
and check them, yet those very thoughts defile us, and make us guilty of
sin before God: and therefore we have no cause to swell, and to be proud, and
to show forth our pride by speech, countenance, gesture, apparel, or the like,
we being guilty not only of many sinful words and works, but also of many
vain and sinful thoughts and imaginations, the least of which deserves the
curse of God and everlasting perdition; and it is the Lords mercy, that for
them we are not utterly confounded.

Again, Conscience is to be made of evil thoughts and desires.
whereby we are stirred up to evil, though consent of will follow not, are
sins: it must needs teach us to make conscience of our very thoughts and
desires; we may not think, as many foolishly do, that our thoughts are free,
and that we shall not be accountable to God for them. No, no: even the evil
thoughts of our hearts, to which we never yield consent of will, are sins, and,
without Gods mercy, shall plunge us into the pit of everlasting perdition, and
for them we stand in need of the precious blood of Jesus Christ. And therefore
learn we to make conscience, not only of what we speak or do, but also of
what we think or desire, and labor we to wash our hearts from wickedness,
as the Lord required, Ierem. 4.14. Labor we not only to cleanse our lives from
wicked conversation, but to purge our souls also from evil thoughts and
sinful imaginations; the Lord sees the one as well as the other, and will
punish the one as well as the other; and therefore learn we to make conscience
of our very thoughts and desires.

The next thing that comes to be considered, is this, the Apostle says, I had
not known lust to be sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. He
was deceived touching lust, and he had not known it to be sin, but that
looking into the Law of God, he there found it expressly to be forbidden and
condemned, and so came to see his error and to be convinced of it. Whereby
first we see, that the Apostle freely acknowledges that he was deceived, and
he is not ashamed to confess that he was in an error touching lust, till he
came to look into the Law of God, and was thereby convinced of his error.
Whence we are taught by his example; I will but point at it.

Not to be ashamed to confess our selves to be deceived, and to acknowledge
our selves to be in an error, Men convinced of error by plain evidence of
truth, mis-acknowledge it.
being convinced of error by the Word of God, by plain evidence of truth; it
is one special use of the Word of God to discover falsehood, and to convince
men of error, 2. Tim. 3.16. The Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable to teach, to improve: that is, to improve errors and false
opinions, and men being convinced of error, and that which they hold, being
discovered by the plain evidence of the Word of God to be erroneous and false,
they are freely to acknowledge it so to be, and willingly to subscribe to the
truth.

And this meets with all such as are wilful in their errors, Wilfulness and
obstinacy in error met withal.
and obstinately persist and go on in their erroneous opinions, notwithstanding
the plain evidence of the Word of God laid before them to the contrary. It is
the case of many Brownists, Papists, Anabaptists, and others, that are taynted
with foul and gross errors, though their errors be discovered, and though
they be convinced by the plain evidence of the Word of God, yet they will not
be driven from their errors, nor brought to renounce them, but still they
persist, and still they go on in them; surely, such persons hold a lie in
their right hand, the Apostle compares them to IANNES and IAMBRES who withstood
MOSES, 2. Tim. 3.8. So they resist the truth, and they are men of corrupt
minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, as the Apostle there speaks: yea,
such persons resist and withstand the Spirit of God; for the Spirit of God
speaks to us in the truth of the Word of God, and therefore they withstanding
that truth, they resist the holy Ghost, as Stephen says of the Jews, Act.
7.51. And without question it is out of pride, and out of an ouerweening of
themselves, that men are wedded to their own gross and erroneous opinions,
and will not be driven from them. They think they see more then other mendoe,
and more is reueiled to them, (and they stick not to speak it) then to all
the world besides, when they are dealt withal and convinced by the Word of
God, and have nothing to say against the plaien evidence of truth; yet they
think it would be a disgrace and a disparagement to them to confess their
error. And hence it is that they wilfully persist, and go on in their absurd
and gross opinions. Now this we must take heed of, this is a fearful height
of sin, and men that are thus conceited, and thus wise in their own
conceits, and wilfully withstand the Spirit of God, speaking in the plain
evidence of the Word of God, are in a dangerous case. Pro. 26.12. See thou a
man wise in his own conceit? more hope is of a Fool then of him.

Then learn we not to be ashamed to confess our selves to be deceived, and
to be in an error, being convinced of error by the plain evidence of the Word
of God; let us in such a case give glory to God, and take shame to our selves;
let God be justified in his Word and Truth, and let us acknowledge our selves
to be liars, being found so to be by the evidence of his Word.

Now further, in that the Apostle says, He had not known lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not lust, he had not known lust to be sin, but by
looking into the Law of God, and there found it expressly forbidden and
condemned; the point hence is this:

That the Law of God discouers sin, Only the Law and Word of God discouers
the rebellion of the heart, and the first motions to evil that arise thence,
to be sins.
it discouers the rebellion of the heart, the very inclination that is in men
naturally to evil, and the first motions that arise from thence, whereby they
are stirred to evil, though consent of will follow not, to be sins; yea, it
is the Law of God only that discouers lust to be sin, and the first motions
that arise from thence to be sins, and it is not any other Law or any other
learning in the world that does that, but only the Law of God. All the wisdom
of the Heathen, and of all the wisest and most learned in the world, was never
able to see the rebellion of the heart to be sin, and the first motions that
arise from thence, having not consent of will; only the Law and Word of God
makes them known so to be, and indeed discouers them to be sins; for why?

The Word of God, as it is, Heb. 4.12. is lively and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing
asunder of the Soul and the Spirit, and of the joints and the marrow; and that
only is a Discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, that discernes
the thoughts and the sinfulness of them. And to this purpose the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 10.4, 5. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty, through God, to cast down holds, and bringing into captivity every
thought, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ: every sinful and rebellious thought. 2. Pet. 1.19. The
Apostle calls the Word of the Prophets, who were the true Interpreters of the
Law of God, A light that shines in a dark place, because indeed it shines in
man's heart, as in a dark place, and tries out all the secrets of his thoughts,
and the sinfulness of them, and makes manifest and discouers the deep and
hidden things that are in the heart. This does the Law and Word of God, and no
other Law or learning in the world is able thus to do. And the reason and
ground of this truth, is that which is added, Ierem. 17.10.

Verse 9. says the Prophet, The heart is deceitful, and wicked above all
things; who can know it? And then he subioynes, Verse 10. I the Lord search the
heart, and try the reins, even to give to every man according to his ways,
and according to the fruit of his works.

Now the Lord being (...), He being the searcher and knower of the heart, Act.
1.24. his Word and his Law must needs be like to himself, and partake of his
nature, virtue, and power; and therefore this we may resolve on as a certain
truth, that the Law of God finds out the rebellion of the heart, and discouers
that to be sin, and the first motions that arise from thence, whereby men
are stirred up to evil, though consent of will follow not, to be sins, and
no other law or learning whatsoever besides is able so to do.

First, A difference between Gods Law and all other laws whatsoever.
this Truth puts plain difference between the Law of God, and all other laws
and learning in the world. The Law of God only discouers the rebellion of the
heart to be sin, and the first motions that arise from thence, whereby men
are stirred up to evil, to be sins, which all the laws, and all the
learning in the world is not able to do.

And hence we may easily conceive the Law of God published in the Book of
God, to be the very Word of God, even to be the eternal Word of the
everliving God: for why? it is not all the learning in the world, that is able
to discern the secret thoughts and intents of the heart, and to discover them
to be sins, but only the Law of God published in the Book of God. And
therefore, as God alone is the Searcher of the heart, so that Word that
declares to man what be his thoughts, that his very evil thoughts to which he
gives no consent of will, are sins, must needs be the Word of the same God,
even the eternal Word of the eternal and everliving God. This is a strong
argument, euincing and demonstrating the Law of God, even the Law of God that
is published in the Book of God, to be the very Word of God, against all
barking, and blasphemous Atheists in the world.

Again, evil, to be sins, and no other Law nor learning is able so to do;
by this we may see whence it is that the learned Papists do so much exalt
flesh and blood, Whence it is that the Papists do so magnify nature.
and so magnify nature, and speak so much of pure naturals. Surely it is from
hence, they look on nature only with the eye of their Schole-learning, which
indeed is a blind guide, and not able to discover to them the filthiness and
corruption of their hearts; and hence it is that they think they can fulfill
the Law of God, and can come to stand just in the sight of God by the works of
the Law. Poor souls! they deceive themselves exceedingly: if they did but
look into their own hearts by the light of the Word of God, and by the Law of
God, they would be far from thus exalting nature, that would discover to them
that the natural stream of their heart is only evil, and that continually,
Genesis 6.5. and that the first motions by which they are stirred up to evil,
though consent of will follow not, are sins; and the consideration of that
would pull down their pride and high conceit of their pure naturals.

But to leave them, and to come to our selves; Is it so, that the Law of God
discouers the rebellion of the heart to be sin, and the first motions that
arise from thence, whereby they are stirred to evil, to be sins, and no
other Law or learning in the world is able so to do?

If then we would find out the rebellion of our own hearts, we must search
them by the Law of God, How by searching, men may find out the rebellion of
their hearts
the light of that will disclose the darkness of our minds; the holiness of
that will reveal the unrighteousness and perverseness of our corrupt natures;
and it is the preaching of the Law of God, and of the Word of God alone, that
will search the hearts and lives of men, and discover to them their hidden and
secret sins: never was any brought to a sight of his sins, and to be
humbled for them by any other learning in the world, but only by the preaching
of the Law of God and the Word of God. If our hidden corruption and sins be
met withal by the ministry of the Word, we are to acknowledge it to be the
very Word of God that is preached to us, and we are to acknowledge the finger
of God in his own Ordinance; for no other word or learning in the world is
able so to do. It is the manner of some, if their close sins, their bosom
sins be met withal by the Word of God, to fret and storm, and to think the
Preacher has been told of their sins, or that he deals with a Familiar.
No, no: thou must know it, whosoever thou art, it is the power of the Word of
God that finds thee out, and thou art to acknowledge it the Word and Law of
God, that is able to diue into thine heart, and to ransacke the most secret
corners of it, and much more is it able to find out the sins of thy life,
though they be done in a corner. 2. King. 6.12.
2. Kin. 6.12. We read, that the Prophet Elisha told the King of Israel the
words that the King of Aram spoke in his privy Chamber. And so the Word of God
is able to disclose the things thou do in thy bedchamber, and as the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 14.25. To make manifest the secrets of thine heart.

And therefore, if thy secret sins be met withal by the ministry of the
Word, acknowledge it to be the very Word of God: for no other learning is able
to do that: and submit thy self to the power of it, and learn to be humbled;
and know this, if thou be not humbled by the Word of God discovering thy sins
to thee, thou art more hardened by it, and thou sauourest the Word to thy deeper
condemnation: for the Word of God is never truly preached in vain; It shall
accomplish the will of the Lord, and prosper in that for which it is sent. And
if thou be not humbled by it discovering thy sins to thee, thou art more
hardened; and that is a fearful condition, take heed of it.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10, 11. But sin took an occasion by the Commandment, and
wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence: for without the Law sin is dead.

For I once was alive without the Law: but when the Commandment came, sin
revived:

But I dyed, and the same Commandment which was ordained unto life, was found
to be unto me unto death:

For sin took occasion by the Commandment, and deceived me, and thereby
slew me.


IN these Verses read, the Apostle goes on further, to clear the Law from
those foul blots that some might happily blemish it withal; as to be the cause
of sin and of death: and he shows, that not the Law, but sin taking
occasion by the Law, wrought Concupiscence, revived in him, deceived him and
slew him: that is the sum of these four Verses. To come to the handling of
them as they lie in order.

In the 8. Verse we have two things offered to our consideration. First, a
concession or grant made by the Apostle, that sin is an accidental event of
the Law; and this he propounds with a reference to that which went before,
employed in the first word (But.) But sin took an occasion by the Law. As if
he had said, The Law indeed is so far from being the cause of sin, as it
discouers sin, and makes sin known: but yet this I must needs grant and
yield unto, that sin is an accidental event of the Law, sin happens, or
sin comes to pass upon occasion of the Law.

Now this Proposition is not thus barely propounded; but the Apostle, in
propounding of it, shows whence it is that sin is an accidental event of
the Law, namely, from the prauitie and corruption of nature, that corruption
took occasion by the Commandment to be stirring and to be working. And
insisting in his own example, he makes known, how far the corruption of
nature was stirring and working on occasion of the Commandment in himself,
even to the bringing forth of all manner of concupiscence. Says he, Sin
took, or, sin taking an occasion by the Commandment, and wrought in me all
manner of Concupiscence.

In which words the Apostle puts down another use of the Law, in respect of
such as be unregenerate: That in respect of them, it has this use as an
accidental occasion, it stirs up the corruption of their natures, and upon
occasion of the Commandment forbidding lust, the lust of their hearts becomes
more violent, and stirs in them more strongly, and breaks out more violently
into all manner of sins; and then to this Proposition the Apostle subioynes a
reason, which is, from the absence of the Law, or from the ignorance of it,
that where either the Law is absent, or not known, there sin lies dead, in
the last words, For without the Law, sin is dead. And that is further
confirmed and amplified in the words following. But to keep within the
compass of this eighth Verse, we see the parts of it:

First, a Proposition, wherein is particular instance of the Apostles own
example, in these words, Sin took, or, sin taking an occasion by the
Commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. And then a reason
of that in the words following: For without the Law, sin is dead.

But sin.] Interpretation
The word Sin in this place signifies the prauitie or corruption of nature,
that inbred corruption that we brought with us into the world, and carry about
us continually: it is the same with that, Chap. 6.12. Let not sin reign in
your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Took, or,
Taking occasion. The word here rendered Occasion, sometimes signifies
opportunity of doing a thing, it cannot be so taken in this place, but the
meaning is this: That though the Law give no occasion of sin, yet man's nature
is so corrupt, as it is stirred up by the Law forbidding sin, and thereby it
takes occasion to be working, and more fiercely breaks out into all manner of
sins. (By the Commandment.) By that Commandment that forbids Lust spoken of
in the Verse before, by that Commandment truly known, and duly considered.
(Wrought in me) that is, effected and brought forth in me, I being yet in my
natural state and condition, being yet in the flesh, as Verse. 5. When we were
in the flesh. (All manner of concupiscence.) The word (Concupiscence) here
signifies actual lust, even actual evil thoughts and desires; and by all
manner of concupiscence, the Apostle means all sorts of evil motions, arising
from the corruption of nature, contrary to the love of God and the love of Men,
and against both the first and second Table of the Commandments; For without
the Law, that is, Without the knowledge and due consideration of the Law, Sin
is dead, or was dead, that is, the corruption of nature lay hid, and was not
known to be sin, or did not so strongly and so fiercely work; it was, as it
were, dead, in comparison of that strong working it had, after the Law was
known and duly considered. That this is the meaning, is clear by the
Context: for the Apostle says, he knew not lust to be sin, till he came to
look into the Law of God, and duly to consider it, and that sin took
occasion by the knowledge, and due consideration of the Law, to rage and swell,
and to break out into all manner of evils. Thus then conceive we the
Apostles meaning in this Verse, as if he had said,

The Law indeed is not the cause of sin, but yet the corruption of nature
being stirred up by the knowledge and due consideration of that Commandment
that forbids lust, though no occasion of sin was thence given, yet the
corruption of nature thereby taking occasion to rage and swell, and to break
out, it effected and brought forth in me, being yet in my natural state and
condition, all sorts of evil motions, contrary to the love of God, and
contrary to the love of Men; for without the knowledge and due consideration of
the Law, the corruption of nature was, as it were, dead, it lay hid, and did
not so strongly and fiercely work as afterward, when the Law was known, and
duly considered.

Here first, Sin took occasion by the Commandment: Such is the prauitie and
perverseness of man's nature, as it takes occasion to break out on the
Commandment of God.
the corruption of nature on the Commandment took occasion to be stirring and
working, to rage, and swell, and to break out more fiercely. We may easily
see and conceive the greatness and strong working of the corruption of nature;
so great is the corruption of nature, and such is the prauitie and perverseness
of it, that it takes occasion to break out on the Commandment of God, and the
more the holy will of God is reueyled and known, the more does the corruption
of nature rage, and swell, and break out into sin: the wicked nature of man
is this; The more he is forbidden to do any thing, the more and the rather he
desires and seeks to do it. In this, the corruption of nature is like the
Gangrene, the Leprosy, the Noli me tangere, and such diseases as are made
worse, by such things as should be a means to cure them. And as a violent
strong stream of water, if you roll a great stone into it, or make a damme or
bank in the midst of it, the higher it rises, and the more it roares and
swells, and breaks over with greater violence; so it is with the wicked and
perverse nature of man, the more it is opposed by the holy Law of God, and the
more that it is set against it as a bank to keep it in; the more does it rage
and swell, and the more it breaks out into sin; and the more a thing is
forbidden, the more does the corrupt mind of man give it self to the doing of
it.

We may see this clearly in the example of the Israelites; we find, that
when the Lord commanded them, and invited them by many sweet promises to go
into the Land of Canaan, then they would not go into it, they dispraise it,
they murmr against God, and they like Egypt better, they desire to return
thither again, Number. Number. 14.2, 3, 4.
14.2, 3, 4. The children of Israel murmured against MOSES and AARON, and the
whole assembly said unto them, Would God we had dyed in the Land of Egypt, or
in this Wilderness, would God we were dead. 3. Wherefore now has the Lord
brought us into this Land, to fall upon the sword? our wives and our children
shall be a prey: Were it not better for us to return into Egypt? 4. And they
say one to another, Let us make a Captain, and return to Egypt. And a little
after, when the Lord in the same Chapter forbids them to enter into the Land,
then they would needs in all haste go thither. The Text says, Verse. 40. They
rose early in the morning, and gate them up into the top of the Mountain,
saying, Lo, we be ready to go up to the place which the Lord has promised:
for we have sinned.

So again, the Lord commanding them to sacrifice to him on his own Altar
only, their corrupt minds carry them to do otherwise, and to sacrifice to him
in every place. When circumcision was commanded of God, all Nations lothed it,
but when it was abolished by the death of Christ, then they would needs take
it up as a thing needful to salvation: and therefore the Apostle bent himself
strongly against it, Gal. 5.2, 3. Behold, I PAVL say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every
man which is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole Law.

To these we might add many like examples clearing and confirming this truth:
That such is the perverseness of our nature, that it takes occasion to break
out on the Commandment, and such is the wicked nature of man, that the more a
thing is forbidden, the more his corrupt mind is set on it, and the more he
gives himself to the doing of it. And do we not see this in common
experience? Are there not many, who the more they are admonished of their evil
courses, and the more they are dissuaded from evil, the more their corrupt
hearts are set on evil, and the more eagerly they follow it? Is it not
sometimes the speech of a blasphemous Swearer, being justly admonished and
reproved for his swearing, he will therefore swear the more? And is it not
thus with some beastly Drunkards, being told of their drunkenness, and justly
reproved for it, do they not thereupon give themselves more and more to the
practice of that sin? I wish it were not thus with too many: but alas, it is
too clear, it is the case of too many: yea, some there be, that the more their
sins are discovered and forbidden by the Word of God, the more desperate they
become in a course of evil, and say, Oh, we are the Goats, we are wicked, and
we shall be damned: and thereupon they set themselves purposely to do evil,
their own corrupt hearts carry them more violently to a course of sin. The
reason of this truth is this:

There is a direct contrariety between the holy Law of God, the wicked nature
of man is this, that the more a thing is forbidden, the more his heart (being
left to it self) is set on it, and the more he gives himself to the doing of
it.

Now then, this being a truth, It is no small matter for a man to be in his
natural state and condition.
it is no small matter for a man or woman to be in their natural state and
condition; many in this respect deceive themselves exceedingly, because happily
they are kept by restrayning grace, from some foul and gross sins, as
Whoredom, Murder, Stealing, and such like; they bless themselves, and think
themselves in a marvelous good case, and they make nothing of it, that they
are yet in their natural state and condition, having no evidence that they are
freed from that, and that they are in bondage under the corruption of nature:
but alas, they deceive themselves exceedingly; and so long as they are in that
state, they are in a miserable condition: for why? through the perverseness of
their nature, they are ready to turn that to an occasion of sin, which
should be a means to do them most good; they are ready to turn the Law of
God, and the holy Word of God, which is the chief means to cure sin in them,
to an occasion to make them sin the more, and to go on with greater violence
and eagerness in a course of sin; and that is a miserable state: what hope
can there be of any good in such a case as that?

We hold that Horse to be a very Jade, that the more he is spurred, the more he
goes backward: and we hold that to be a stubborn and desperate child, that
because his Father wills him to do a thing, therefore he sets himself against
it; and the more earnest his Father is to have him do it, the more backward he
shows himself to the doing of it. Now this is the case of every one of us by
nature; so wicked and so perverse is our nature, that the more the Lord
requires good duties at our hands, the more untoward we are to the doing of
them; and the more any evil is forbidden, the more eagerly we desire it, and
seek to do it, if we be left to our selves; and therefore think it not a
matter of nothing to be in thy natural state and condition, so long as thou
art in that state, thou art in a miserable state: and therefore finding thy
self in that state and condition, hasten out of it, and never rest, till thou
be renewed by grace, and that thou art wrought on by the Spirit of grace and
sanctification.

Again, We must come prepared to the hearing of the Word of God.
and the more he gives himself to the doing of it? We must then learn to come
to the hearing of the Word of God prepared; for why? we are in danger, through
the perverseness of our own nature, to turn that into our bane and poison,
that should be a means to do us most good, even to take occasion from the
holy Word of God discovering our sins, and condemning them, to become more
eager and violent in a course of sin, and to be hardened in our evil ways,
as many are by the Ministry and Preaching of the Word of God: and therefore we
are carefully to prepare our selves, when we come to hear the Word of God, we
are to labor to disburden our hearts of sinful lusts, and of that
perverseness that is in them by nature, and to humble our souls before the
Lord, entreating him to sanctify our hearts by his grace, and to come in fear
and trembling, that so the Word may be to us a Word of life and comfort, and a
Word of salvation.

In the next place observe we, Sin took occasion by the Commandment. The
Commandment of God gave no occasion, but the corruption of nature thereby
took occasion to be stirring, and working, and to bring forth all manner of
evil. We see then, the Apostle cleeres the Commandment of God, and frees
that from blame, he iustifies that, and lays no fault on that at all; but he
lays the fault and blame where it ought to lie, namely, on the corruption of
nature, that the corruption of nature took occasion where none was given, even
by the holy Commandment, to bring forth all manner of concupiscence.

Whence note we, The holy Word of God justified, though some be hardened by
the preaching of it.
and they are thereby hardened and made worse. By this we learn how to
justify the holy Word of God preached, in that respect, and to lay the fault
and blame where it ought to be, namely, on the corruption of their own
hearts: the holy Word of God preached, gives men no occasion to be hardened,
and made worse in a course of sin, but their own wicked and corrupt hearts
thereby take occasion to be hardened and to become worse, and from the strength
of their own corruption they pervert the holy Word of God to their own
destruction; Isai. 6.9, 10.
and thus it was said by the Prophet ISAIAH, Isai. 6.9, 10. Go and say unto
this people, Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand; ye shall
plainly see, and not perceive: make their hearts fat, make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them.

The holy Prophet is said to make their heart fat, and to harden them, because
they were hardened by occasion of his preaching. His preaching gave them no
occasion: but they thereby took occasion to be hardened and made worse. So is
that place to be understood; and so we learn how to justify the holy Word of
God preached, and to free it from blame, though some be thereby hardened, and
savor it to death and to their own destruction: the fault is not in the Word
of God, but in their own corruption; yea, by this we learn to justify God,
and to clear Him in respect of His dealing with men, when He is said to harden
their hearts, and to stir them up to evil. How God hardens the heart and
stirs up to evil.
The Lord hardens the heart, and stirs up to evil, not by instilling or
infusing any the least evil into the hearts of men, but by setting before them
such things, as they through their own corruption abuse, and turn to
occasions of evil to themselves; as his precepts, his threatenings, his
counsels, his blessings. Psalm. 105.25. Psalm. 105.25.
it is said, The Lord turned the heart of the Egyptians to hate his People. The
meaning is, they hated Gods People, because the Lord blessed them; they took
occasion by those benefits the Lord bestowed on his People, to hate them. And
so the Lord turned their hearts to hate his People, not by putting evil into
them, but by setting his benefits bestowed upon his People, before them, by
which through their own corruption, they took occasion to hate Gods People.
And thus we may justify the Lords dealing with man, and clear him from
blame, when he is said to harden their hearts, and to stir them up to evil.

Further observe we, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in
them all manner of Concupiscence, it effected, and it brought forth in him all
sorts of evil motions. Where we see, the Apostle gives to the corruption of
nature, an effecting or working power, a power to effect, and to bring forth
evil motions. Hence then we may easily gather thus much:

Natural corruption has a real being.
it is not, as some have thought, a mere absence or privation, or a mere want
of that holiness and righteousness that ought to be in us: but it is a
positive thing, it is a thing that has a real being, it is both a guiltiness
of the sin of our first Parents; for in ADAM all sinned, Romans 5.12.
Romans 5.12. and it is an inclination, a pronenesse of all the faculties of the
soul to that which is evil, and against the Law of God; and so it is a thing
that has a real being; and it is the proper cause producing and bringing
forth all evil motions, and all wicked and sinful actions, it is the mother
sin, it brings forth all other sins whatsoever. And to this purpose the
Apostle James speaks plainly, Chap. 1.14, 15. says he, Iam. 1.14, 15.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
entised. And when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when
it is finished, brings forth death. Where we see, he gives a power to
concupiscence, that is, to the corruption of nature, to entise, to draw to
sin, and to conceive, and bring forth sin, even all manner of actual
sins.

And hence is the corruption of nature called, The body of sin, Romans 6.6. and
the old man, Romans 6.6.
in that place and in many other places: and it is called, the flesh. All which
denominations do signify and imply thus much, that it is a Positive thing,
and has a real being, yea, the Apostle ascribes to the corruption of nature,
a lusting, Romans 6.12.
Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof: and Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh: and these are contrary one to the other. And
therefore doubtless it has a real being, and it has an effecting and
working power, and as a mother, it brings forth all manner of actual sin.

This being a truth, Pelagians ancient and of later times confuted.
that the Pelagians of ancient and of later times held, that all sins that
are committed, they come not from the corruption of nature, but they are done
only by imitation. So Pelagius and his followers held and taught. That cannot
stand with this truth, that the corruption of nature has a real being, and as
a mother, gives being to other sins, and as a mother, brings forth all manner
of actual sins.

Again, is it so, and as a mother, Children do evil, not only by imitation,
but the evil they do, comes from a root of corruption in themselves.
brings forth all manner of actual sins? Surely then children do not evil
only, because they see others to do evil, children do not practice evil
only by imitation; which was likewise the error of the Pelagians: but the
evil that children do, it comes from a root within them, the corruption of
nature has a real residence and being in them, and that corruption has a
working power, and that gives being to all the evils they commit, and that
children do evil from the corruption that has a real residence and being in
themselves, may plainly appear by this.

Many times some particular evil quality is found in a child in his infancy,
the child is peevish, froward, and such like; it has some particular evil
quality in it, in the very infancy, before it can learn any thing that is ill
by imitation: and therefore certainly the corruption of nature is a thing that
has a real residence and being in children, and has a working power in them,
and gives being to all the evil they commit. And this Parents are to take
notice of, Parents are not only to consider that their children are subject to
learn ill, and to take it from examples, and so to take heed they give them no
ill example, wherein many are faulty; but they must think on this, that there
is a root of bitterness really abiding in their children, and that, that has
an effecting and working power, and gives being to all the evils that they
commit, and so labor by all good means to root it out of their children.
Pro. 22.15.
Pro. 22.15. says SOLOMON, Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child: but
the rod of correction shall drive it away from him: there is a bundle of folly
in the heart of a child: but the rod of correction shall drive it away.

Let then all Parents take notice of that folly, and that vanity and
wickedness that is really abiding in their children, and labor by
instruction, by correction, and by all other means to drive it out. If thou
fail in this duty, thou that art a Father or Mother, thou shall one day find
to thy woe and sorrow, that there is a bitter root really abiding in the heart
of thy child, it will one day show forth the working power of it, and break
out into stubbornness, disobedience, and many foul disorders; yea, happily such,
as will bring thy child to an untimely end: and then thou will wish that thou
had taken notice of it, and in time labored to root it out: but then it will
be too late; yea, then thou shall find a burre in thine own soul, and a
wound in thine own conscience: for without repentance the blood of that child
shall be required at thy hands: therefore let all Parents think on this duty.

One thing note we further in the Apostles Proposition. He says, that sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence. That is to be observed of us, even in Paul himself, being yet
in his natural state and condition, the corruption of nature effected and
brought forth all sorts of evil motions, contrary to the love of God, and
contrary to the love of men; and yet Paul was a man excellently well gifted and
qualified, even before his Conversion, he says of himself, Gal. 1.14.
Gal. 1.14.
that he profited in the Jewish Religion above many of his companions, and of
his own Nation, and was much more zealous of the tradition of his fathers: And
Philip. 3.6. Philip. 3.6.
Touching the righteousness which is in the Law, says he, I was unrebukable.
And yet even in him thus qualified, did the corruption of nature, on occasion
of the Commandment, effect and bring forth all sorts of evil motions and
lusts. Hence then we are given to understand,

The same seeds of sin are in every man and woman by nature.
though they be never so well descended, even of the best Parents in the world,
never so well qualified; men that have the greatest gifts of nature, or the
greatest endowments of learning, or the like, they have in them by nature the
same seeds of sin that other men have, yea, in the best man in the world,
Ioh. 3.6.
there are by nature the seeds of all manner of sins, as Christ says, Ioh.
3.6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: it is nothing but a lump of
corruption. Hence it is that men that are yet in their natural state, Ephesians.
5.8. Romans 7.5.
are said to be darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. and to be in the flesh, verse. 5. of
this Chapter, and to be dead, Ephesians. 2.1. in trespasses and sins. All these
Phrases do show, that men that are yet in their natural state and condition,
are overwhelmed in sin, and are nothing but a lump of corruption. And so,
whatsoever they be, be they never so well descended, or never so well
qualified, they have in them by nature the same seeds of sin that others
have. The reason and ground of this truth is this:

Adam partake of the nature of man, and are all alike the children of wrath;
and therefore there is in all and every one by nature, the same seeds of
sin, and the same perverseness of nature; indeed the corruption of nature
does not break out in all natural men alike, because it is limited and kept
in by the hand of God, and by restrayning grace; and men are kept from breaking
out into some notorious foul sins, by good education, by wholesome Laws of
men, by their own natural temper, and constitution of body, and the like.

But yet this remaynes a truth, that be men never so well descended, or never
so well qualified, they have in them by nature the same seeds of sin that
others have: and therefore let no man or woman think highly of themselves, Men
are not to pride themselves in a conceit of goodness and excellency of their
nature.
and lift up themselves in a conceit of goodness and excellency of their own
natures.

It is the manner of some to magnify their own good natures, and to think
they have excellent natures, they are not given to such and such sins, they
thank God they are not so il as others are. But let such persons know, they
deceive themselves; it is not the goodness of their nature, but the hand of
God, and his restrayning grace that keeps them from those sins that others
fall into; nature in them is as corrupt in the root, as in the worst men in the
world. And whence is it, that thou art not so bad as Cain, as Pharaoh, as the
Sodomites, as Judas, or the vilest monster in all outrage of sin, thou being
yet in thy natural state and condition? Surely, from the hand and power of
God, and from his restrayning grace. And therefore cease thou from magnifying
thine own good nature, and blessed God for so restrayning thy nature, and
desire of the Lord, that as he has given thee a better tempered nature then
others, and thou art not naturally given to such foul sins as others are, so
he would be pleased to go on with his mercy, and give unto thee his special
renewing grace, even the sanctifying grace of his Spirit, without which thou
shall never see the face of God to thy comfort.

The best natured man or woman in the world, if they have no more in them but
the goodness of nature, they shall go to hell. And therefore never rest, till
thou find thine heart renewed by grace, and that the Spirit of God has framed
thee in some measure to the Image of Jesus Christ; and that will give thee
comfort, and that will give thee assurance of Gods special love toward thee
in Jesus Christ.

One thing mark we further in the Apostles Proposition; he says, The
corruption of nature taking occasion by the Commandment, brought forth in him
(he being yet in his natural state) all manner of concupiscence, even all
sorts of evil motions and lusts, all ill motions contrary to the love of God,
and contrary to the love of Men; Hence then it is clear,

That the corruption of nature has a marvelous strong working in unregenerate
persons, Natural corruption has a strong working in unregenerate persons.
it carries a strong hand over them and in them, it carries them directly
against the Commandment of God, yea, on occasion of the Commandment, it
stirs up in them all manner of evil motions and lusts: no thought so wicked,
and no lust so vile, but the corruption of nature brings it forth in
unregenerate persons, on occasion of the Commandment of God: the Commandment
of God which forbids sin, and is the rule of good life, and so should work
good in men, it works no good at all in unregenerate persons being left to
themselves, nay it is so far from working good in themselves, as on occasion
of that, their corruption stirs, and works, and brings forth in them all
manner of evil.

Freedom of will in spiritual good things in unregenerate persons,
overthrown.
as the Papists hold and teach, That men being yet in their natural state and
condition, have freedom of will in things that are spiritual, and truly
good, and commanded of God in his Word, and that mere natural and
unregenerate persons may will that which is truly good? That cannot stand with
this truth, that the corruption of nature has such a strong working in
unregenerate persons, as, on occasion of the Commandment of God, it stirs up
in them all sorts of evil motions and lusts. Is it possible, that unregenerate
persons should have it in their free choice to will spiritual good things, and
to be able freely to will and choose that which is truly good and holy? and yet
the frame of their hearts is not only altogether evil of it self even from
the cradle, Genesis 8.21.
Genesis 8.21. The disposition of their understanding, their will and their
affections, with all that their hearts devise, frame or imagine, is not only
wholly evil, but more then that, so strong is the corruption of their nature,
as, on occasion of the Commandment of God, it breaks out, and stirs up in
them all manner of evil motions and lusts, and they are made worse by that
which should be a means to do them good?

Is it possible there should be a liberty and freedom of will in such a
miserable bondage? No, no: it is a thing altogether impossible, and it is a
mere fancy, and an idle conceit, to think that unregenerate persons have
freedom of will in things spiritual and heavenly, and can freely will that
which is truly good: we are to renounce it as a gross Popish error.

Come we now to the last words of this Verse, For without the Law, sin is
dead. In these words, as before we showed, the Apostle adds a reason to his
foregoing Proposition. The meaning of them I have also given, as that they are
thus to be conceived: That without the true knowledge and due consideration of
the Law of God, the corruption of nature lies, as it were, dead, it lies hid,
and has not that strong and violent working, as it has when the Law of God is
known. From these words thus understood, two things are offered. I will
speak of them in order.

First this; hence we are given to understand, Where the Law and Word of God
is wanting, or not soundly known, there natural corruption has not that
violent working in unregenerate persons, as where the Law and Word of God is
known, and thoroughly considered.
or men having the Law and Word of God, do not soundly know it, and duly
consider it, there the corruption of nature has not that raging and violent
working, and it breaks not out with that violence in unregenerate persons, as
it does where the Law and Word of God is well known, and thoroughly considered
of them that be unregenerate, being then left to themselves. Indeed we may not
think, that the corruption of nature has not a strong and a powerful working
in unregenerate persons, where the Law and Word of God is either wanting, or is
not well known, and duly considered of them. No, no: doubtless it has a
strong and powerful working in unregenerate persons, either wanting the Law
and Word of God, or having it, and yet being ignorant of it, or not duly
considering it, the corruption of nature even then brings forth in them most
vile and most abominable fruits. The Apostle shows it at large, Romans 1. in
many Verses, as, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30.

But this is the thing that I deliver grounded on this Text: That where the Law
and Word of God is either wanting, or men having it, do not know it, or do
not at all consider it, or but slenderly; there, though the corruption of
nature do strongly prevail, yet it has not that fierce, and that raging and
violent working in unregenerate persons, as it has where the Law and Word of
God is soundly known, and thoroughly considered of them that be unregenerate,
they being then left to themselves: and for this, we have further evidence and
testimony of Scripture, and this may be further confirmed by some examples out
of the Book of God.

To this purpose read Ierem. Jerem. 36.23.
36. We there find, that though Iehotakim the King was a wicked man, and his
corrupt heart set him on to work much evil in the sight of the Lord, yet then
did his corruption rage and swell, and then did it break out fiercely and
violently, when Iehudi had read before him the Roll that was written from the
mouth of Jeremiah, then the Text says, Ver. 23. that in his rage he cut the
Roll, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, and burnt it. Yea then
his rage was so great, he was so violently carried to mischief, and set on it,
he sent to take BARVCH and JEREMIAH, to clap them up in prison, Verse. 26.

And thus we read of the people, Ierem. 44. Though they were foul and gross
Idolaters before, yet then were they raging mad on that sin, and carried
after it with violence, when they heard and knew the Word of the Lord to the
contrary, from the mouth of the Prophet, then they said, Verse. 16, 17. The Word
that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hear it of
thee. But we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, as to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her, as
we have done.

And thus we read of the people of Ephesus, Act. 19. their corruption strongly
prevailed over them, to the worship of their goddess Diana; yet it had not
that force, that raging, and that violent working in them, till they knew the
Word and Will of God to the contrary, by the preaching of Paul; then their
corruption had a marvelous violent working in them. The Text says, Verse. 28.
that then they were full of wrath, and cried out, Act. 19.28.
saying, Great is DIANA of the Ephesians. And so, Verse. 34. There arose amongst
them a shout almost for the space of two hours, of all men, crying, Great is
DIANA of the Ephesians.

By these examples not to add more, we see, that howsoever the corruption of
nature have a strong working in such as either want the Law and Word of God, or
having it, are ignorant of it, or do not duly consider it, yet it has not
that fierce, that raging and violent working, as it has in them that know the
Law and Word of God, and thoroughly consider it; they being then left to
themselves, in them the corruption of nature rages extremely, and it breaks
out most violently: and the reason is plain;

Such as either want the Law and Word of God,

Now this being a truth, Strength against amazement in those me^ that knowing
the Law and Word of God, break out into fear full outrage of sin.
it may serve to arm and strengthen us against amazement, and wonder, when we
see men that know the Law, and know the Word of God, notwithstanding to break
out into fearful outrage in sin. We are not to marvel at men's outrage in
sin in these days, wherein they have the clear light of the Word shining
forth to them, and they have also knowledge of it: for why? The Devil now
rages more then in former times, because his time is short; and in men that
know the Law and Word of God, being left to themselves, the corruption of their
nature rages extremely, and breaks out most violently; yea, in them the
corruption of nature has a more fierce and a more violent working, then in
them that either want the Word of God, or are ignorant of it. And therefore we
are not to marvel at it, that many that live in the clear light of the Word
of God, and where it is truly and faithfully preached, and have knowledge of
the Word forbidding sin, are notwithstanding most outrageous in sin, and
carried on most violently in a course of sin; we are not to wonder at this.
Yet in the mean time, such persons as are so carried on in sin, are in a
fearful case, and it is the case of too many.

Are there not many that know the Word of God forbidding sin, yea, that know
the Word of God forbidding their particular sins, and have often heard it
urged against their particular sins of Pride, of Covetousness, of
Drunkenness, of Sabbath-breaking, and such like; and yet the corruption of
their hearts carries them on even with violence and eagerness, to the practice
of these sins? Surely, such persons are in a miserable condition. They that
either want the Word of God, or are ignorant of it, though they be in a
miserable taking; yet thou that know the Word of God forbidding sin, yea,
forbidding that particular sin, which thy corruption carries thee even with
violence, to practice, thy case is far worse; for that is to sin against
knowledge, and presumptuously, yea, that is a fearful step to that
unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost, yea, that seals up to
thee a fearful conclusion; if thou speedily amend not, it is more then
probable, that thou art in the state of reprobation, thou art a child of
disobedience and wilful rebellion; and therefore thou art not only a child of
wrath, as all others are by nature, but it is more then probable, that thou
shall never be received to mercy, and that thou art a child of perdition.

Oh let all such as are carried on violently in a course of sin, though they
know the Word of God to the contrary, think on this; and if hell have not
taken hold and possession of them, let them bethink themselves of speedy
reformation.

Now the second thing offered unto us, in that the Apostle says, Without the
Law, sin is dead; without the true knowledge of the Law, the corruption of
nature lies hid, and as it were dead, is this:

That ignorant persons, They that either know not the Law and Word of God, or
consider it not, have no true touch of conscience, in regard of inward
corruption.
such as either know not the Law and Word of God, or at least confider it not
as they ought, they have no true touch of conscience in respect of inward
corruption, the corruption of nature lies as it were dead in them, not only in
respect of the working power of it, but also in regard of the accusing power of
it; it has not in them that accusing power, that it has in those that are
acquainted with the Law and Word of God, the ugliness and grieuousnesse of the
corruption of nature, does not press and lie heavy on the souls of such as
are ignorant of the Law and Word of God, they are not touched with the danger
of it, they see not themselves, in regard of the corruption of nature, under
the curse of God, and liable to everlasting perdition. And why? Surely, because
they know not Lust to be sin, they see not the corruption of nature to be
sin, and to be a thing forbidden and condemned in the Law of God; no, though
they be men of great knowledge and understanding in other things, yet they are
as blind as Beetles in respect of the corruption of nature, they see not their
ignorance of God, and of his Word, their hardness of heart, their distrust of
Gods providence, their self-love, their seeking themselves, their own ease,
pleasure, profit, and many actual lusts of their hearts, to be sins, much
less do they see the root of those lusts, the corruption of their nature, to
be sin; and therefore they cannot be touched with the weight of it, and with
the danger of it, and find themselves under the curse of God in regard of it.

This serves further to discover to us the necessary use of teaching and
learning the Law of God, It is needful that the Law of God should be taught,
and that men should learn it.
that it is needful the Law of God should be taught, and that men should
learn it, and come to the knowledge of it. Men that are ignorant of the Law of
God, or at least consider it not as they ought, they have no true touch of
conscience in respect of inward corruption, the corruption of nature lies, as
it were, dead in them, even in respect of the accusing power of it, and they
go on in a deadness and dullness of heart, and have no sense or feeling of
their inward lusts, that are strong and powerful in them: they are not
humbled, they sorrow not, they grieve not, they hang not down their heads, in
regard of inward corruption: and why? Because it is not in them? No, no: but
because they feel it not, they have no touch of conscience in respect of it,
being ignorant of the Law of God, that should bring them to a true touch of
conscience, for the very corruption of their hearts, and make them see
themselves, in regard that they are under the wrath of God, and liable to
everlasting peridition; and therefore it is needful that the Law of God should
be taught, and that men should learn it, and come to the knowledge of it; and
to this purpose consider but this, without knowledge of the Law of God, men can
never come to a sight of the corruption of their own hearts, and without a
true sight of it, they can never come to be truly humbled for it, and without
true humiliation for it, in some measure, they cannot come to be raised up with
true comfort. And therefore, as we tender our own good and comfort, we are to
learn the Law of God, that thereby we may come to the knowledge of the
corruption of our own hearts, and may be truly humbled for it, and so find
true comfort in Jesus Christ.

VERSE. 9. For I once was alive without the Law: but when the Commandment came,
sin revived.


THe Apostle having said, Without the Law, sin is dead, without the Law,
sin lay as it were, dead, both in regard of the working, and also of the
accusing power of it; In this Verse he confirms it by his own example, he
gives instance in himself, and shows, that even in himself sin lay, as it
were, dead, without the Law. That is the general drift and purpose of the
Apostle in this Verse; and thus much is intended by him, and easily gathered
from his words, though it be not in these very terms propounded in this Verse.

We have laid before us two contrary states and conditions both of the Apostle
himself, and of sin in regard of the Law. As first, that without the Law the
Apostle was once alive, and sin was then dead. In the first words, For I once
was alive without the Law, and sin was then dead: that is not expressed, but
employed. And then secondly, that on the coming of the Commandment, sin,
which before was dead, revived, and then he dyed. But when the Commandment
came, sin revived, but I dyed.

For I once, that is, I my self, Interpretation
heretofore being a Pharise, being in my natural state, and before my
conversion, was alive, that is, seemed to my self to be alive, in mine own
conceit and opinion I was alive. Now the life the Apostle here intends, is
spiritual life, and that is put for a good and an happy spiritual state and
condition; for so the word (Life) is sometimes used in Scripture, for an happy
state and condition, Psalm. 34.12.
as Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires life? that is, Who is it that
would live well and happily, in an happy state and condition? And so the
Apostles meaning, in saying, I was alive, is this: I was in mine own conceit
and opinion in a marvelous good case, I thought my self, in regard of my
spiritual state and condition, exceeding well, and far from any danger of
death and damnation: I observed the Law outwardly, and touching the outward
observation of it, I was unrebukable, Philip. 3.6.
Philip. 3.6. and I was secure, my conscience did not trouble me, nor make me
afraid of Gods justice and vengeance. So much is employed in that phrase (I was
alive.) Without the Law, that we expounded before, and showed this to be the
meaning, Without the sound knowledge and due consideration of the Law of God.

But when the Commandment came.] By Commandment we are to understand that
Commandment beforespoken of, that forbids lust and condemns it. And the
Apostle says, that the Commandment came; not because he had it not before,
but because he did not rightly understand it and duly consider it; for this
phrase is opposed to the former, without the Law: and so the Commandment came
to the Apostle, when he rightly understood it, and did duly consider it (sin
revived.) The word Sin is here to be taken as before, for the corruption of
nature, for inward lust and concupiscence, and that is said to revive, when it
shows forth the power of it, both in stirring and working, and in accusing;
without sound knowledge and due consideration of the Law of God, it lay, as it
were, dead, but on the sound knowledge and due consideration of the Law, it
begun to show forth the life of it, even strongly to stir, and to work, and
to accuse.

And I dyed.] This is opposed to that he said before (was alive.) The meaning
is this:

I found my self in regard of my spiritual state and condition, as a dead
man, I saw my self guilty of sin, and so under the curse and wrath of God,
and liable to eternal death and damnation, my conscience accused me, and made
me afraid of Gods wrath and vengeance. That is the meaning of that phrase (I
dyed.) Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this
Verse, as if he had said,

But I my self heretofore, when I was a Pharise, and did not soundly
understand the Law of God, nor duly consider it, but contented my self with
an outward observation of it, thought my self, in regard of my spiritual
state and condition, exceeding well, and in a marvelous good case, I was
secure, my conscience never troubled me, and I thought my self far from any
danger of death and damnation: but when I came to a right understanding, and
due consideration of the Commandment of God, that forbids Lust, and condemns
it, then the corruption of my nature, the lust of mine heart, showed forth the
life of it, then it began strongly to work, and to stir, and to accuse me,
then I found my self, in regard of my spiritual state and condition, in a
miserable case, then my conscience accused me, and terrified me, and I saw my
self guilty of sin, and so under the curse of the Law and wrath of God, and
liable to eternal death and damnation.

Here first observe we, that the Apostle says, that when he was a Pharise,
and had no sound knowledge of the Law of God, nor due consideration of it, but
rested only in the outward observation of the Law, then he thought himself
alive, he then thought himself, in regard of his spiritual state and
condition, exceeding well, and in a marvelous good case. Now that which was the
conceit and thought of the Apostle, is the very conceit and thought of all
natural men being ignorant of the Law of God, or not duly considering it: and
the point hence is this,

That such as are ignorant of the Law and Word of God, It is the nature of
ignorant persons, to please themselves in an outward conformity to Gods Law.
or do not duly consider it, they please themselves exceedingly in an outward
conformity to the Law of God, and if they carry themselves orderly, and yield
an outward conformity to the Law, and perform outward good things, they are
highly conceited of themselves, and they think they are in a marvelous good
case, in respect of their spiritual state and condition; it is the nature of
ignorant persons to bless themselves, in respect of their outward good
carriage and civil behavior, and to think themselves, in respect of that,
alive to Godward, and without all question in Gods favor, and sarre from any
danger of death and damnation. This is the conceit of all ignorant persons,
even of all such as are not well acquainted with the Law and Word of God, or
do not duly consider it. We see it here in the example of the Apostle; and
to this purpose we have other examples in the Word of God, as that of the
Pharise, Luke 18.11, 12. we there read, that the Pharise gives thanks to
God, that he was not thus and thus, That he was not an Extortioner, Unjust, an
Adulterer, or as this Publican: but he did this, and he did that, He fasted,
and he gave alms, and such like. As if he had said in plain terms, I
thank God, I carry my self orderly and well, and I do good duties; and
therefore I doubt not but that I am in a good case, and I am in the favor of
God, and I am far from danger of death and damnation.

And thus we read, Mat. 19.17, 18.
Mat. 19. that a vaunting young man coming to Christ, and demanding, What he
should do to be saved? and Christ saying to him, If thou will enter into life,
keep the Commandments. Verse. 20. I have observed all these things from my
youth; what lack I yet? He being unacquainted with the true sense and meaning
of the Law, and resting on an outward observance of some Commandments, he was
highly conceited of himself, he thought himself in a marvelous good case;
and unless Christ could tell him what he should do more, he had done as
much as would certainly bring him to heaven.

And this is the conceit of all such as are unacquainted with the Law and Word
of God, or do not duly consider it; they think, if they live ciuilly and
yield only an outward conformity to the Law of God, and Will of God reueiled in
his Word, they are in a marvelous good case, and they cannot be persuaded,
that they are in a bad case, and in any danger of death and damnation: and if
you tell them that they are in danger of it, they will be ready to answer you,
as the people did the Prophet, Ierem. 2.35.
Ierem. 2.35. They are guiltless, and they fear no such danger. And to say
with the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.17. Revel. 3.17.
that they are rich; and they are marvelous well, and in good case. And why?
Surely, the reason of it is this:

Men are ready to soothe up themselves;

This being a truth, Whence it is that the Papists please themselves in their
outward obseruances.
they bless themselves, if they say over so many Creedes, and so many Pater
nosters, and do such and such good works, yea, they think that the very doing
of such and such works, merits at the hands of God, and that no less, then the
reward of eternal life. Poor souls! they deceive themselves in their own
conceit; and here is the cause of their misconceit, they are ignorant of the
Law of God, or at least consider it not as they ought, they either know not, or
they consider not the strict justice of the Law of God, that it requires exact
and perfect holiness, as well of heart as of life, and a perfection of love
both to God and Men: this they are either ignorant of, or they consider it not.

To come to ourselves; Whence it is, that men please themselves in their civil
carriage.
or do not duly consider it, they please themselves exceedingly, in an outward
conformity to the Law, and if they carry themselves orderly and ciuilly, they
think they are in a marvelous good case, in regard of their spiritual state
and condition? By this then we may easily see, whence it is that men are
secure, and please themselves in their civil carriage, and their outward
conformity to the Law of God, and think, that in regard of that, they are in a
marvelous good case, yea, that they are in the favor of God, and free from
danger of death and damnation.

Surely, hence it is, they are ignorant of the Law and Word of God, or at
least, they consider it not as they ought, they carry themselves ciuilly in the
world, and they do good things, and because they are ignorant of the Law of
God, or do not consider, what that requires at their hands, therefore they
think themselves alive to Godward and in very good case, yea, you shall hardly
persuade them that their case is miserable, and that they are in danger of hell
and damnation: deal with them, and tell them their case is fearful and
damnable; and they think it strange, and you bring strange things to their
ears. What, they in a bad case? they in danger of hell and damnation? Surely
no, it cannot be; they thank the Lord, they carry themselves orderly and
ciuilly, and none can justly tax them with any soul crime, they do no man
wrong, they pay every man his own: and therefore say what you will, you shall
never make them believe that they are in a bad case, that they are in danger of
hell and damnation.

Thus thousands in the world are conceited of themselves, not knowing, or at
least, not considering what the Law and Word of God requires at their hands;
they bless themselves in their civil carriage, and their outward conformity
to the Law of God; and so, poor souls, they deceive themselves, and they are
in a miserable taking, and indeed, their case is far more miserable, because
they see not their misery, and they are hardly brought to take notice of it:
it is an harder matter to bring a civil man or woman to a sight of their
misery, then a Swearer and a Ruffian: for why? They take themselves to be in a
blessed case, they think all is well with them, and they are such as Christ
speaks of, Luke 15.7. Luke 15.7.
They think they are just, and in the favor of God, and they need no
repentance; and so they go on in a blockishnesse, and without all true sense
and feeling of their sins; and they are like to a man that is dangerously and
deadly sick, and feels not his sickness, and so neglects the means of his
recovery, and dies without remedy. So they are dangerously sick in their
souls, and they feel it not, and they go on, neglecting the means of their
good, and salvation of their souls; and so their case is miserable, yea, I
dare be bold to say, either God says not true in his Word (which were
blasphemy once to think) or else such as rest in their civil carriage and
behavior, and think all is well with them, are in a miserable case: for mark
what Christ says, Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

Now what was the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? Surely, an
outward conformity to the Law of God, and for that, they were admired, and in
respect of that, held as petty Angels; and yet Christ says, Except our
righteousness exceed them, we shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
And therefore take notice of thy miserable state and condition, thou that
please thy self in thy civil carriage, and think all is well with thee.
It is through ignorance of the Law and Word of God: or because thou considerest
not what the Lord requires of thee in his Word, and thou do but dream that
thou art alive to Godward; when God awakens thee thou shall find thy self in
a miserable case: and therefore take notice of it now in time, and know that
God in his Word, requires of thee conformity to his Law and Word as well inward
as outward, and that thy doing of outward good things, comes from a sanctified
soul, and proceed out of a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned,
and that they be done in conscience and obedience to the Commandment of GOD,
and with a desire to please him, and with a due respect to his glory.

In the next place, observe we the manner of speaking, the Phrase and form of
speech here used by the Apostle. He says, I once was alive, without the Law.
And again, that the Commandment came to him (and when the Commandment came)
not meaning that he was altogether without the Law, or that the Law was
altogether absent from him, (for he had the Law, and was instructed in it at
the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 12.3.
Act. 22. verse. 3.) but his meaning is this, that he was in former time
without the sound knowledge and understanding of the Law, and did not duly and
thoroughly consider it, the Law came to him when he soundly understood it, and
did duly consider it.

Now the Apostle setting out his want of sound knowledge, and due consideration
of the Law of God, under this Phrase and form of speech, He was without the
Law, and again, His sound knowledge and through-consideration of the Law.
Under this form of speech, The Commandment came to him, we are given to
understand thus much:

That men are as without the Law and Word of God, Men are as without the Law
and Word of God, though they hear the sound of it, when they do not rightly
understand it and duly consider it.
though they hear the sound of it in their ears, when they do not rightly
understand it, and duly consider it; such as hear the Law and Gospel, even
the whole Word of God, and have it sounding in their cares, and do not rightly
understand it, and duly consider it, so as they feel the proper and powerful
effect and working of it in themselves for their humiliation and comfort; it
may be truly said of them, that they are as without the Word of God, they are
as if they had not the Word of God at all; as one that is blind, may be said to
be without the light of the Sun, though the Sun shine most clearly round
about him, and the beams of it fall on his eyes; and as a man that has
riches, and yet has not the use of them, nor any further profit of them, then
the beholding of them with his eyes, Eccles. 5.10. may be said to be as without
riches, and as if he had no wealth at all. So they that have the Word of God,
and they hear it, they read it, and it may be have some general and consused
knowledge of it, and yet have not the right and sound understanding of it, and
do not thoroughly consider it, so as they feel the power and working of it in
themselves to their humbling and strengthening; certainly they are as without
the Word of God, as if they had it not at all.

To this purpose mark what the holy Ghost says, Heb. 4.2. The Word that they
heard, profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. The meaning is this, Because the Jews, in the time of the old
Testament, did not soundly understand the Word of God, the Gospel that they
heard, and did not mingle it with faith, because they did not so thoroughly and
duly consider it as they ought, even till they come to feel sweetness and
comfort of it in themselves; therefore it was fruitless, it was unprofitable
to them, and they were as without the Word of God, and as if they had never had
it at all.

Isai. 28.9. we read, that the Prophet contesteth with the people, and blames
them exceedingly, that though the Lord had sent his Word unto them by his
Prophets, and they had heard it, yet they had no sound knowledge and
understanding of it, and he says, in that regard they were as Babes, and the
preaching of it had done them no more good, then as if it had been preached to
young Infants: and so it was with them, as if they had been without the
preaching of it, and as if they had never heard it at all. Whom, says the
Prophet, shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand the
things that he hears? Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from
the breasts?

2. Tim. 2. The Apostle having exhorted Timothy constantly to undergo the
labors of his calling, and the troubles and afflictions attending on it, Verse.
7. he says, Consider what I say, 2. Tim. 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. As if he had said, All
that I have said, is nothing worth, it is as if I had never spoken it, and as
if thou had never heard it, unless thou rightly understand it, and duly
consider it, to make thy profit and benefit of it: and therefore understand me
aright, and consider what I say, and the Lord give thee that thou may both
rightly understand, and wisely consider what I have said, that may be fit for
thy good.

Ioh. 5.39. We find, that Christ inioynes a diligent Search of the Scripture,
that men should again and again search into the Scriptures: for so the word
signifies: and never rest till they find out the right sense and meaning of
them, and be able to make a right use of them to themselves. Christ knowing
well, that if men do not so understand the Word, and if they be not able so to
make use of it, they are as if they were without the Word, and as if they had
it not at all. And the reason of it is this:

Howsoever the Word of God be in it self the Will and Wisdom of God
reueiled;

This being a truth, the use of it is for instruction: We must not rest in the
hearing, reading, and general knowledge of the Word of God.
though we do often both hear and read it, and with some general knowledge
of it; but we must labor for a further matter, even for a right understanding
of the Word of God, that we may be able duly to consider it. And herein many
deceive themselves; they rest only in the hearing of the Word, and content
themselves with some general knowledge, they know only the outward face and
sentence of the Word, and they are able to repeat it, but they have no sound
knowledge of it, they are not acquainted with the inward purpose and meaning of
the holy Ghost in it. Poor souls! whosoever they be that thus do, they
deceive themselves, and they are as without the Word of God, and as if they had
it not at all, yea, on them is verified that heavy and fearful threatening and
judgment denounced, Isai. 6.9. They hear, and do not understand, they see,
and do not perceive. Which is a most heavy judgment of God, worse then
famine, plague, or any other outward calamity: For that is a judgment of God
on the soul.

Let us not then content our selves with the hearing or reading of the Word of
God, and with a general knowledge of it, but labor we for the right
understanding of it, and let us never rest till we come to a right
understanding of the Word of God, and be able duly to consider it, yea, so, as
we feel the proper effect and working of it in our selves.

How is that,

To this I answer: comfort in the Gospel in the time of health, and in the
time of prosperity; but let us never rest, till we be able to say with David,
Psalm. 119.50. It is my comfort in my trouble: for thy promise has quickened
me. Then indeed we rightly understand it, and we feel the proper effect of
it in our selves: and to help us forward in this, consider we briefly these
two things:

First, nothing is able to yield us true comfort in time of trouble and
distress, but only the Word of God; and if we be not able to comfort our
selves out of the Word of God in our troubles, we either grow impatient, or we
become desperate, or we fly to unlawful means: for indeed if men know not
God in his Word, they know not his Mercy, they know not his Truth, his Love and
his Goodness; and how then can they possibly be comforted in their troubles?

Again, consider we, that Prayer brings a feeling of comfort, and the
Sacraments a sealing up of comfort, but it is only of that comfort we have in
the Word of God: If we have no comfort in the Word of God, Prayer brings no
feeling of any true comfort, the Sacraments seal up nothing to us, but
Judgment and Damnation. If we desire to find true comfort in time of trouble
and distress, and would have Prayer to bring us to a feeling of true comfort,
and the Sacraments to seal up true comfort in our own souls: let us not
content our selves with the hearing or reading of the Word of God, and with a
general knowledge of it, but labor we, and never let us rest, till we come
to a right understanding of the Word, and that we be able duly to consider it,
and that we feel the proper effect of the Law in our own hearts, to the
humbling of us for our sins: and the Gospel raising us up with true comfort,
yea, that we are able to find comfort in the Gospel in time of our greatest
trouble and distress, then we rightly understand and duly consider it: and if
it be not thus with us, we are as without the Word of God, and as if we had
it not at all.

Note we further, the Apostle says, When the Commandment came; meaning, that
Commandment that forbids Lust, and condemns it; when he came more narrowly
to look into that Commandment, and more duly to consider it; thereby
intimating, that in former times he did not so narrowly look into that
Commandment, nor so thoroughly consider as he ought. And hence we are taught,

That we are carefully to consider, We are carefully to consider every
Commandment of God.
even to consider one Commandment of God as well as another, and all of them
together; for indeed he that breaks one Commandment, is guilty of all, Iam.
2.10. And there is the same Lawgiver of one Commandment, as well as of
another; he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, as it follows, Verse.
11. said also, Thou shall not kill, etc. And the least breach of any
Commandment, is a sin against God, even against the infinite Majesty of
God, and so deserves the wrath of God and everlasting perdition.

And therefore we are carefully to consider all and every Commandment of God,
They deceive themselves, that look to some of the Commandments, and not unto
the other
and to look to one Commandment as well as to another: and therefore they
deceive themselves, who look to some of the Commandments, and not to the
other, and are careful to avoid the breach of some Commandments, and not of
the other.

Art thou no Thief, no Murderer, no Adulterer, no Swearer, and such like? and
yet art thou a Sabbathbreaker, or the like? thou deceiuest thy self: thou
can find no true comfort in so doing. David says, Ps. 119.6. He should not
be confounded, when he had respect to all the Commandments of God. Thus must
we do, we must have respect to all the Commandments of God, and we must be
careful to obey God in all his Commandments, otherwise we shall find no true
comfort nor peace to our own souls.

Now further, in that the Apostle says, that whereas before without the Law he
thought himself alive, and on the coming of the Commandment sin revived,
and he dyed, his meaning being this, that when he came to a true understanding
of the Commandment of God that forbids lust, and more thoroughly to consider
that Commandment, then the corruption of his nature showed forth the life of
it, it began then to stir, to work, and to accuse him, and then he found
himself, in respect of his spiritual state, as a dead man, he saw himself
guilty of sin, and so under the curse of the Law. Hence we are given to
understand thus much:

That the sound knowledge and due consideration of the Law of God, Sound
knowledge of the Law of God, brings men to a sight of inward corruption.
brings men to a sight of inward corruption, it makes men see that corruption
in themselves they saw not before, and it makes that to accuse them and to
condemn them; such as carry themselves ciuilly and orderly, and are of civil
carriage and good behavior, if so be they look into the Law of God, and duly
consider that, and compare themselves with that, they shall see themselves vile
wretches, and they shall see their souls polluted and defiled with many foul
and gross sins which they saw not before their careful looking into the Law
of God, and their due consideration of that, will bring them to a sight of many
foul hidden corruptions, and to a sight of such sins as they saw not before.

Thus it was with the Apostle, when he had no sound knowledge and due
consideration of the Law of God, he thought himself alive, and in very good
case, but when he came more narrowly to look into the Law of God, and
thoroughly to consider that, then he saw the filthynesse and corruption of his
own heart; then he saw himself guilty of sin, which before he had no
sight of, then the lust of his heart showed forth the life of it, both in
stirring and working, and in accusing, his conscience was then touched with
that which never troubled him before.

And thus we read of the Jews, Acts the second, before Peter preached to them,
they were secure, they had no manner of inward touch of conscience for that
foul sin of crucifying Christ the Lord of life: no, it is said, Verse. Act.
2.13.
13. They mocked at PETER and others, and said they were full of new wine. But
when Peter preached to them the Law, and laid before them the Word of God
discovering their sin, and they heard it, and did ponder on it, and thoroughly
consider it, then, the Text says, Ver. 37. They were pricked in their hearts,
Verse. 37.
and said unto PETER and the other Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? Then they were brought to a sight of that sin which they saw not before,
and the sight of it did amaze them, and smite their hearts with bitter vexation.

And hence it is, 1. Cor. 14.24, 25
that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14, 24, 25 that the Word of God discovering
sin, being truly preached, the ignorant man and unbeliever, one that has no
sight of the hidden corruption of his own heart, hearing it and duly
considering it, he finds his sin rebuked, his conscience judged, and the
secret corruption of his heart made manifest, and he comes to see that in
himself, which he saw not before, he is rebuked, and so the secrets of his
heart are made manifest: And indeed the reason of it is this,

The Law of God being the perfect rule of righteousness, and duly consider
the Law of God, it will certainly bring them to a sight of Inward corruption,
and make them see that corruption in themselves which they saw not before; and,
if men carefully look into the Law of God, and compare themselves with that,
they shall see their souls filthy, and defiled with many foul and gross
corruptions and sins which they saw not before.

By this, in the first place we may easily see, Whence it is that many see not
the inward corruptions of their own hearts.
whence it is that many in the world see not the inward lusts and corruptions
of their own hearts, their hearts abound with many gross corruptions and
lusts, and they are full of envy, of pride, of covetousness, they are
selfe-conceited, they are earthly-minded, they are set on the world and the
things of it, even to seek their own ease, pleasure, profit, and the like,
and they see not these corruptions and lusts, their consciences are never
troubled with them, they go lightly under the burden, and why? Surely, here is
the cause of it, they do not foundly understand the Law of God, at least, they
consider it not as they ought, they never lay their hearts to the rule, even to
the Law of God; and that is the cause that they see not the foul and gross
corruptions of them. And hence it is, that such persons as most carefully look
into the Law of God, and most duly compare themselves with that, do most of
all others see their own inward corruptions, and are most of all humbled under
the weight of them.

The world thinks, that such as they call Puritanes, hold themselves pure and
free from sin. But (alas) they are deceived, they, of all others, do most of
all see their own inward corruptions, and do most of all groan under the
burden of them, they see the vanity of their minds, the rebellion of their
wills, and that their affections are exceedingly disordered, and they have much
ado with their own hearts, and they often complain of their sinful
infirmities, and why? Because indeed they soundly understand the Law of God,
and duly and thoroughly consider it, and that brings them to a sight of inward
corruption, and makes them see those corruptions and sins in themselves,
which the world takes no notice of. And they find it true in themselves that
Solomon speaks, Pro. 20.9. Who can say, I have made mine heart clean, I am
clean from my sin? that is, I am without all relics of natural
corruption. They find themselves vile wretches, in regard of their finnes,
because they look narrowly into the Law of God, and compare themselves with it.

And so for a second use of this doctrine. How men may come to know themselves
what they are within as well as without.
and make them see that corruption in themselves which they saw not before?
Surely then, if we would know our selves what we are as well within as
without, and not deceive our selves, nor please our selves in a false conceit,
we must look our selves in the glass of Gods Law. If thou would be
acquainted with thine own heart, and willingly see the hidden corruption of
it, even that which thou see not in thy self, and as yet never troubled
thee, then bring thine heart to the rule, the Law of God, and compare thy self
with that, and that will certainly discover to thee the foul and ugly face of
thine own heart, and let thee see that there is nothing but vanity in thy
mind, rebellion in thy will, and a confused disorder in all thy affections;
that there is nothing in thee of thy self, but the ugly shape of the Devil,
and that will drive thee from self-love, and selfe-liking, and out of all
conceit of thy self, yea, it will make thee not only deny thy self, as Christ
commands, but even to abhor thy self, repenting in dust and ashes, as Job
did, Job 42.6. Yea the more narrowly thou look into the Law of God, and the
more thou do compare thy self with that, the more vile thou will see thy
self, and the more will the filthiness and corruption of thine heart appear
to thee. And therefore if thou desire to be thoroughly acquainted with thine
own self, and would see as well what is within thee as without thee, that
thou may be truly humbled for thy corruptions and sins of thine heart,
as well as thy life, which is the only way to true comfort and peace of
conscience: then labor for sound understanding of the Law of God, and duly
and thoroughly consider that, and compare thy self with that; that is the way
to bring thee to that thou desire.

Further observe we, that the Apostle says, When the Commandment came, sin
revived, and not only so, but he adds, That he dyed, the Commandment of God
being soundly understood, and duly considered of him, the corruption of his
heart, which before lay hid, began strongly to accuse him, and then he saw
himself guilty of sin, which before he saw not, and not only so, but
thereupon also he found himself, in regard of his spiritual condition, in a
miserable case, as a dead man, under the curse of the Law and wrath of God,
liable to eternal death and damnation. Hence we are plainly taught,

That the Law of God does not only discover sin, The Law of God discouers to
men their sins, and their wretchedness, by reason of them
but it serves also to kill men, and to make them as dead men, in regard of
their sins; it shows men their sins, and it makes men see and feel
themselves as dead men, and in a most wretched case, by reason of their sins:
the Law of God discouers to men their sins they saw not before, and withal
on a true sight and feeling of them, it strikes them as it were dead, it works
in them terror, and fear, and dread, and amazement, and a fearful
expectation of Gods wrath and vengeance, and so they are as dead men while they
live: and hence is the Law called a killing Letter, 2. Cor. 3.6. and the
ministration of death, Verse. 7. 2. Cor. 3.6, 7.
the ministry of condemnation, Verse. 9. Yea, the strength of sin, 1. Cor.
15.56.
1. Cor. 15.56. it not only makes sin known, but it gives strength to it, to
accuse and to condemn; Gal. 3.21.
and so it is the strength of sin. Gal. 3.21. the Apostle says, The Law is a
Schole-master to bring men to Christ. How does the Law as a Schole-master bring
men to Christ? Surely thus; it shows them their sins, and withal, it wounds
their hearts, and fills them with terror and fear, and a fearful looking for
of the wrath of God, and shows them no remedy in it self; and so it drives
them from it self to Christ: and thus the Law makes men see and feel
themselves as dead men, and in a most miserable case in regard of their sins;
the reasons of it are these:

First,

Secondly,

It serves first, Difference between the Law and the Gospel, in regard of the
effect of them discovered.
in regard of the effect and working of them: the Law works terror, fear, and
dread; and the Gospel, that works comfort, joy, and peace: the Law discouers
sin, and what sin deserves, and wounds the soul, and works Legal
Repentance, properly called Penitence, or Contrition, which differs from
Evangelical Repentance, that Repentance that is wrought by the Gospel, which
is a turning from sin, to God, or a through change of the purpose of heart,
and course of life, from evil to good, as the Law differs from the Gospel;
and this is that that deceiues some, they cannot distinguish between these two,
Difference between Penitence and Repentance.
they cannot put a difference between Penitence or Contrition, which is the
effect of the Law, and Repentance or turning from sin, to God, or a through
change of the purpose of heart, and course of life, from evil to good, which
is the proper effect of the Gospel; and so they deceive themselves.

Penitence or Contrition may be, it was in Cain and in Judas, they were brought
on the sight and feeling of their sins, to see and feel themselves in a
miserable and desperate case, and were filled with terror, and fear, and
amazement, and a fearful expectation of Gods wrath and vengeance: but
Repentance properly taken, is never found in any but true believers: In them
only is found a turning from sin, to God, and a through change of the purpose
of the heart, and course of life, from evil to good; and that is the proper
effect and work of the Gospel.

For further use of the point. Is it so, What we are to find in our selves, on
the sight of our sins.
to see and feel themselves in a miserable case, even as dead men, while they
are yet alive? Is this the proper effect of the Law? Let us then look, that we
find this effect in our selves, on the fight of our sins; when we are
brought to a sight of our sins, let us look that we find our selves as dead
men, and as it were at the very gates of hell. It is a dangerous thing when a
man is touched by the Word of God, and his sins are discovered by the
ministry of the Word, then to set a good face on the matter, and to bite in
all tokens of Repentance and Contrition, because he would not seem to be
touched with the Word, or that the Word came so near him. They that thus
harden their hearts, are in danger never to repent. These two go together,
Romans 2.5. Thou, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just Judgment of God. And therefore take we heed of this. I will here stand a
while to show the variety of acceptance of the word (Repentance) in Scripture.
How it is taken diverse ways in the Book of God, which some not discerning, or
not observing, deceive themselves.

And first we find, that the word (Repentance) is sometimes taken only for
grief of heart or mind, in respect of things done amiss, in respect of some
evil committed; it signifies only sorrow, anguish, and vexation of heart and
soul, and that the heart is displeased for some thing done, which is called
Contrition of heart. Thus it is taken, Mar. 1.15. where Christ says, Repent
and believe the Gospel: that is, Be humbled, be sorry for your former wicked
lives, and let your hearts be grieved and broken in you for your sins past,
and believe the Gospel.

Thus also is it taken, Luke 10.13. They had a great while agone repented,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes: that is, They had long since been humbled and
grieved for their sins, and had testified their sorrow, by sitting in
sacke-cloth and ashes. Act. 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness:
that is, Be humbled, and let thine heart be grieved for this thy wickedness.
So, 2. Cor. 12.21. I fcare, says the Apostle, when I come again, my God abase
me among you, and I shall bewail many of them which have sinned already, and
have not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness which
they have committed: that is, They have not bewailed, grieved and sorrowed for
it. Ier. 8.6. No man repented of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? that
is, No man was displeased with himself, and no man said, Alas, what have I
done? And so in many other places we find, that Repentance is taken for sorrow,
grief, and vexation of heart for things done amiss, and for the breaking of
the heart. Thus Heb. 6.1. and thus it is said that Judas repented, Matthew. 27.3.
Did Judas repent? did he turn from his sin to God? Nay rather, he ran from
God, he was full of horror, fear, anguish, and grief, he was sorry for that
he had done, and overwhelmed with horror.

Again, Diverse acceptions of the word (Repentance.)
the word (Repentance) sometimes in Scripture signifies not only contrition of
heart, but it compriseth also under it the whole conversion of a sinner, and it
signifies both contrition and sorrow for sin, and faith in Christ, and a
through turning from sin to God. Thus Mar. 1.4. It is said, John preached the
baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, that is, he preached that men
should be humbled for their sins, and believe in Christ, and thoroughly turn
to God, and so repenting, and so believing in Christ, that they should be
baptized, and thereby testify and seal yp the remission of their sins.

And that under Repentance, faith in Christ is here to be understood, it is
clear, Act. 19.4. where Paul says, Act. 19.4.
JOHN baptized with the baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that
they should believe in him which should come after him, that is, in Jesus
Christ. Thus Mat. 9.13. Christ says, that he came not to call the righteous,
but the sinners to Repentance: meaning this, to turn sinners from sin to
God, that they might be converted, and believe in him, and be saved, as 1. Tim.
1.15. The Apostle says, 1. Tim. 1.15.
This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners. And we read, Act. 26.20. Act. 26.20.
that repenting and turning to God are joined and put together, as one
expounding the other, but showed first, that they should repent and turn to
God. And to this purpose we might bring many other testimonies, where
Repentance is put, to signify not only contrition of heart, but faith also in
Christ, and a through turning from sin to God.

Thirdly, the word (Repentance) is sometimes put, to signify the marks of
Repentance, or new obedience, as Revel. 2.5. says Christ to the Church of
Ephesus, Revel. 2.5.
Repent and do thy first works. Where he expounds what he means by the word
Repent, namely, doing of the first works.

Fourthly, the word (Repentance) is sometimes in Scripture put for the good
things that follow true conversion, and turning to God, Act. 5.31.
and believing in Christ, Act. 5.31. Peter and the other Apostles say, that God
lift up Christ with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance to Israel: that is, to give Israel reconciliation with God, Act.
11.18.
and to give them his holy Spirit. So Act. 11.18. the Church speaks thus in
Peter's Apology, in going to the Gentiles: Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted Repentance unto life: that is, accepted them for his, and made them
also members of his Church, and adopted them for his children.

Thus we see, not to add any more, though more might be added, that the word
(Repentance) is diversely taken in the Scripture, and has not always one and
the same signification: and this is that which deceiues such as cannot, or at
least will not distinguish of things that differ; they think it is ever to be
taken in the same sense and signification, and so they deceive themselves.

Now whereas I said, that Repentance properly taken, (that is) a turning from
sin to God, or a through change of the purpose of the heart, and course of life
from evil to good, is never found in any but in true believers, and so must
needs follow faith in Christ, in the order of nature, and must needs be the
proper effect and fruit of the Gospel; I confirm that position, and make it
good by these reasons:

First, Reasons, proving Repentance properly taken, to follow faith in the
order of nature.
no man repents soundly, that is, soundly turns from sin to God, unless he
deny himself, and hate sin from his heart, and willingly embrace true
holiness and righteousness: And this none can or will in any measure
perform, unless he be regenerate; for no unregenerate person hates sin from
his heart; and none is regenerate, unless he be in Christ; and none is in
Christ, unless he embrace Christ by a true justifying and saving faith; and
true justifying faith is ever grounded and fastened on the promise of the
Gospel, touching Gods free grace and favor in Christ, and free remission of
sins: and so, without question, it is the proper effect of the Gospel; and
therefore it must needs be, that true, sound, and saving Repentance follows
faith in Christ, and is the proper effect and fruit of the Gospel.

Secondly, Mar. 16.16. Act. 2.41.
Scripture. And Baptism is also a sign and seal of true Repentance. Luke 3.3.
JOHN came preaching the baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. Act.
2.38.
Amend your lives and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. And therefore Baptism belonging only to the Gospel, and sealing that
faith that is wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, and that being also a
seal of Repentance, it cannot be, but that true Repentance is the proper
effect and fruit of the Gospel, and follows true faith in Christ.

Thirdly, sound and saving Repentance,

Fourthly, and lastly, Isai. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, Jsai.
61.1.
therefore has the Lord anointed me, he has sent me to preach good tidings
unto the poor, and bind up the brokenhearted, and to preach liberty to the
captives, and to them that are bound, the opening of prison. Mat. 3.2. Repent;
Matthew. 3.2. and 9.13.
for the Kingdom if heaven is at hand. Mat. 9.13. I am not come to call the
righteous, but the sinners to Repentance. And therefore true saving Repentance
is the proper effect and fruit of the Gospel, and follows true saving faith
in CHRIST.

These reasons do sufficiently euince the truth of this Position, that
Repentance properly taken, namely, a turning from sin to God, or a through
change of the purpose of heart and course of life from evil to good, is never
found in any but in true believers; and so is the proper effect and fruit of
the Gospel, and follows true saving and justifying faith in Christ. And these
may satisfy any that is not wilfully blind and wedded to his own idle and
selfe-pleasing conceit.

One thing is further offered unto us from the phrase and form of speech here
used. In that the Apostle says, Sin revived, and he dyed: In that he tells us
that sin reviving, that is, sin now accusing him, and his conscience now
being touched, and troubled with the sight of sin, which he saw not before,
thereupon he dyed, he found himself as a dead man. Hence we are further
given to understand thus much:

That the accusation of the conscience for sin, The terror of a guilty
conscience is most fearful.
is a most fearful thing, the terror of a guilty conscience, of a conscience
awakened, and now seeing and feeling the guilt of sin, and terrified and
affrighted for sin, is a most heavy thing, it is even as a death, it is of
all evils and miseries that can befall a man in this world, the greatest. And
to this purpose Solomon speaks plainly, Pro. 18.14. Pro. 18.14.
says he, The Spirit of man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit
who can bear it. The mind of man being sound and whole, will enable him to
bear in some measure with patience, diseases of body, or any outward
calamity: but a wounded spirit, the wound of the soul, the horror of a guilty
and accusing conscience who can bear it? That is a thing insufferable, no man
or woman in the world is able to endure that, and to bear that. And this we
may see in the example of Cain, of Judas, of Belshazer, and many others in the
Book of God.

Cain being pursued with the terrors of a guilty conscience, he ran up and
down as a Rogue, as a Vagabond, as a Runnagate in the earth, Genesis 4.14. Genesis
4.14.
And Belshazer being in the midst of his cups carrowsing, and in the midst of
his mirth and iollity, and seeing the handwriting on the wall, and that
awaking his conscience, and terrifying and affrighting him; the Text says,
Dan. 5.6.
His countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him so, that the joints
of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan. 5.6.
And we know, that Judas being galled with the gripes of a guilty conscience,
his conscience accusing him for his sin, he never rested till he made a
dispatch of himself; He went and hanged himself, Matthew. 27.5. Matthew. 27.5.
Yea, we see it many times in woeful experience, that some that are pursued with
the galls and terrors of a guilty conscience, they never rest till they have
laid violent hands on themselves, and they seek for death more then treasures,
Job 3.21.
Job 3.21. And that shows plainly that the accusation of the conscience for
sin, and the horror of a guilty conscience is a most fearful thing, and of
all evils in this world the greatest. And the reasons of it are these:

First,

Again, Isay 66.24. Isai. 66.24.
The worm of conscience in hell shall never dye. And therefore it must needs
be most true, that the horror of a guilty conscience, of a conscience accusing
for sin, is a most fearful thing, it is as death, yea, more dreadful then
the death of the body, and of all evils in this world, it is the greatest.

Now then, The folly of most in the world discovered.
this being a truth, in the first place it serves to discover the folly and
madness of the most in the world, who care little or nothing to pull this
evil on themselves: most men are careful to prevent other evils, they are
very wary and circumspect, lest they should fall into poverty, or sickness, or
be cast into prison, or the like: but where is almost any man or woman, that is
careful to prevent the evil of an accusing conscience, of all evils in the
world, the greatest? Few there be that take any pains that way; nay, most men,
as it were with both hands, hale and pull that evil on themselves; they
wittingly and wilfully rush into known sins, and wilfully go on in known
sins.

For example; do not many know that Garishnesse of apparel is a sin? and
yet they wilfully go on in that sin. And do not many know that Usury is a
sin? and yet they wilfully practice it, and make a trade of it. And so for
Drunkenness, Common Swearing, etc. Do not many know these to be foul sins?
and yet they wilfully go on in the practice of them. Poor souls! thus doing,
they pull on themselves the greatest evil in the world, the wound and horror
of a guilty conscience. And when the Lord shall let loose the cord of their
conscience, and cause that to accuse them, they shall find themselves, as it
were, in hell, and they shall feel the flames of hell flashing up in their
own souls; yea, such as now are foole-hardy, and desperately bold to commit
sin, and say they care not what can be threatened against them; when the Lord
comes to reckon with them, and awakens their conscience, they shall find
themselves most of all others affrighted and terrified, and they shall then
wish for death, and feeke for it as for treasures, and think thereby to ease
themselves: but (alas) all in vain; for death shall plunge their souls into
everlasting torment.

And if the horror of a guilty conscience be in this life so grievous, oh then,
how grievous is it in hell! and therefore take we heed how we pull that evil
on our selves; rather labor we to prevent it. And if thou would know how,
In a word remember these things:

First, examine thy self, call thy self to account for thy sins past, be
humbled for them, and never rest suing for mercy, till thou get the pardon of
them, and be assured of it by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ. And,

Secondly, take heed thou pierce not thy soul with any known sin.

And if thou carefully use these two means, thou shall through Gods mercy
prevent the evil of an accusing conscience.

Again, is it so, We are to pity them that lie under the trouble of an
accusing conscience.
if we see any lie under the trouble of an accusing conscience, we are to
pity them, and to put on tender bowels toward them: it ought to be far from
us to despise, to reproach, or to laugh at them. The case may be our own: and
therefore let us pity them, and be compassionate toward them, pray for them,
and comfort them, and do them what good we shall be able.

VERSE. 10. And the same Commandment which was ordained unto life, was found to
be unto me unto death.


THis Verse depends on the former, as a further setting forth of the Apostles
dead state and condition, in respect of the Law: for the Apostle having said in
the Verse before, that on the coming of the Commandment, sin revived, and
he dyed: here he further amplifies that state and condition of his, by making
known the proper end and use of the Law, which was contrary to that he found;
and he further shows, that he was indeed as a dead man on the coming of the
Commandment, yea, on the coming of the Commandment that was ordained to
another end and purpose, that even the same Commandment that was ordained to
life, that being the natural and proper end and use of it, he found to be to
him to death. And the same Commandment (says the Apostle) which was ordained
unto life, was found to be unto me unto death.

So then, here the Apostle lays before us,

First,

Secondly,

And the same Commandment.] Interpretation
The word Commandment, is doubtless here to be taken, as in the Verse before;
the Apostle still going on in the same argument and matter: and his meaning is
this, And that Commandment that forbids lust, and condemns it, even that same
Commandment which was ordained unto life, was found to be unto me unto death.
The word (ordained) we find not in the Text original, nor any word answering
to it: for the Text runs thus, And the Commandment, even that selfsame
Commandment that was unto life. But indeed it may well be supplied, the Text
requiring it as needful for the right understanding of it, the meaning being
this:

That Commandment that was given and appointed of God to this end and purpose,
namely, unto life. The word (Life) here signifies not only eternal life and
salvation, propounded and promised to the perfect doers of the Law of God, even
to such as should perfectly observe and do all things commanded in the Law of
God, and avoid all evils therein forbidden, according to that, Leuit. 18.5. Ye
shall keep my Statutes and my Judgments, Leuit. 18.5.
which if a man do, he shall then live in them; I am the Lord. Romans 10.5.
Which is cited by the Apostle, Romans 10.5. where he says, Moses thus
describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
these things, shall live thereby. I say, the word (Life) does not only
signify that life, namely, eternal life and salvation, but it signifies also
tranquillity of mind and conscience, peace and comfort, and the well being of
the soul in this life: for that is agreeable to the context and present
purpose of the Apostle, as I showed Verse before, when he said he was alive.
We are thus to understand him, that he was quiet and at peace in himself, he
thought himself, in regard of his spiritual state, exceeding well and in very
good case; and so indeed the word (Life) is here to be taken, not only for
eternal life and salvation, but also for peace, comfort, tranquillity of mind
and conscience, and the well being of the soul in this life.

Was found, that is, of me my self, it fell out and it proved to be to me to
death, and I found it so. Now the word (Death) is here opposed to the word life
before expressed, and it signifies not only eternal death and damnation, but
also disquietnesse, and trouble of mind and conscience, and a wretched
miscrable case in this life. And so the meaning of those words (was found) is
this; It fell out and proved to be to me to the disquiet and trouble of mind
and conscience, and made me liable to eternal death and damnation, and I found
it so to be to me.

Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this Verse,
as if he had said,

And that Commandment of God that forbids lust, and condemns it, even that
selfsame Commandment that was given and ordained of God, for the good of
such as should yield perfect obedience to it, even for the tranquillity of
their minds and consciences, and for the peace, comfort and well being of their
souls in this world, and for their eternal happiness and salvation in the
world to come, fell out and proved to be to me, to the disquiet and to the
trouble of my mind and conscience, and made me liable to eternal death and
damnation, and I found it so to be to me.

Here first observe we, that the Apostle says, That Commandment of God, even
that selfsame Commandment that God gave and ordained to life, fell out to
him to death, and was found to be to him to the discomfort of his soul in this
world, and to make him liable to eternal death and damnation in the world to
come. Whence we easily take up this conclusion,

That the Word of God, even that Word that God gave, and appointed to be a Word
of life and salvation; the same Word becomes to many, a word of death and
damnation, and is found so to be to many; and that very Word of God, that is by
Gods appointment, in the true and proper use of it, a Word of life and
salvation, is found to be to many, a word of death and damnation. The Apostle
here affirms it of the Law of God, and it is true also of the Gospel. Though
God gave the Gospel, and ordained it for the bringing of men to believe in
Christ, and so to life and salvation, and it is his arm and power to
salvation, Romans 1.16.
Romans 1.16. yet to many it turns to hurt, even to their death and damnation:
yea, the point may be general, and may thus be conceived:

That the selfsame things, The same things that by Gods appointment, in the
proper use of them, are for the good of men, fall out to many to their evil.
2. Cor. 2.16.
that by Gods appointment, in the true and proper use of them, are for the good
of men, those turn to the hurt and to the evil of many, and fall out to many
to their evil. And this may be further cleared by many particulars: as,

First, the Word of God, even the sweet and saving Word of God, that Word that
God has ordained to bring men to life and salvation, that is found to some the
savor of death and of damnation, 2. Cor. 2.16.

So the Sacraments, which by Gods appointment, in the true and proper use of
them, are seals of the Covenant of grace, they prove to some to be seals of
judgment and damnation.

The holy Angels, by Gods appointment, are ministering spirits for the good of
the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. Heb. 1.14.
And yet they are found to be to many, executioners of Gods wrath and
vengeance, as to Pharaoh, to Sancherib, and other such like.

So, wit, honor, commendation amongst men, riches, and the like, are, by Gods
appointment, in the true and proper use of them, for the good of men, and yet
they are found to many, to be to their evil and to their bane; as Achitophels
wit was found to be his ruin, Hamans honor and his advancement turned to his
fearful downfall; Act. 12.
and Herod's applause given him by the people, Act. 12. was turned to his utter
destruction: and many find their wealth and their outward prosperity to be
their ruin, Psalm. 69.22.
Psalm. 69.22. And as Solomon says, Pro. 1.32. Ease slays the foolish, and
the prosperity of fools destroys them.

I might instance in many other particulars, and show that the same things,
that by Gods appointment, in the true and proper use of them, are for the good
of men, are found to be to the hurt of many, and fall out to many to their
evil: and the reasons of it are these:

First, many are not capable of that good, Romans 8.28.
and as yet in their natural state and condition, and being not in covenant
with God: for as all things work together for the best, unto them that love
God, even to them that are called of his purpose, Romans 8.28. So all things
work together for the worst, to those that are yet unregenerate; and so they
are not capable of that good that God ordaynes to be in the true use of good
things.

Again; Secondly, As a bad stomach turns the best meat into bad humors: so
their corrupt hearts do corrupt and poison every thing they have, and every
thing they meddle withal, and they pervert good things, and turn them to a
wrong use; and the better gifts they have of body, mind, or outward state, the
worse they are, perverting and abusing those good gifts. And therefore this we
may resolve on as a certain truth, that the same things that by Gods
appointment, in the true and proper use of them, are for the good of men, are
found to be to the hurt of many, and fall out to many to their evil and to
their hurt.

This being a truth, Many men in the top of their happiness, are full of
misery.
as they count it, that is, in the midst of their plenty and store of good
things, even of things good in themselves, and good in the true and proper use
of them, are notwithstanding full of misery; for why? many times even those
good things that men enjoy in abundance, are found to be to their hurt, and to
their evil; yea, many times to their bane, and to their destruction. For
example: men enjoy abundance of wealth and outward things, which by Gods
appointment, in the true and proper use of them, are for the good of men; yet
they, through the poison of their own hearts, abuse those good things to
pride, to wantonness, to oppressing of others that are not so rich as they:
and so those good things are made instruments and means of evil to them, and
are found to be to them to their hurt, even to the hastening of Gods punishing
hand on them in this world, and, without repentance, to the aggravating and
increasing of their woe, and judgment, and damnation in hell: and therefore in
the midst of their happiness, (as they esteem it) they are most wretched and
miserable.

Again, good of men, We are not to rest in the having and enjoying of good
things.
are found to be to the hurt of many and to their evil? Surely, then this must
teach us, not to rest in the having and enjoying of good things, whether the
good things of this life, or the good things of the life to come, and think
our selves happy and blessed of God, if we have and enjoy good things: for so
we may deceive our selves: those good things may be to our hurt and to our
evil. And herein many deceive themselves; they think, if they have good
things, they are happy; and if they have abundance of wealth, they bless
themselves, and think certainly they are blessed of God, and stick not
sometimes to say, that God has blessed them with such and such things, and
they doubt not but that they are in the favor of God, and it shall go well
with them. Poor souls! they may deceive themselves; thou may have abundance
of Corn, Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 104.15.
which indeed are by Gods appointment for the good of men, Psalm. 104.15. and
yet have no true comfort in those things, but find them to be to thy hurt and
to thy bane, Eccles. 5.12.
and reserved to thee for thy evil, Eccles. 5.12. For why? it may be the Lord
has given thee wealth, and abundance of outward things, in wrath and
judgment, not in mercy, as thus; Psalm. 17.14.
It may be he has given them as thy portion, Psalm. 17.14. and thou art to
look for no other good from his hand, yea, Iam. 5.5.
he has given them for thy fatting against the day of slaughter, Iam. 5.5. for
increase of thy judgment and condemnation, and the more thou have, the more
art thou to be accountable for at the day of Judgment, and the heavier shall
be thy judgment and condemnation: and therefore rest not in the having of good
things, and think that therefore thou art blessed of God. No, no: we are not
to rest in the having of good things that belong to life and salvation, in
having the Gospel and the means of salvation; thou may have the Gospel and
enjoy the means of salvation, and yet find them to be to thy hurt and deeper
condemnation, yea, one day nothing more galling thy conscience, then the sweet
and comfortable doctrine of the Gospel.

Ask a conscience despayring of Gods mercy, and therefore we are not to rest
in the having of good things of this life, or belonging to the life to come,
and think our selves happy if we have them: but labor we for a further
matter, that those good things may be found to be to our good, that we may find
true comfort in them.

How is that, may some say? Surely, thus, we must never rest, till we find
that we have part in the merit of Christ, and that the good things that we
enjoy, are tokens and pledges of GODS love toward us in and through him.

And secondly, we must labor for grace in our hearts to make a right use of
those good things, that we may use them to the glory of God and good of our
selves and others, and that they may be helps to further us in the way of
godliness, and to eternal life and salvation; and then doubtless we shall
find them to be to our good and to our comfort.

The next thing that comes to be considered, is this, the Apostle says, The
Commandment was ordained to life: the proper and natural end and use of the
Law of God was life, that is, the Law was given of God, and ordained for the
good of such as should perfectly obey it, even for the tranquillity of their
minds and consciences, for the well being of their souls in this life, and for
their eternal happiness and salvation in the Life to come. Hence this point
might be stood on; I will but only point at it.

That the perfect fulfilling of the Law of God brings life and salvation,
Perfect fulfilling of the Law of God brings life and salvation.
and the way to life and salvation is the perfect fulfilling of the Law of God.
Howsoever no man, since the fall of Adam, being but a mere man, is able
perfectly to fulfill the Law of God, in his own person, and so cannot be
justified by the Law in the fight of God, and by the Law fulfilled by himself
can come to life and salvation, Gal. 3.21. Gal. 3.21.
If there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness, that is, justification, should have been by the Law. Yet this
is a truth, that the perfect fulfilling of the Law, brings life and salvation,
and the way to life and salvation, is the perfect fulfilling of the Law of God:
yea, this is so true, that Christ himself brings none to life and salvation,
but by his perfect obedience, and by his perfect fulfilling of the Law of God
for them; true believers come to life and salvation by the perfect fulfilling
of the Law of God, not in their own persons, but in Christ their Head and
Savior; and he having perfectly fulfilled the Law of God for them, is made
righteousness to them, 1. Cor. 1.30. 1. Cor. 1.30.
He is made to such as truly believe in him, Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Sanctification and Redemption.

For indeed both the Law and the Gospel, How the Law and the Gospel agree,
and how they differ.
in the general matter of them, require justice and righteousness to
salvation, therein they consent and agree. But here is the difference; the Law
requires righteousness inherent and personal, and the Gospel, that requires
righteousness imputed, righteousness inherent in Christ, and made ours by
apprehension and application of faith: and so it is a truth, that the way to
life and salvation, is the perfect fulfilling of the Law of God, and Christ
iustifies true believers, not only by his death and suffering, freeing them
from the guilt and punishment of their sins, but also by his perfect
fulfilling of the Law of God for them, by his active obedience. Let it suffice
to have touched that in a word.

The point I will stand on a little further offered to us from hence, that the
Law was given of God, and ordained for the good of such as should perfectly
fulfill it, namely, for the tranquillity of their minds in this life, and for
their eternal happiness and salvation in the life to come, is this:

That there is much comfort in doing the Will of God, There is much comfort in
yielding sound and sincere obedience to Gods Commandments.
howsoever true believers cannot in time of this life perfectly fulfill the Law
of God, according to the exact rule and justice of it in their own persons,
yet doubtless they fulfill it in Christ, Christ having fulfilled it for them;
and their sound and sincere obedience to the Laws and Commandments of God,
yields to them a proportionable comfort, even sound and true peace, and
tranquillity of mind and conscience in this life, and assurance of eternal
comfort, happiness and salvation in the life to come; the Law of God is given
and ordained for the good of such as perfectly fulfill it; both in this life,
and in the life to come.

Now true believers perfectly fulfill the Law of God in Christ, as they are one
with him by faith, and in their own persons they yield sound and sincere,
though not perfect obedience to the Will of God reueyled in his Word, and that
which is lacking and defective in their obedience, is supplied by the perfect
righteousness of Christ: and so, without question, it yields to them much
comfort, peace, and tranquillity of mind and conscience in this life, and
certain assurance of eternal happiness and salvation in the Life to come,
and the Lord has promised so to reward it; and for this we have further plain
evidence and testimony of Scripture.

Psalm. Psalm. 19.11.
19.11. David says, that in keeping the judgments, that is, the Laws and
Commandments of God, There is great reward. Heb. 6.9, 10, 12.
Heb. 6.9. says the Author of that Epistle, We are persuaded of you such
things as accompany salvation. Then Ver. 10.11. he subioynes, For God is not
unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and doc
minister your doing of good duties. And we desire that every one of you do
show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end. 2. Cor.
1.12. 2. Cor. 1.12.
says the Apostle, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of a good conscience,
that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom. As if he
had said, This yields unto us much comfort and matter of great rejoicing, that
our hearts witness with us, that we have behaved our selves in simplicity and
godly pureness, and in all holy obedience to the Will of God, in doing our
duty: and to this purpose is that, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16. Behold, says MOSES, Deuteronomy.
30.15, 16
I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil: In that I
command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to
keep his Commandments and his Ordinances, and his Laws, that thou may live
and be multiplied, and that the Lord thy God may bless thee in the Land,
whither thou go to possess it. These and many other testimonies of
Scripture do make this a clear truth, That the sound and sincere obedience of
true believers to the Will of God revealed in his Word, to the Laws and
Commandments of God, yields them much comfort, much peace and tranquillity of
mind and conscience in this life, and certain assurance of eternal
happiness and salvation in the life to come: and the reasons of it be these:

First, Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, 1. Pet. 1.9.
even the salvation of your souls.

And secondly, Mat. 10.42. Mat. 10.42.
The giving of a cup of cold water shall not lose his reward. And therefore it
is as possible that God should lie, or deny Himself, which is altogether
impossible, as that true believers, yielding sound and sincere obedience to the
Commandments of God, should fail to find much comfort, peace and
tranquillity of mind and conscience in this life, and certain assurance of
eternal life and salvation in the life to come.

This truth serves first to answer an old rotten cavil of the wicked and
profane, A cavil of the wicked against Gods children answered. Malac. 3.14.
against Gods children and servants, even that cavil that was rife and common
in the days of the Prophet Malac. 3.14. We there find that the wicked of his
time said, It is in vain to serve God: and, What profit is it that we have
kept his Commandments, and that we have walked humbly before the Lord of
hoasts? And this is the very speech and language of many wicked persons in
these our days. Many wicked persons, seeing Gods children careful to keep
good conscience in all things, and that they hold on a strict course in
holiness and in all good duties, and in yielding obedience to the
Commandments of God, and that they will not lie, nor swear, nor break the
Sabbath, nor give themselves liberty (as they do) to follow after the
pleasures and profits of the world; commonly they open their mouths wide
against them, and thus they cavil against them with a kind of insulting over
them; Oh, say they, what good comes of your strict and precise course of life?
what are you the better for it? are you better then we that are not so strict
as you are? Nay, do you not see that we thrive and prosper, and come forward
in the world, and you thrive not, but are crossed in your dealings? and are ye
not hated and contemned of all? do not you lose many a sweet morsel, and many
a penny, and many a pound that you might have, if you would do as others do?
And I pray you then, what good get you by your strict course of life?

Thus commonly the wicked and profane have their mouths opened against Gods
children, in respect of their care to do the Will of GOD, and to obey him in
all his Commandments.

Now the Doctrine delivered affoords to Gods Children an answer to this
cavil: thus they may answer them and stop their mouths, they may tell them,
and that truly,

That they find much good by their holy course of life, and in yielding sound
and sincere obedience to the Commandments of God: for why? it yields them much
tranquillity of mind and conscience; it yields them much peace and comfort,
yea, such peace of mind and conscience, as passes all understanding, and it
yields them certain assurance of eternal life, happiness, and salvation of
their souls and bodies in the Kingdom of heaven. And is that no matter of
benefit? Can they then be said to get no good by their holy course of life?
Oh! the good and profit of it is unspeakable, far surpassing the good that
comes of silver, gold, or all riches: and this may silence the wicked, and stop
their mouths, cauilling against Gods Children.

Again, the doctrine delivered, Comfort to Gods children in their greatest
distress.
For what though they be troubled and vexed in the world, they are hated,
contemned of all, they undergo many wrongs and much hard measure at the hands
of the wicked, yet they may be a comfort to them, and cheer up their hearts,
that howsoever they are troubled without, and there is nothing but war
without, yet they have peace within, their sound and sincere obedience to the
Commandments of God, yields them tranquillity of mind and conscience, and
certain assurance that their end shall be happiness and peace, as it is Psalm.
37.37. we read Isai. 38. Psalm. 37.37. Isai. 38.3.
that when good King Ezekiah had received the sentence of death in himself,
this was his comfort, Verse. 3. that he had walked before the Lord in truth and
in a perfect heart, and had done that which was good in his sight.

And so Gods children, in time of their greatest trouble and distress, yea,
when the pangs of death are on them, may cheer up their hearts with the
remembrance of this, that they have walked before the Lord in truth and in a
perfect heart, and done that which was good in his sight; that will fill their
hearts full of sweet comfort.

The Law, as the Apostle says, was ordained to life. And they shall find, that
their sound and sincere obedience to the Commandments of God, duly
considered, will put life into them when they are half dead, it will revive
their spirits, and cheer up their hearts, giving them peace and comfort in
this life, and assurance of salvation in the life to come. Let Gods children
think on this in their greatest troubles, let them be constant in well doing,
and not be daunted; and when their Lord comes and sinds them so doing, they
shall be blessed of him, and he shall make them Rulers over all his goods,
Matthew. 24.46, 47. Let all Gods children think on that to their comfort.

One thing yet remaynes to be noted in this Verse, namely this; The Apostle
says, The Law which was ordained to life, proved to be to him to death, and he
found it so; he looking into the Law of God, it discovered to him his sin,
and withal it wounded his heart and conscience on the sight of his sin, and
he found that it did so.

Thus it must be with us, The Law must not only bring us to a sight of our
sins, but also sinite our heart with sorrow for them. Act. 2.37.
and examine our selves by that; we are not only thereby to come to a sight of
our sins, but on the sight of them, we are to find our consciences and our
hearts smitten through with sorrow for them, as they, Act. 2.37. on the sight of
their sins were pricked in their hearts, they were wounded in their souls.
It is said, that DAVID'S heart smote him when he had numbered the people, 2. 2.
Sam. 24.10.
Sam. 24.10. So must it be with us on the sight of our sins; perdition in the
life to come, and so have our hearts thoroughly humbled for our sins.

Many fail, and are defective in this; they content themselves with some
general sight and sense of sin, and with some light and vanishing touch of
conscience, causing them to send out a natural sigh or sob, but their hearts
are never truly pressed and broken by the exceeding weight and burden of any
one sin: we must find our hearts wounded, broken, and thoroughly humbled on
the sight of our sins: and unless on the sight of our sins we be brought
to a feeling of our own deserved damnation, we are not capable of the grace
of Christ to salvation.

VERSE. 11. For sin took occasion by the Commandment, and deceived me, and
thereby slew me.


IN this Verse the Apostle gives the reason of that he said in the Verse
foregoing, that the Commandment fell out to be to him to death, and he makes
known, that the cause of that was his own corruption and sin, and he
cleeres the Law in that respect, and he shows that the Commandment was not
the proper cause of death to him, but only an occasion, and that occasion was
thence taken, and none given, Sin took occasion by the Commandment, and
thereby slew him: and withal he shows how, and by what means sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, did by the Commandment slay him, namely, by
deceiving him. Sin, says he, took occasion by the Commandment, and
deceived me, and so by the Commandment slew me.

Here then is laid before us, that the Law only occasionally slew the Apostle,
and that the proper cause of it, that the Commandment fell out to be to death
to him, was his own corruption. And secondly, that his own corruption taking
occasion by the Commandment, deceived him, and so by the Commandment slew
him. In these two things stands the general matter of this Verse, For sin
took occasion by the Commandment.

These words we have, Verse. 8. where I showed the meaning of them: therefore
I will not now stand on every word particularly; we are thus to conceive them,
as if the Apostle had said, Interpretation
For the corruption of my nature, being stirred up by the knowledge and due
consideration of that Commandment of God, that forbids lust, and condemns it,
though no occasion was given from that Commandment, yet the corruption of my
heart took occasion on that Commandment to be stirring and working, and
thereby deceived me.

These words (Deceived me) are diversely expounded. Some would have the word
(Deceived) to be understood not of sin it self, but of the knowledge of
sin, and the meaning to be this, that at length the Apostle perceived, how
far he had been deceived, and came to know how far he had been led out of
the way by sin. But indeed that is a forced Exposition, and it offers
violence to the Text and to the drift of the Apostle. The word (Deceived)
rather points out the proper effect of sin, taking occasion by the Law, which
is to deceive; and that we may rightly understand it, know, the word here
rendered (Deceived) comes from a word that properly signifies to seduce, or to
draw out of the way by enticement, by persuasion, or by insinuation; as a
Thief sometimes persuades a Traveler to leave the ordinary way in which he is
going, and to take some by-path, insinuating with him, and persuading him it is
better, more easier, or more pleasant for him, and such like. And in this sense
we find the word used, Ephesians. 5.6.
Ephesians. 5.6. where the Apostle says, Let no man deceive you with vain words.
As if he had said, Let no man seduce you, and draw you out of the way, to the
committing of those sins before named, persuading with you that there is no
such danger in them, as I tell you of: his words are but wind, they are vain
words. Certainly these sins pull down the wrath of God on the children of
disobedience. I et no man therefore persuade you to the contrary, and so
deceive you. That is the proper signification of the word; and so the meaning
of the Apostle in this place is this, as if he had said,

Sin took occasion by the Commandment, to be stirring and working in me,
and enticed me, and persuaded with me, not to obey the Commandment of God, but
rather to yield to the lusts of mine own heart, and to fulfill them, as things
far better and more pleasant, yea, it insinuated with me, that the more the
things were forbidden and condemned, the more sweet and the more pleasant would
be the doing of them, as it is Pro. 9.17. Pro. 9.17.
Stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is pleasant. And by this means it
drew me out of the way of obedience to the Commandments of God, and to the
committing of sin, and so deceived me, and thereby slew me. (Thereby) that
is, by the same Commandment.

Sin took occasion by the Commandment, and deceived me, and by the same
Commandment slew me. The meaning of that is this; the same Commandment, I
being guilty of the breach of it, bound me over to the curse, and made me see
my self liable to the wrath of God, and to eternal death and damnation; and
so, by the same Commandment sin wounded my conscience, and gave a deadly
blow to my soul, it slew me spiritually. Thus then conceive we the meaning
of the Apostle, as if he had said,

For the corruption of my heart took occasion on that Commandment of God,
that forbids lust, and condemns it; though no occasion was thence given, yet
it took occasion thereby to be stirring in me, and it enticed me, and
persuaded with me, not to obey the Commandment of God, but to yield to the
lusts of mine own heart, and to fulfill them, as things far better and more
pleasant, yea, rather to do things because they were forbidden and condemned,
as more sweet and pleasant in the doing of them; and by that means it drew me
out of the way of obedience to the Commandment of God, to the committing of
sin, and so deceived me, and then by the same Commandment I being guilty of
the breach of it, and thereby bound over to the curse, and made liable to
eternal death, sin wounded my conscience, and gave my soul a deadly blow,
it slew me spiritually.

First here note we, that the Apostle still goes on in clearing the Law of God
from all fault and blame. Having said in the Verse before, that the
Commandment was found to be unto him unto death; In this Verse he cleeres the
Commandment, and lays the fault and blame where it ought to lie, namely, on
the corruption of his own heart, that the corruption of his own heart took
occasion to be stirring in him, and by the Commandment slew him. Hence then
we may see, how we may clear the Law and the Word of God, though it prove
and fall out to be to some a savor of death and damnation.

The fault is not in the Law of God and in the Word of God, The Word of God
cleared, though to some it become a savor of death.
but in the corruption of their own hearts. This point we handled Verse the
eighth, and I will not now stand on it.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle says, Sin took occasion by
the Commandment, and deceived him, it enticed him, and persuaded with him not
to obey the Commandment of God, but to yield to the lusts of his own heart,
and to fulfill them as things far better and more pleasant, and so deceived
him, and drew him to the practice of sin. Hence we are given to understand
thus much:

That the corruption of the heart is of a subtle and deceiving nature, Inbred
corruption is of a subtle and deceiving nature.
that sin and corruption that is in the hearts of men, deceiues them, and by
deceit draws them to the practice of sin, it sets on sin many fair
glosses and goodly colors, and so inticeth men, and persuades them to the
practice of it, and by many colorable pretenses it draws men out of the way
of obedience to the Commandments of God, to the committing of sin: inbred
corruption plays the cunning Sophister with men, and deceiues them. And hence
it is, that the holy Ghost exhorts, Heb. 3.13. Heb. 3.13. Ephesians. 4.22.
Take heed lest any of you be deceived through the deceitfulness of sin.
And Ephesians. 4.22. the Apostle calls the lusts that arise from the corruption of
nature, deceivable lusts, or lusts of deceit.

2. Chron. 29.11. we read, 2. Chron. 29.11.
that Hezekiah gives this advertisement to the Levites, Now my sons, (says
he) be not deceived. As if he had said, Let not your own hearts deceive you,
and draw you from the performance of your office and duty; look to your
Office, and perform it. And to this purpose many other testimonies might be
brought, setting forth the subtlety and the deceiving nature of the heart of
man: but that we may better conceive the point, and that it may be more
profitable to us, I hold it needful to instance in some particular ways, How
many ways it deceiues men.
by which inbred corruption plays the Sophister with men, and deceiues them,
and draws them to the practice of sin; for happily some may say, We easily
yield, that the corruption of nature is of a subtle and deceiving nature; but
how does it deceive men, we would willingly know, for the satissying of such as
may thus desire it, I will stand to show how the corruption of the heart
deceiues men, and know that the ways by which the corruption of the heart
deceiues men, and draws them on to the practice of sin, are especially these:

First, it deceiues men, by blinding their judgment. In respect of themselves
it makes them look outward, and not inward, that is, it makes men see, and
take notice of the sins of others, and not of their own sins, it makes men
see that to be a sin in others, which they see not to be a sin in
themselves, yea, to see little faults, even faylings in others, and not greater
and gross sins in themselves; Matthew. 7.3, 4.
according to that, Matthew. 7.3, 4. Why see thou a Mote that is in thy
brothers eye, and perceiuest not the Beam that is in thine own eye? Or how
say thou to thy brother, Suffer me to cast out the mote out of thine eye,
and behold, a beam in thine own eye?

Secondly, Pro. 20.17.
as Solomon says, Pro. 20.17. The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but
afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

Thirdly, Saul deceived, 1. Sam. 15.
1. Sam. 15.

Fourthly, Amos 6.3.
it makes men put far away the evil day, and approach to the seat of
iniquity, Amos 6.3. It makes them think that the sin is not so great, and
either it shall have no punishment, or but a small punishment; as the Devil
persuaded Eve, that she should not dye at all, Genesis 3.4. Genesis 3.4.
But it makes them think that they shall keep sin secret, or repent of it,
and prevent the punishment, and so, in hope either of secrecy, or of impunity,
it makes them bold to commit the sin. And these ways especially, besides
many other, does the corruption of the heart deceive men, and draw them on to
the practice of sin. And so we see the truth of this Position: That the
corruption of the heart is of a subtle and deceiving nature, and no marvel:
the reason of it is this:

It is the brood and offspring of the Devil,

Now then this serves first, Whence it is that ignorant persons are easily
drawn to sin.
that ignorant persons are so easily drawn on the practice of any sin, be it
never so gross; surely, hence it is, The Devil is a strong and subtle enemy,
and they have also in their own bosoms another enemy both strong and subtle,
the corruption of their own hearts, that joins hands with the Devil, and
they have nothing in them to oppose to the force and subtilty of those enemies,
they have neither knowledge nor grace to withstand them; for so long as they be
ignorant, they are graceless. An ignorant man or woman is a graceless man or
woman; and therefore no marvel though they be easily drawn to the practice of
any sin, be it never so gross: and so they are in a miserable case and
condition. Yea, the doctrine now delivered, discouers whence it is that many
that are renowned for wisdom in the world, and are indeed very wise, I mean,
for worldly wisdom, they are able to foresee harms and dangers, and to
prevent them; whence (I say) it is, that such persons are easily foiled by the
lusts of their own hearts, and easily drawn on the practice of some foul
sins: they are found to be Usurers, Extortioners, Tauerne-hunters,
Whore-hunters: and why? Surely, hence it is, though they be worldly wise, yet
having no dram of true heavenly wisdom, the subtle corruption of their own
hearts easily circumuents them, and goes beyond them, and draws them upon the
practice of sin, notwithstanding their worldly wisdom.

Again, We are to arm our selves against the subtilty of inbred corruption.
Then we must take notice of the subtilty of it, and learn to arm our selves
against the subtilty and cunning working of it. And in this respect many in the
world are justly to be blamed, they are ignorant of the nature of sin, they
know not the subtilty of it, and they are secure. Well, our duty is to take
notice of the subtilty of our own corrupt hearts, and we are to spy out the
cunning working and sleights of them, and to arm our selves against them.

Labor thou to spy out the sleights and subtilties of thine own deceiving
heart, how thine own heart is ready to join hands with the Devil, to deceive
thee, and to draw thee to the practice of sin, by blinding thy judgment, by
the pleasure of sin, by the profits of the world, by turning away thy mind
from thinking of the punishment of sin seriously, and many other ways, and
arm thy self against these subtilties and sleights, and endeavor to prevent
them.

Happily thou will ask me,

I answer,

First,

Secondly, a standing subject to all the plagues and judgments of God in this
world, and everlasting perdition in the life to come.

Thirdly, remember that Gods eye looks on thee,

Fourthly, blessed is the man that fears always, but he that hardens his
heart, Pro. 28.14.
shall fall into evil, Pro. 28.14. And add to these, frequent,

And if thou carefully use these means, thou shall find thy self in some good
measure armed against the subtilties and sleights of thine own deceiving
heart, and be able to prevent them: It is a work of thy whole life, thus to
spy out the subtilties of thine own deceiving heart, and to arm thy self
against them; and if thou slack this duty, sin will deceive thee. Remember
the example of David and Solomon, they were men of great wisdom and grace,
and yet slacking this duty, they were surprised by their own deceiving hearts,
and brought to the practice of sin.

Be careful therefore in spying out the sleights of thine own deceiving
heart, and in arming thy self against them, and remember but this one thing,
If thou suffer thy self to be deceived by thine own subtle corruption, thou
art in danger to be hardened, and then follows a fearful condition.

We are further to mark, that the Apostle says (Sin) that is, his own
corruption took occasion by the Commandment, to be stirring and working, and
it deceived him, and it slew him on occasion of the Commandment of God, it
enticed him to sin, and then it wounded his conscience, and gave a deadly
blow to his soul, and made him liable to the wrath of God, and eternal death
and damnation. The Apostle ioynes these two together, as following one on the
other, Sin deceived him, and Sin slew him. Hence we are given to
understand thus much:

That these two things ever follow one on the other, Sin deceiving, and sin
wounding the conscience, ever follow one the other.
and sin wounding the conscience, and making liable to the wrath of GOD, and
to eternal death and damnation; the corruption of the heart deceiues men, and
by deceit draws them upon the practice of sin, and thereupon follows the
wound of conscience, and a subjection to the wrath of God, and eternal death
and damnation: inbred corruption inticeth and persuades men to the practice of
sin, and under the color of pleasure, or profit, or the like, it draws them
on the practice of it, but afterward it brings on them horror of conscience,
and without Gods mercy everlasting confusion, it makes them liable to plagues
and punishments in this world, and to eternal plagues and punishments in the
world to come. And for this, we have plentiful evidence and testimony of
Scripture: Job 20.12, 13, 14.
Job 20.12, 13, 14. says ZOPHAR, Wickedness is for a time sweet in the mouth:
a man's own heart deceiving him, it makes sin seem sweet and pleasant to him
for a time, and he hides it under his tongue, he rowles it up and down in his
mouth as some sweet morsel, he favors it, and will not forsake it, but keeps
it close in his heart, he makes much of it: but afterward it turns to gall
and bitterness in his bowels, and he finds it to be as deadly poison to him,
grinding and tormenting him inwardly in his soul and conscience.

And thus speaks Solomon of him that is drawn to the sin of adultery, Pro.
6.32, 33.
Pro. 6.32, 33. that howsoever his own heart deceiues him, and by the pleasure
of that sin, draws him to the practice of it, yet afterward it brings on him
a wound, and dishonor, and destruction to his own soul. Pro. 20.17. says
SOLOMON, Pro. 20.17.
The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, that is, that which is gotten by
deceit, and by unlawful means, seems sweet to a man in the getting, but
afterward it turns to grit and gravel in his mouth.

And to this purpose we have many examples in the Book of God, as that of
Achan, Iosuah 7. he says Verse. Joshua 7.21.
21. that his own covetous and deceiving heart set him on to lay his hands on
a goodly booty, persuading him it would be much for his profit and advantage,
even to take a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver,
and a wedge of gold. But afterward, by that means, besides the wound of a
guilty conscience, it brought on him further trouble, even a violent and
shameful death on him and all his, Verse. 25. Ahab; his own wretched and
deceiving heart enticed him to get away Naboths Vineyard, as a thing that lay
very fit and commodious for him, yea, it drew him on to the murdering of
Naboth, and to the shedding of his blood most wickedly and most unjustly, that
he might get possession of it, 1. King. 21.19. But afterward, 1. King. 21.19.
that sin brought utter ruin and destruction both on him and his whole
house. And many other examples might be brought to this purpose, clearing this
point, that inbred corruption, the corruption of the heart, under the color
of pleasure, profit, or the like, draws men upon the practice of sin, and
after that, it brings on them horror of conscience, and it makes them liable to
plagues and punishments in this world, and to eternal plagues in the world to
come: and these two ever follow one on the other, sin deceiving, and sin
wounding the conscience, and making liable to the wrath of God, and to eternal
death and destruction: And it must needs be so:

For men being drawn upon the practice of sin, 1. Ioh. 3.4.
for, Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3.4. And being guilty of
the transgression of Gods Law, they are liable to the curse of the Law; and
that is, all manner of plagues and judgments in this world, and everlasting
plagues and judgments in the world to come.

This serves to discover the folly and madness of most men in the world. The
folly of most in the world discovered.
Are there not many in the world, that wittingly and wilfully rush and run
into known sins? Do they not suffer themselves to be led by the lusts of
their own hearts, and to be drawn upon the practice of sin, by their own
deceiving corruption, setting sin before them, clothed in the habit of
pleasure, or profit, or the like? For example; Do not many suffer themselves
to be drawn on that sin of pouring in Wine and strong drink, by the color
of the wine, and because it goes down pleasantly, Pro. 23.31.
as Solomon speaks? Pro. 23.31. Does not that make many sit guzzeling in the
Alehouse or Tavern, when they should be in other places? Are not many drawn
on to the practice of the sin of Uncleanness, by the pleasure of that sin?
And for the matter of Profit, alas, how does that dazell the eyes of many, and
make them, for the gain of a penny, to lie, to swear, to coozen and deceive,
yea, to break the Sabbath? Do not Victuallers, for the gain of a penny, sell
their Victuals on the Lords holy Sabbath, and make no bones of breaking the
holy Commandment of God? Poor souls! in so doing, what do they? Surely,
rush on their own destruction: they bring on themselves guiltiness of
conscience, and they make themselves liable to plagues and judgments in this
world, and, without Gods great mercy, to eternal plagues and judgments in the
world to come. And what folly and madness is it, for the enjoying of a little
vanishing pleasure (for the pleasure of sin is but for a season, Heb. 11.25.)
and for the getting of some trifling profit, to run into such fearful
danger? If a man gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, he makes but
a miserable bargain. Therein then appears the folly and madness of most,
that they suffer their own deceiving hearts to impose on them, and to draw
them upon the practice of sin, for a little vanishing pleasure or some
trifling profit.

Again, is it so, that the corruption of the heart, We must take heed, our own
beguiling hearts deceive us not.
draws men on the practice of sin, and after that, brings on them horror of
conscience, and makes them liable to plagues and judgments in this life? Then
we must take heed we be not coozened by our own subtle and beguiling hearts,
and that we suffer not them, under the color of pleasure, profit, or the
like, to draw us upon the practice of any known sin.

Do thou know the thing to be evil, and to be a sin? Then take heed:
let not thine own deceiving heart draw thee on the practice of it, by any
color whatsoever: remember what will follow after, even horror of conscience,
and a standing subject to all plagues in this world, and to eternal plagues in
the world to come. Yea, make account of Gods threatenings, to be as certain as
present executions, as if thou should presently feel them.

As if thou suffer thy self to be drawn on that beastly sin of
Drunkenness, make account of the woes and plagues threatened against that
sin, as that it shall bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice, Pro.
23.32. Pro. 23.32.
as presently to seize on thee. So, if thou suffer thy self to break the
Sabbath, for the gayning of a penny, or for any vile pleasure, make account of
that, that is threatened Ierem. 17.27. as presently to be made good upon thee,
Ierem. 17.27.
that a fire indeed shall be kindled in thy gates, and shall not be quenched,
even a fire unquenchable, that shall devour all thy substance.

And so in other particulars, make reckoning of the Judgments of GOD,
threatened against any sin whatsoever thou art guilty of, as presently to
light on thee, thou wittingly and willingly committing that sin. For indeed,
if thou wittingly and willingly run into any known sin, thou have no
assurance to be freed from the plagues and judgments threatened against that
sin one minuite of an hour: thou can not say, and make it good, when thou
art quaffing and singing in the Alehouse, that thou shall make an end of thy
drunken merriment, before Gods punishing hand light on thee. No, no, thou have
no warrant for it, it is the Lords patience, if he throw not down judgment
on thee presently. Therefore learn we to take heed of our own deceiving
corruption; let it not, under the color of pleasure, or profit, or the like,
draw us upon the practice of any known sin: if it do, it brings on us
guiltiness of conscience, and makes us liable to plagues and judgments in
this world, and without Gods mercy, to eternal plagues and judgments in the
world to come; and we cannot promise to our selves freedom from the punishing
hand of God, and from his judgments threatened against our sin, one minute of
an hour.

Now in the last place observe we, that the Apostle says, that sin took
occasion by the Commandment, and deceived him, and by the Commandment slew
him. Sin says he, took occasion by the Commandment and deceived me, and
thereby slew me: that is, as we showed, by the same Commandment, I being
guilty of the transgression of it, and bound over to the curse of the Law, and
made liable to the wrath of God, sin wounded my conscience, and gave a deadly
blow to my soul, and slew me spiritually. The point hence is this:

That the Law of God wounds the conscience of such as are guilty of the breach
of it, Gods Law wounds the conscience of such as are guilty of the breach of
it, when they come to see their sins.
when they come to a sight of their sins, it strikes a terror into them, and
fills them full of fear and amazement, and a fearful expectation of the
wrath and vengeance of God; it binds them over to the curse of the Law, and it
condemns them, and they are already condemned persons, and dead by the Law,
that are guilty of the breach of it, being not freed from the curse and
condemnation of it by Christ. And therefore the Apostle says, Romans 4.15. that
the Law causes wrath. His meaning is, that the Law being violated and broken,
causes wrath and vengeance to come on the breakers of it. The Law properly,
and by it self, does not cause wrath; but accidentally being violated and
broken, it binds over to the curse of the Law, and so brings wrath and
vengeance on the breakers of it; for indeed the curse of the Law is due to
every one that breaks the Law in the least degree, being not freed from it by
Christ. Deuter. 27.26. Cursed is he that continues not in all the words of
this Law, to do them. And therefore the Law of God wounds the conscience of
such as are guilty of the breach of it, when they come to a sight of their
sins; it strikes a terror into them, it binds them over to the curse of the
Law, it condemns them being not freed from it by Christ.

And this discouers the case and condition of such as are brought to a sight of
their sins, The condition of such as are brought to a sight of their sins,
being yet in their natural condition discovered.
and are yet in their natural condition, and out of Christ: the Law of God
wounds their conscience, it terrifies them, and condemns them: but yet in this
case there is difference between Gods Elect and the reprobate: for the
reprobate, on the sight of their sins, are wounded by the Law to utter
despair, and their wound and torment of conscience is but a beginning of
hellish torment that shall last for ever, but Gods Elect being yet in their
natural condition, and coming to a sight of their sins, the Law wounds
their conscience, and terrifies them, and condemns them, yet withal, the Lord
working graciously in them by his Spirit: The Law drives them to Christ, Gal.
3.24.

As the sense and smart of a wound sends a man to the Chyrurgian: so the sense
and feeling of sin, sends Gods Elect to Christ the heavenly Physician; and
Gods Elect being vexed and disquieted on the sight of their sin, by the
terrors and threatenings of the Law, are in better case then they, that never
knew what the trouble of mind meant; for that trouble drives them to seek to
Christ.

And thus it must be with us on the sight of our sins: we must find our
selves thereby driven to Christ; and then happy we, that we have been
troubled, for coming to Christ, weary, and laden, and groaning under the weight
and burden of our sins; we shall find from him, ease, comfort, and
refreshing, and eternal rest to our souls.

VERSE. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy, just and
good.


Our Apostle having, in the Verse foregoing, cleared the Law of God from being
the cause of sin, in this Verse he concludes that point, and further
strengthens his conclusion touching the Law, not to be the cause of sin, by
an Argument taken from the nature and property of the Law of God; and he
shows, that the Law of God in it self, in it own nature, is holy, just, and
good, and therefore cannot be the cause of sin; that is his argument. Here
then we have three things affirmed of the Law of God; that it is holy, that it
is just, and that it is good. And these three things are affirmed both of the
whole Law in general, and of that Commandment of God spoken of before in
particular. Wherefore (says the Apostle) the Law is holy, and the Commandment
is holy, just and good.

Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy.

Some make this difference and this distinction between these two words, Law
and Commandment, in this place, Interpretation
that the Law signifies any Law of God whatsoever, and that the Commandment
signifies only the affirmative Precepts. But that is but a nice distinction.
Some again thus understand these two words, Law and Commandment, as if the
Apostle had said, The Law, and whatsoever there is therein commanded. But
indeed, that Interpretation does not so fitly suite and agree to that which the
Apostle said before, Verse. 7. He speaks not only of the Law of God in
general, but he also gives instance of one particular Commandment, namely,
of the tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet or lust, etc.

And therefore the word (Law) in this Verse, is to be taken as before, for the
whole moral Law of God, and the word (Commandment) is likewise taken for that
particular Commandment before spoken of, namely, that Commandment that
forbids Lust, is holy, that is, is pure and undefiled, and free from all stayne
of falsehood, error, lies, and sins, as David says, Psalm. 12.6. Psalm. 12.6.
The words of the Lord are pure words, and they are like to silver tried in a
furnace of earth, fined seuen-fold. And Iam. 1.27. Iam. 1.27.
the Apostle ioynes these two together, pure and undefiled (and just) namely,
righteous, having in it no wrong nor iniquity at all, teaching and requiring
such things as are just, and cannot be taxed or reproved as unjust, or unequal
in any respect. Psalm. 19.8, 9.
Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right. And Verse. 9. the Judgments of
the Lord are truth, and righteous altogether, (and good) that is, requiring and
commanding only such things as are good, and forbidding the contrary all manner
of evil, and showing the good way in which men are to walk to life
everlasting. And therefore Moses puts these two together, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16.
30. ver. 15, 16. Behold, I have set before thee this day life and good, in
that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God. Thus then are we to
conceive the Apostles meaning in the words of this Verse, as if he had said,

Wherefore the whole moral Law of God, yea, even that Commandment of God,
that forbids Lust, is pure and undefiled, free from all pollution of falsehood,
error, lies and sins, and is also righteous, having in it no wrong, nor
iniquity at all, teaching and requiring only such things as are just, and
cannot be taxed as unjust, or unequal in any respect: and it is likewise good,
it requires and commands only good things, and forbids all manner of evil, and
shows the good way, in which men are to walk to life everlasting.

Here first consider we the whole Verse in general. We see, the Apostle not
only cleeres the Law of God, and frees it from some foul blots, that some
might, or happily did blemish it withal: but here also he sets before us the
excellency of the Law, and gives to it excellent and worthy Titles, that it is
holy, just, and good. Now then the point hence is this,

That the Law of God, The whole Word of God is a most excellent Truth.
it is such a Truth, as is holy, just and good, it is a Truth that is pure,
free from all stayne of error, falsehood, lies, and sins, having no wrong nor
iniquity at all in it, and it requires only good things, and forbids all manner
of evil; and so it is a most excellent and heavenly Truth: and to this purpose
the holy Ghost speaks plainly, and witnesses this Truth to us in many places
of the Scripture. Pro. 8.6, 7, 8. says Wisdom, Pro. 8.6, 7, 8.
Give ear, I will speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall
teach things that be right. 7. For my mouth shall speak the truth, and my lips
abhor wickedness. 8. All the words of my mouth are righteous, there is no
lewdness nor frowardness in them. And Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. says DAVID, The Law
of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the Testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right,
and rejoice the heart, the Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light
unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the
Judgments of the Lord are Truth, and righteous altogether. And Psalm. 119. in
many places of it, David gives these excellent Titles to the Law of God, and to
the Commandments, that they are pure, and just, and righteous, and true, and
good, and the like. Romans 12.2. says the Apostle, Be changed by the renewing of
your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God (meaning his will
reueyled in his written Word) acceptable and perfect. And to this purpose we
might bring many other testimonies, giving evidence to this Truth; That the Law
and Word of God is a most excellent and heavenly Truth, pure and free from all
stayne of error, falsehood, lies, and sins, and just, and righteous, having no
wrong, nor iniquity at all in it, and commanding only good things, and
forbidding all manner of evil. And the reasons of this truth are,

First, holy men of God, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21.

Secondly, holy and unchangeable will of God, according to which he would have
us to frame our hearts and lives, it is the perfect rule of holiness,
righteousness, and goodness; and therefore it must needs be in it self holy,
and just, and good, and so a most excellent and heavenly Truth. Now then to
make use of this,

First, The preferment of the Law and Word of God, above all other laws and
writings.
above all Laws and Writings of men whatsoever; this makes known to us the
privilege and preferment that the Law and Word of God has above all other
Laws and Writings whatsoever; for in other Laws and Writings there is found
some error or sin, but the Law and Word of God is a most excellent and
heavenly Truth, breathed out from the Lord himself, bearing his Image, and so
most pure, just, and good, free from all stayne of error and sin, yea, herein
appears the privilege of Gods Church and People, above all other people in
the world, in that they have a Law and Word so excelent and heavenly, and so
holy, and so just, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
given to them, as Moses said, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is so great, that has
Ordinances and Laws so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this
day? and Psalm. Psalm. 147.19, 20
147.19, 20. says the Psalmist, The Lord shows his Word unto IAACOB, his
Statutes and his Judgments unto ISRAEL; he has not dealt so with every
Nation, neither have they known his Judgments. This is our privilege and
perferment in this Land, above many Nations in the world: The Lord has
vouchsafed to us his holy and just Law and Word, yea, his holy Gospel, which
by a special kind of excellency is called, The good Word of God, Heb. 6.5.
Heb. 6.5. And we are to carry our selves answerable to such a privilege and
preferment.

For a second use of this; Is it so, that the Law and Word of God is a most
excellent and heavenly Truth, holy, and pure, and just, and good? Surely then,
our duty is to acknowledge it so to be, and to esteem it so to be. And the
Lord vouchsafing to us his holy, just, Our duty, in respect of the excellency
of the Word of God vouchsafed unto us.
and good Word, we are to carry our selves answerable to the holiness,
righteousness, and goodness of it. Shall the Lord betrust us with his
excellent and heavenly Truth, his holy, just, and good Word, the Rule of all
holiness, justice, and goodness; and shall we carry our selves as those that
want this excellent Truth? Shall we carry our selves as Turks, and as Pagans
that know not God, and have not his holy and good Word vouchsafed unto them? If
we do, in the end it will turn to our shame and reproach, yea certainly,
without Gods great mercy, to our everlasting shame and confusion, and to our
deeper condemnation.

And yet thus it is with many of us; many amongst us will sometimes confess and
say, We have the holy Word of God amongst us, we hear many good things, and
many holy and good Lessons are delivered unto us from the Word of God; but
alas, where is our answering of them? where is almost the man or woman, that
suffer themselves to be changed into the mould and pattern of the good Word of
God? Nay, do not many carry themselves, as if they had never heard one
syllable of the good Word of God? are not many as vile and as wretched in the
course of their lives, as if they had been bred and brought up among the wild
Irish? Yea, I dare boldly speak it, though with grief, you shall not find
such beastly Drunkenness, and such bitterness in Cursing, Swearing, Railing,
and the like, in a Country-Village or Town, where they scarce hear one Sermon
in a year, as is to be found in some amongst us, we having the holy and good
Word of God in plentiful measure vouchsafed unto us. And will not the Lord one
day vifit for this? Yes assuredly, the Lord will one day require it at their
hands that thus wretchedly carry themselves; making light account, yea, abusing
his holy and good Word sent unto them; the Lord will not suffer a thing of such
excellent worth, as his holy, just, and good Word is, so to be contemned and
abused. No, no, The Lord Jesus will one day show himself from heaven in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance. 2. Thessal. 1.3.
To whom? Surely, To such as know not God, and to such as do not obey unto the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Thessal. 1.8. And it shall be easier at
the day of judgment for very Pagans and Infidels, then for them that contemn
and abuse the holy and good Word of God vouchsafed to them.

Oh then, learn we (the Lord vouchsafing his holy, just, and good Word to us)
to acknowledge the excellency of it, and to esteem it according to the worth
of it, and to carry our selves answerable to it; let it work on us, and
transform and change us into the Image of it self, into holiness,
righteousness, and goodness: and then doubtless we shall find the comforts
of it made good unto us; otherwise, every good and holy instruction we have
heard out of the Word of God, shall one day be so many bills of Indictment
against us to condemn us, and shall aggrauate and increase our judgment and
condemnation.

Note we in the next place, the Apostle says not only thus, The Law is holy,
but he adds further, and the Commandment is holy, just, and good, even that
Commandment of God that forbids Lust, is holy, just, and good.

Hence we are taught, Every one of Gods Commandments is to be esteemed holy,
just, and good. Psalm. 119.128.
just, and good, as David did, Psalm. 119.128. says he, I esteem all thy
Precepts most just, and hate all false ways: and Verse. 151. All thy
Commandments are true.

Thus must we do: for indeed the Law of God is thorow-out like it self in
every part and parcel of it, it is holy, that it is a sure sign of grace,
when we can acknowledge every Commandment of God to be holy, just, and good,
when we can justify the Wisdom of God in his Word, Matthew. 11.19. Wisdom is
justified of her children; when a man can justify the Commandment of the
Sabbath, the Commandment against Uncleanness, and whatsoever Commandment of
God does most cross his own corruption, that is an argument of grace and of
an holy heart; then our eyes are opened to see the excellency of the Word of
God. Every wise worldling will be disputing and reasoning against each
Commandment of God, that in some thing it is too hard and too strict; as that,
On the Sabbath we are not to do our own wills, Isai. 58.13.
but to call the Sabbath a delight, and to consecrate it as glorious to the
Lord, and to honor him, not seeking our own will, nor speaking a vain word,
Isai. 58.13. Oh that is too strict and too hard. That money is not to be given
on Usury; that our apparel must be modest and sober, what will some carnal
person say, May we not a little follow the fashion? We shall then be nothing
esteemed of in the world; that is too strict and too hard. And so for Gaming,
Carding, and Dicing, may we not a little use them? Well, know thou, whosoever
thou art, it is a sign of a rotten and corrupt heart, thus to be reasoning
against the Commandments of God: whosoever has grace truly wrought in his
heart, will justify every part and parcel of the Word of God, and hold it to
be most holy, just, and good.

Come we now to speak of the Titles and Epithites here given to the Law of
God severally; and first (as you see) it is said to be holy, The Law is holy,
and the Commandment is holy: that is, pure and undefiled, free from all stayne
of error, falsehood, lies, and sins: and that is a special property of the
Law of God; the Law and Word of God is in it self, in it own nature, holy and
pure, having no manner of pollution cleaving to it at al; and we find this
Title and Epithet (holy or pure) expressly given to the written Word of God in
other places of it, as Romans 1.2. Which he had promised before by his Prophets in
the holy Scriptures. So likewise, 2. Tim. 3.15. says the Apostle to TIMOTHY;
Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child. And so, Psalm. 12.6. says
DAVID, The words of God are pure words. And, Psalm. 19.8. The Commandment of
the Lord is pure.

And to these, many other testimonies might be added, where this Epithet or
Title (holy or pure) is given to the Law and Word of God. But I hold it not so
needful; I will rather show, how and in what respect the Law and Word of God
is said to be holy, that so we may rightly conceive the holiness and purity of
it.

And to this purpose know we, The Law and Word of God is holy in three respects.
that the Law and Word of God is holy and pure in three respects especially,
namely, in respect of the Author of it, in respect of the matter of it, and in
respect of the working of it.

As first,

Secondly, the Truth, which is according to godliness. Tit. 1.1.
Tit. 1.1. PAVL a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
the faith of Gods Elect, and the knowledge of the Truth, which is according to
Godliness.

And it is holy, How the Word of God does sanctify.
howsoever (I say) the Law and the Word of God do not so sanctify and make
holy as causes, yet as instruments and means they do sanctify and make other
things holy, as the Sacraments and Prayer do: the Word of God sanctifies men
instrumentally, in that it makes them resemble God in many graces as Christ
prayed, Ioh. 17.17. Ioh. 17.17.
Sanctify them with thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. And again, the Word of God,
it sanctifies other inferior creatures to the use of man, as also Prayer does;
the Word of God, either by promise or by commandment, sanctifies the creatures
to their lawful ends and uses, so that men having a promise or a commandment
in the Word of God, touching the lawful use of the creatures, they may use
them with a good conscience. 1. Tim. 4.5. Every creature of God is good: and
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4.4,
5.
For it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, 1. Tim. 4.4, 5.

Thus then we see, how and in what respects the Law and Word of God is holy
and pure. It comes from the holy Spirit of God: it is the reueiled Wisdom and
Truth of God, teaching that Truth which is according to godliness; and as an
instrument and means, it sanctifies, and makes both men and other things holy:
and so it is a most holy and pure Truth.

This property of the Word of God, One infallible note that Scripture is the
Word of God.
the purity and holiness of it, is one infallible note and mark, by which we
may know and be persuaded that it is the very Word of God: this one note, if we
had no other, carries with it, and contaynes in it, sufficient evidence against
all contradiction, that it is from God, and has a sacred authority in it
self, and depends not on the Church, or the Pope, as the Papists teach: the
Scripture is holy and pure, as God himself; and therefore certainly it is of
God, and from God: it is not the testimony and tradition of the Church, that is
able to resolve and settle the conscience, which is Scripture, and which is
not, as the Papists teach. No, no: the testimony of the Church is inferior to
the evidence of the Scripture: for the Scripture points out the Church, and
contaynes in it the true notes of the Church: yea, the Scripture, as an
instrument and means, it sanctifies the Church and members of it. And
therefore, as Christ said to the Pharisees, Mat. 23.17. Ye fools and blind:
whether is greater the gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the gold? So it may
be justly said to the Papists, Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, and
which is of more authority, the Church, or the Scripture which sanctifies the
Church? Without question the Scripture is of greater authority then the Church:
and it is not the testimony and tradition of the Church, that can authorize the
Scripture in any man's conscience; but the purity and holiness of the Scripture
it self is a special note, infallibly assuring us that it is the very Word of
God.

Again, Gods Word must be thought on and spoken of with reverence.
Surely, then it must be thought on, and it must be spoken of with reverence
and due respect; the Minister must purely think on the Word of God, and purely
deliver it; and it must be far from us, to apply the holy and pure Word of
God, or any part or parcel of it, to vain, light, or profane and wicked
uses, as to Charms, to Enchantments, to Jests and Merriments, to turn the
Scripture-phrases to Jests, or to make Stage Plays of matters contained in the
Book of God; to apply the holy Word of God, or any part of it, to these vile
uses, is a grievous sin, and a most horrible and fearful profanation of the
holy and pure Word of God, and a taking of Gods Name in vain; and doubtless,
the Lord will not suffer them that are guilty of that sin, to escape
unpunished. And it is a wicked and graceless speech, that is uttered by some,
that thy can profit as much by a Stage Play, setting forth some good matter
out of the Scripture, as by the best Sermon in the world.

Alas, poor soul, whosoever thou art! Can the holy Word of God, fearfully
abused and profaned, profit thee, as much as when it is rightly divided, and
applied according to the ordinance of God? Is it possible? No, no: it is not
possible: and thou that art of that mind, thou art blinded by the Devil, and
thou have a rotten and corrupt heart in thee, and continuing in that mind, and
frequenting Stage Plays, with a conceit that thou can profit as much by them
as by the best Sermons, thou art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of
iniquity, and thou art partaker with those graceless Imps, I mean,
Stage Players, the limbs of the Devil: for so they are, as long as they go
on in that course of life, in the profanation of the holy Word of God; and
assure thy self, the Lord will not hold thee guiltless for that sin; The
wrath and vengeance of God continually hangs over thine head for that sin:
and therefore if thou tender the good of thine own soul, learn to reform
thy self.

In the third place, is it so, We are to come to the reading and hearing of
Gods Word with holy hearts.
that the Word of God is a most holy and pure Truth? Certainly, then our duty
is to come to the reading and to the hearing of it, with holy hearts, and with
holy affections; when we either read the Word of God, or hear it preached
unto us, we are to empty our hearts of all impure lusts and vile affections,
and we must labor to receive the holy and pure Word of God into holy hearts
and sanctified souls. Now herein most men fail exceedingly; most men rush
into the House of God, and never care to search into their own hearts, and to
disburden them of filthy lusts and vile affections. No, no: they come with
their hearts full fraught with such lusts and affections, full of Pride, full
of Self-love, full of Covetousness, and cares of the world, full of Envy and
Malice, yea, many times full of Malice and bitterness against the Preacher
that delivers the holy Word of God to them: and can they then look to profit
by the Word of God, and to find good by it? No, no: it is not possible. This is
one special cause, that men and women profit not by the holy Word of God, and
that they are not bettered by it; they lay impure hands on the pure Word of
God, and bring impure hearts to the hearing of it, and so doing, they defile
the Word, and make it impure to themselves. Tit. 1.15. To the impure, all
things (even the holy things of God) are impure. And how then can they possibly
find profit or comfort from the holy Word of God? Yea, they not only defile
the holy Word of God, but they turn it to a curse to themselves. Malac. 2.2. I
will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them already.

Oh then learn we, if we would not defile the holy Word of God, and turn it
to a curse to our selves, learn we to come to the reading and hearing of it
with holy hearts, and holy affections. Exodus 3.5. Moses was commanded to put
off his shoes, because the place whereon he stood was holy ground. So must we
do, when we come to the hearing of the Word of God: for then we come before
the face and presence of God after a special manner, and we must then put off
our shoes, that is, we must put off impure lusts, and vile affections, that
are as shoes on our hearts. It is the counsel of the Preacher, Eccles. 4.17.
Take heed to thy feet, when thou entrest into the House of God. When thou
come to Gods House, Gods Altar, Gods Table, etc. take heed to thy feet,
look to thy heart and affections, wash, purge, and cleanse thine heart and
soul, cast off all worldly cares, impure thoughts and vile affections, if thou
would have the holy Word of God and his holy Ordinances profitable and truly
comfortable to thee.

Come we now to speak of the Epithet and Title of the Law. The Apostle here,
in the second place, gives to the Law of God, that it is just, the Law is just,
and the Commandment is just, that is, as we showed, righteous, having no
wrong nor iniquity in it at all: it is such a truth as teaches just things,
and cannot be taxed as unjust or unequal in any thing. And this also is a
special property of the Law of God, and of the Word of God, it is a just Word,
it is just and righteous in every thing it requires, and whatsoever is
commanded, or taught, or promised, or threatened in the Word of God, is just,
and cannot be taxed as unjust, or unequal in any thing.

And thus much we find witnessed of the Word of God in many places of
Scripture. Pro. 8.8. Pro. 8.8.
All the words of my mouth are righteous, and there is no lewdness nor
frowardness in them, says Wisdom, even the Wisdom of God. Psalm. 19.8. The
Statutes of the Lord are right. Psalm. 19.8.9.
And Verse 9. The judgments of the Lord are righteous altogether. Psalm.
119.106. says David, Psalm. 119.106.
I will keep thy righteous judgments. And Verse 123. Mine eyes have failed,
in waiting for thy salvation and for thy just promise. And Verse 128. I esteem
all thy Precepts most just. Righteous art thou, oh Lord, and just are thy
judgments. Thou have commanded justice by thy Testimonies. And many like
testimonies of Scripture we find, where this Title ( just, or righteous) is
attributed to the Law of God, and to the Word of God.

But not to spend time in citing more testimonies to that purpose, I will, as
before, in speaking of the holiness and purity of the Law and Word of God,
briefly also show how, and in what respects, the Law and Word of God is said to
be just and righteous, which may serve as grounds and reasons of this Epithet
given to the Law and Word of God.

Know we then, The Law and Word of God is just in three respects. 1.2.
that the Law and Word of God is said to be just and righteous in these three
respects: In respect of the Author of it: In respect of the matter of it: And
in respect of the end and use of it, as,

First, it is just and righteous,

And secondly, matter of it is the revealed Justice of God, it reueales the
perfect Justice of God and his Righteousness; it is the perfect Rule of all
righteousness; it teaches what is due to God, and what is due to man; and it
gives to every one that which is due; it promises good to those that are good;
and it threatens ill to those that are wicked; and that without respect of
persons; it makes known the just and righteous will of God, without all
flattery or partiality.

And thirdly, Tim. 3.16, 17. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works. Yea the moral Law of God is able to justify such as perfectly
keep and fulfill it, and the Word of God will certainly acquit, and justify
those that believe it, and embrace it, and yield sound obedience to it, and
that, before the Judgment Seat of the Lord.

We see then, how, and in what respects the Law and Word of God is just and
righteous; it proceeds from God, who is most just, yea infinite in holiness
and justice; it reueales the perfect Justice of God, and his righteousness; it
is the perfect Rule of righteousness, teaching what of right belongs to God,
and what also is due to men; it gives to every one his due, promising good to
those that are good, and threatening ill to those that are wicked, and that,
without respect of persons, and without all flattery and partiality; and it
tends to this end, to make men just and righteous, even to acquit and justify
as many as truly embrace it, believe it, and yield sound obedience to it, and
that, before the Judgment Seat of the Lord. And so we may certainly conclude
and resolve on this, that the Law and Word of GOD is a most just and righteous
Truth.

This being a truth, it must needs follow on this, The Law of God requires
perfect justice and righteousness in this life.
and perfect righteousness, and that in this life. The Law of God requires
that men in this life, yield perfect obedience to it. It is a mere shift and
device of our Adversaries the Papists, to say that men are not bound in this
life to yield such perfect obedience to the Law of God, as in the life to come
(for so they distinguish between obedience to the Law of God in this life, and
in the life to come.)

They say there is a double obedience to the Law of God, and a double perfect
fulfilling of the Law: one in time of this life, which is, when men love GOD
above all things and their Neighbor as themselves: and the other in the life
to come; and that is, when men love God with all the heart and soul, with all
the powers and faculties of the soul, and with all the strength of all those
powers: that is their distinction. Indeed a very absurd and foolish
distinction, and directly opposite and contrary to the plain evidence of
Scripture: for when the Lord says in the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might: to whom does he
speak? only to men glorified in heaven? No certainly: he speaks to all
men, to such as live yet in this world, and also to them that are glorified in
heaven; his Law is eternal, and unchangeable, and contaynes an eternal and
unchangeable truth and righteousness, yea one and the same truth and
righteousness for ever: and there is one and the same rule of righteousness
given to men glorified in heaven, and to men living here on the face of the
earth: and it is very absurd to say, that a man is not bound in time of this
life to love God with all his heart, and with all his soul, but only in the
life to come: For what man was bound to, of innocence, the same, and so much
the Law of God requires at his hands in the state of corruption. Now, in the
state of Innocence, Adam was bound to love God with all his heart and soul,
and could so love God; and therefore the same absolute and entire obedience is
now required at the hands of men, though they are never able to yield it; and
therefore that distinction invented by the Papists, is absurd, that there is a
double fulfilling of the Law of God; one in the time of this life, and another
in the life to come. And it cannot stand with the truth now delivered, that the
Law of God is most just and righteous, and so requires perfect justice and
righteousness at the hands of men.

Again, The Word of God must be dispensed justly and impartially.
is it so, that the Law and Word of God is a most just and righteous Truth, a
Truth that gives every one his due, promising good to those that are good, and
threatening ill to those that are wicked, and that without respect of persons,
and without all partiality? Surely, then it must in like manner be delivered,
the Word of God is just, it is impartial, it respects no man's person; and it
must so be delivered, it must justly and impartially be dispensed, the Minister
of the Word, in preaching and dispencing the Word of God to the people, must
look that he deal justly, that he promise good to those that are good, and
threaten ill to those that are wicked; he must not make sad the hearts of
those whom God has not made sad, nor soothe up any in their sins, nor
strengthen the hands of the wicked, Ierem. 23.14.
Iere. 23.14. nor promise peace to those that walk after the stubbornness of
their own hearts, Verse. Gal. 1.10. If I should yet please men, I were not the
servant of Christ.

This was the fault that was charged on the Priests, Malac. 2.9. that they were
partial in the Law; they lift up the faces of men; they made the wicked lift
up their heads. And this was a foul fault, and this ought to be far from the
Ministers of the Gospel; they are to dispense the just and righteous Word of
God justly and impartially: yea, as it is said of the Levites, Deuteronomy. 33.9. In
the execution of their Office in teaching the people, they must take no notice
of Father or Mother, Brethren or their own Kindred, they must spare none, if
they be wicked, be they never so dear or near unto them, but tell them their
own, and give to every one his due; admonition, to whom admonition belongs;
rebuke, to whom rebuke belongs; comfort, to whom comfort belongs, without fear
or favor, without flattery or partiality.

And if this be the duty of the Minister; surely, How people are to hear the
Word of God, being impartially dispensed.
then there is a duty answerable to it, required of the people. Must the
Minister dispense the Word of God justly, and without respect of persons?
Doubtless, then the Word of God being in that manner dispensed, the people are
to hear it willingly and patiently, the people are to hear the Word of just
reproof with patience, and they must not fret and kick against it, as the
manner of some is. Art thou justly reproved for thy sin, and are the
Judgments of God justly denounced against thee? Hear the Word of God so
applied, with willingness and patience, and let it be far from thee to
except against the Minister, or to quarrel with his affections, and to say, he
speaks out of spleen, or malice, or the like. No, no: remember that he is
called to that office, to dispense the Word of God: and if he make conscience
of his duty, he dares not but dispense it justly and impartially, not sparing
thee, when thou art justly to be reproved, whosoever thou art.

But thou will say, I have been kind to him, and many ways testified my love
unto him. Have thou so? and would thou have thy kindness make him partial
in the execution of his office and duty? Shall thy kindness make him
unfaithful to him that has put him in that office? Ierem. 13.30.
and shall it make him steal away the Word from thee? Ierem. 23.30. and not
give thee that portion of the Word that belongs to thee, and so betray thee
into the hands of the Devil? Surely, that were to require thy kindness, with
the greatest unkindness and unthankfulness in the world; and thou have no
reason to expect it, and yet this is expected and desired of many: they think,
if they be kind to their Minister, then the Minister is bound to speak peace
to them, though they be wicked, and he must not meddle with their sins, but
suffer them to go on quietly to their own destruction. And if the Minister be
to preach a Funeral Sermon, it is presumed, that he must praise the party
deceased, though there were nothing in him praiseworthy: and if he do not
so, then men's mouths are opened wide against him, and they censure him at
their pleasure. A Minister in dispencing the Word of God, must speak as God
would speak. And would God commend a man or a woman, in whom nothing was found
worthy commendation? No certainly: neither dares the Minister of God do it,
that makes conscience of his duty, as Elihu said, Job 32.21, 22. He dare not
give titles to men, lest his Maker should take him away suddenly.

The Minister of God must dispense the just Word of God justly, giving to every
one his due portion: admonition, to whom admonition; rebuke, to whom rebuke;
and comfort, to whom comfort belongs. And if the Minister do so, thou art to
hear it with meekness, and patience, and subjection to it. And know this for
a truth; If thou think that which is justly and truly delivered out of the
Word of God, too hard and too strict, and that there is too much required at
thy hands, and thou spurnest against it, when thou art called on to the
practice of any duty, or justly reproved for thy sin by the ministry of the
Word; thou layest injustice on the just and righteous Law and Word of God; and
so doing, thou chargest God with injustice: and that is a fearful height of
sin, and the Lord will not suffer it to escape unpunished.

In the third place; Is it so, Whither we must go, to know what is just and
what is equal.
even the perfect Rule of righteousness? If then we would know what is just,
and what is equal, what in equity and good conscience we are bound to do,
both toward God and toward men; we must go to the rule of justice and
equity, To the Law, and to the testimony, as Isai. 8.20. Isai. 8.20.
That is able to resolve us, what honor, worship, fear, reverence, obedience,
love, considence, and such like, that we owe to God, and how we may carry our
selves justly toward men; what honor, reverence, and respect, and what
reward, or punishment belongs to men, and how we are to deal with them in
matters of contract, in buying and selling with them.

Men commonly deceive themselves in the matter of justice; they think they
deal justly and truly with men, if they pay every one his own, and owe
nothing to any, when notwithstanding they are Usurers, and they stick not to
defraud men, and to ouer-reach them in bargayning with them, and make no
conscience of using false waights and measures. The Word of God will tell them
another thing. And therefore if we would be resolved, what is just and equal
both in duties toward God and toward men, and what we may justly do, and with
good conscience, in every particular action, we must have recourse to the Law
and Word of God.

Come we now to the third and last Epithet and Title here given to the Law of
God, that is, that it is good: says the Apostle, The Law is good, and the
Commandment: that is, as we showed; It commands only such things as are good,
and forbids all manner of evil, and it shows men the good way in which they
are to walk. And this likewise is a special property of the Law and of the
Word of God; the Word of God is such a Truth, as teaches good things, yea,
whatsoever is taught, or promised, or threatened in the Word of God, is good,
and whatsoever the Word of God forbids and condemns, is certainly evil, and
cannot be justified: and the Word of God shows men what is good, even the good
Way, in which they are to walk to life and salvation. And for this also we
have evidence and testimony of Scripture. Romans 12.2. says the Apostle, Romans
12.2.
Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the
good will of God, acceptable and perfect. He means the will of God reueyled in
his Word, 1. Tim. 1.8.
and he calls that The good will of God. 1. Tim. 1.8. The Apostle takes it for
a known and confessed truth: says he, We know, that the Law is good. And of
the Gospel, by a special kind of excellency it is affirmed, that it is the
good Word of God. Heb. 6.5. And have tasted of the good Word of God.

And to these we might add many other testimonies of Scripture, where this
Epithet and Title (good) is given to the Law and Word of God. But as before,
in handling the former Epithites of the Law and Word of God, so here also I
hold it needful, to show how, and in what respect, the Law and Word of God is
said to be good, and to make known, why it is called the good Word of God. And
to this purpose know, that the Law and Word of God has this Epithet and Title
(good) given to it, in a threefold respect. The Law and Word of God is styled
with this title (good) in these three respects:

In respect of the Author of it. The Law and Word of God is good in three
respects.
In respect of the Matter of it. And in respect of the effect, and of the end
and use of it, as first:

The Law and Word of God is good,

Secondly, the Law and Word of God is good, and the will of all creatures in
heaven or earth is so far forth good, And the Word of God does not allow of,
nor bear with the least evil that is, but condemns all things that be evil,
be they never so pleasant, or never so profitable in the corrupt sense and
judgment of men, and threatens judgment against those that are guilty of
evil, and it commends all good things, and shows men every good way in which
they are to walk, and it contaynes promises of many good things both temporal
and eternal, both belonging to the body and to the soul, and concerning this
life, and that life that is to come, to those that yield obedience to it.

Thirdly, David says, Psalm. 19.7. Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. And the Word of God, as
an instrument, works in the heart true saving faith, and all other good graces
of the Spirit, and makes men perfect to all good works, 2. Tim. 3.17. 2. Tim.
3.17.
and it tends to this end, to make Gods Elect partakers of the greatest good in
this life, namely, of true comfort in Christ, and true peace of conscience, and
of the everlasting good of their souls and bodies in the life to come. Iam.
1.21. It is able to save men's souls. Iam. 1.21.
And therefore Peter said to Christ, Ioh. 6.68. Thou have the words of eternal
life. And 2. Tim. 3.15. says the Apostle to TIMOTHY, Thou have known the holy
Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Thus then we see how, and in what respects the Law and Word of God is said to
be good. It comes from God, who is Goodness it self, and the Fountain of all
goodness, from whom nothing can come but Goodness. It is the Wisdom and
Will of God reueiled, whose Will only is good, and the Rule of all goodness,
and it condemns all evil whatsoever, threatening judgment to them that are
guilty of evil, and it commends all good things, and shows men every good way
in which they ought to walk: It contaynes sweet promises of many good things
both temporal and eternal, made to those that yield obedience to it, and as
an instrument, it makes men, of ill to become good, turning them from evil to
good, it works true saving faith, and all other good graces in the heart, and
it tends to this end, to make Gods Chosen partakers of the greatest good in
this life, and of eternal good in the life to come: and therefore certainly,
the Law and Word of God is a Truth that is truly good and every way good.

Now then this being so, A deceit of the Papists discovered.
the Papists. By this we may easily see, that they are no such friends to good
works, as they would make the world believe they are; they seem to carry a
great zeal to good works, and they pretend to be such friends to good works,
as if none were like them, and they open their mouths wide against us, as
enemies to all good works. But indeed, if the matter be well examined, we
shall find none greater enemies to good works then Papists are. For why? They
take order to keep the people amongst them, from the knowledge of Gods will
reueiled in his Law and Word; they straightly charge the people, on pain of
damnation, not to read the Book of God; and they will not suffer them to have
the Scripture in their Mother tongue, in a Language known to them.

Now then consider it; Is the Law and Word of God the Rule of all goodness,
showing men every good way, and teaching men what is good, and what is ill, and
how good works are to be done; and will they bar men from the knowledge of
the Word of God, and not suffer them to have any acquaintance with it, and yet
bear the world in hand, that they are the only friends and favorers of good
works? Who is so simple, as sees not their deceit? A man with half an eye may
easily see, that their practice is in flat opposition to their words; they say
one thing, and they practice another.

And for the use of the point to our selves: Is it so, We must acknowledge the
Word of God to be every way good.
Does it commend all good things, and promise good to those that yield
obedience to it? and does it condemn all evil, and threaten judgment to
those that are guilty of evil? Is it good in the promises, and good in the
threatenings of it? Surely then, it must be so acknowledged, and so esteemed of
us; we must acknowledge the Word of God to be good, in promising good things,
and good also, in condemning ill, and in threatening judgment against those
that are guilty of sin, and as well good in the one, as in the other; yea, we
must acknowledge the Word of God, applied to the discovering, and to the
condemning of our particular sins, and the threatenings of it justly denounced
against us for the same, to be the good Word of God.

Thus did Ezechiah, Isai. 39.8. When the Prophet came unto him, and told him of
his particular sin in showing his treasures, and reproving him for it, and
let him understand what evil the Lord would bring upon him for that sin;
says HEZEKIAH, The Word of the Lord is good, which thou have spoken: I
acknowledge the Word that thou have spoken, to be the good Word of God. Thus
must we do; we must acknowledge the Word in the ministry of it, discovering
and condemning our sins, and the threatenings of it applied to us in regard of
those sins, to be the good Word of GOD.

Now, herein men come too short, and they fail. Let the Word of mercy, and the
Word of comfort be delivered and preached, and every one is ready to hale and
pull that to himself, though it belong not to him, and to acknowledge that, and
to esteem that to be the good Word of God. But let the particular sins
whereof men are guilty, be discovered and condemned in the ministry and
preaching of the Word, and Judgments due to those sins be justly denounced,
and men think that the Word so applied, is but the word of man, the word of
the Preacher, and not the good Word of God; they will not acknowledge that, and
esteem that as the good Word of God, but hold and deem that to be the bare
word of man.

Well, let such persons know, that the Lord in his just judgment will deal
with them proportionably. Do thou hold and esteem the Word discovering thy
particular sins, and condemning them, and threatening just Judgments against
thee for them, to be but the word of man, the word of the Preacher, and not the
good Word of God? Assure thy self, the Lord in his just Judgment will punish
thee in the same kind, and a word that shall perish with the breath of man; it
shall not be the good Word of God to thee in time of need; thou shall then
find no comfort in it. Remember the example of HEROD; Mar. 6.20.
He heard JOHN, and did many things, and heard him gladly, Mar. 6.20. yet when
John told him of his particular sin, and reproved him for it, then he thought
that was but John's word, and not the Word of God, and he would be meet with
John for it. And so indeed, the Lord, in his just judgment, made all that
Herod heard from John, even the things he heard gladly, and took great
comfort in (as he thought) to become unprofitable to him, and the Lord
suffered him to rot and perish in his sins.

Learn we then to take heed of dividing between God and his Word, when his
Word discouers our particular sins, and threatens Judgments justly against
us for the same: and if thinking the Word so applied, to be but the word of
man, and not the good Word of God, if we so do, we may justly look, that
the Lord should make his Word of comfort, not to be his good Word to us in the
time of need, but only as the word of man. Let us therefore acknowledge the
Word of God, both promising mercy and good things, and also justly threatening
Judgment against us for our sins, to be the good Word of God; and then
doubtless we shall find the comforts of it, made good to us in time of need.

Lastly, is it so, That only is good, which is agreeable to Gods Word
that is only good, that is agreeable to the Word of God; that is a good
work, that is done according to the rule of the Word of God. And so the
works which Papists so much boast and brag of, are no good works.

And for our selves, would thou have ground for that thou do, and be sure
that thou may lawfully do it, and that it is good which thou do? Then go
to the Word of God, advise with that, if the Word of God give thee warrant
for the thing, it is good which thou do; if not, it is evil. Michah. 6.8.
Mica. 6.8.
He has shown thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee: Surely, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to
walk with thy God. It is not thine own sense, nor reason, nor custom of
time, nor examples of men, that can sufficiently warrant the doing of any
thing. No, no: look to the Word of God, if that warrant the thing thou do,
either expressly or by good consequent, it is good; if it do not, thou can
not do it with any comfort.

VERSE. 13. Was then that which is good, made death unto me? God forbid: but
sin, that it might appear sin, wrought death in me, by that which is good,
that sin might be out of measure sinful by the Commandment.


IN this Verse our Apostle propounds a new cavil, that some might, or happily
did make against the Law of God, and answers it; he wipes away a new calumny
and slander that some might, and it may be, did charge on the Law of God,
namely this, that the Law should be the cause of death, and the occasion of
this cavil and calumny, was from that the Apostle had delivered, Verse. 10, 11.
That on the coming of the Law, sin revived, and he dyed: and the same
Commandment which was ordained unto life, was found to be unto him unto death.
Sin took occasion by the Commandment, and deceived him, and thereby slew
him. Hereupon some Cauillers were ready to object against the Apostle, and to
lay a foul blot on the Law of God, and in this or the like manner to open
their mouths against the Law, and against the Apostle, and to say, Thou say
that the Law is good. Well, let that be granted, that the Law indeed is good
in it self, and good to others: yet to thee it fell out as thou say to be
to death, it wounded thee, and it slew thee; therefore that which is good to
others, was made death to thee; even the good Law of God was found to be the
cause of death to thee: and so thou make the Law a most pestilent and vile
thing.

Now this cavil and this calumny and slander the Apostle first propounds, and
then answers: and he propounds it very emphatically, by way of interrogation
or question. Was that then which is good, made death unto me? Was the good Law
of God the cause of death to me? Will you so affirm, and so gather from my
speech? Will it bear and bring forth such a Conclusion?

To this the Apostle answers first generally, No, and that by way of abhorring
such a foul conclusion (God forbid,) Was that then which is good, made death
unto me? God forbid, says he: and then he subioynes a more particular answer
to this absurd conclusion, and he shows, that not the Law, but sin was the
cause of death to him, and how sin was so the cause of death to him, namely,
by working death in him by that which is good; and that is further amplified by
the end of that working, or by the event that might follow on it, as namely,
this might be the event and issue of it, that the vileness of sin might
appear. But sin (says the Apostle) that it might appear sin, wrought
death in me by that which is good. And that event he further explaynes in those
words, That sin might be out of measure sinful by the Commandment. As if he
had said, That sin might appear sin, that is, that sin might be out of
measure sinful: adding further by what in particular, namely, By the
Commandment, that sin might be out of measure sinful by the Commandment.
And so we see the general matter of this Verse.

Was that then which is good] By that which is good, Interpretation
the Apostle means the Law of God, to which in the Verse before he gave this
Epithet and Title (good) made death tome: that is, made deadly, or the cause
of death to me: the word (Death) being here put by a Metonymie of the effect,
for the cause, and the Apostle here using an Interrogation, Was that then which
is good, made death to me? It is as if he had said, Will you that are given to
cavil, concluding from mine own words, affirm, that therefore the good Law
of God was made deadly, or the cause of death to me? Will that conclusion
follow on my foregoing speech (God forbid?) That, as we showed, Verse. 7. is a
phrase of abhorring, as if he had said, Far be it from us so to think: fie
on it, it is an absurd thing so to imagine. (But sin) The word sin is here
to be taken as before, for the corruption of nature; as if he had said, But
the corruption of my nature, that it might appear sin, that is, that it might
appear, and be known to be that which indeed it is, even vile and filthy, and
of a cursed nature (wrought death in me.) These words we shall easily
understand, if we call to mind what was delivered in my exposition on Verse. 8,
9, 10, 11. The meaning of them is this. It was stirred up in me with greater
violence to bring forth all manner of evil, and so it did infold me more
deeply in death and damnation, and made me more liable to the curse of the Law
and to the wrath of God, and my conscience was smitten and wounded, and I found
my self as a dead man. (By that which is good) that is, on occasion of the
good Law of God, it was so stirred up in me, and by the same Law I being
guilty of the breach of it, my conscience was so smitten. (That sin might
appear sin.) These words as we said, are an exposition of those, that sin
might appear sin: and the meaning of them is this, That the corruption of my
nature might show it self extremely evil and vile, and might appear to be
most wicked and cursed sin. (By the Commandment) that is, by the
Commandment forbidding it and condemning it. Thus then briefly conceive we the
Apostles meaning, as if he had spoken a little more plainly on this manner:

Will you that are disposed to cavil, cast a further blot on the good Law of
God, and from my former speech conclude, that the good Law of God was made to
me deadly, or the cause of death? Oh, far be it from us so to think: fie on
it, that is an absurd conclusion; there is no such matter: but indeed the
corruption of nature, that the vile, filthy, and cursed nature of it might
appear, on occasion of the good Law of God, was stirred up in me, with greater
violence to bring forth all manner of evil: so it did infold me more deeply in
death and damnation; and I being further guilty of the breach of it, it made
me more liable to the curse of the Law, and to the wrath of God, and my
conscience was thereupon wounded and smitten, and I found my self as a dead
man, even by the good Law of God, I say, thus the corruption of my nature
wrought in me by the good Law of God, that it might show it self extremely
evil and vile, and might appear to be most wicked and cursed sin, by the
Commandment of God that forbad it, and condemned it.

Here we see, that the Apostle is put to answer a new cavil, and to wipe away
a new calumny that some were ready to cast on the good Law of God; there was
cauilling against it before, and now again. The nature of malicious cauillers
is, never to be satisfied.
the nature of malicious cauillers and contradicting spirits, such as are given
to cavil against the Truth, and to contradict it, their nature is never to be
satisfied, but they have ever something to object, and something to say against
the Truth, be it never so clear, and never so plainly laid before them.

And they are able to take some exception against it, and therefore it is no
marvel, it is not a thing to be wondered at, when the Truth that is grounded on
the good Word of God, and made most clear by evidence of Scripture, be it
matter of faith or manners, as Usury, Sabbath-breaking, and such like, has
some to except against it and to contradict it; no marvel (I say) though some
do cavil against things clearly delivered out of the Word of God: for indeed
cauillers and contradicting spirits are never satisfied, their unsanctified
wits delight in crossing the Truth, and as it is, 2. Tim. 3.8. 2. Tim. 3.8.
As IANNES and IAMBRES withstood MOSES, so these men also resist the Truth, and
they are men of corrupt minds. Let it suffice to have pointed at that.

The point I will stand on a little further, may thus be gathered: we see that
the Apostle is here put to answer a new slander, brought against the good Law
of God, that the good Law of God should be deadly, or the cause of death to
him, and so a most vile and pestilent thing: this, the Apostle is here put to
wipe away from the good Law of God. The point hence is this:

That the enemies of the Truth, Unsanctified wits and hearts commonly charge
vile things on Gods Truth, and on good things.
they stick not to charge most vile things on the Truth of God, and on the
good things of God; they care not to charge the holy Truth and good Word of
God, and the ministry and preaching of it, and other good things of God, to
be the cause of much mischief and many evils. And hence it was, that the holy
men of God, the Prophets, publishing the Truth and the good things of God to
the people, they have been held to be troublers of the State, and pestilent and
dangerous fellows, even by publishing the holy Truth of God to do much evil.
1. King. 18.17.
1. King. 18.17. says AHAB to ELIIAH, Art thou he that troubles Israel? Acts
24.5. says TERTVLLVS, Certainly we have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a moouer of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world. And Mat.
11.18, 19. The people charged John's precise and strict course, to be no better
then deuillish, and they said he had a Devil. And again, Christ taking more
liberty in the holy use of Gods creatures, they charged that holy course of
his with intemperancy, they said he was a glutton and a drinker of wine. Thus
it has been in all ages; we read in the Primitive times of the Church, the
Gospel was charged to be the cause of all evils: if any Plague or Judgment
was sent, the enemies of the Truth of God presently laid the fault on the
Gospel, and the Christians must forthwith be cast to the Lions. And not to
fetch proof of this so far off, Do not we see in our own times, and in our
own woeful experience, that cauillers and men of unsanctified hearts and wits,
stick not to charge most foul things on the truth of God, and on the holy
things of God? Do not some charge the ministry of the Word, and the preaching
of it, to be the cause of al Schisms and Heresies? yea, do not men sometimes
utter it, when a Preacher is sent to a people, and is careful to do his duty
faithfully, that if they should follow him and his preaching, he would make
them all fools and mad men, and they should soon go out of their wits? This
we see or may see in our own times. Now what are the reasons of this? Surely
these:

First,

Again, men of unsanctified hearts and wits, Strength against the vile
slanders, that the Papists cast on our doctrine,
cast on the Truth we hold and teach, calling it heresy and the like: yea,
this may serve to arm and strengthen us against the clamours and speeches of
ungodly men amongst us: we are not to stand amazed and wonder at it, And
against other clamours also.
when we hear ungodly men open their mouths wide against the ministry of the
Word, and against the holy profession of the Truth; when we hear men say,
There was never good world, since there was so much preaching and so much
professing: Here is a vile place indeed, here is so much preaching and so much
professing in it, as that men cannot now be merry in this place, and they
cannot use that good neighborhood in it as they were wont.

When we hear men utter these, or the like speeches, we are not to think it
a strange thing; thus it has been, and thus it will be to the end of the
world; cauillers and men of unsanctified hearts and wits, will charge most vile
things on the holy Truth of God, and on the holy profession of the Truth, and
on the Professors of it.

It may be, The Devil dare not say that true Religion is Heresy, and that
sound and sincere profession of the Truth of God is hypocrisy. Herein then
they are worse then the Devil.

Again, True Professors of the Gospel must carry themselves answerable to
their Profession.
stick not to charge most vile things on the holy Truth of God, and on the
holy things of God? Then true Professors of the Truth must look to themselves,
that they carry themselves answerable to that holy Profession, and give the
wicked and ungodly no just cause to speak evil of them: for are ungodly men
grown to that height of impudency, that they dare charge vile things on the
holy Truth of God, and on the holy things of God? Certainly then, much more
will they charge foul things on thee that art a Professor of the Truth of God;
if thou give them just occasion to speak evil of thee, they will then open
their mouths wide against thee, and insult over thee exceedingly. And
therefore let such as profess the Truth sincerely, labor to shine as lights
in the midst of a naughty and crooked generation.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle having propounded that absurd
cavil and slander, that some were ready to charge on the Law of God, that the
good Law of God should be deadly, or the cause of death to him: having (I say)
propounded that by way of Interrogation, Was that then which is good, made
death to me? he answers it negatiuely, and that with a detestation, and an
abhorring of such soul conclusions: (God forbid:) far be it from us so to
think: oh, fie on it, that is a very absurd conclusion. Hence we are given to
understand thus much:

That it is a very absurd thing, It is very absurd, to charge the good Law of
God, to be the cause of death and damnation to any.
and to be the cause of death to any one. The good Law of God is not to be
charged to be the cause of any man's spiritual death; that does not properly,
as a working cause, wound the conscience of any, nor of it self make any
liable to death and damnation. Indeed, the good Law of God justly threatens
death and damnation to such as are guilty of the breach of it, the curse of the
Law being annexed to it, and this being joined to the Law, that cursed is every
one that continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law, to do
them: but yet it is a wrong to the Law, and an imputation falsely cast upon it,
to say that it is the proper cause of death and damnation, and that it
properly, as a cause, brings forth the wound of conscience, or of it self
makes any liable to death and damnation.

We know that the Laws of the Kingdom threaten death to such as are guilty
of Treason, Murder, Theft, and other capital crimes, and they condemn such to
death as are found guilty of those crimes: but yet it were a wrong, and a
slander falsely laid on the Laws, to say that they, of themselves, and as
causes, make men liable and subject to death, and that they bring forth that
effect of themselves. And so indeed the Law of God (as it is) Romans Romans 4.15.
4.15. causes wrath, that is, it shows men that are guilty of the breach of
it, their guiltiness, and it pronounces sentence of death and damnation
against them, it shows them, that by reason of their guiltiness, they are
liable to death and damnation; but to say, that the Law of God is the proper
cause of death and damnation to any, or of it self wounds the conscience, or
makes any liable to death and damnation, that is absurd, and that is against
reason, and a thing unjustly charged on the good Law of God. For why? The good
Law of God, as the Apostle says, Romans 7. verse. 10.
Verse. 10. was ordained to life. And Deuteronomy. 30.15. Moses having published the
good Law of God to the people, Deuteronomy. 30.15.
he says, Behold, I have set before thee this day life and good; and if the
good Law of God be kept and observed perfectly, without failing in any jot or
tittle of it, it is able to give life and salvation, according to that, Leuit.
18.5.
Leuit. 18.5. Ye shall keep therefore my Statutes and my Judgments, which if
a man do, he shall then live in them. And the same is again repeated, Ezech.
20.11. And I gave them my Statutes, Ezech. 20.11.
and declared my Judgments unto them, which if a man do, he shall live in
them.

Again, the good Law of God being perfectly good, and every way good, as
before we showed, it cannot of it self properly, as a working cause, wound the
conscience of any, or make any liable to death and damnation. And therefore, to
charge the good Law of God to be the proper cause of the wound of conscience,
or the proper cause of death and damnation to any, it is a wrong to the Law of
God, and an imputation falsely cast on it.

Sometimes it is said,

Not the Word,

Now this I note, The error of some men's judgment, touching the working and
effect of the good Word of God discovered.
to show that some are deceived in their opinion, touching the working and
effect of the good Word of God. Some think and have this conceit, that the
good Word of God is many times the proper cause of inward trouble, and
distemper, and disquietnesse of mind, and that the reading and hearing of the
good Word of God, is the very cause that some become mad, and are distracted,
yea that some lay violent hands on themselves; they charge the reading and
hearing of the good Word of God, to be the cause of these foul evils.

This is the subtilty of Satan; and men that have no love nor liking to the
Word of God, are ready to join with Satan, thus to discountenance and to
disparage the reading and hearing of the good Word of God. Indeed it is true,
that men, in reading and hearing the good Word of God, are sometimes brought to
trouble of mind and conscience. But what then? Is the reading or hearing of the
good Word of God, the proper cause of that trouble? No, no: the proper cause of
it, is their own guiltiness of sin, the good Word of God read or heard, is
a means to show men their sins and guiltiness; and thereupon they are
wounded in soul, and troubled in mind and conscience: and so their trouble in
that kind comes not from the Word of God, as the proper cause of it, but from
their own guiltiness of sin. A Physician shows a man some dangerous
disease in his body, that he knew not of before; and thereupon the man is
troubled and much discouraged. Is the Physician the proper cause of that
trouble and discouragement? Surely no. But the disease of his body now made
known to him. So is it in this case; the good Word of God shows men their
guiltiness of sin, and thereupon they are troubled; the proper cause of that
trouble is not the good Word of God, but their own guiltiness.

Happily then thou will say, should forbear the reading or hearing of the Word?
or at least, not read or hear so much, as thereby to be brought to that
trouble of mind and conscience?

I answer,

But you will say, It does fall into utter despair: and many times that it
does so, is through men's own weakness, and the fault is in themselves; The
Gospel, even the sweet doctrine of the Gospel does sometimes more wound the
conscience, then any other thing: and is the fault in the doctrine of the
Gospel? No; but in the parties own weakness, that cannot take hold of the
promises of it.

We may not then conclude against the reading or hearing the good Word of God:
or say, It is not good to read or hear so much, because trouble of mind
follows on it. Trouble of mind for sin is good, if it fall not into
despair; and the fault is in men themselves, if it so do, in that they cannot
take hold of the comforts offered unto them in the good Word of God. And
therefore take we heed of charging that on the good Word of God, on the
reading or hearing of it, that indeed comes not from it; and let it be far
from us to think that the good Word of God, or the reading or hearing of it,
is the proper cause of trouble of mind, of madness or distraction. If we
charge these things on the good Word of God, we wrong it, and lay an
imputation falsely upon it.

Now touching the Apostles particular answer to that slander charged by some on
the Law of God. In that he says that sin, that is, the corruption of his
nature, wrought death in him, that is, was stirred up by the good Law of God;
we might hence show the prauity and perverseness of the corruption of nature,
that it takes occasion to stir, and work, and break out on the good Law of
God. But that point we have heretofore handled: therefore I pass by it.

Now in that the Apostle says, that the corruption of his heart wrought death
in him: Hence we are plainly taught,

That the wicked and corrupt heart of man abuses the best things: such is the
poison of our corrupt nature, Man's wicked and corrupt heart abuses the best
things
if it be left to it self, and not renewed or restrained, as it poisons every
thing it meets withal, it peruerts the best things, and it works the bane and
destruction of men, even by the good and holy things of God. As by the good
Word of God, it turns that to a savor of death, 2. Cor. 2. Cor. 2.16.
2.16. by the Sacrament, it makes a man guilty of the blood of Christ, and to
eat and drink his own damnation, 1. Cor. 1. Cor. 11.27, 29
11.27, 29. So by the sweet and comfortable doctrine of the Gospel, the
doctrine of Faith, and free Justification in the sight of God, the corrupt
heart of man turns that to a ground of carnal security and liberty, Jud.
Epist. v. 4.
Jude Epistle Verse. 4. So the most sweet and holy attributes of God, his
goodness, his mercy, his patience, the corrupt heart of man abuses all these,
and even by these it works the bane and destruction of men. Romans 2.4. Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
sufferance? Thereby implying, that the wicked and corrupt heart of man abuses
these things to destruction. I might instance in many other particulars, and
show that the corrupt heart of man works the ruin and destruction of men,
even by the best and most holy things of God. And the reason of it is this,

The mind of man left to it self,

By this we may easily conceive the miserable state and condition of all such
as are in their natural state; The miserable state of such as be in their
natural condition, discovered.
their case and condition is fearful: for why? they bring destruction on
themselves, not only by foul gross sins, but by good things, yea, by the
good and holy things of God, even by those things that should do them most
good. And what a miserable condition is that, that men should be in that state,
that their own corrupt hearts should work their bane by those things, that
should be to their good, and to their comfort both in this life, and in the
life to come?

And such is the state and condition of all such as are yet in their natural
condition; their own wicked and corrupt hearts, being left to themselves, do
work their bane and destruction, not only by such sins as the world takes
notice of to be dangerous and pernicious, but by the good and holy things of
God. Men commonly bless themselves, because (as they think) they are free
from gross sins, they live ciuilly and orderly in the world. Alas, this they
may do, and yet work their own bane and destruction by good things, even by
the good things of God: and this indeed men do being yet in their natural
state and condition; and their wicked and corrupt hearts do work their own
bane and destruction, by the good and holy things of God, by the good Word of
God, by the Sacraments, by the goodness and mercy of God; and they shall one
day find, if they have no other foul sins, which is a thing impossible, yet
they continuing in these sins, their abuse of the good things of God, shall
smite their hearts, and wound their consciences, and bring utter ruin and
destruction on them.

Oh then let ignorant and unrepentant persons take notice of their fearful
condition. Art thou an ignorant man or woman? or a man or woman unrepentant?
Thou art in a fearful condition. Thine own wicked heart works thy woe and
thy destruction, not only by gross sins, but even by the good and holy
things of God. Oh, therefore think on it, and hasten out of that fear full
state and condition.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle faith, Sin wrought death in
him by that which is good. He adds further, That sin might appear sin,
that is, as we showed, that the vile, filthy, and cursed nature of it might
appear. And he explaines that in the last words: And that sin might be out
of measure sinful by the Commandment, that is, that sin might show it self
extremely evil, and vile, and most wicked and cursed sin, it breaking out
against the good Commandment of God. The point hence is this:

That then sin shows it self most vile and filthy, Sin is then most vile
and filthy, when it breaks out against the means that should keep it in.
when it breaks out against that which is good, and should be a means to
keep it in, then sin appears most odious and foul, and it is a fearful
aggrauation of sin, and makes it out of measure sinful, when it breaks out
against the good means that should restrain it, and should keep it in. And
bence it is, that holy men of God, when they would make sin, sin committed,
to appear most vile and most foul, they have laid it forth, not only as a
breach and transgression of the Law of God, but they have further labored to
set it out, as a thing done against knowledge, against conscience, against the
good means of restraint, which the Lord had vouchsafed, yea, as a sin
committed against the mercy of God, and they have clothed it with the
circumstances of time, of place, of person, that might aggrauate the sin, and
make it appear more foul and more heinous.

Thus dealt Nathan with David, 2. Sam. 12.7. He not only told David, Verse. 7.
2. Sam. 12.7.
that he was the man that had sinned, but he proceeded further, and told him,
that he was the man whom the Lord had anointed King over Israel, and delivered
out of the hand of SAVL, and had given him his Lords house, and would moreover,
if that had been too little, have given him such and such things: and that he
had sinned in secret and close manner, as if Vriah had not been killed by him,
but that the sword of the children of Ammon had slain him.

Thus the holy Prophet labored to make the vileness of David's sin to
appear, by bringing to his mind Gods mercy in his advancement, his contempt
of Gods Commandment, and his cunning dealing in committing of that sin. 1.
Sam. 15.17.
And thus dealt Samuel with Saul, 1. Sam. 15.17. He laid before Saul the Lords
gracious dealing with him in his advancement, in that when he was little in his
own sight, the Lord made him Head over the Tribes of Israel, for the Lord
anointed him King over Israel, and thereby showed him, that his sin was most
vile, in sparing Agag and the best of the Sheep and Oxen, in that his wicked
heart had made him sin against such mercies vouchsafed unto him.

And this aggrauation of sin we find used by the Prophet in express
terms, Isai. 26.10. Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn
righteousness: in the Land of uprightness will he doc wickedly. As if he had
said, Herein appears the vile and cursed nature of the wicked, that though the
Lord vouchsafe mercy to them, yet they will still be wicked, and they will not
learn to do well; nay, in the Land of uprightness, amongst many occasions
and means of good, they will do wickedly. And therein appears the vileness
and cursednesse of their corrupt nature; and so the Prophet plainly confirms
this point, That then sin appears most foul, and it is a fearful
aggrauation of it, and makes it out of measure sinful, when it breaks out
against the good means that should restrain it, when it breaks out against
knowledge, against conscience, against the mercies of of God, and the like. And
the reason of it is this,

Sin breaking out against the good means that should keep it in, therein it
shows it self to be of the greatest force and strength; and the stronger it
is being vile, the more vile it is, and therefore this we may conclude as a
certain truth, that then sin appears most foul, and it is a fearful
aggrauation of it, and then it is out of measure sinful, when it breaks out
against the good means that should restrain it and keep it in.

Now then, this serves first to discover to us, The sins of many discovered
to be most odious and soul.
for indeed the sins of too many want not this circumstance of aggrauation,
they are committed against knowledge, against conscience, against the clear
light of the Word of God, and against the good means of restraynt the Lord
has vouchsafed unto them. Can the Drunkard, the unclean person, the proud
person, can these and the like plead ignorance, or the want of means to
restrain them? No certainly, they cannot: and therefore their sins are
committed against knowledge, and against conscience, and so they are most vile
and most filthy. The sin of Ignorance is not excusable, because men have in
them sufficient light to leave them without excuse: but when men have a further
light given them, and sin against that, that is most searefull, and then is
their sin out of measure sinful; and without great repentance shall find a
proportionable punishment, even more fearful punishment.

Again, is it so, that sin is most foul and filthy, Sin may be justly
taxed as more vile, in respect of circumstances of aggrauation.
and makes it out of measure sinful, that it breaks out against the good
means that should restrain it and keep it in? Surely, then sin may justly
be taxed as more vile, in that respect that it has been committed against
knowledge, against conscience, against the good means, against the clear
light of the Gospel, and against the evidence of Truth, that has been
taught, and men are not to think much when their sins are thus laid before
them, with those necessary circumstances of aggrauation. Men commonly think
they are disgraced too much, when their sins are thus laid before them. But
they must know, that this is the way to bring men to see the vileness of their
sins, and to bring them out of love and liking of them: Yea, this is the way to
strip men of all colorable excuses, as of their own infirmity, the example of
others, or the like. For what shall a man be able to plead in defense of his
sin, when his own knowledge, conscience, good means, and mercies of God
vouchsafed unto him shall plead against him, as Christ said, Ioh. 15.22. If I
had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin, but now have
they no cloak for their sins.

And so it may justly be said to men having the means of good, and many
mercies bestowed on them, if they had not had those means and those mercies
vouchsafed, they should not have had so great sin, but now they have no cloak
for their sin. Therefore sin must thus be laid before men, that the
vileness of it may appear, yea, we are thus to acknowledge sin, and to make
confession of it to God, when we humble our selves in the confession and
acknowledgement of our sins. It is not enough to confess in general that we
are sinners, no, nor yet to confess sin in particular: but we must add the
circumstances of aggrauation, we must confess it with all circumstances by
which it has been made more foul and filthy, as that it has been done
against knowledge, against conscience, against the good means vouchsafed unto
us. Ezra 9. Dan. 9.
Thus did Ezra, Ezra 9. and thus did Daniel, Dan. 9. The Lord sees sin in the
vileness of it, and he will have us so to lay it before him in the
acknowledgement of it, that we may thereby testify our hatred and lothing of
it, and that it is vile to us and in our eyes, or else we can never look to
find mercy from him for the pardon of it.

VERSE. 14. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin.


IN this Verse our Apostle first brings an argument, to prove that the Law was
not the cause of death to him, taken from the nature of the Law, that the Law
in the nature of it, is spiritual, and therefore cannot be the cause of death:
and this, that the Law is spiritual, is further set forth, as a thing well
known to the Apostle and to other true Believers; For we know (says he) that
the Law is spiritual.

Then in the words following, he speaks of himself, and sets forth himself
as standing in an opposite and contrary state to the Law of God, and says,
that he was carnal, and he adds to that, Sold under sin. The Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. And so he falls on the third and
last part of this Chapter; he makes an entrance and passage to it: which part
is continued from this Verse, to the end of the Chapter: and the sum of it is
thus much: A troubled complaint of the Apostle, that though he were regenerate,
and had received a great measure of grace and sanctification, yet through the
remainders of sin still abiding in him, he was far from that he ought to
be, and far from that the Law of God required at his hands, and that he was
even carnal, in respect of the spiritual nature of the Law of God: and so a
setting forth, in his own example, of the combat between the flesh and the
Spirit, in them that are truly regenerate.

Now touching the combat between the flesh and the Spirit in them that are
truly regenerate: The Apostle first lays it forth in his own example, from
this 14. Verse, to the 24. and then he shows the issue of it, still insisting
in his own example, Verse. 24.25.

The combat is laid forth in three degrees. Verse. 15, 16, 17.

The second degree is, Verse. 18. and proved: First, by the contrary effects,
Verse. 19. and then by the contrary cause, the Law moving to good, and he
thereunto consenting, and sin hindering him, Verse. 20, 21.

The third degree is, Verse. 22, 23.

Then, touching the issue of this combat, the Apostle first desires to be freed
from this spiritual bondage and captivity, Ver. 24. and then gives thanks for
his freedom in and through Christ, in that in him he was thus far freed, as
that he was not wholly captiued to sin, but in his mind he served the Law of
God, Verse. 25.

And thus we see the general matter of the third and last part of this
Chapter.

In this 14. Verse, as I said, the Apostle yields a reason why the Law of God
is not the cause of death: because the Law is spiritual, delivering that as a
known truth, and then he sets himself as standing in a contrary state to the
Law, that he was carnal, and adds to that, that he was sold under sin.

For we know, Interpretation
(We know) that is, both I and you know this, this is a truth which we know
well, and wherewith we are well acquainted, that the Law: The word (Law) is
here to be taken, as before for the moral Law of God, and that Law is here
said to be spiritual; and for the understanding of that Epithet, we are to
mark that the Apostle here opposes Spiritual to Carnal: the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal. As it is a usual thing with him to oppose flesh
and Spirit, Romans 8. verse. 1, 5, 6, etc. so here he opposes Spiritual to
Carnal, and his meaning is this: That the moral Law of God is in the nature
of it, most pure, and perfect, heavenly and divine, and this it is, both in
respect of the Author of it, because it comes from God, who is a Spirit, and it
is the revealed Will and Wisdom of God, touching all moral duties; and also
in respect of the matter of it, because it requires spiritual, that is,
heavenly, Angelical, and divine obedience, even absolute, exact and perfect
purity both of heart and life, it requires a perfect conformity to it, not only
in the outward man, but also in the very heart, and soul, and Spirit, as well
inward as outward, yea, as well in man's nature, as in his actions; so is the
moral Law of God said to be spiritual.

But I am carnal, sold under sin. Some make question, whether the Apostle
here spoke of himself, as he was now an Apostle and truly regenerate, or no.
Doubtless he did: for he speaks of himself in the time present, I am
carnal: not in the time past, as before, Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Why? but will some say, Was Paul,

I answer, Yes, he was, in the flesh, as Verse. 5. not altogether flesh, as
Ioh. 3.6. Ioh. 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. But yet he was in some respect
carnal, as first, in respect of that perfect integrity, uprightness, or (as I
may so speak) that spirituality that is taught and required in the Law of God;
and doubtless, this he intended, in setting these two one against the other,
spiritual and carnal. The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal. As if he had
said, It is heavenly and divine, it requires Angelical and divine obedience:
but alas, I come far short of that uprightness, and that spirituality that
the Law requires, I am even carnal, in respect of it.

Secondly, the Apostle was carnal, and might justly say of himself, that he
was carnal, in respect of perfect regeneration; that though he were truly
regenerate, yet he was regenerate but in part, not perfectly, and that he was
still in part carnal, and had still the relikes of original corruption
abiding in him, and carnal infirmities still cleaving unto him; as Ignorance,
Unbelief, Doubting, and the like.

And thus we are to understand the Apostle, in saying that he was carnal;
that he was not so simply, and altogether as unregenerate persons be, but in
respect of that uprightness of the Law, and in respect of perfect regeneration.

He adds further, (sold under sin.) This Phrase is borrowed from bondmen or
captives: and the Apostles meaning is, that he was as a bondsman or captive
under sin, the corruption of his nature: and that we may conceive how, know,
that one may be a bondsman, either by selling himself into captivity and
willingly obeying a Tyrant, or by being brought into captivity against his
will: as Joseph was sold into captivity by his brethren. And this was Paul's
case here, in respect of sin, he was a bondsman under sin unwillingly; he sold
not himself, as Ahab did, to work wickedness: but he was held unwillingly
under the power of his corruption, and by that he was drawn to many things he
allowed not, as he expounds himself in the Verses following: and that is his
meaning, when he says, he was sold under sin. Thus then conceive we his
meaning in the words of this Verse, as if he had said,

Both you, and I, even all of us know this to be a truth, we well understand
it, that the moral Law of God is, in the nature of it, most pure and perfect,
heavenly and divine, being breathed out from the Spirit of God, and requiring
heavenly, Angelical, and divine obedience, even absolute and perfect purity
and holiness, both of heart and life, and perfect conformity to it in the very
heart, soul, and Spirit, and as well inward as outward, and as well in man's
nature, as in his actions: but alas, I must needs acknowledge this of my
self, if I look into my self, and compare my self with that uprightness,
and that spirituality of Gods Law, and duly consider the imperfection of my
regeneration, having still the relikes of original corruption abiding in me,
and carnal infirmities cleaving unto me, that I am in these respects carnal,
and earthly, and that I am sold as a bondsman and captive, against my will,
under the power of mine own corruption.

We are here first to consider the Epithet and Title given to the moral Law
of God, that it is spiritual, and the point hence is that which is intended by
this Epithet, namely this,

That the moral Law of God is in the nature of it heavenly, Angelical, and
divine, The moral Law of God is of an heavenly and divine nature, and it
requires a proportionable obedience.
and it requires heavenly and Angelical obedience; it requires that men
conform themselves to it, and yield obedience to it, not only in the outward
man, but also in the most inward motions of their minds, wills, and affections,
and in their very spirits, and thoughts: yea, it requires every way absolute,
exact, and perfect obedience in soul and body: and to this purpose we have
plain evidence of Scripture. Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and these
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart. Luke 10.27. the
Expounder of the Law says thus, It is written in the Law, Thou shall love thy
Lord God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy thought. And thus CHRIST himself expounds the
moral Law of GOD, Matthew. 5. in many Verses of it, as 22, 28, 34, etc. And he
gives the spiritual sense of the Law, and shows that it reaches to the most
inward motions of the mind, will and affections, and that it requires absolute
and perfect obedience, as well in the soul, as in the body, and in the very
spirits and thoughts of men. The reason of it is this,

The moral Law of God being breathed out from the Spirit of God, Isai. 55.8.
Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor Gods will our will: but his thoughts,
his mind, and his will, are like to himself, most heavenly, and most
spiritual; and therefore the moral Law of God must needs be in the nature of
it, Heavenly, Angelical, and Divine, and requiring obedience; in no sort
sauouring of the flesh, nor such as men think and judge to be good, but
Heavenly and Angelical, and that which is every way absolute and perfect, and
as well in soul as in body.

And this serves to teach us how the Law of God must be understood, Gods Law
must be spiritually understood.
namely, spiritually; it being in the nature of it, heavenly and spiritual, it
must be spiritually understood. The Pharisees in their time misse-vnderstood the
Law of God. And many in our time misse-vnderstand it, many think, that men may
understand the Law of God by the strength of natural reason, and they stick
not sometimes to say, that if the Law of God be but read to the people, it is
sufficient. Why, say they, who knows not this, that it is a sin to kill, to
steal, and the like? Alas, such men look on the Law of God with a wrong eye,
they look on it with the eye of natural reason, and that eye is not able to
see the uprightness of the Law of God, and to discern the spirituality of it;
and such men have a veil over their eyes, 2. Cor. 3.15. They rest in the
outward rind and bark of the Law of God, they see not the pith and marrow of
it. If we would rightly understand the Law of God, we must labor to
understand it spiritually, and to find out the spiritual sense and meaning of
it.

Again, is it so, that the Law of God, No man is able in time of this life,
perfectly to fulfill the Law of God in his own person.
and requires heavenly and Angelical obedience? who then is able in time of
this life, in his own person, perfectly to fulfill the Law of God? who is able
to attain to that perfect purity the Law of God requires? Surely, none living
being a mere man: and therefore it is a dream of the Papists, to say that men
may perfectly fulfill the Law of God in this life, in their own persons, and
may merit by their works, and do works of supererogation: these be fancies of
idle brains.

Lastly, is it so, We must yield internal and spiritual obedience to Gods Law.
requiring heavenly and Angelical obedience to it, as well in soul as in
body? Surely, then we may not think it enough to conform our selves to the
Law of God in outward actions only. No, no: we must yield internal and
spiritual obedience to the Law of God; the Law of God, in commanding outward
good works, and in forbidding outward evil deeds, commands and forbids the
very first motions and desires of those works, and therefore we must labor in
truth, though we cannot perfectly, yet in truth to yield obedience to the Law
of God, not only in our bodies, but also in our hearts, souls and Spirits.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle does not barely affirm this
of the Law of God, that it is spiritual; but he affirms it as a known thing,
a thing well known to himself and other true believers. We know (says the
Apostle:) both I, and you, and all true believers are well acquainted with
this, that the Law is spiritual, and that the Law of God, in the nature of it,
is heavenly and spiritual; this we know. The point hence is this,

That true believers, such as are truly enlightened, know the spiritual nature
of the Law of God, True believers see and discern the spiritual nature of the
whole Word of God.
they rest not in the letter of the Law, but they see and discern the
spirituality of it, and they are well acquainted with it, yea such as are truly
enlightened, they know and understand, and they see and discern the spiritual
nature of the whole Word of God, they are acquainted with the Spirit and Life
of the whole Word of God, both of the Law and of the Gospel: The Word of God
dwells in them, as it is Coloss. 3.16. and they know not only the outward face
of the Word of God, but they are acquainted with the inward purpose and meaning
of it, and the nature of it, as they know the nature, and disposition, and very
purpose of the heart of one that dwells with them, and with whom they do
converse familiarly and are inwardly acquainted.

And to this purpose the Apostle says, Coloss. 1.9. that he prayed for the
Colossians, that they might be fulfilled with knowledge of the will of God, in
all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might come to the wise and
spiritual understanding of the Will of God revealed in his Word. And thus also
he prayed for the Ephesians. Ephesians. 1.18. That the eyes of their understanding
might be enlightened, that they might know not only the letter and story of
the Gospel, but the sweet and excellent things of it, the hope of his calling,
and the riches of his glorious inheritance in his Saints. Such as are truly
enlightened, they know, and they understand, and they discern the spiritual
nature of the Word of God, and they are acquainted with the Spirit and Life of
it. For why?

God gives to true believers his Spirit, the secrets of God, Psalm. 25.14. that
is, not only such things as may be known by the common gift of illumination,
but the deep and hidden things of God, even the things which eye has not
seen, neither care has heard, nor have entered into man's heart, 1. Cor. 2.9.
And therefore they rest not in the letter of the Law of God, nor in the letter
of the Gospel, but they see and discern the spiritual nature of the Law,
that the Law is heavenly, Angelical and divine, and requires heavenly and
Angelical obedience, and they are acquainted with the marrow and sweetness of
the Gospel.

By this then let us try our selves, Trial of our knowledge and understanding
of the Word of God.
whether we be truly enlightened or no. By this we may know it: Do we rest in
the letter of the Law, or do we stick in the letter of the Gospel, and go
no further? Let us not deceive our selves, we have no true understanding either
of the Law or of the Gospel; we may soothe up our selves, but indeed we are
not truly enlightened. Such as are truly enlightened, they see and discern the
spiritual nature of the Law, and they are well acquainted with the sweet and
excellent comforts of the Gospel.

Why, will some say,

I answer,

And again, thou may be sure that thou art well acquainted with the sweet
comforts of the Gospel, if thou be affected with them according to the
excellency and worth of them, and thou make them thy chief Treasure, and thy
desire after them is insatiable, and especially, if thou find the sweetness
and comfort of them in time of thy greatest trouble. If it be thus with thee,
certainly, then thou art truly enlightened, and thou do see and discern the
spiritual nature of the Law, and thou art well acquainted with the sweet
comforts of the Gospel: and if it be not thus with thee, assure thy self thou
art not truly enlightened.

Come we to that the Apostle speaks of himself. Having said, The Law is
spiritual, he subioynes (but I am carnal, sold under sin) he falls, as we
see, into a troubled complaint in regard of himself, that in respect of the
spiritual nature of the Law of God, and in respect of perfect regeneration, he
was carnal, and sold under sin.

Now then, the Apostle being an holy and sanctified vessel, a man truly
regenerate, and a man that had attained a great measure of grace and
sanctification, and thus complaining and acknowledging thus much of himself,
that he was carnal, sold under sin, we are given to understand thus much:

That the most holy, The best of Gods children have just cause to complain of
carnality still abiding in them.
have just cause to complain of carnality still remaining in them, that as yet
they are in some measure carnal: even the most holy have just cause
continually to groan under the burden of the remaynder of carnal corruption
still abiding in them, and of carnal infirmities still cleaving to them, as
Ignorance, Unbelief, Doubting, Hypocrisy, Pride, and the like: and we shall
find, if we observe it, that the most holy and the most regenerate that have
been in all ages, have ever thus complained, and thus groned under the weight
of corruption still abiding in them in part, and of carnal infirmities still
remaining in them.

Thus did Job, Job 9.30, 31.
Job 9.30, 31. If I wash my self with snow water, and purge mine hands most
clean, yet thou shall plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes shall make
me filthy, I have such corruption still abiding in me, and such filthiness
cleaving to me. And thus David, knowing the corruption of his heart, and
sinful infirmities still cleaving to him, entreates the Lord not to enter into
Judgment with him. Psalm. 143.2. Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that
lives be justified.

We read of the father of the child, Mar. 9.24. Mar. 9.24.
that though he had a measure of true faith, yet he complained of the
weakness of his faith, and he cried out with tears, and said, Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief.

And thus the holy and blessed Martyrs of God, as Bradford, and others, have
much complained of their unbelief. Bradford almost in all his writings, and in
every Meditation, complaynes of his unbelief; and yet he was a man exceedingly
mortified to the world, and had received a rich and plentiful measure of
grace. And thus in all ages the most holy and most regenerate have complained,
and groned under the burden of corruption still abiding in them, and of sinful
infirmities still cleaving to them: And therefore certainly, the most holy and
most regenerate that are, have just cause continually to groan under the burden
of the remaynder of sin which still abides in them, and of carnal
infirmities that still cleave to them.

Happily here some will say,

I answer, The Lord is so pleased, others, as occasion is offered. For these
causes the Lord is pleased to suffer the relikes of corruption still to abide
in his children, and sinful infirmities still to cleave to them; and so,
though men or women be most holy, yet they have just cause, continually to
groan under the burden of the remaynders of sin still abiding in them, and of
sinful infirmities still cleaving to them.

Now this Truth meets with that proud conceit of some, That conceit of
absolute perfection of holiness in this life, met withal.
that dream of an absolute perfection of holiness and regeneration in time of
this life, as the Papists, the Pelagians, the Familists: they think that men
may come to be absolutely perfect in holiness and regeneration in this life,
yea, some vpstart Nouellers and newfangled Divines there be, who think, that
where there is true Faith, there is no doubting at all, and where there is any
the least doubting, there is no true Faith, and that men may come to be so free
from sin, as they need not any more to mourn and weep for their sins.
These be fancies and idle conceits, and they cannot stand with the Truth now
delivered and grounded on the Word of God; the most holy, and the most
regenerate have continually, so long as they be in this life, just cause to
groan under the burden of the remaynders of sin still abiding in them, and of
sinful infirmities still cleaving to them, even to groan under the burden of
Ignorance, Unbelief, Doubting, and such like.

Oh,

I answer:

Again, and truth of it, and in true and sound assurance of the pardon of his
sins, not in the absolute assurance of it: for indeed there is no such
assurance to be found in any; there is some weakness and some doubting mingled
with the assurance of faith in the best, and the best and most holy have just
cause to bewail their unbelief, and their doubting, and other sinful
infirmities cleaving unto them, so long as they are in this life: and therefore
it is hellish pride for any to think, that they may come to absolute
perfection of holiness and regeneration in this life.

Again, is it so, that the most holy, Comfort for such as are ever complaining
of their own infirmities.
Here is then a ground of comfort for thee, whosoever thou art that art a
child of God, and art ever complaining of thine own infirmities. Did Paul
thus? Did he break out and say he was carnal, having the remainder of sin
still abiding in him, and sinful infirmities still cleaving to him? And have
the best of Gods children done thus? And have they just cause thus to do? Then
do not thou too much cast down thy self, in regard of corruption still
abiding in thee, and sinful infirmities still cleaving to thee: thy case is
not singular, but the case of all Gods children.

Oh, but thou will say,

Well, assure thy self, for full holiness in the life to come. It is a
blessed thing that God gives thee a sight of thine own corruption and sinful
infirmities, and an heart to be grieved for them. Thousands in the world go
lightly under the burden, not of sinful infirmities, but of foul and gross
sins, and they laugh and are merry.

Last of all, The best of Gods Children are continually to be watchful.
just cause continually to groan under the burden of the remainders of sin
still abiding in them? Surely, then it concerns the best and the most holy
that are, to be watchful, and continually to stand on their guard; they have a
Serpent lurking in their own bosoms, and though he be wounded, yet he is
not altogether dead, and he will sting them, and poison them, if they watch him
not narrowly: they are therefore to suspect every thing that comes from
themselves, lest it savor of the flesh and of corruption; and they are not
easily to approve that which is pleasing to their own sense and reason; for
they having still in them corruption of nature, through that corruption, the
Devil is still ready to wind himself into their hearts, and to mingle his
poison with their thoughts: and therefore they are to watch over their own
hearts continually.

Come we now to stand more particularly on that the Apostle here affirms of
himself; that he was carnal, sold under sin. And first, he says, that he
was carnal: namely, as we showed, he was not simply and merely carnal, as
unregenerate persons be but he was carnal comparatively, and in some respects,
as, namely, in respect of the perfect integrity, uprightness, and spiritual
nature of the Law of God, and in respect of perfect regeneration, he was even
carnal, earthly and sensual. Hence two conclusions are offered to us. I will
speak of them in order; as first, in that the Apostle says, he was carnal,
in respect of the perfect purity, uprightness, and spiritual nature of the
Law, we may take up this conclusion:

That true believers, and such as are truly regenerate, The best of Gods
children are carnal, in comparison of the Law of God.
as unregenerate persons be, yet they are carnal, in comparison of the Law of
God. If the best, and most holy, and most regenerate in the world, compare
themselves with the perfect holiness, integrity, and spirituality of the Law
of God, they shall find, that in respect of that, they are carnal, yea, the
more they compare themselves with the pure, holy, and perfect Law of God, the
more vile, and the more filthy shall they see themselves, and the more vile and
wretched shall they acknowledge themselves.

Thus it was with the holy Apostle in this place, he comparing himself with
the pure, holy, and spiritual Law of God, he breaks out and says, I am
carnal, and I am a vile sinful wretch. And thus we may read of holy David,
Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19.11.
that David having in that Psalm largely discoursed of the excellency and
perfection of the Law of God, and of the holiness, integrity, and purity of
it, and having said, Verse. 11. that in keeping the Commandments of God, there
is great reward: he presently subioynes, Verse. 12. Who can understand his
faults? Cleanse me from secret faults. As if he had said, The Law of God is
indeed most pure, and holy, and of excellent perfection: but (alas) if I and
others, whosoever we be, compare our selves with the holy and perfect Law of
God, we are far short of the holiness and perfection the Law of God requires
at our hands, and we shall find our selves full of sin, and full of
corruption, and the more we look into the holy and pure Law of God, and
compare our selves with that, the more vile and filthy we see our selves, the
more vile and wretched we must needs acknowledge our selves to be, and that
we have such filthiness in us, that we cannot sound the depth and bottom of
it. Who can understand his faults?

And hence it is that the Prophet Isai. 64.6. says, Isai. 64.6.
that the best righteousness of man is as filthy clouts; all our
righteousness is as filthy clouts. The righteousness of such as are most
holy, and most regenerate in this world, is as filthy clouts. And therefore, if
the best and most holy that live in this world, compare themselves with the
perfect holiness and purity of the Law of God, they shall find, that in
respect of that, they are carnal, and the more they compare themselves with
the pure, holy, and perfect Law of God, the more vile and filthy they shall see
themselves, and the more vile and wretched they must needs acknowledge
themselves: and the reasons of it are these,

First, Pro. 20.9. None can say, I have cleansed my heart, I am pure, I am
clean from my sin.

Now then, the perverse and crooked heart of the best, being laid to the right
rule of holiness, the crookedness of it must needs appear, the right rule of
the Law will certainly discover it, and they shall thereby come more to see
it, and more to acknowledge it.

Again, Abraham, Genesis 18.27.
Genesis 18.27. Drawing near to the Lord, they are but dust and ashes. And say
with Job, Job 9.20. If they would be perfect, Job 9.20.
yet the Lord shall judge them wicked.

And therefore, doubtless, if the best and most holy that are in the world,
compare themselves with the holiness, integrity, and spiritual nature of the
Law of God, they shall find, that in that respect they are carnal, and the
more they compare themselves with the pure and holy Law of God, the more vile
and filthy shall they see themselves, and the more vile, and the more wretched
must they needs acknowledge themselves.

First, is it so, that the most holy that are in the world, Unregenerate
persons compared with the Law of God, are most vile and filthy.
and perfect Law of God, are carnal, and are vile, and filthy? What are then
the unregenerate, and such as are yet in their natural state? and what are
they then that are unholy, and profane, and give themselves over to
wickedness and sin, even with greediness, and make but a mock of
holiness, and scoff at those that are in any measure holy and religious? What
shall we think that they are? Surely, we may justly think thus of them, that
if they be compared with the Law of God, they will be found to be deuillish,
and lips of the Devil. Are they that are most holy, carnal? What then art
thou that art a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, a Rayler, a Scoffer of Religion, and of
all that are religious? Surely, if thou be compared with the holy Law of God,
thou will be found not only carnal, but even a Devil incarnate: and if thou
compare thy self with the holy Law of God, and have thine eyes open, to see
what thou art, thou shall find thy self as black as the Devil, and as hell
it self. And if Abraham and holy men of God, drawing near to the Lord, have
cried out, they were but dust and ashes, vile, and sinful; and, rottenness
entered into their bones, Habbak. 3.16. Habbak. 3.16.
and as 1. Pet. 4.18. If the righteous searcely be saved, where then will thou,
that art a vile, wicked and ungodly sinner, appear? When the Lord shall open
thine eyes, and awaken thy conscience, to see thy vileness, thou shall be
forced to cry out, thou art a Devil, and a damned wretch: and when the Lord
shall appear to judgment, thou shall then call to the Mountains to fall on
thee, and to the Hills to cover thee. Oh then, if hell have not taken full
possession of thy soul, think of this in time.

Again, is it so, that the most holy and most regenerate that are in this
world, if they be compared with the holy and pure Law of God, they are carnal,
and the more they compare themselves with the holy and pure Law of God, the
more vile and filthy shall they see themselves, how then can any look to be
justified in the sight of God, by his own inherent holiness, by that
holiness that is found in himself? Justification in Gods sight by inherent
holiness, confuted.
And yet it is not able to abide the try all, according to the strict rule of
the Law of God: and if it be examined by the pure and holy Law of God, it will
be found in some measure carnal. Can that then justify a man before the
Judgment seat of God? No, no: it is not possible. And it is but a fancy of
the Papists, that true believers are first justified by the merit of Christ,
but afterward their second and further justification in the sight of God, is
by their own inherent holiness. This is a dotage.

And we may further drive the point to the just reproof of some amongst our
selves, I mean ignorant persons. Ask an ignorant man or woman, one that
cannot give the meaning of any Article of faith, or any Petition of the Lords
Prayer, how he or she look to be saved? Their answer is commonly this, They
do no body harm, they serve God, and they pray to God, and they hope to be
saved by their good meaning and their good dealing, and serving of God. This is
gross and palpable ignorance: such persons deceive themselves exceedingly.
Alas (as David says, Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 130.3.) If the Lord should marks iniquities, who shall stand? The best
and the most holy are not able to stand in his sight. And do thou then
think, that thy good meaning, and serving of God, shall go for current before
him? No, no: thou deceiuest thy self: and, if thou rest on that, it will
certainly deceive thee, and plunge thy soul into the gulf of hell: therefore
take heed of it.

Last of all, this being so, that the most holy, Whence it is that the Papists
dote on inherent holiness, and that many amongst us are highly conceited of
their own holiness and good things in themselves.
if they compare themselves with the pure, holy, and perfect Law of God, shall
find themselves carnal, and the more they compare themselves with it, the
more vile and filthy shall they see themselves. By this we may easily see and
discern, whence it is, that the Papists so much dote on inherent holiness,
and that many amongst us are so highly conceited of their own holiness, and
good things in themselves; and that many please themselves in their civil
honest carriage. Why? Surely, all these, and the like, compare not themselves
with the holy and pure Law of God, they compare themselves either with
themselves, or with others amongst men, and they never examine themselves by
the holy and pure Law of God: and that indeed is the ground of their carnal
self-love, and selfe-liking. And therefore, when thou find a swelling
conceit in thee, in respect of some holiness or good thing in thy self, go
to the Law of God, compare thy self with that, and thou shall find thy best
holiness, but carnality, in respect of the holiness of the Law of God, and of
that which the Law of God requires at thy hands: and that will beat down thy
swelling self-conceit.

Now in the second place, in that the Apostle says, he was carnal, in
respect of perfect regeneration; this conclusion is further offered,

That the most holy, The best of Gods children are still carnal, in regard of
perfect regeneration.
in regard of perfect regeneration; the most holy have still carnality in them,
and have still flesh and corruption abiding in them, yea, they are still in
part carnal thorowout, they are thorowout partly flesh, and partly Spirit;
their minds, their wills, their affections, and all the powers of their
souls, are thorowout partly spiritual, and partly carnal: and therefore the
Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 1^.9. that in time of this life, we know but in
part. As if he had said, We that are true Believers, true Christians, yea,
we that are Apostles, even we all and every one of us know but in part, and
we are but in part enlightened, and consequently but in part sanctified
thorowout.

And Gal. 5. verse. 17. the Apostle speaking of the regenerate, he says, there
is still in them flesh and Spirit, lusting one against the other, and fighting
and striving one against the other. Therefore this is a certain truth, that
the most holy, and most regenerate that live in this world, are still in part
carnal, and that thorowout, their minds, their wills, and all the powers of
their souls, are thorowout partly spiritual, and partly carnal.

This then first makes known to us, The bestworks of the regenerate are
imperfectly good.
are imperfect works, they are not perfectly good, but partly good, and partly
evil and sinful. For why? Such as the cause is, such must needs be the
effect. Now the mind and will of man are the cause of all his works, and the
mind is partly carnal, and partly spiritual, and so is the will; and
therefore the works that proceed from thence, must needs be answerable, even
partly spiritual, and partly carnal and sinful, and so not able to
justify any in the sight of God.

Again, The most holy that be in the world, have cause to be humbled for their
best works.
must learn to be humbled for their best works: they have cause to be humbled
even for the best works they perform. Though we be truly regenerate, and
have the Spirit of grace and sanctification, yet when we have done any good
thing, we have cause to be humbled for the carnality and sinfulness that
cleaues to it: for we being in part carnal, our best works are in part
carnal, and are sinfully performed as they come from us, and therefore we have
cause to be humbled for them; and it must be far from us (as the manner of
the most is) to rest in the outward good work done, and to think we have
done God high service, when we have done an outward good thing, when we have
prayed, heard the Word of God, or the like. Indeed these are good things in
themselves, but when we have prayed, we have cause to be hun bled for our
failing in Prayer; and when we have heard the Word of God, we have cause to be
humbled for our sinfulness in hearing; and so in other things.

Come we now to the second thing the Apostle here affirms of himself, namely
this, that he was sold under sin, that is, as we showed, was held, though
unwillingly, yet held he was as a captive under the power of his own
corruption. Hence in the first place we are surther given to understand thus
much,

That though true believers, The best of Gods children are in some thraldom
and bondage to their own inbred corruption.
are not altogether and wholly in thraldom and bondage to the corruption of
nature, and slaves to it, as unregenerate persons are, yet they are in some
sort under the power of it: the best, and the most holy, and most regenerate
that are in the world, are in some thraldom and bondage to their own inbred
corruption, it holds them, though they be in part unwilling, in some captivity,
and it makes them sometimes yield to the evil motions and lusts of it; and
though they do not yield to it, as good subjects do to their lawful Prince,
willingly, yet sometimes they do yield to it, as to a Tyrant, unwillingly, and
by the strength of it they are sometimes drawn to perform the lusts of the
flesh. And thus we shall find it has been with the dearest Saints of God in
all ages, as with Noah, with Lot, with Abraham, David, Peter, and the rest,
though these were men truly regenerate, and men that had received a great
measure of grace, yet sometimes they were drawn by the strength of their own
corruption, to foul sins, and did sometimes yield, though unwillingly, to the
evil motions and lusts of their own hearts. Iam. 5.17.
And to this purpose is that, Iam. 5.17. HELIAS was a man subject to like
passions as we are. And hence it is, Gal. 6.1.
that the Apostle, Gal. 6.1. puts it down indefinitely, and he says, If a man
be fallen by occasion into any fault: or if a man, whosoever he be, be
ouer-taken by any sin. Thereby teaching us, that no man, be he never so good,
or never so holy, is exempted from falling, or from being sometimes ouer-taken
and supplanted by the strength of his own corruption still abiding in him in
part.

And thus also speaks John, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
1. Ioh. 2.1. My babes (says he) these things write I unto you, that you sin
not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous. As if he had said, These things I write to you, my Babes, even
you that are truly regenerate: I write them to this end, that ye should be
kept from sin: but yet I know, that the best of us all are subject sometimes
to sin, and we that are truly regenerate, are sometimes drawn by the
strength of our own corruption, to fall into sin: and if any of us do
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Hence we may easily gather proof and confirmation of this Truth, that the
best, and the most holy, and most regenerate that are in the world, are in some
thraldom and bondage to their own inbred corruption, and though they do not
willingly yield to it, yet they are sometimes by the strength of it ouer-carryed
and ouer-mastered, and made to yield to the evil motions and lusts of it, and
it does sometimes exercise a kind of power over them: and the reasons of it
are these:

First, moves the mind and will after they be regenerate: for there is not
only a preventing grace, but a subsequent grace needful to the regenerate.
Now the Lord sometimes is pleased to withdraw that following grace from them;
and thereupon it is, that they are sometimes ouercarryed, and made to yield to
the evil motions and lusts of their own hearts.

Again,

We are not to marvel, It is no marvel though Gods children do sometimes
slip and fail.
and though sometimes they be ouer-taken by some particular evil, we are not
to judge hardly of them because of some particular failing. It is the manner
indeed of the men of the world, to open their mouths wide against Gods
children, and hardly to censure them, and to judge them hypocrites, and to cry
shame on them, and to say they are vile wretches, because sometimes they slip
and fail, and are sometimes ouer-taken by some sin: it must be far from us
thus to judge. Psalm. 73.15.
If we thus judge the generation of Gods children, we sin, and we trespass,
as David says, Psalm. 73.15.

The dearest Saints and Servants of God that live in the world, have still
inbred corruption in part abiding in them; and though they be freed by the
power of grace that is in them, from the full force and strength of it, and
from a willing subjection to it, yet they are still in part in thraldom, and
in bondage under it, and sometimes it ouer-carryes them by the strength of it,
and makes them sometimes yield to the evil motions and lusts of it, sometimes
it strikes them, and wounds them, and gives them such a blow in such sort, as
the points and strokes of it are seen, and do openly appear, even to the
view of the world; and therefore we are not to judge hardly of them, because of
some slip and some failing, and because sometimes they are ouer-taken by some
sin. No: take this for a general and certain rule, we are not to judge any
man to be good or bad, by any one or few acts, but by his walking, and by the
course of his life; if the course of his life be carnal, earthly, and
sensual, certainly then he is a carnal man, and we may so judge him. If the
course of his life be holy, and such as it ought to be, then doubtless he is
holy, and his state is good, and we may so judge of him, though sometimes he
fail, and be sometimes ouer-taken by some sin.

Again, A ground of contentation, and willing subjection of our selves to the
hand of God in all troubles.
and their own corruption does sometimes exercise a kind of power over them,
and ouer-carry them, and make them yield to the evil motions and lusts of it?
The consideration of this may serve to work in all Gods children, contentation
of mind, and a willing subjection of themselves to the hand of God, in all
their troubles and afflictions that befall them in this life, whatsoever they
be: for why? though thou be a child of God, and dear and precious in the
sight of God, yet withal consider, that thou art still in part under the power
of sin, and thou art still in some sort a slave of sin, and thine own
corruption does sometimes ouer-carry thee, and draw thee from that obedience
thou owe to thy God and gracious Father, and makes thee sometimes sin
against him, and provoke him to anger against thee; and if then the Lord lay on
thee sickness, poverty, reproach, banishment, or any other affliction; alas, it
is far short of that thou have deserved; thou by thy sin have deserved
death and damnation.

And if thou duly consider this, it will make thee willingly and contentedly
to bear any affliction the Lord lays on thee, and to say with thy self when
thou art under the afflicting hand of God; Vile wretch that I am, I find my
self, that I am still a slave under sin, and that I have been ouer-carryed
by the strength of mine own corruption, to yield to the lusts and motions of
it, and to sin against my good God and gracious Father, and I am worthy of
death and damnation, and it were just with him to throw me to hell for my
sins, and it is his mercy that I am not thrown to hell, shall I then think
this sickness, this poverty, this reproach, and the like, grievous, or long and
tedious to me? No, no: I will bear it with patience, with willingness, and
with contentation. Oh, I have deserved far more at the hands of my God, this
is nothing to that I have deserved. Thus it will be with thee, if thou duly
confider that thou art still a slave under sin, and sometimes ouer-carryed by
the strength of thine own corruption, to sin against thy GOD.

Let then all Gods children, feeling the hand of God on them, call this to
their minds, that they are still in part slaves to sin; and it will work in
them, in some measure, contentation of mind, and a willing subjection of
themselves to the hand of the Lord in all their troubles and distresses.

Lastly, this being so, that the best, the most holy, children, A ground of
comfort to Gods children in regard of their particular faylings against their
purpose.
in respect of their particular saylings against their purpose. When they are
sometimes ouer-carryed by the strength of their own corruption, to do evil
against their purpose, they are indeed then to be humbled, and not thereupon to
be utterly dejected, and to call their state in doubt and question. No, no: they
have still corruption in part abiding in them, and they are still in some
thraldom and bondage under it, and sometimes it will ouer-carry them, and make
them yield to the evil motions and lusts of it; and in this respect, they are
to labor for liberty, and to groan for deliverance out of their captivity; and
this should sharpen their desire after heaven, because here they cannot go on
in a course of holiness with free spirits, but they are sometimes ouer-carryed
and drawn aside; yet this should not utterly daunt them, and utterly cast them
down.

Further observe we, that the Apostle here says, that he was sold under
sin. He says not, that he sold himself to sin, as it is said of Ahab, 1.
King. 21.25. that he sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord: but he was sold under sin: thereby implying an unwillingness in
himself to be held under the power of sin; and that howsoever his own
inbred corruption did exercise a kind of power over him, and sometimes
ouer-carry him, yet he was not willing to be under that power, he would feign
have been out of that thraldom, and he did not willingly yield to the
command of such a master. Hence we may gather

A manifest difference between the regenerate and the unregenerate, The
difference between the regenerate and unregenerate, in respect of the power of
inbred corruption.
in respect of the power of their inbred corruption: the regenerate are sold
under the corruption of their hearts, they are held in some sort under the
power of it unwillingly, and they are, as it were, haled and drawn by the
force and strength of it, unwillingly to sin. But the other, the
unregenerate, they sell themselves to their own inbred corruption, and they
willingly yield to it, and with pleasure they follow the evil motions and
lusts that arise from their own corruption; yea, in falling into one and the
same sin, there is this difference between the regenerate and the
unregenerate: The regenerate, they fall into it unwillingly, against their
purpose, and with a striving against it; but the unregenerate, they fall into
it purposely, and with full consent of will, and it is as meat and drink to
them, to fulfill the lusts of their own hearts. Pro. 10.23. Pro. 10.23.
It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly. And Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
the Apostle describing the natural state of the Ephesians, says, They walked
in sin: and he shows how, namely, according to the course of this world, and
after the Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience, among whom we also had our conversation in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of
the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath. And thus Jude Epist. verse.
18. Iud. Ep. verse. 18.
speaks of the unregenerate persons, that they walk after their own vagodly
lusts: They are willingly led by them. And to these we might add many other
testimonies of Scripture, showing a manifest difference between the regenerate
and the unregenerate, in respect of the power of their own corruption.

And this serves to strip ungodly men and women of their common shift: they use
to defend, or to excuse, Ungodly men's excuse, and extenuation of their sins
taken away.
and to extenuate their sins; as first, an ungodly man or woman, a common
Drunkard, a filthy Fornicator, and such like, plead their infirmity. Alas, it
is not so; the regenerate only sin of infirmity, and they only are haled and
drawn to sin, against their purpose: but the unregenerate sin with all
their hearts, with pleasure.

Again, an ungodly man or woman, Another shift of ungodly persons removed.
being convinced of sin, and justly reproved, as for Swearing, or the like;
what is their shift? Oh, say they, I pray you, what are you that reprove us?
will not you swear? you will do worse, I warrant you: and have you no sin?
and are you without faults? Poor souls! the best are not without faults, but
it is one thing to sin of frailty, and another, to sin wittingly and
willingly, and to hold on a course in sin, as it is one thing, of weakness
to fall into the mire, and another thing, to walk in it purposely, or to
tumble in it after the manner of Swine. And it is one thing, to be sold under
sin, and to be held under the power of it unwillingly, and sometimes to be
ouercarryed by it: and another thing, to sell a man's self to sin, and to
follow the lusts of his own heart, with pleasure and much delight. If thou
find thy self in that case, certainly thou art unregenerate.

VERSE. 15, 16, 17. For I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do
I not, but what I hate, that do I.

If I do then that which I would not, I consent to the Law, that it is good.

Now then, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me.


Our Apostle now comes to lay forth the combat between the Flesh and the
Spirit, in them that are truly regenerate, giving instance of it in his own
particular, insisting in his own example.

In these three Verses, 15, 16, 17. he lays before us the first degree of
that combat, as that by sin he was brought to do that evil he would not;
thereby making known an opposition between the Law of God commanding, and his
will consenting, and sin ouer-ruling, and his flesh obeying. That is the
sum of them.

Now the Apostle having said in the Verse before, that he was sold under sin,
that he was held under the power of his own corruption unwillingly; in the
first words of the fifteenth Verse he proves it by this, that he disallowed
that which he did: thus he reasons. The things he did, he did not allow; and
therefore he was held under the power of sin unwillingly: I am sold under
sin: for (says he) I allow not that which I do. Then he further confirms
that Proposition, that he allowed not that which he did; because his will was
to do that which he did not, and that which he did, was hateful unto him,
and he did it with a lothing and detestation: for (says he) What I would, that
do I not, but what I hate, that do I. And hereupon he infers two
conclusions: one in the 16. Verse, and the other in the 17. Verse.

VERSE. 15. For I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do I not:
but what I hate, that do I.


THe Apostle here still speaks of himself, and that in the time present, I
allow not that which I do, and what I would not, that do I: but what I hate,
that do I. And so, to the end of the Chapter: giving us to understand, that he
spoke these things of himself, as he was now in the state of regeneration:
and the very things that in this discourse the Apostle affirms of himself,
do plainly prove as much: for he says, he willed the good, and hated the
evil: he consented to the Law, he delighted in the Law, he felt in himself
a striving between the Law in his members, and the Law of his mind, he was
led captive to the Law of sin, he groned under his misery, in respect of the
power of his corruption, he desired deliverance from it, and he acknowledged
and magnified the grace of God in and through Christ. All which are proper to
the regenerate, and are never found in any that are yet in their natural state
and condition.

The objections that are brought to the contrary, we will answer in handling
the particulars. But this we are to take for a certain truth, that the
Apostle, in this whole Context, speaks of himself as he was now regenerate,
and in his own person makes known, how it is with all that are truly
regenerate. And here he says, I allow not. Interpretation
The word here rendered (allow) properly signifies know (I know not) but the
word (know) is sometimes in Scripture put to signify, acknowledge, approve,
allow, etc. Psalm. 1.6.
as Psalm. 1.6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous: that is, he
acknowledges, he approves, he likes their way. So Matthew. 7.23. I never knew
you: that is, I never acknowledged you for mine. And so the meaning of the
Apostle in this place is this, I approve not, I like not, it is not pleasing
unto me, it is in some sort against my mind and my heart; (That which I do) or
that which I work: for the word is the same we had, Verse 8. and 13. and it is
to be understood of the sinful thoughts and motions of the Apostles mind,
will, and affections; likewise of his sinful words and actions: and his
meaning is this, That evil which I act and do inwardly in my mind, my will,
and my affections, and outwardly in my words and actions. For what I would,
that is, What good I would think, affect, speak, and do, that good I do not
think, speak, or do, but what I hate, that is, The evil that I loathe and
abhor, and is hateful unto me, that I do, that I act, and do in my mind,
will and affections, and in my words and actions.

Yet this must not so be understood, that the Apostle was compelled to evil,
but that he confented not to it with his whole will, he being now regenerate;
as he was regenerate, he hated evil, and the evil he did, he did it with a
lothing. Thus then briefly conceive we the Apostles meaning in this Verse, as
if he had said,

For the evil which I act and do inwardly, in my mind, will, and affections,
and outwardly, in my words and actions, I approve not, its not pleasing to me,
I like it not, nay, it is against my mind and my heart: for the good I would
think, will, and affect, speak and do, I do not think, will, affect,
speak, nor do: but the evil that I loathe and abhor, and is hateful to me,
in part, as I am regenerate, (for as I am regenerate, I hate evil in part)
even that evil that I act and do in my mind, will, and affections, and in my
words and actions.

First, here observe we the reason the Apostle uses to prove that he was sold
under sin, that he was held under the power of sin unwillingly: how proves
he that? Surely thus; that he did not allow nor approve of the evil he did,
either inward or outward; though he did evil sometimes, yet it was not
pleasing to him, it was in some sort against his heart and mind: and by this
he proves, that he was sold under sin. Hence then note we in a word,

How men may know whether they be held under sin, By the allowance or
disallowance of evil, men may know whether they be slaves to sin willingly
or unwillingly.
whether men be slaves to sin willingly or unwillingly, by their allowance or
their disallowance of the evil they do, they may certainly know it. Do thou
find, that the evil thou do is displeasing to thee, thou do not allow it,
nor approve it in thine heart, but rather thine heart rises against it, and
cannot away with it? thereupon thou may conclude, that though in some sort
thou art in bondage to thine own corruption, yet it is unwillingly, Trial of
our selves.
if thou find that the evil thou do, is pleasing to thee, and thine heart
likes it, and approues it, and thine heart is tickled and affected with
pleasure in doing of it, as it is, Pro. 2.14. Pro. 2.14.
Thou reioycest in doing evil: Out of all question thou art then a slave and a
drudge to sin willingly, thou art a slave to the lusts of thine own heart,
and thou will be so, it is pleasing to thee: and so thou art in a miserable
slavery, Thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity,
Act. 8.23.
Act. 8.23. Hereby then let every one try himself.

Now consider we the Proposition it self. I allow not that which I do: that
evil I do, I allow not; I approve not, it is not pleasing unto me. Hence we
are given to understand thus much:

That true believers, Though true believers do sometimes sin, yet they allow
not the evil they do.
and they sometimes sin in their thoughts and affections, and in their words
and actions; but yet they allow not the evil they do, they approve it not, it
is not pleasing to them, but their hearts rise up against it, and they are
displeased with it: though true believers, and such as are truly regenerate,
be sometimes ouercarried by violence of temptation, or by force and strength of
their own corruption still in part remaining in them, to do evil and to
sin, yet their hearts approve not of that evil and sin, but they find
that their hearts do rise up against that evil, and check them in the doing
of it, and when it is done, their hearts are not quiet, but they do then smite
them, and stir them up to recover themselves by speedy repentance; their
hearts do not allow them to lie in that evil and sin, and to go on in it
with pleasure.

We read, that thus it was with David, when he had numbered the people, 2. Sam.
24.10. Psalm. 66.18.19.
2. Sam. 24.10. the text says, that his heart smote him. And Psalm. 66.18, 19.
says David, If I regard wickedness in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me.
But God has heard me, and considered the voice of my prayer. Thereby implying,
that howsoever he was sometimes overtaken with evil and sin, yet he did not
regard it in his heart, his heart did not approve it, it was not pleasing unto
him. And thus it is with all Gods children, and such as are truly regenerate;
And the reason of it is this:

True believers, the work of that Spirit in them is entire; I mean, it
renewes them throughout in all the powers of their souls; it makes not only
their conscience to check them for sin, and their judgment to dislike it,
which may in some sort be found in the reprobate, but it makes their hearts
also to dislike it, and as it is, Isai. 30.21. Isai. 30.21.
It makes their ears hear a word behind them: and when they turn to the
right hand or to the left, it makes their hearts tell them they are wrong, as
it is, Ioh. 16.8. Ioh. 16.8.
The Spirit rebukes them for their evil thoughts and desires. And therefore,
though sometimes they be ouer-carryed by violence of temptation, or strength of
corruption, to do evil and to sin, yet their hearts approve not of that
evil, but do rise up against it, and check them in the doing of it, and when
it is done, they allow it not either in the doing or afterward.

Now then this being a truth, it makes known to us, The sins of the
regenerate, are sins of a mixed kind.
they are partly from the will, and partly against it; for the regenerate are
sometimes ouer-carryed by strength of corruption to do evil, and yet their
hearts renewed by grace, disallow that evil, and they are divided in the doing
of that evil, and in all their evils and sins there is some striving in
their wills against them, and so they are mixed sins, partly from the will, and
partly against it.

Again, is it so, that though true believers, A note, by which men may know
whether they be regenerate or no.
be sometimes ouer-carryed by the violence of temptation, or strength of
corruption to do evil and sin, yet their hearts approve not of that evil,
but do rise up against it? Here is then one special note, by which men may
know whether they be truly regenerate or no. Would thou know whether thou be
truly regenerate or no? Examine thy self by this. Do thou find that the
known evil thou do, is displeasing to thee, and thine heart rises against
it both in the doing of it and afterward, and not only thy conscience checks
thee for that evil, and thy judgment dislikes it, (for that may be, and is
sometimes found in the reprobate) but thine heart disallowes it, and is
displeased with it? Certainly, then thou may conclude to thy comfort, that
thou art truly regenerate, and that thou art freed by grace from the full
force of thine own corruption. Happily thou will say, How shall I know that I
differ from the reprobate in dislike of sin, and that not only my conscience
checks me for the evil I do, and my judgment dislikes it, but that my heart
disallowes it?

How shall I be sure of that?

I answer thee, David before mentioned, Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. If thou
regard wickedness in thine heart, and approve of it either in thy self or
others, thy case is not good, the Lord will not hear thee, thy prayers and all
thy services to God are abominable.

The Papists from these words of the Apostle, A Popish conceit confuted.
I allow not that which I do, conclude, that sudden inuoluntary motions,
motions to evil, that arise from the flesh and inferior parts of the soul
(as they call them) and gain not the consent of will, are no sins. This is
but a fancy. I showed heretofore the weakness of this conceit, Verse 7. and
made known, that concupiscence, and the very first motions to evil, that
arise from the corruption of nature, though they gain not consent of will, and
though they be repelled and rejected, yet they are sins forbidden in the
tenth Commandment: and this very Text confuses this conceit: for the Apostle
says not only thus, that he did not allow that which he did, but he hated it,
it was odious and hateful to him as he was regenerate; and doubtless it was
odious and hateful to him, because it was evil and sinful, yea, evil and
sinful in it self, though he had never done it, and his doing of it
unwillingly, did not take away the nature of it, and make it cease to be
evil: no, no; it was evil in it self, and so, odious and hateful to the
Apostle. I pass from that Popish conceit and fancy.

Come we to the confirmation of this Proposition, that the Apostle did not
allow the evil that he did, in these words, for what I would, that I do not:
but what I hate, that do I. And in that the Apostle confirms it, that he did
not allow the evil he did, because his will was to do good, which he did not,
and the evil he did, was hateful to him: Hence we might stand to show,

That men may know they allow not the evil they do, when they would do good,
and they do it not, and they allow not the evil they do, they are hindered
from doing good unwillingly, and the evil they do, is hateful to them: but
of that we have partly spoken before, and therefore I pass by it.

Now from these words of the Apostle (What I would, that do I not: but what I
would not, that do I: we may gather this conclusion,

That true believers, True believers sometimes do that evil that is hateful
to them.
but they do the evil they hate, they are sometimes drawn by the strength of
their own corruption still in part abiding in them, to do that evil that is
hateful to them, even that evil they do in part loathe and abhor, they are
sometimes ouer-carryed to the doing of it. The Apostle here affirms thus much
of himself; and this may be surther exemplified, and made clear by the
example of many other holy servants of God. We read that Genesis 6.9.
NOAH was a just and upright man, and he walked with God. And the holy Ghost
gives this testimony of him, Heb. 11.7.
that he being moved with reverence, prepared the Arc to the saving of his
household. He was a man truly fearing God, and a dear child of God, and
doubtless, he hated all manner of sins, and especially foul and gross sins.
And yet we read, Genesis 9.21.
that for want of watchfulnes, this holy man of God was overtaken with a foul
sin, even with the sin of drunkenness. Likewise we read of Lot, that he was a
just man, a dear child of God: yea, the Apostle witnesses of him, 2. Pet.
2.7, 8.
that he being just, was vexed with the filthy and unclean conversation of the
Sodomites, and being righteous, and dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. So that
without question, his soul hated the sin of uncleanness: and yet we read
Genesis 19.33, 35
the latter end of the Chapter, he was overtaken with that sin that was
hateful to him, even with the sin of uncleanness, and that with his own
daughters. And to these we might add many other examples of the dear Saints
and Servants of God, that have been sometimes ouer-carryed by the strength of
their own corruption, to do the evil that was hateful to them, and which
they did in part loathe and abhor. But here happily the question will be moved,
and I hold it needful to answer it.

How far one that is truly regenerate, and a child of God, I do that I hate:
but for perseverance in the act of evil, and holding on in a course in doing
evil with pleasure, that cannot befall a child of God: for he has the seed of
grace in him, and that stirs him up to recover himself by new repentance.
Again, we must know that a child of God, and one that is truly regenerate, may
be drawn by the strength of his own corruption to do evil, yea, some foul
and gross particular evil, not generally to do evil, but some particular
evil, being suddenly surprised by violence of temptation, and the strength of
his own corruption. This was the case of Noah, of Lot, of David, of Peter, in
those particular foul sins they fell into.

Thus then I briefly answer to the question propounded:

And this being a truth, Comfort to Gods children in respect of their falling
into some sin.
in respect of their falling sometimes into some sin. Do thou find, thou
that art a child of God, that thou art sometimes drawn by the strength of
thine own corruption still in part abiding in thee, to do that evil that is
hateful unto thee? Art thou sometimes ouer-carryed to do that evil thou do
in part loathe and abhor? It is no otherwise with thee then it was with the
holy Apostle Paul; he did the evil he hated: and it is no otherwise with
thee, then with other of the dearest Saints and Servants of God. Thus it has
been with them, and thus it is with true believers, and such as are truly
regenerate, they are sometimes drawn by the strength of their own corruption,
to do that evil that is hateful unto them; and look that the evil that
thou art sometimes drawn to do, be odious in thy sight and hateful to thee,
and howsoever thou art ouer-carryed to the doing of it, yet thou do in part
loathe and abhor it, and then though thou have cause to be humbled, yet thou
have no cause to be utterly discouraged and clean out of heart; no, though the
evil thou have been ouer-carryed to the doing of, be a foul and gross evil
and sin, thou art yet in no worse case then the dearest of Gods children have
been in, or may be in. Indeed, thou professing thy self a servant of God, it
is thy part to labor by all good means to keep thy self free, as from the
least and most secret sin, so especially from open and gross sins, by
which God is much dishonored, his Spirit grieved, thine own conscience
wounded, the godly offended, and the mouths of Atheists and wicked persons
opened to blaspheme the Truth of God. But I speak this for thy comfort, when
notwithstanding thy watchfulness, and notwithstanding thy care to keep thy
self from sin, thou art sometimes ouer-carryed to the doing of that evil
that is hateful unto thee, and which thou do in some part loathe and abhor,
thou art not then to be utterly dejected and utterly cast down.

But thou will say, thou addest one fall to another,

But to help the poor soul out of the briars in this case, deal truly with
thy self: Word, and to his Children? Art thou not able to say, and that truly,
that thy life is not defiled with many foul and gross sins, and that thou
do not always give way to thy sin that troubles thee? Sometimes thou art
enabled by grace to withstand it, and when thou give place to it, it is not
of any obstinate wilfulness, but of frailty and weakness, not of set purpose,
but against thy will and flat resolution, thou having often resolved with thy
self, never to fall into that sin again: and do thou not even hate and
loathe that sin, and use all good means possible to be freed from it, as
continual hearing, reading and meditating on the Word of God, Prayer, avoiding
all occasions that might draw thee on that sin? Is it not thus with thee?
Thou will say, Yes, thus it is with me indeed. Why then, comfort thy self;
thou may hereupon certainly conclude to thy comfort, that thou have true
faith, and thy faith is a true working faith; it works in thee that love to
God, and that love to his children, and that hatred of that evil thou do;
and therefore comfort thy self, thou have true faith, and thou have no cause
to call thy state into question: no, no, assuredly thou shall in time be able
to stop the mouth of Satan, and to wring from him this weapon by which he
wounds thy poor soul, thy often falling into the same sin, and by the mercy
of God, and through his grace, thou shall one day be fully freed from that
evil that is so hateful to thee; for the Lord has begun in thee the work of
grace, and he will certainly finish it, Philip. 1.6. Romans 11.29.
Philip. 1.6. His gifts of grace are without repentance, Romans 11.29. And let
that cheer up thine heart.

Now in that the Apostle says, He willed good, and he hated evil, we made
this a note of his regeneration, that therefore he was certainly regenerate;
this being proper to the regenerate, and never found in any but such as are
truly regenerate. But against this lies an objection: I will briefly propound
and answer it.

Thus some object against it; say they, Judas cried out, Matthew. 27.4. I have
sinned, and have done evil, betraying the innocent blood. And therefore this
is not proper to the regenerate, to will good, and to hate evil.

To this I answer thus; There is a threefold good:

Secondly, there is a moral good, which howsoever the light of reason being in
the full strength of it, may yield to, in them that be unregenerate, and may
make them sometimes to do it; yet as that good comes from them, and as it is
done by them, it is not truly good, nay, it is sin to them, being not done in
obedience to Gods Commandment, and of Faith, and to the glory of God.

Thirdly, there is spiritual good, which is heavenly and spiritual, which is
of the Spirit and of Faith: now that good unregenerate persons cannot will, it
is not possible they should will it; for they have no knowledge nor
understanding of it: and this is that good, the Apostle here said he willed,
and would have done.

Again, unregenerate persons in some sort hate evil. It is true: but how?
Surely, only for fear of punishment, or in some other sinister and
by-respect, and not because it is evil, and sinful, and displeasing to God,
and to the dishonor of God. No, no: they hate not evil in any such respect:
and so it remains a true note of the Apostles regeneration, that he willed
good, and hated evil: and it is a true note to others, A true note of
regeneration.
that they are also regenerate, if they find in themselves that they will that
which is spiritually good, even that good which is of the Spirit and of faith,
and that they hate evil, not in a sinister and by-respect, but because it is
evil, and displeasing to God, and is to the dishonor of God: and, if they
were put to their choice, they would rather dye the most cruel death, then
wittingly and willingly do evil, and sin against God. That is a true note
of regeneration.

Now further, What I hate, that I do: Sin must be odious and hateful to
true believers.
meaning, that the evil he did, was odious and hateful to him. Whence we
may easily conclude thus much, that sin must be odious and hateful to us,
even to such as would approve themselves to be true believers, Gods children,
and truly regenerate: they must find this in themselves, that they hate and
loath evil, yea, all manner of evil and sin, all known sins whatsoever,
and that they abstain from evil and sin, out of a loathing and a
detestation of it. It is not enough for us to abstain from this or that evil
and sin, for that a man or woman may do, as being not prone to it, or being
not tempted to it, or by custom, or for fear of danger of Law, or shame of
the world, and such like; but we must abstain from every known evil and
sin, out of an hatred and detestation of it: we must hate, detest, and
abhor every known evil and sin. And to this purpose David speaks
plainly, Psalm. 119.104.128.
Psalm. 119.104. I hate all the ways of falsehood. And Verse 128. I esteem all
thy Precepts most just, and hate all false ways: I do not only disclaim
false ways and keep my self from walking in them, but I hate and abhor
them, they are odious and hateful unto me. Psalm. 97.10. says the Psalmist,
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

And thus the Lord exhorts by his Prophet, Amos 5.15 Hate the evil, and love
the good. It is the exhortation of Jude, Jude Epist. verse. 23. That we should
hate the very garment spotted by the flesh. Romans 12.9. says the Apostle,
Abhor that which is evil. The original word there used, is very emphatical,
it signifies to hate with extreme hatred, and to detest with an utter
detestation, even as we hate and detest hell it self. These places, not to
add any further testimony, do sufficiently clear and confirm the point,
that sin must be odious and hateful to us. If we would approve our selves
true believers, we must hate and loathe all manner of evil, even all known
sins whatsoever, and we must abstain from evil and sin, out of an utter
lothing and detestation of it: for why?

Sin is odious, hateful,

Again, Pro. 6.16. Pro. 6.16.
These six things does the Lord hate, yea his soul abhors seven. Yea, Ver.
17, 18.

Now then, this being a clear truth, it follows on it, Indifferency in
respect of sin, reproved.
and it must be far from men to be indifferent in respect of sin; that
indifferency, in respect of sin, is justly on the ground of doctrine now
delivered, to be taxed. Many there be in the world that are indifferent in
respect of sin. Are there not many that can commend Papists and Atheists, and
stick not sometimes to say of the Papists, Why, I hope they be good honest men,
though they be a little carried aside to Idolattie and Superstition: and of
Atheists, There is no such hurt in them, they are worst to themselves, though
they be not so strict as others are? Yea, be there not some, that care not to
join fellowship with Papists, that can walk, and talk, and converse with them
familiarly; and some that when a course is taken on just cause to take Papists
at their Idolatrous meetings, stick not to say, Oh, you are strict against
them: but it were more meet, you should rather look to others that have their
private meetings, to Puritan meetings, those they cannot abide; they rather
like of Popish meetings, and of drunken meetings: though men sit guzzeling in
Alehouses or Tauernes whole days and nights, they take no notice of those
meetings: but these Puritan meetings they cannot abide, and so I might insist
in other particulars.

Well, consider it, whosoever thou art: Do thou, that can commend Papists,
that are utter enemies to Gods grace and glory, and thou that can speak well
of Atheists and profane persons, do thou hate sin? do thou abhor it?
No, no: there is no such matter, thou art an indifferent man, and thou have not
in thee that lothing and detestation of sin, that ought to be in a true
Believer; and take this with thee, thou art odious and hateful to God. Mark
what the Lord Jesus threatens, Revel. Revel. 3.16.
3.16. Such as be lukewarm, indifferent persons, it will come to pass, that
he will spue them out of his mouth: they are as loathsome as lukewarm water to
a man's stomach, he cannot digest them, but will cast them out, as raw and
undigested matter. It is a sentence full of terror if it be duly considered.
Thou, that art indifferent in respect of sin, thou art unfit to be made one
with Christ, and partaker of the life and grace of Christ, or any of his saving
comforts; thou go against the stomach of Christ, thou prouokest him to cast
thee out, as a thing loathsome and abominable: and that is a fearful condition.

Again, is it so, Men may and ought to be zealous in speaking against sin.
men may be zealous and fervent in speaking against sin, yea, they ought so to
be, especially Ministers. Here is a justification of our often and seruent
speaking against sin. Men find fault with us, that we often hit upon their
sins, and we are ever galling them with the same things; they shame not to
do evil, to lie, to slander, and to have their drunken meetings, and the
like: but they cannot away to hear of these things. Alas, we cannot but
speak against open gross sins, if our hearts be right within us; we hate
sin both in our selves and in others, and we cannot but speak against sin,
so long as men go on in sin: we desire their leaving and forsaking of
sin, and that sin may be odious and hateful to men. And know this,
whosoever thou art, that sin must be odious and hateful to thee, if thou
would prove thy self a true Believer.

And to shut up this in a word: Would thou make it good to the comfort of
thine own soul, that thou art a true Believer? yea, would thou make it good
that thou love God, and love his Truth? Then look thou hate and detest
sin, Psalm. 97.10. yea all manner of evil, even every known evil and sin.
Thou must not hate one sin, and like of another, and happily hate Drunkenness,
and love Covetousness, or hate Covetousness, and love Swearing. If thou do
not hate Atheism, thou love not God: if thou hate not Heresy, thou love
not Gods Truth: if thou hate not Sabbath-breaking, thou love not the right
keeping and sanctifying of it. Hereby try thy self, and look that thou hate
every known sin, because it is sin and displeasing to God.

Happily thou will say,

I answer, By two things especially.

First, if no reward can allure thee, nor any punishment force thee upon any
known sin, but thou can willingly rather embrace death, then wittingly
sin against GOD.

Secondly, if thou make conscience not only of open and gross sins, but of
the very thought of evil, and thou make as much conscience of sin in
secret, as in the open view of the world. Hence thou may conclude, that thou
do hate and abhor sin, because it is sin and displeasing to God: and
thence thou may gather to thy comfort, that thou art a true Believer, and a
Child of God, and that thou love God, and art beloved of God in the Son of
his love, Christ Jesus.

VERSE. 16. If I do then that which I would not, I consent to the Law, that it
is good.


ON that which the Apostle said in the Verse before, that what he would, that
he did not, but what he hated, that he did; he brings in two inferences, two
conclusions; one in this Verse, another in the Verse following. The sum and
substance of his first inference and conclusion laid before us in this Verse,
is this, that there was in some sort a good harmony, and a consent between
Gods Law and his heart, being now renewed by grace, in that he hated and
abhorred the evil that was done by him, because it was evil and sinful, and
contrary to the Law of God.

And thus he concludes, If I do what I would not, I consent to the Law of God
that it is good. But the first of these is true: therefore the second. Now the
ground of this inference is this general,

That whosoever he be, that wills not the evil he does, but disallowes and
hates it, and that out of a love, and liking, and respect to the Law of God,
and a consent to that, he seeing that evil which he does, to be contrary to
the Law of God, doubtless he approues of the Law of God to be good, and to be
the perfect rule of righteousness.

Thus we have the Apostles first inference and conclusion, and the ground of
it. Now the words of this Verse need not long to be stood on, touching the
sense and meaning of them.

If I do then that which I would not. Interpretation
These words we had in effect before: and the meaning of them is briefly this:
If I act and do inwardly in my mind, my will and my affections, and outwardly
in my words and actions, that evil that I in part would not do, as I am
regenerate, because it is evil, and against the Law of God, then I consent to
the Law, that it is good.

(Consent) The word in the Original properly signifies to confess, to
witness with a thing, or to speak with a thing to which it is applied. As
here, being applied to the Law of God, the meaning is, as if the Apostle had
said, I confess the goodness of the Law of God, I subscribe to it, I agree to
it, I bear witness with it to be good, I consent, or I assent in my mind and
judgment, and in mine heart I approve the Law of God to be good.

By the word (Law) as before, we are to understand the moral Law of God.
(That it is good) that is, as before we expounded the word, Verse. 12. that it
requires and commands only such things as be good, and forbids the contrary all
manner of evil, and shows the good way in which men are to walk to life
everlasting. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of
this Verse, as if he had said,

If I then act and do inwardly in my mind, will and affections, and outwardly
in my words and actions that evil, that I in part would not do, as I am
regenerate, and as my heart is renewed by grace, and that, because it is evil,
and against the Law of God. Surely then, I agree to the moral Law of God, and
I bear witness with it to be good, I consent, or I assent to the goodness of
the Law of God, in my mind and judgment, and in mine heart renewed by grace, I
approve the Law of God to be such a Law, as requires and commands only good
things, and forbids the contrary, even all manner of evil, and showing the
good way in which men are to walk to life everlasting.

First, hence observe we the Apostles inference, If (says he) I act and do
the evil I would not, the evil that in some sort is against my mind, my will,
and my purpose, then I consent to the Law, that it is good; I then assent to
the goodness of the Law of God, I approve the Law of God to be such a Law, as
requires and commands only good things, and forbids the contrary. Hence note we
briefly thus much,

That when men do evil against their purpose and will, It is an evidence of
consent to the goodness of Gods Law, when men do evil, and they would not
do it.
they do evil, and they would not do it, they have in them a full purpose
and resolution, not to sin against God in any thing wittingly and willingly,
and yet they sin against that purpose, then they consent to the Law of God,
then they yield to the Word of God commanding good duties, that it is good,
that plainly proves it, and thereupon they may certainly conclude, that they
in their minds assent to the good Law of God, and approve of it in their
hearts to be good; it is a plain evidence of consent to the goodness of the
Law of God, when men do evil, and they would not do it, but they would
willingly be freed from doing of evil, and from breaking of the holy Laws and
Commandments of GOD.

Thus our Apostle here concludes directly, If I do that evil which I would
not, I consent to the Law, that it is good. This I note in a word, to teach
every one of us to try our selves, touching our consent to the Word of God. No
doubt, every one will say he likes the Word of God, and he approues of it, and
it were pity of his life if he did not consent to the Truth, and to the
goodness of the Word of God. But take heed, whosoever thou art, that thou do
not deceive thy self: try thy self by the note now delivered;

Do thou find, that the evil thou do, A ground of trial.
Thereupon thou may certainly conclude, that thou do consent to the Truth
and goodness of the Word of God: that is a good evidence indeed, that thou
do approve the Law of God to be good, in commanding good things, and good
also in forbidding of evil. But on the other side, if thou find that the evil
thou do, is pleasing to thee, and thou do wittingly, and willingly, and
purposely do any known evil, deceive not thy self, out of all question thou
do not consent to the Truth and goodness of the Word of God; thou may
think thou give assent to the Word of God, and do approve of it in thine
heart; but the truth is, there is no such matter, thy doing evil wittingly and
willingly, is an evidence against thee, yea, it proves plainly, that thou
denyest the Truth and goodness of the Word of God; and if thou go on in that
course, thou shall be punished as one that denies the Truth of the Word of God,
and with holds the Truth of it in unrighteousness. Romans 1.18. Romans 1.18.
The wrath of God shall one day be revealed from heaven against thee, yea, it
is a fearful step to the unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, to deny
the Truth and goodness of the Word of God.

It is reported of Julian the Apostata, and so by degrees fell to that foul
sin of Apostasy. Full little do men think of this, that their doing evil
purposely and willingly, proves this against them, that they deny the Truth and
goodness of the Word of God, and are going on to that fearful unpardonable
sin against the holy Ghost: but indeed so it is. And if a men appeal to
their own hearts, if they deal truly, their own hearts must needs yield to
it, that they doing evil purposely, they deny the Truth and goodness of the
Word of God. Does not thine own heart, whosoever thou art, while thou go on
wilfully in sin, say thus to thee, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
God is merciful, and as it is, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Thou shall have peace, though
thou walk according to the stubbornness of thine own heart? And what is
this, but to deny the Truth of God, the Word of God, that revealing that God is
just as well as merciful? and as it follows, Deuteronomy. 29.20. that he will not be
merciful unto him, but the wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and every curse that is written in this Book, shall light
upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven. Therefore take
heed of doing evil purposely and willingly.

Consider we further, that the Apostle says, he doing that he would not, yet
he consented to the Law of God, that it was good. And this consent of his, we
made a second argument and proof of his regeneration. That therefore he was
certainly a man truly regenerate, because howsoever he was ouer-carryed to
do that he would not, yet he consented to the Law of God, that it was good.

Now against this, Herod, that he heard JOHN BAPTIST gladly, Mar. 8.20.
Mar. 8.20. and of Temporaries, such as have only a temporary faith, it is
said, Mat. 13.20. Matthew. 13.20.
that they received the Word with joy. And Heb. 6.5. it is said of Apostataes,
that they have tasted of the good Word of God. And therefore it is not a true
note of the Apostles regeneration, or of the regeneration of any other, that
they consent to the Law of God, and approve it to be good.

For answer to this, first know, Exodus 9.27.
as PHARAOH acknowledged the Lord to be righteous, Exodus 9.27. not out of any
love or liking of the Law. No: they could wish there were no Law at all, they
hate it, because it condemns their sins, and shows them the curse of it due
to them for their sins.

As for hypocrites, they outwardly approve of the Law and Word of God, in
outward profession only, but they have no true inward love and liking of it,
they suffer it not to work on their hearts, and to reform them in their
inward affections, they only yield an outward conformity to it, in respect of
their ease, pleasure, profit, or the like, but inwardly they reject it, and
cast it behind them, Psalm. 50.17.

Again, for the instances brought: Herod indeed heard John Baptist gladly:
but if we mark the Text, it was only in some things, he liked of some
things John taught, not all that he heard from him; and so he did not
thoroughly like of the Word preached by John, but only in part, and that only
in some sinister and by-respect. And so also Temporaries, they receive the Word
with joy, not out of any love and liking of it, but in respect of ease, or
gain, or credit, or the like. And for Apostataes, it is true indeed; they
taste, and as it were sippe of the sweetness of the Word of God, they touch
it, as it were with the tip of their tongues, but they never send it down into
their hearts, they digest it not, it is not converted and turned as good
nourishment into the substance of their souls, to the true comfort and
strengthening of them, and so they have in them but a light and vanishing, and
no true sound and solid approbation of the Law and Word of God: And therefore
still it remaynes a true note of the Apostles regeneration, that howsoever he
was ouercarryed by his own corruption, to do the evil he would not have
done, yet he consented to the Law of God, that it was good.

And it is a true note to others, A true note of regeneration.
that they also are truly regenerate, if they find, that though they do the
evil they would not do, yet they consent to the Law and Word of God, they
assent to it in their minds and judgments, and in their hearts they approve of
the goodness of it, and they love, and like it, and cleave to it in their
inward affections. In that the Apostle says, I consent to the Law of God, that
it is good; we are given to understand yet further thus much,

That true Believers, Gods children have in them a true love and liking of Gods
Law.
they have in them not only knowledge of the Law of God, and an assent to it
in their minds and in their judgments, but they also approve of it in their
hearts, they have in them a true love and liking of the Law of God, and that
both in commanding of good things, and in forbidding of evil: so far forth
as men are regenerate, they consent to the Law of God, and there is a good
agreement between their hearts and the good Law of God, and sin is
displeasing to them, and they dislike it, and disallow it, and hate it, because
it is against the good Law of God, and good duties are liked and loved of them,
and performed by them, because Gods Law requires them. Thus it is with all Gods
Children, and such as are truly regenerate.

Psalm. 40.8. David speaks thus, I desired to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy
Law is within mine heart. As if he had said, Thy will O Lord, made known to
me in thy Law. I do not only know to be holy, and good, and assent to it in my
mind and judgment, but I like it, I approve of it, I desire to do it, mine
heart is inclined to it, yea, thy Law is within my heart, I willingly embrace
it, my heart consents to it, and I find a good agreement between thy good Law
and my heart. And again, Psalm. 119.127. says DAVID, I love thy Commandments
above gold, yea above most fine gold: I do not only know thy Commandments,
and assent to them in mind and judgment, but I approve of them in my heart,
and I have an exceeding great love to them. And then he subioynes in the next
Verse. 128. I esteem all thy Precepts most just, and I hate all false ways. As
if he had said, I have a true love and liking of thy holy Commandments, and
that both in commanding of good things, and in forbidding of evil, there is a
sweet consent and agreement between my heart, and thy holy Laws and
Commandments, in whatsoever they either command or forbid; I like good duties
and I perform them, because thy Law requires them, and I dislike evil and
sin, and hate it, because thy Law forbids it, and because it is against thy
Law. Thus it was with David, and thus indeed it is with all Gods children.

And hence it is, that Gods children are ready and willing to obey God in any
thing he commands them, be it never so contrary to nature, and never so hard
and harsh to flesh and blood. Genesis 22.2. The Lord no sooner said to ABRAHAM,
Offer thine only son ISAAC, even that beloved and dear son, and that with
thine own hands, and burn him when thou have done for a burnt offering, but
he without grudging or gaine-saying, was ready to do as the Lord commanded
him. The Text says, Verse 3. that he rose up early in the morning to do it,
Genesis 22.2, 3.
there was in him alacrity and forwardness, to do that which the Lord
required at his hands: and so it is in all Gods children.

Instance might be given in many other examples, Gods children are ready to do
the will of God made known to them. The Lord no sooner says to a child of
God, Do this: but his heart answers, I will do it. And again, no sooner
says the Lord, Forbear this, or, Avoid that: but the heart of a child of God
answers, I will forbear it, and I will avoid it. And that strongly confirms
the truth of the point in hand, that there is a good agreement between the
hearts of Gods children, and the good Law of God: the reason and ground of it
is this:

Gods children, Ezech. 36.27.
Ezech. 36.27. says the Lord, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. Yea,
that Spirit being powerful in them, makes the Laws and Commandments of God,
which to nature are harsh and hard, easy to them, and makes them not to think
them hard and grievous, 1. Joh. 5.3.
1. Ioh. 5.3. And therefore hereupon we may conclude, that true Believers, and
Gods children, have not only knowledge of the Law of God, and do not only
assent to it in their minds and judgments, but they also approve of it in
their hearts, and have in them a true love and liking of the Law of God; so
far forth as they are regenerate, they consent to the Law of God, and there
is a good agreement between their hearts and the good Law of God; they dislike
and hate sin, because it is against the good Law of God, and they like good
duties, and perform them, because Gods Law requires them.

Now this serves to discover unto us, hard to nature, Whence it is that the
holy Commandments of God are easy to Gods children
and to men that are in their natural condition, are in some sort easy to
Gods children, and that Gods children willingly yield to that which God
commands, which others wrestle and strive against, and will by no means be
brought to bend unto. Surely hence it is, the hearts of Gods children being
renewed by grace, consent to the Law of God, and there is a good agreement
between them and the good Law of God, they have in them that Spirit from whom
the Law of God was breathed, and that Spirit makes their hearts, which of
themselves are wayward and auerse to every thing that is good, pliable and
inclinable to the good Law of GOD.

Say to an angry furious man or woman, one that is yet in the dregs of nature,
Thou must forgive, Thou must love thy Neighbor, Thou must bless them that
curse thee, and do good to them that hurt thee; he being yet in his natural
state, he cries out, These be things impossible; how can one yield to such a
Law? But tell a child of God of these things, and let him understand that this
is his duty; and he willingly yields unto it, and his heart consents to the
good Word of God; he has in him that Spirit, that makes men that are as
Wolves, Bears, and Tigres, put off their brutish and savage nature, Isai.
11.6, 7. Isai. 11.6, 7.


Again, is it so, that true Believers, Gods children, A difference between
Gods children and others, discovered.
and do not only assent unto it, but their hearts also approve of it, and so
far forth as they are regenerate, they consent to the Law of God, they
dislike and hate sin, because the Law of God forbids it, and they like good
duties, because the Law of God requires them? Surely then, this points out a
plain difference between Gods children, and others that are either openly
wicked or hypocrites, for it is far otherwise with them: the ungodly man and
the hypocrite may indeed in his mind and judgment assent to the good Law of
God, he may, being co^uinced in conscience, acknowledge such and such things to
be good, and such and such things to be evil and sinful; but in the mean
time his heart is not inclined to that he acknowledges, and his heart
approues not of it, because Gods Law commands it, and his heart does not
dislike and hate that he knows to be sin, because the Law of God forbids it.
No, no: he rather hates the Commandment, and he could wish there were no such
Commandment: for example, the Drunkard, being in conscience convinced and
pressed with it, will sometimes confess Drunkenness to be evil, yet his
heart dislikes it not, his heart is not inclined to hate that sin, but he could
rather wish there were no Word of God against that sin. Yea, if we observe
it, and if the ungodly and hypocrite themselves do observe it, they shall
find, that they neither do any good thing, nor eschew any evil, because the
Law of God commands the one, and forbids the other, but they ever have respect
to gain, or credit, or pleasure, or pain, and it is still themselves they
aim at, in doing good, or in eschuing evil, and not the Law and Word of God:
and so it is with them in all other things; it may be, the joys of heaven
being spoken of, do somewhat affect them, and when they hear of the pains of
hell, they are somewhat astonished; and it may be, they know God to be of
infinite Majesty and Power, and that none is able to endure the fierceness of
his wrath; it may be, these things a little touch them when they hear of them;
but it is only, because they would escape the wrath of God and his judgments,
and so it is still themselves that they love: if there were neither heaven nor
hell, they would not care for God, nor for the Word of God.

But on the other side, true Believers, and Gods children, they obey God in his
Word, out of a love to God, and their souls are not so dear to them, as the
Name of God is to see that glorified; and they, as it were, carry their lives
in their hands, and they are ready to yield them up to the glory of his Name,
and they consent to the Law of God in their hearts, and they dislike and hate
sin, because the Law of God forbids it, and they like good duties, because
the Law of God requires them. And thus it must be with thee, if thou would
make it good to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou art a child of God.

Happily thou will say,

I answer, By this thou shall certainly know it: Iam. 2.11. Iam. 2.11.
There is the same Lawgiuer, and he that commands one thing, commands another,
and he that forbids one thing, forbids another: and if thou wittingly and
willingly break one Commandment, thou art guilty of all, Verse. 10.

If then thou would be sure, that thou do dislike sin, because the Law of
God forbids it, and that thou likest good duties, and performest them, because
Gods Law requires them, then never rest, till thou find that thou art equally
affected to every Commandment of God, and that thou art equally inclined to
the keeping of all and every one of Gods Commandments, and that thou do not
think any thing, that the Word of God commands or forbids, light and trifling,
but that thou make conscience of the least evil and sin.

Last of all, Ignorance of Gods Law, a fearful thing.
do not only know the Law of God, and assent to it in their minds, but their
hearts also approve it? Surely then, their case must needs be fearful that
are ignorant of the Law of God. Can they yield consent of heart to the good Law
of God, and approve of it in their hearts, that are ignorant of it? It is not
possible. Consider this all you that are ignorant of Gods Law, you cannot
comfort your selves with this, that you are Gods children. No, no: Gods
children not only know the Law of God, but they also approve of it in their
hearts: now you are so far from that, as you know not the good Law of God,
and so your case is fearful. Oh then labor you for knowledge of the Law of
God, whilst you have time and means, that so you may approve of it in your
hearts, and yield sound obedience to it both in heart and life.

VERSE. 17. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells
in me.


IN this Verse we have the second inference and conclusion laid before us, that
the Apostle brings in on that he said Verse 15. that the good he would, that he
did not: but the evil he hated, that he did. Thereupon the Apostle concludes
in this Verse on this manner: If I hate the evil I do, then I being renewed by
grace, do it not. And he further shows what it was that did it, namely, the
sinful corruption that still in part remained in him. But (says he) sin
that dwells in me, that does it. And this inference the Apostle delivers
with a note of difference, in respect of himself, comparing his present state
with his former, that now it was not with him, as in former times, and he
says, Now then, it is no more I that do it: not barely, then it is not I, but,
then it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me.

Now then, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. Here
to make up the full sense, those words used in the Verse before (if I do that
which I would not) are to be resumed and repeated, they being the common
antecedent to both the Apostles inferences and conclusions: As if he had said,
If I do that which I would not, then it is no more I that do it. It is no
more I; that is, Interpretation
It is no longer I, as I am now renewed by grace, and in the state of
regeneration, it is not any longer I, as I am regenerate, and so far forth as
I am regenerate that now do it: (do it) that is, that evil that I would not,
and that evil and that sin that I hate (but the sin that dwells in me,
that does it.)

(Sin) is here taken as before, for sinful corruption, the corruption of
nature, or inborne finne (that dwells in me.) This Phrase is Metaphorical,
it is borrowed and taken from Householders, from such as have their certain
abode and residence in a place or house, and do there busy themselves, and
exercise their power and authority, and it signifies the true and powerful
presence of sin, and the strong working of it, as the Spirit of God is said
to dwell in true Believers, Romans 8.9. 1. Cor. 3.16. signifying the true
powerful and working presence of the Spirit in them: and so Satan with seven
other spirits is said to return to the house whence he came, and to enter in,
and to dwell there, Matthew. 12.45. that is, more powerfully and more strongly to
take possession of that man. And so the Apostles meaning, in saying, sin that
dwells in me, is this, The sin that is still remaining and abiding in me, and
has a powerful and a working presence in me, even forcibly crossing the
motions of the Spirit in my heart, and haling and pulling me to evil and
sin. Thus then briefly conceive we the Apostles meaning in this Verse, as if
he had said,

And again if I do that evil, which I would not, and that evil that I hate,
then it is no longer I, as I am regenerate, and so far forth as I am
regenerate, that do that evil, but the sinful corruption, the corruption of
nature, that is still remaining and abiding in me in part, and has a powerful
and working presence in me, even forcibly crossing the motions of the Spirit in
my heart, and haling and pulling me to evil, that is it that does the evil
that is done.

Here again observe we the Apostles inference, mark his conclusion here
brought in on his former antecedent, thus he concludes: If (says he) I do
the evil which I would not do, If I do that evil that is against my mind, my
will, my purpose and resolution, as I am now regenerate, then it is not I that
do it, but it is the sin that dwells in me that does it, that is his
inference. Hence note we further thus much,

That when men do evil, Evil done by men against their mind, will, and holy
purpose, may in some sort be said, not to be their sin.
is against their mind, their will and their holy purpose, they resolve not to
sin against God in any thing wittingly and willingly, and yet they are
ouercarried by the strength of corruption, and do sin, then it may be truly
said, It is not they that sin, and the evil done by them, may in some sort
be said not to be their sin. If the thing be rightly understood, and not
misconceiued, and if a man or woman be able to say with the Apostle, and that
truly, I do the evil I would not do, then he or she may also conclude
with the Apostle, and truly say, It is not I that do it, but the inbred
corruption that still in part abides in me, that does it: and to this agrees
that of John, 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
It is a plain Text to this purpose: Whosoever (says he) is borne of God,
sins not: for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he
is borne of God. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not. Why? may some say,
there is no man living on the face of the earth but he sins. And Saint John
himself says, 1. Ioh. 1.8. If we say that we hane no sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

What is then his meaning, when he says, Whosoever is borne of God, sins
not? Surely this: When they that are truly regenerate and borne anew of God,
sin, it is against their mind, and against their purpose, they would not so
sin; and so indeed it is as if they sinned not: and it may be truly
affirmed of them, being rightly understood, it is not they that sin, but the
corruption of nature that still in part abides in them: and the reason of this
may easily be rendered; this it is:

That part in man that is truly regenerate, Psalm. 37.37. Pro. 10. Psalm. 37.37.
Pro. 10.3, 6, 7, 11, 16, 20, 21, 24, 25, 28, 30, 32.
in many Verses: and so that part that is truly regenerate not sinning, and
they taking their denomination from that part, it may be truly said, that they
that are borne of God, and truly regenerate, sin not: and we may hold this
as a certain truth, when men do evil, and they would not do it, the evil
they do, is against their mind and purpose, that then it may be truly said,
being rightly understood, it is not they that sin and do evil, but it is
the inbred corruption, that still in part abides in them, that does it. Now
then to make use of this, first,

This Truth meets with that fond conceit of some, The fond conceit of the
Familists and others, met withal.
yet foolishly thus think to excuse themselves, that it is sin that does
evil, and not themselves, as those foolish, phanaticall and fantastike spirits
the Familists, of all erring spirits the most gross, they make no conscience
of Swearing, of Lying and Equiuocating, of Sabbath-breaking, of Drunkenness,
of Whoredom and filthiness, they make no bones of any foul sin, and yet
they think to excuse themselves by this, that (forsooth) it is the flesh that
sins, and not they, and they think so to shift off the matter, by laying
the burden on the flesh: and so common Drunkards, filthy Adulterers, common
Swearers, and the like, they think to excuse and cloak their wicked and
vicious life with this, that they do not the evil, but sin that dwells in
them. Now, such persons, both Familists and others, do most wickedly abuse
this holy sentence of the Apostle, It is no more I that do evil, but sin
that dwells in me.

The doctrine delivered shows plainly, that this sentence cannot agree to such
persons: for why? they cannot say and speak the truth, that they do evil,
and they would not do it, and the evil they do is against their mind and
purpose, and that they hate the evil they do. No, no: there is no such matter
in them, they do evil wittingly and willingly, yea, they rush into sin, as
the barbed horse rusheth into the battle. Ierem. 8.6. And therefore they
cannot thus plead excuse, and thus shift off the matter, that it is not they
that do evil, but sin that dwells in them. If they so do, they abuse this
holy sentence, and they misapply it, and it will not serve their turn. If thou
would find comfort in this holy Sentence, and apply it to thy self with
comfort, thou must be able to say with the Apostle, The evil I do, I would
not do, I allow it not, nay, I hate it: and then indeed thou may say with
comfort, It is not I that do evil, but the sin that dwells in me.

And this indeed is a sweet comfort to Gods children, their own hearts
witnessing with them, that the evil they do, they would not do it: they may
then say, It is not they that do it, but sin that dwells in them, and the
evil done by them may in some sort be said not to be their sin, if it be
rightly understood: and so, to drive the point to a second use,

Is it so, that evil done by the regenerate, Comfort for such as are tempted
to strange evils.
then much less is the evil to which they only are tempted, and to which they
yield not, much less is that their sin. Here is then comfort for such as are
tempted to strange evils, and whom Satan does vex with fearful suggestions;
as to blaspheme God, to deny God, or any way to think amiss of God: do they
thereupon think amiss of themselves? do they thereupon hold themselves most
vile wretches? do they beat back the temptation? Surely, then it is not
their sin: even the best may be tempted to most horrible sins. What more
fearful, then to worship the Devil in person? Yet to this sin was Christ
himself tempted, Matthew. 4.9. Matthew 4.9.
Therefore be not thou discouraged, though thou be tempted to most gross and
odious sins, if thou yield not unto them.

Observe we further, the Apostle says, It is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me. He says not barely, It is not I that do it, but,
It is no more I, I find now a difference in my self, from that it was wont to
be with me in doing evil, It was heretofore I that did evil, but now it is
not I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me.

Hence we may gather a manifest difference between Gods children, Difference
between Gods children and the unregenerate, in doing evil.
and such as be unregenerate, in doing evil: Gods children, they sin no
more, it is no more they that sin, that is, they sin not wholly with full
consent of will, because they have in them not only flesh, but Spirit; not only
corruption but grace also: but unregenerate persons, they sin wholly with
full consent of will, and it is they that do the sin, and the evil that is
done by them, they do it indeed, they power out themselves to sin. Jude
Epist. verse. 11. They walk after the lusts of their own hearts, because they
are wholly and altogether flesh and corruption. And this difference between
the regenerate and unregenerate in sinning, we find put down in many places
of Scripture.

If then for the use of it, How a man may prove himself a child of God.
thou must find it thus with thee, that thou art able to say, The evil that is
done by thee, it is not now thou that do it, but sin that dwells in thee:
and know this for a truth, That a child of God is never so given over, but he
is ever able to say, It it not I that do it, but sin that dwells in (...).
Labor thou to find it thus with thee, if thou would make it good to the
comfort of thine own soul, that thou art a child of God.

Now further, in that the Apostle adds, but sin that dwells in me: that
is, as we showed, sinful corruption, the corruption of nature that still
remaynes in me in part, and has a powerful and working presence in me, even
forcibly crossing the good motions of the Spirit, and haling and pulling me to
sin. Hence we are given to understand thus much,

That the best of Gods children, freed from the inhabitation of sin, The best
of Gods children have sin still dwelling in them, as a bold Inmate.
from the in-dwelling of sin. Howsoever it is true, that corruption of nature
remaynes not in Gods children, in the full force and strength of it, as it does
in the unregenerate, and does not reign in them, yet the relikes of it are
still abiding in them, and it has still a powerful working presence, crossing
them in good things, and haling and pulling them to sin; it is still as a
bold, saucy, and troublesome Inmate, it dwells in them, and shall dwell in them
so long as they live in this world.

And to this purpose we have many plain evidences of Scripture, Pro. 20.9. Who
can say, Pro. 20.9.
I have made mine heart clean? I am clean from my sin? I am in this world
without all relikes of natural corruption? As if he had said, None can say
it. Eccles. 7.22. says the Preacher, Eccles. 7.22.
There is no man just in the earth, that does good, and sins not. Gal. 5.16.
Walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16, 17.
and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. He says not, The lusts of
the flesh shall not be in you. No: but, You shall not fulfill them. And he
subioynes, Verse. 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot
do the same things that ye would: The flesh is still in you, and it wrastleth
and strives against the Spirit; even forcibly crossing the good motions of the
Spirit, haling you to sin. Iam. 3.2. Iam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all, even we all, and every one of us without
exception, do sin in diverse things. These and many other testimonies of
Scripture do plainly prove the point in hand, that howsoever the corruption
of nature remain not in Gods children, in the full force and strength of it,
yet it still abides in them in part, and has still a powerful and working
presence in them, crossing them in good things, and haling and pulling them on
to evil; it is still an In-dweller in them, and shall dwell in them so long as
they be in this world.

And this may be further cleared and confirmed, Gods children are subject to
many chastisements and afflictions, yea, to mortality and death: for surely, it
could not stand with the justice of God, to lay afflictions and chastisements
on his children, and they could not be subject to mortality and death, their
souls could not part from their bodies, if there were not corruption and sin
still abiding in them; that is it that makes them subject and liable to
chastisements and to death it self. And therefore this is a certain truth,
that the best of Gods children, even the most holy, and most regenerate that
live on the face of the earth, are not freed from the inhabitation of sin; it
is still as a bold and troublesome In-mate dwelling in them, and shall dwell in
them so long as they live in this world.

Now then, Some erroneous opinions consuted.
as first, that of the Papists, That by Baptism, original corruption is
utterly abolished, and quite taken away: so they hold and teach. Now that
opinion cannot stand with this truth, That the best of Gods children, and the
most regenerate that live on the face of the earth, have sin still dwelling
in them in part; and this Truth also meets with that proud conceit of the
Familists and others, that hold, that a perfection of inherent holiness may be
attained to in time of this life; and they brag of such a perfection of
purity and holiness already attained to in themselves, as that they need not
any further to be purged from corruption. This is a proud conceit, and a most
idle and a wicked fancy, and it cannot stand with the Truth of God now
delivered, That the best and most holy that live on the face of the earth, have
sin still dwelling in them, and have still need to be renewed in the Spirit of
their minds in the purest part of their souls, Ephesians. 4.23.
Ephesians. 4.23. And they that find not sin still crossing the good motions of
the Spirit in them, and haling them unto sin, know not themselves, they are
not acquainted with their own state and condition.

Again, is it so, that the best of Gods children, Comfort against the feeling
of indwelling corruption, disturbing and crossing men in good purposes, and in
good things.
but have sin as a bold and troublesome In-mate dwelling in them, disturbing
and troubling them, and crossing them in good things, and haling them to sin?
Then be not thou too much dejected and cast down, when thou feel
corruption still in thee, crossing thee in good purposes and good things, and
haling thee on to sin; it is a thing that many times troubles and disquiets a
poor soul, even an honest and good hearted Christian man or woman, that he
or she are crossed in good purposes, and in good things, and are either
hindered from doing of them, or they do them untowardly, and they are sometimes
haled to do evil.

Oh this troubles them, and this sometimes makes them to call their state into
question: Thou may remember, whosoever thou art, thou have still corruption
dwelling in thee, and it shall dwell in thee so long as thou art in this world,
and it is a bold and a saucy In-mate, it will be troublesome to thee, it will
be busy with thee in the best purposes and actions, and it will cross thee in
good things, and hale and pull thee on to sin.

Therefore think on this: and though thou have cause to be humbled, and to
labor and strive against the corruption of thy heart, yet thou have no cause
thereupon to be utterly dejected and cast down. No, no: it is no otherwise
with thee, then with the dearest of Gods children, so long as they are in this
world: and know this for thy comfort, that it is a mercy of God, that thou art
troubled for sin dwelling in thee, and crossing thee in good things;
thousands in the world are not troubled for sin reigning in them, and
exercising dominion over them, and holding them as slaves under the power of
it, they think it nothing to be under such a lord, who indeed can pay them
no better wages, but the damnation of hell: and therefore bless God for it,
that he has opened thine eyes to see thy corruption: and be watchful over
thine own heart, in regard of corruption still dwelling in it.

On the ground of doctrine now delivered, Gods children must look warily to
themselves.
and they must take heed they be not circumuented by Satan, they have a
treacherous foe, that still continually lies in wait to betray them into the
hands of the Devil, and that as near as may be, even in their own bosom,
the corruption of their own hearts: and therefore it behoues every child of
God to be very watchful and circumspect: and the best and most holy, and such
as have the greatest measure of grace, may not be secure and confident on that
strength, and think that they are so furnished with grace and strength, that
they are out of danger, at least, of being ouer-taken with any foul and gross
sin. No, no: they must take heed of that; if a man have an In-mate, an
In-dweller, that he knows is ready to cut his throat, and watches every
opportunity that is offered, to do him a mischief, without question he will
be sure to have an eye to that In-mate, and he will watch him, and take
diligent heed of him, lest he do him hurt, before he be aware.

Surely, this is the very case of us all; and the best of Gods children have
sin in them, that is, such an In-mate, as is ready on any opportunity offered,
to cut the threat of our souls; yea, sin is such an Inmate, as Gods children
cannot be rid of, they cannot be freed from, so long as they live on the face
of the earth.

It says to them, Ruth. 1.16, 17.
as Ruth said to Naomi, Ruth. 1. verse. 16, 17. Whither thou go, I will go,
and where thou dwell, I will dwell: where thou dyest, will I dye, and there
will I be buried: nothing but death shall part us, and sunder us quite one from
another. Therefore Gods children had need to be vigilant, and wary, and
circumspect, lest they be circumuented. And indeed whosoever sees his own
corruption, truly he will be sly and wary of the very appearance of evil:
and none are more careless and secure then they that see not their in-dwelling
corruption. Without question, Job was never an Adulterer; yet being privy to
his own in-dwelling corruption, He made a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1.
Job 31.1.

And thus it ought to be with all Gods children; they are to make covenants
with their eyes, ears, and all the parts and members of their bodies, and to
watch over their hearts narrowly; they have a secret foe that dwells in them,
ready to betray them into the hands of Satan, who seeks their destruction; and
therefore they cannot be too heedfull and watchful over their own hearts, in
regard of in-dwelling corruption, and especially they are to watch over them in
time of prosperity, and when they have abundance of outward things: for then
they are in greatest danger to be surprised, and ouer-taken with pride,
deadness of heart, selfeloue, and the like, Pro. 1.32. Pro. 1.32.


VERSE. 18. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing:
for to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is
good.


IN this Verse, our Apostle falls on the second degree of the Spiritual combat
between the flesh and the Spirit, in them that be truly regenerate, still
insisting in his own example; and having showed before, that by sin he was
brought to do the evil he would not, that being the first degree of the
spiritual conflict; Here he comes to the second degree of it, and shows that
he by sin was hindered from doing the good which he would. And this is
propounded Verse 18. and proved first by the contrary effects, Verse 19. and
then by the contrary causes, the Law moving to good, and he thereunto
consenting, and sin hindering him, Verse 20, 21. that is the general matter of
the 18, 19, 20, and 21, Verses.

Now touching the dependence of the 18. Verse on foregoing matter, thus it is,
the Apostle having said in the Verse before, that find welt in him, in the
first words of the 18. Verse, he confirms that by his own experience and
knowledge, that he knew it, and found it to be so in himself, and he affirms
on his own knowledge, that in him there was no good thing dwelling: and
therefore sin dwelling in him (expounding his own meaning, lest he should be
mistaken, in saying, that in him dwelt no good thing, namely thus, that he
meant in his flesh:) for, says he, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh
dwells no good thing, and then he further explaines and confirms the
Proposition, that in him, that is, in his flesh dwelt no good thing, by an
Argument from the effect of sin in himself, namely, the doing of good
hindered that he could not perform it; he says he was hindered in doing good,
so as he found no means to perform it; and he further amplifies that effect,
by his will to good, as he was now regenerate, that indeed he willed good, as
he was now in the state of regeneration, but he found no power in himself to
perform it: for, says he, to will is present with me, but I find no means
to perform that which is good: and that could be from no other thing, but from
sin dwelling in him.

We have then in this Verse laid before us, first, a Proposition, wherein the
Apostle affirms on his own knowledge, that there was no good thing dwelling
in him, namely, in his flesh. And secondly, a confirmation of that Proposition,
from the effect of sin dwelling in him, hindering him in doing of good,
amplified by his will to good, as he was now regenerate: That howsoever there
was in him, as he was now regenerate, a will to good, yet he found no means
to perform it. Of these in order, and first, of the Apostles Proposition. For
I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing.

For I know. I know, says the Apostle, that is, Interpretation
I am privy to it, and well acquainted with it, and I frankly and freely
confess and acknowledge it, as a thing well and certainly known to me so to
be, (that in me) this the Apostle expounds himself in the words following,
that is, in my flesh. Now the word Flesh, is not here to be taken for the
external part of man, the fleshy lump of the body, nor as sometimes it is in
Scripture, for the humane nature, as Ioh. 1.14. The Word was made flesh: but
for the corruption of nature, or for the part unregenerate: and that thorowout,
in all the powers and faculties of the soul, it signifies not only, as the
Papists teach, sensuality and the corruption of the inferior parts of the
soul, but the corruption also of the mind, understanding, and will: therefore
the Apostle says, Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God:
which must needs be understood of the very best parts of the soul, wherein
wisdom is seated: and Coloss. 2.18. the Apostle speaks plainly, and gives
fleshlinesse to the mind rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind, with his carnal
corruption, and unregenerate mind. (Dwells) that is, as before we showed,
abides, and has a powerful and working presence (no good thing.) By Good in
this place, we are not to understand natural good, which is the object of the
natural appetite, nor yet moral good, which is sometimes apprehended of
natural reason, being in full force and strength; but spiritual good, even
that which is spiritually holy and good, and is pleasing to God, that good is
here meant. Thus then conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in these words.
For I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing: As if he
had said,

For I am privy to it, I am well acquainted with it, and I freely and frankly
acknowledge it so to be, that in me, that is, in my corrupt nature, and so
far forth as I am unregenerate, there is nothing that is truly and
spiritually good and holy, nothing that is pleasing to God, remaining and
abiding; there is no such thing has any residence or abode, or has any
powerful and working presence in any power or faculty of my soul.

We are here to mark, that the Apostle does not barely affirm this of
himself, that in him, that is, in his flesh there was no good thing dwelling:
but he affirms it on his own knowledge, he says, I know it, I am privy to
it, I am well acquainted with it, and I freely acknowledge it. Hence two things
are offered to us; I will speak of them in order, as first this, hence we are
given to understand,

That Gods children, Gods children well discern that there is no good thing in
themselves as of themselves.
they are privy to their own corruption, still in part abiding in them, they
are well acquainted with it, that in their corrupt and unregenerate nature, so
far forth as they are unregenerate, there is no goodness, they are not
ignorant of it, but they know it well, and they see it, and well discern it,
that there is no good thing in themselves, as of themselves, but that all the
goodness they have in them, is of grace, and merely of grace, as the Apostle
speaks plainly, speaking of himself, 1. Cor. 15.10. 1. Cor. 15.10.
says he, By the grace of God, I am that I am. As if he had said, I have no
goodness in me as of my self, but all the goodness I have in me, is merely
of grace: and 2. Cor. 3.5. he says, We are not sufficient, 2. Cor. 3.5.
We are not able of our selves to think any thing that is truly good as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, it is merely of God, and of his grace,
that we are able to think a good thought, of our selves, we cannot think any
thing that is truly good. This the Apostle was privy to, and this he was well
acquainted withal. And so indeed are all Gods children, and such as are truly
regenerate, they are privy to it, they are well acquainted with it, they see
it, and well discern it, that there is no good thing in themselves, as of
themselves, and that in their unregenerate part, there is no good thing
dwelling: And the reason of it is this,

Gods children, and such as are truly regenerate, their eyes are anointed with
eye-salue, spoken of Revel. 3.18. their eyes are opened, and they are truly
inlighted, and they are made able to see and discern what is in them, and so
they come to be privy to it, and to be well acquainted with it, that there is
no good thing in themselves, as of themselves. Now then for the use of this,
first,

It discouers whence it is that most men in the world are highly conceited of
themselves, Whence is it, that most men are highly conceited of themselves.
and think that there is some goodness in them by nature; yea, in this point
men by nature are Popish; as the Papists do, so do they, they magnify nature,
and they are conceited of their pure naturals, and they think if they live a
civil honest life, they are not to be taxed for any thing, they are in an
happy case, yea, poor blind ignorant souls stick not to stand on their good
hearts, and on their good meaning, and good dealing, and to think they shall
be saved for these things. Now whence is this? Surely, from hence; they are not
regenerate, they have not the Spirit of grace and of discerning, their eyes are
not anointed with the eye-salue of the Spirit, and so they think as the Church
of Laodicea did, Revel. 3.17. that they are rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing, and know not that they are wretched, and miserable, and
blind, and poor, and naked; their eyes are not opened as the eyes of Gods
children be, to see and discern that there is no good thing in them, as of
themselves, and it is a plain evidence against men whosoever they be, that
think they have some goodness in them, of themselves, and that think they
are so purged from the corruption of sin, as that they have no more remaining
in them, that they know not themselves, and as one says well, they are Noni
homines, they are new and strange men indeed, that is, they are notable
hypocrites.

Again, A note of a child of God, and one truly regenerate.
are privy to it, and well acquainted with it, that there is no good thing in
themselves, as of themselves? do they see it, and do they well discern it?
Then do not thou fancy to thy self, that thou art a a child of God, unless
thou find it thus with thee, that thou see and discernest the hidden
corruption of thine own heart, and that thou art well acquainted with it, that
there is no good thing in thee as of thy self. Every one of years and
discretion, can take notice of foul open sins; but few see and discern it,
and few are thoroughly acquainted with it, that there is no good thing dwelling
in them; and if thou once come to see it, and well to discern it, and
complain of it, that there is no goodness in thee, and if thou come to be
thoroughly acquainted with thine own blindness of mind, deadness of heart, and
the like, and see these things in thy self with grief, and complain of them,
that is a good complaint, it seals up comfort unto thee, it is a plain
evidence that thou art a child of God: for thus indeed it is with Gods
children, and with as many as are truly regenerate. Now the second thing
offered from hence, in that the Apostle says, I know that in me (that is) in
my flesh dwells no good thing, I know it, I am privy to it, and I freely
acknowledge it, is this,

That Gods children are not only privy to it, Gods children are ready freely
to acknowledge their own weakness and their own infirmities.
but they are ready to acknowledge it on any just occasion, they dissemble not
the weakness of their unregenerate nature, but they are ready to acknowledge
it freely and ingeniously, whenever it may make for the glory of God, and the
good of others, yea, Gods children are ready to shame themselves in laying open
their sinful infirmities, yea in charging on themselves foul sins, whereof
they have been guilty, when it may be for Gods glory, or any way for the good
of others. Thus did the Apostle 1. Tim. 1.13, 1. Tim. 1.13, 14, 15.
14, 15.

This then for the use of it shows, they know nothing by themselves, in regard
of any gross sin, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 4.4. yet they dare not stand
on that, 1. Cor. 4.4.
but still condemn themselves, being privy to it, that there is in them matter
enough deserving condemnation.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle affirms this of himself, that
there was no good thing dwelling in him, as a proof of that which he said in
the Verse foregoing, that sin dwelt in him: he proves it by this, That there
was in him, namely, in his flesh, no good thing dwelling and abiding. And thus
he reasons, There is in me, that is, in my flesh, no good thing dwelling;
therefore sin dwells in me. This manner of reasoning points out thus much to
us,

That where there is no good thing dwelling, Such persons as have no holiness
nor sanctification in them, have nothing but sin and corruption abiding in
all the powers and faculties of their souls.
In whomsoever there is no goodness, no holiness abiding, in them sin and
corruption has certain residence and abode: yea such men as have in them no
holiness nor sanctification at all in them, there is nothing but sin and
corruption abiding, and that throughout in all the powers of their souls. Men
and Women may please themselves in a conceit of some goodness in them, and
think that they are of a better temper and better nature then others, and that
they have more goodness in them then others: because happily they are not
troubled and annoyed with such particular corruptions as others are; but
indeed, unless they be renewed by grace, and have true holiness and
sanctification in them, they do but deceive themselves: that they are not
troubled and annoyed with those particular corruptions that others are, is but
from restrayning grace, the Lord moderating and brideling their corruption,
that they break not forth; indeed and truth they have nothing but sin and
corruption abiding in them, in all the powers and faculties of their souls.
For why? Every man and woman in the world is either regenerate or unregenerate;
every one is either in his natural state and condition, and bears the image
of old Adam, and the image of Satan, or else is translated and set out of that
state, and is renewed according to Gods Image, and in some measure bears the
Image of God; there is no medium: no middle nor indifferent state and condition
between these two.

And hence it is, that we are often in the Scripture exhorted to cast off, or
put off the old man, and to put on the new, as Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 4.22,
23, 24
Cast off (says the Apostle) the old man, and put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness and true holiness. And Coloss. 3.9, 10.
Coloss. 3.9, 10.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
works, and have put on the new which is renned in knowledge, after the Image
of him that created him. Plainly teaching us, that there is no middle state
and condition between these two. A man or woman is certainly either regenerate
or unregenerate, and bears either the image of the old man with his works, or
the Image of God. And therefore such men or women as have no true holiness nor
sanctification in them, there is nothing but sin and corruption abiding in all
the powers and faculties of their souls.

And this I note, Many deceive themselves, in resting in their harmelesnesse
and ciuility.
many in the world please themselves exceedingly in a kind of harmelesnesse and
ciuility, in that they are of an harmless disposition, and in that they are
not given to such foul and gross sins as others are. Oh, herein they bless
themselves, and in this respect they think themselves in a marvelous good
case. Alas, if men have no better ground of comfort then this, this is but a
poor evidence of comfort; for this they may be by restrayning grace. Art thou
then of an harmless disposition? It is well thou art so, it is Gods mercy
thou art so, I deny it not. But what holiness and sanctification have thou in
thee? Art thou, notwithstanding thy harmless disposition, ignorant of the
will and ways of God? Have thou in thee no true zeal to Gods glory, no true
love to God, to his Word and Ordinances, to his Children? Do thou find no new
quality of grace and holiness wrought in thee? Deceive not thy self, thy case
is not good, thy harmless disposition is only from the ouer-ruling hand of
God, moderating and brideling thy corruption, and indeed there is yet nothing
but sin and corruption abiding in all the powers and faculties of thy soul,
and as yet thou bear the image of Adam; Therefore rest not in that, but if
thou would have ground of true comfort, never rest till thou find that there
is some new goodness and holiness wrought in thee, that thou art truly
enlightened, that thou have in thine heart a true love of God, a true delight
in good things; and that indeed will minister true and sound comfort to thy
soul.

Now further, in that the Apostle here affirms of himself, that in him, that
is, in his flesh, in his corrupt and vnregenerte nature, and so far forth as
he was unregenerate, there was no good thing dwelling, he being a man truly
regenerate, and endued with a great measure of grace, he gives us to
understand, how it is with the best and most regenerate: and the point hence is
this,

That in the best and most regenerate that live in this world, There is no
goodness in the best of Gods children of themselves.
there is no goodness of themselves, howsoever there is much goodness in
them, and they have many graces and good things in them, as they are regenerate
and renewed by the Spirit of God, yet as they are still in part flesh, in that
flesh of theirs, and in that part of them that is yet unregenerate, there is no
good thing to be found, there is no goodness in any power or faculty of their
souls, no, not in their minds, so far forth as their minds be unregenerate:
and hence it is that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13.9.
1. Cor. 13.9. that true Believers know but in part: and of himself he
affirms as much, Verse. 12. I know in part. True Believers are but in part
enlightened, and so in part, and so far forth as their minds are not
enlightened, there is no sound knowledge of God, nor of his will in their
minds. And hence it is, that the best and dearest of Gods children we read of
in the Scripture, have acknowledged themselves to be vile, filthy, and
unclean, as Isai. Jsai. 64.6.
64.6. says the Prophet, We have all been as an vucleane thing, and all our
righteousness is as filthy clouts: even I am unclean as well as others. And
Job 9.31. Job says, Job 9.31.
His own clothes made him filthy.

Whence it is clear, that howsoever these holy Servants of God and his dear
children, were men that had the Spirit of grace and sanctification in a very
ample and large measure, yet they found that there was no goodness in them as
they were unregenerate, but rather much filthiness, and much uncleanness,
polluting and defiling the best of their actions. And thus indeed it is with
the best of Gods children, and the most regenerate that live in the world, in
their flesh, and in that part of them that is unregenerate, there is no good
thing to be found; and the reason is plain, namely this,

Nature, in regard of the corruption of it, Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against God.

Now Gods children, so far forth as they are still in part flesh and not
regenerate, they are not altered and changed, nor wrought on by grace, but the
flesh that remaynes in them in part, still continues flesh, and it is still
corrupt and naught: and therefore hereupon we may conclude, that howsoever Gods
children, and such as are truly regenerate, have many graces and good things in
them, as they are regenerate and renewed by grace, yet as they are still in part
flesh, in their flesh, and in that part of them that is yet unregenerate, there
is no good thing to be found.

Now then first, in unregenerate persons, Unregenerate persons have not so much
goodness in them, as to prepare themselves to receive grace and to merit of
congruity.
and in such as are yet in their natural condition? Is it possible that they
should have any thing that is truly good in them? No, no: it is altogether
impossible, and it is erroneous and false which the Papists hold and teach,
That men, before Regeneration, have so much goodness in them, as they are able
to prepare themselves to receive grace, yea, to do good works that may please
God, and merit of congruity, as they speak. This is a foul and gross error,
if men that are truly regenerate have no good thing in them, as they are yet
flesh, and so far forth as they are unregenerate, certainly such as be
unregenerate, cannot possibly have any thing that is truly good in them, they
being altogether flesh, and nothing but flesh, neither can they do any thing
truly good and pleasing to God. Things that are good they may do, but as they
are done by them, they are not good, nor pleasing to God, much less do they
merit any thing at the hands of God; for their flesh and their corrupt nature
is the ground of all that they do; and so the things done by them, though good
in themselves, yet as they are done by them, they are sins. Therefore we are
to renounce it as an untruth, and Popish error, that men, before Regeneration,
are able to prepare themselves to receive grace, and to do good works
pleasing to God, and meriting of congruity.

Again, Gods children have cause to be humbled for their best actions.
as they be regenerate, yet as they are still in part flesh, there is in that
flesh of theirs no good thing to be found. Surely then, Gods children must know
they have cause to be humbled for their best actions: for why? their flesh will
be meddling in their best works, and the best things they do, come in part
from the flesh: and so far forth as any thing done by Gods children comes
from the flesh, it savors of the flesh, and it is evil, and they have cause
to be humbled for it; yea, on the ground of doctrine now delivered, Gods
children must further learn to keep their hearts and minds exercised on good
things, and they must look that they exercise that grace and that holiness
that is in them: for indeed, and there is no good thing in that, and that will
certainly bring forth nothing but evil.

And hence it is, no doubt, that Gods children are many times foiled and
overcome of temptation to sin, because they keep not that grace that is in
them, stirring, and working, and in exercise: for it is either through want of
grace, or weakness of grace, or through want of the exercise of grace, that
men fall into sin; for, if grace be not stirred up and exercised, the heart
that has no good thing in it, of it self ioynes hands with the Devil, and
betrays men into his hands, and thrusts them on into temptation. This was
David's case, and Iudahs case, Genesis 38. Oh then, learn, whosoeues thou art, to
keep that grace that is in thee, stirring and in exercise, if thou would not
be foiled and overcome of temptation to sin; thy heart has no good thing in
it of it self; and if that grace that is in it, be not kept stirring, and
working, and in exercise, it will deceive thee, and thrust thee on into
temptation.

Come we now to the second general thing laid before us in this Verse, the
confirmation of the Apostles Proposition, That in him, namely, in his flesh,
dwelt no good thing, in those words, For to will is present with me, but I find
no means to perform that which is good. In these words the Apostle confirms
his Proposition, that in him, that is, in his flesh, no good thing dwelled,
from the effect of sin dwelling in him, which was the hindering of him in doing
of good; as that it so hindered him in doing good, as he found no means to
perform it: which is amplified by his will to good, as he was regenerate, and
howsoever as he was regenerate, he willed good, yet he found no means to
perform that which is good. So much in general is comprised in these words,
For to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is
good.

For to will: the word (Will) here signifies not that power or faculty of the
soul that is called Will. And again, it signifies not an absolute act or
work of willing, Interpretation
to will absolutely, nor to will indifferently, nor yet to will evil; but an
act of willing good, to will that which is good, namely, to choose good, to
purpose good, and to desire to do that which is good, as appears plainly by
that the Apostle subioynes, I find no means to perform that which is good. As
if he had said, To will good, to choose good, to purpose and to desire the
doing of good, is present with me, but I find no means to perform that good.
(Is present) The word Present signifies, is ready, and is at hand, or is not to
seek. (With me) that is, with me Paul, as I am regenerate, and renewed by
grace: for the Apostle here speaks of himself with that limitation, that with
him, as he was regenerate to will, Good was present with me, but I find no
means to perform, or as it is in the Original, but to perform that which is
good I find not.

The word here rendered (to perform) signifies to accomplish, or to perfect;
and by the word (Good) we are to understand that which is truly good. And so
the Apostles meaning is, to accomplish the good I purpose and desire to do, or
to perfect good things, even things truly good, as I would do them, and
without imperfection. (I find not) that is, I find not sufficient ability and
power, I find that I want ability and strength to that purpose, my flesh and
corruption that still remaynes in me hindering of me. Some may say, It seems
then that Paul was not regenerate, in that he says, he willed good, but was
not able to perform it; for in the regenerate, God works both the will and the
deed. Philip. 2.13. says the Apostle, Phil. 2.13.
It is God that works in you both the will and thee deed, even of his good
pleasure.

I answer, That it is true indeed that God works both the will and the deed in
the regenerate, whenever they do both will good, and perform good, it is
God that works both; but hence it follows not, that regenerate persons do
always, and in every particular act, both will good and do good. No:
sometimes they will and desire to do good, and either they do it not, or at
the least they do it not as it ought to be done: but when they will good and
do good, it is God that works both in them: that is the meaning of the
Apostle: and so notwithstanding this, it remaynes a truth, that the Apostle was
truly regenerate, when he spoke thus of himself, To will is present with me,
but I find no means to perform that which is good. And his meaning is, That
as he was regenerate, he had a will and desire to do good, but many times he
was hindered, and was not able either to do the good he desired, or he was not
able to do it, as it ought to be done. Thus then briefly conceive we the
Apostles meaning in these words, For to will is present with me, but I find no
means to perform that which is good: as if he had said,

For to will, and to choose good, to purpose good, and to desire to do that
which is good, is ready and at hand, and not to seek with me, as I am
regenerate and renewed by grace; but through that corruption that still in part
abides in me, I am hindered in doing that good, so as I find that I want
ability and power many times to accomplish that good I purpose and desire to
do, or at least, to perfect good things as I would, and to do them without
imperfection, as they ought to be done.

First note we hence, how the Apostle confirms it, that there was no good
thing dwelling in him, that is, in his flesh, and how he knew it so to be,
namely thus; he found, that as he was regenerate, there was in him a will to
good, a purpose to do good, but yet he was hindered in the doing of it, so as
either he did it not at all, or he did it untowardly: by this he knew it,
and was well acquainted with it, that in him, namely, in his flesh, there was
no good thing abiding. Whence take we notice of it in a word,

That men may know that they have no good thing in them, Men may know that they
have no good thing in themselves.
of themselves, and may be acquainted with it, that they have still corruption
abiding in them: if they observe how they are hindered in doing good; if men do
but mark and observe, and withal consider, how they are either kept back
from doing good; or if they do any good thing, how untowardly they do it;
they cannot choose but be privy to it, and well acquainted with it, that there
is still corruption and sin abiding in them, and that their hearts are still
in part naught, they cannot but see this and discern it: and doubtless, hence
it is, that Familists and others are blown up, with a conceit of perfection in
themselves, and think that they are come to an absolute perfection of
holiness, because they observe not how they be hindered in doing of good
things: they mark not, or at least, consider not, that the best things they
do, they do them untowardly: they think they do good things perfectly, and
without any failing at all, and that makes them swell with a conceit of
perfection in themselves: if men do but observe and consider how untowardly
they do good things, and how many ways they fail in the doing of them, it
will certainly put them out of all conceit of perfection in themselves.

If then thou that art a child of God, How men may know the naughtiness of
their own hearts.
and the corruption that still in part abides in it, do but mark and consider
how untowardly thou do good things, with what deadness and dullness of heart
thou do them, how thy thoughts are distracted and carried aside in the doing
of them, how thou do them not with due respect to Gods glory, but in sinister
and by-respects, and the like, and it will bring thee to a sight of the
naughtiness of thine own heart, and make thee to acknowledge that thou have
still in thee a naughty and a corrupt heart: if thou see all thy righteousness
to be as filthy clouts, thou will then with the holy Prophet acknowledge, Isai.
64. verse. 6. Isai. 64.6.
that thou art unclean, and that ^ere is still filthiness and corruption in
part abiding in thee; thou will then see it and discern it. The point was in
part before handled, therefore I spare further to speak of it.

Now in that the Apostle says, To will is present with me, to will and to
choose good, to purpose good, and to desire to do that which is good, is ready
and at hand, and not to seek with me, as I am regenerate and renewed by grace,
we are given to understand.

That Gods children, To will good is ready, and at hand, with Gods children, as
they be regenerate.
but through grace, to will that which is truly good, yea, it follows from
hence, that GODS children have in them a ready purpose of heart, and a ready
desire to do good things, and to please God in all things; to will good, is
ready and at hand with Gods children, as they be regenerate, and renewed by the
Spirit of grace.

And touching this, for the evidence and truth of it, we have not only the
example of the Apostle in this place, but the examples of other Saints and
Children of God, as of David, when he says of himself, Psalm. 40. verse. 8. I
desired to do thy will, O my God, Psalm. 40.8.
yea, thy Law is within my heart. As if he had said, My heart is inclined, and
I have a ready will, purpose and desire in me to do thy will, O my God.

Thus good Joshua, Josh. 24.15. he says, Josh. 24.15.
I and my house will serve the Lord: I am resolved and I have a ready will and
purpose within me to serve the Lord. Thus much Christ affirms of his
Disciples, Matthew. 26.41. The Spirit, says he, is ready indeed, but the flesh
is weak. I see in you a readiness of Spirit, there is in you a ready will to
good, but the flesh is weak. And many other examples might be brought to this
purpose, confirming this truth, that Gods children have in them a power not of
themselves, but through grace, to will and to choose that which is truly good,
yea, as they are regenerate, they have in them a ready purpose of heart, and a
ready desire to do good things: And the reason is this,

Because as they are regenerate,

But happily here some will move this question:

To this I answer, and in general they have in them a ready purpose, and a
ready desire to do good things. Now then for the use of this: First,

This serves as a ground of trial to every one of us, Trial whether we be
Gods children, and truly regenerate.
and truly regenerate or no. Would thou know whether thou be a child of God
or no? Examine thy self by this note: Do thou find that thou art enabled by
grace to will that which is truly good? Have thou in thee a ready purpose, and
a ready desire to do good things? Do thou no sooner hear of any good duty
required of thee, but thine heart answers, I will do it, and to will to do it
is present with me? Certainly that is an infallible evidence that thou art a
child of God. But on the other side, if thou find that when good duties are
required at thine hand, and thou art called on to do good things, as to hear
the Word of God, to pray, to sanctify the Sabbath, and such like, thou art
auerse and repugnant to these things, and thine heart and mind goes against
these things, thou have no mind to them; deceive not thy self, thou art not
yet in the state of regeneration, no, thou art yet in the state of nature, and
till thine heart be changed, thou can have no comfort in that state.

Again, for a second use, is it so, that Gods children, Comfort for such as
find in themselves a readiness to will good things.
through grace, to will that which is truly good, and as they are regenerate,
they have in them a ready purpose of heart, and a ready desire to do good
things? Then here is a ground of comfort for thee, whosoever thou art that
find in thee, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 8.11, 12. a willing mind, and
a readiness to will good things. Do thou find in thee a ready purpose of
heart, and a ready desire to do the will of God? and do thou find, that (the
Lord calling on thee, to do this or that good duty) thine heart answers
readily, I will do it, I purpose to do it, I desire in my heart to do it?
Comfort thy self; that is a sure evidence of thy regeneration, and that thou
have true grace in thine heart: for as it is a note of a wicked man, willingly
to purpose to live in any known sin; so is it a note of a child of God, to
have a will ready and prepared to do the will of God, and in every thing to
please God. If then it be the ready purpose of thine heart, and the ready
desire of thy soul, to do good things, and to will good things is present
with thee, and thou find in thee an heart ready and prepared to do good
things, and thou set thy self purposely to do them, using carefully all
good means to that end, that is a sure testimony that thou art regenerate, a
child of God, and in the state of grace and salvation.

Now from this that the Apostle says, To will is prosent with me but to
perform I find not. His meaning being this, as we showed, that to will good,
to purpose good, to desire to do good, was ready and at hand with him, as he
was regenerate, but yet through corruption still abiding in him, he found that
he wanted ability many times either to accomplish the good he desired to do,
or if he did any good thing, that he was not able to do it perfectly, as it
ought to be done. Hence two things offer themselves: I will speak of them in
order. First, this hence we are given to understand:

That howsoever to will good, Gods children many times want ability to (...)
particular good things which they desire to do.
be ready at hand, and present to Gods children, as they be regenerate, yet
many times, through that corruption that still abides in them, they want
ability to do good, they are not able to do the good things they purpose and
desire to do; to do this or that particular good, is many times to seek with
the best of Gods children, though to will that good, be present with them, and
that by reason of that corruption that still abides in them.

And to make this further manifest, that Text is clear to this purpose, Matthew.
26.41. where Christ says of his Disciples, The Spirit indeed is ready, but the
flesh is weak. As if he had said, There is in you a readiness of Spirit,
there is in you a ready will and purpose to watch with me, but through the
weakness of your flesh, you are not able to do that good you would, you
cannot do that good you purpose and desire to do. And hence it was (no doubt)
that David, Psalm. 119.106. bound himself with an Oath to keep the righteous
Judgments of the Lord, I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep
thy righteous Judgments. If David had found no weakness, no mistrust, nor
doubtfulnesse in himself, he needed not so straightly to have bound himself:
but finding this, that howsoever he had in him, as he was regenerate, a will to
good, a purpose and desire to do good things, yet through the corruption of
his nature still abiding in him in part, there was in him a weakness and want
of ability to do good things: he therefore did provoke and stir up himself
to a greater care, by an Oath and solemn Covenant made with God.

In David's example we see, how it is with the best of Gods children, that
howsoever to will good, to purpose good, to desire to do good things, is
ready, and at hand, and present with them, as they be regenerate, yet many
times through that corruption that still abides in them, they want ability to
do good, they are not able to do the good things they purpose and desire to
do, and one reason of it is given by the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. Gal. 5.17.


The flesh lusts against the Spirit, The flesh is not only remaining in Gods
children, but it is also stirring in them, and lusting, and rebelling against
the Spirit, and against that grace that is in them. And hence it is that many
times they are hindered, and cannot do the good things they would.

Again, a second reason of it is this: It is God that works in his children
both the will and deed, Philip. 2.13.
Philip. 2.13 It is he that makes them both to will good, and to do good,
Ioh. 15.5.
as Christ says, Ioh. 15.5. Without him true Believers can do nothing that is
good. And hence it was, that David 1. 1. Chron. 29.14.
Chron. 29.14. broke out into magnifying and praising the Name of the Lord, for
that the Lord had not only made him and his people, willing to offer, but had
also enabled them to offer indeed. Who am I (says he) and what is my people,
that we should be able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come
of thee, and of thine own hand have we given thee.

Now God sometimes is pleased to withold his assisting grace from his
children, even that grace that should assist them in doing of good: and thence
also it is, that they are not able many times to do the good things they
purpose and desire to do, and though to will be present with them, yet to do
this or that particular good, is many times to seek with them, through that
corruption that still abides in them, they are hindered and they are not able to
do it: and thus it is even with the best of Gods children. And this for the
use,

First, It is an easier matter to purpose, then to practice good things.
discouers and makes known to us that it is an easier matter to purpose, then
to practice good things. To will good, is present to Gods children, as they be
regenerate: but to do this or that particular good, is many times to seek
with them, through that corruption that still abides in them: and therefore if
we find our selves enabled by grace to will that which is truly good, if we
find in us at any time a purpose and desire of doing any good thing, we must
not presume of our own wisdom, will and strength for the doing of it, but we
must desire further strength from God to enable us to the performance of it: it
is Gods grace that we are able to will good, and to purpose and desire to do
good truly; but yet there is a further grace required for the doing of that
good; and if that grace be not likewise given, we shall never do it. Now,
when we have done one good thing, we cannot do a second, but by a new supply
of grace. When therefore we find our hearts disposed to good things, as
DAVID'S heart was to pray, 2. Sam. 7.27. when our hearts are prepared and ready
to do any good thing, we may not undertake the doing of it otherwise then
thus, even with a denial of all power in our selves, and with earnest craving
the presence of Gods Spirit and Grace, without which we cannot purpose, much
less perform any thing that is truly good; and in every good thing we do,
we must give all glory to God: for he it is that makes us able both to will
and to do good things.

Again, for a second use, is it so, Comfort for such as find in themselves a
purpose to do good things, and yet find themselves unable to perform them.
be present with them, yet to do this or that particular good, is many times
to seek with them, through the corruption that still abides in them: they are
like to prisoners that have escaped out of prison, who would go twenty miles
in an hour, but are not able to go one mile. Is it thus with the best of Gods
children? Then be not thou, whosoever thou art, too much dejected and cast
down, that find in thy self a purpose and a desire to do good things, and
yet withal find thy self unable to perform them.

For example: Art thou able to say in truth of heart, I would be more humbled
for my sins, I would feign weep and shead tears for my sins, but mine
heart is hard and I cannot do it; I would feign pray with more feeling and
more feruency, I would hear the Word with more cheerfulness and delight:
but, alas, I find in my self a deadness and dullness, and I cannot do these
good things as I would? is it thus with thee? Comfort thy self, thy case is no
other then the case of all Gods children: thus it has been with them, and
thus it will be with the best of Gods children. Look that thy purpose and
desire after these good things, be in truth, and unfeigned, and that thou be
careful to cherish it, striving against thy hardness, deadness, and dullness
of heart, and using all good means that may bring that purpose and desire of
thine into act; and then though thou be not able to bring it forth into act,
yet know to thy comfort, it is no otherwise with thee, then with the dearest of
Gods Children; thy case and theirs is alike: the Lord is pleased to try thee
whether thou will continue striving against thy corruption or no. And if thou
so do, he will at length give thee power against it; and in the mean time
assure thy self, he accepts thy will for the deed, as he does at the hands
of his Children: and let that be thy comfort.

Now in the second thing offered from hence, that the Apostle says, To will
good, to purpose good, is present with me, but through that corruption that
still abides in me, I find that I want ability either to accomplish the good
I desire to do, or if I do any good thing, that I am not able to do it
perfectly as I ought. Hence we are taught;

That the good things Gods Children do, Gods children do not good things
perfitly.
it is not possible for any Child of God to do any good so perfectly, as that
there should be no evil found in his action: no, no: as says the Prophet
Isaiah, Isai. 64.6. All our righteousness is as filthy clouts. The best
actions Gods Children do, are polluted and defiled, and there is sin
cleaving to them, and it must needs be so: for why?

GODS Children are not perfectly renewed by grace; Jonah, 4.2. It is said, that
JONAH prayed unto the Lord. But if we read the place, we shall find, that
he did it marvelous untowardly, it was rather a quarrelling with God, then a
praying unto him. So indeed the good things that Gods Children do, they do
them exceeding untowardly, and they cannot possibly do good things perfectly.

Object. The works of God are perfect,

Answer.

Now this for the use of it, first, That opinion, that Gods children may
perfitly fulfill the Law of God, confuted.
that the works of the Regenerate are perfectly good, and that Regenerate
persons may perfectly fufill the Law of God in time of this life; and though
sometimes they sin, yet it is but venially, not mortally; not against, but
besides the Law of God. This is an error plainly convinced by the Doctrine
now delivered: and indeed it is a transgression of the Law of God, not only to
do evil, but to fail in the doing of good, and it deserves the Curse of God,
and from such failing none are freed, no not the best of Gods Children: And
therefore, it is erroneous and false, to say that the Regenerate may perfectly
fulfill the Law of God in time of this life.

Again, is it so, do, We must take heed of pride, when we have either spoken
or done any good thing.
they do them not perfectly, but there is sin cleaving to the best of their
actions? Then we must take heed, that when we have either spoken well, or
done well, we be not proud of it; there is imperfection cleaues to our best
speeches and best actions, yea, matter enough to condemn us, if God be not
gracious to us, in Christ: and therefore take we heed of pride and swelling,
in regard of any good things said or done by us.

Last of all, We are not to be discouraged, because of some faylings that
cleave to our good motions.
they do them not perfectly, but sin cleaues to the best of their actions?
Then be not thou, whosoever thou art, discouraged, because some failing and
some imperfection cleaues to the good things done by thee. Labor thou to do
good things according to knowledge, in soundness of judgment, and truth of
heart, and use thy best care and endeavor to do them as they ought to be done;
and then, though thou do them weakly and imperfectly, yet be not thereupon
discouraged and utterly cast down: remember that there be wants and
imperfections cleaving to the best actions that the dearest of Gods Children
do perform; be thou humbled for thy failing, and crave pardon for it in and
through Christ, and strive to do better, and assure thy self, the Lord will
never lay it to thy charge: no, no: the Lord seeing thee do good things
willingly, though weakly, he will spare thee, as a Father spares his own
Son that serves him, a Father, finding in his child a good will and desire
to please him, takes that which his child does, in good part, and is content
with it, though it be done marvelous weakly, and though the thing done be
very faulty; so deals the LORD with his Children.

VERSE. 19. For I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I
would not, that do I.


IN this Verse our Apostle confirms that which he said in the Verse before;
That though to will was present with him, yet to perform good he found not;
by an argument from the effect negatiuely, and he denies the effect to be
answerable to his will and desire, touching that which is truly good, that
indeed his will was to do good, but he did it not: and therefore he found in
himself a want of ability to perform the good he willed, and purposed, and
desired to do. So he reasons: to will is present with me, but I find no
means to perform that which is good: for (says he) I do not the good thing
which I would. And that is further amplified by the contrary effect in respect
of evil: the Apostle affirms on the contrary, that the evil which he would
not do, that he did, But the evil which I would not, that do I. And so we
have the dependence of this Verse, on foregoing matter, and the sum and
substance of it.

The words of this Verse need not much to be stood on, touching the sense of
them, we had the same in effect, Verse 15. where the Apostle says, What I
would, that do I not, but what I hate that do I. I will briefly run them
over. (For I do not the good thing which I would.) Interpretation
By good thing, we are to understand, that which is spiritually and truly
good, and pleasing to God: and the Word here rendered (do) signifies to act,
effect and bring forth Which I would: that is, which I, as I am regenerate,
would act and do, and which I purpose and earnestly desire to do. But the
evil which I would not. By evil is here meant the contrary to the good
before spoken of, namely, the evil of sin, and that is repugnant and
contrary to the Law of God, and displeasing to God. Which I would not, that
is, as before I showed, which I, as I am regenerate, would not do, that I do,
that I act and do, and bring forth: yet this (as heretofore I said) is not to
be understood as if the Apostle had been forced to do evil against his will,
but that he consented not to it with his whole will, he being now regenerate,
the evil he now did, was not with the full and whole consent of his will.

And again, we must know, that the Apostle saying, he did not the good thing
which he would have done, we are to understand it, that so it was with him
many times, not always, that many times he did it not; and on the otherside,
in saying, The evil which he would not, that he did, we are likewise to
conceive it, that so it was with him many times, not always.

Thus then take we up the Apostles meaning in the words of this Verse, as if
he had said, For the good thing, even that thing that is truly good and
pleasing to God, which I, as I am regenerate, would act and do, and which I
purpose and earnestly desire to do, many times I do not, I act not, I effect
it not, I bring it not forth: but on the other side, the evil that is
repugnant, and contrary to the Law of GOD, and displeasing to God, which as I
am regenerate, I would not do, that many times I act, and bring forth, and
that many times I do. We shall stand the less while on this Verse, because
we had it in substance before, Verse 15. The Apostle here repeates that in
substance, which there he laid down, as likewise in Verse 20. he repeates
that which we had Verse 16, 17.

Now this the Apostle did not for want of matter; he was full of heavenly
matter, neither was it idly and unprofitably done, but to good purpose, no
doubt, to let us understand, that the things he here puts down touching the
spiritual Combat, are things of weight and importance, and needful to be
known, and that we cannot be too well acquainted with them: and again, that
we are dull of hearing, and dull of conceiving these heavenly matters, and do
not sufficiently mark and consider them: and therefore the Apostle is pleased
to repeat them, and to urge and press them on us again; and indeed,
repetitions (which shall be the point I will hence note in the first place) I
say,

Repetitions in Scripture are not idle and vain, Repetitions in the Scripture,
are to good use and purpose.
but they are to very good purpose, they serve to teach us the infallible and
certain truth of things repeated; doubling of things in Scripture is for more
certainty, and more plainness. Genesis 41.32. Joseph says, Genesis 41.32.
The Dream was doubled; because the thing was established by GOD. And Philip.
3.1. the Apostle says, Phi. 3.1.
It grieved not him to write the same things to them. And he says, Heb. 2.1.
To them it was a sure thing.

And again, repeating and doubling of things in Scripture, serves to put us in
mind, that we are more carefully to mark and observe, and to mind and
remember the things repeated. Heb. 2.1. it is said, We ought diligently to
give heed to the things which we have already heard; even when they are
repeated, and when we hear them again. And there is reason for it:

For if the Lord have a mouth to speak, Just reproof of many, who regard not
things doubled and trebled in Scripture.


And this ferues for the just reproof of many in the World: Many there be
that are defective, and come short of their duty in this respect, they have
little or no regard of that the Lord speaks to them in his Word, no, though
the Lord double, yea, treble his speech, and often urge and press the same
thing on them, especially in matter of threatening and denouncing of Judgment,
the Lord in his Word doubling his threats of Judgment against sin, who
almost regards it according to that manner of delivery? who is it almost that
doubles his attention, and his care to be bettered by it accordingly? To
instance in some particulars, 1. Cor. 6.9, 10.
1. Cor. 6.9, 10. the Apostle says, The unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. And he reckons up particulars, Neither Fornicaters, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor The eues, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And he repeates the same again, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.5.
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And again, Ephesians. 5.5. No Whoremonger, neither Unclean
person, nor Conetous person which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for,
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

Now, where is that Whoremonger, that Filthy person, that Drunkard, that
according to this doubled threatening, doubles his regard of it, and his care to
be bettered by it to this reformation? where is almost such an one to be
found? Nay, do not many Filthy persons, and Drunkards, and such like, even
blunt the edge of Gods thteatnings on the hardness of their hearts? Well,
think on it, whosoever thou art: Has the Lord spoken a thing, and shall not
he do it? Has he threatened Judgments against thee for thy sin, and that
again, and again, and shall not he be as good as his word? Yes, assuredly;
Unless thou answer the Lord in doubling his threatenings by a sound and
through reformation, he will bring his threatened Judgments on thee; yea, know
it for a truth, thou that go on in thy known sin, notwithstanding the
Lord doubles his threats of Judgment against thee, either in his written
Word, or in the Ministry of his Word, the Lord directing his Ministers often
to hit upon the sin, and justly to denounce the Judgments of God against thee
for the same, thou do in an high degree resist the Spirit of God, Act. 7.51.
and as it is Pro. 1.25. Thou despisest all the Counsels of God. And assure thy
self, the Lord will deal with thee proportionably; he will certainly double
his Plagues and Judgments on thee.

Repetitions in Scripture, or in the Ministry of the Word, are not idle and
vain: no, no, they signify the infallible truth of the things repeated, and
that we are more carefully to attend them, and to make use of them: and
therefore when the Lord doubles his speech in promising mercy, in commanding
any duty, and especially in threatening Judgment against sin; let us look
we answer the Lord, in doubling our attention and care to profit by the same:
otherwise, the Lord will one day certainly require it at our hands, and we
shall smart for it. Now from this Verse, in that the Apostle says, that he
did not the good thing which he would; he would have done good, but he did it
not, he points out to us,

That the good which Gods children would do, Gods children do not always
perform the good they desire to do.
they do not always perform that good they desire to do. And again, in
that he says, The good thing which I would, I do not, but the evil which I
would not, that do I: we might further note,

That Gods children are never so given over, Gods children never sin with
full consent of will.
for when they omit the doing of good, or fail in the doing of any good, they
would not so do; or when they do evil, they would not do it, they do it
not with full consent of will. But these things we have formerly handled;
therefore I pass by them. And the point I will stand on, hence offered, is
this: In that the Apostle says, I do not the good thing that I would, but the
evil that I would not, that do I. Hence we are given to understand,

That Gods children do not only sometimes omit the doing of good, Gods
dearest children sometimes sin, in doing that which is directly evil.
or fail in the doing of that good which they do, and so sin; but sometimes
they sin in doing evil: even the best of Gods children that live on the face
of the earth, sometimes sin in doing that which is directly evil, and
sometimes they do that which is directly repugnant and contrary to the rule of
Gods Law. Gods children not only sin by failing in performance of good
duties, but sometimes also by evil actions, even by such actions as are simply
evil in themselves, and directly contrary to the Law. Thus did the Apostle, he
did evil. And thus we find that Abraham sinned by lying, Genesis 20.2. Job by
impatiencie, Job 3. Ezechiah by vainglory, 2. King. 20.13. Moses by speaking
unadvisedly, Number. 20.10. And so many other of Gods dear children have sinned,
by doing things simply evil in themselves, and directly contrary to Gods Law:
yea, we find that Gods children sometimes through the strength of their own
corruption and violence of temptation, have been overtaken with foul gross
evils; as Noah, Lot, David, and Peter.

Now if any demand why the Lord suffers his children so to be overtaken?

I answer,

Now then, That opinion of the Papists, that a man may in time of this life be
without sin, confuted.
but sometimes also by doing that which is directly evil, and contrary to the
Law of God, it must needs be false which the Papists hold and teach; That a
man may in time of this life be without sin, and may so live, as that he may
be altogether void of sin. That cannot stand with the truth now delivered,
but must needs be erroneous and false.

But they bring for defense of their opinion, Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.
where it is said, that they were both just before God, and walked in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord without reproof.

Answer. They were indeed just before God, that is, Zachary, as one of Gods
people, looked for remission of sins, and salnation by Christ, Verse 77.

Again: Is it so, The best of Gods children have need to watch over their own
hearts.
but sometimes also by doing that which is directly evil? Then the best of us
have need to be watchful over our own hearts, we are in danger to be
overcome of temptation, and occasions of sin and doing evil being offered,
to be sometimes ouercarried by corruption that still abides in us, to the
doing of it. And if the corruption of nature was so strong in Paul, and other
of Gods children, as that sometimes they were ouer-carried by it, not only by
failing in good duties, but by the doing of evil; Oh what need have we then to
be watchful over our selves, we having not so great a measure of grace as they
had! yea, the best of us have cause every day to be humbled for our sins, and
every day to renew our repentance, and to say, Lord, forgive us our sins:
yea, though we be assured of our own salvation, and know nothing by our
selves, though we be not guilty of any gross sin, yet with David we have
need to pray, Lord, cleanse us from our secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. We do many
things that are directly evil, and repugnant to the Law of God, and we have
cause to be humbled not only for our failings, but for our sins also that
are directly against the Law of God, and are in themselves transgressions of
Gods Law.

VERSE. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me.


IN this Verse our Apostle further confirms that Proposition, that howsoever,
as he was regenerate, he willed good, yet he was not able to perform it, from
the cause of hinderance. He here points out the true and right cause of it,
whence it was that he was hindered in doing of good, that he could not do it,
namely, his own in-dwelling corruption; yea, he says, that it was from his
own in-dwelling corruption, that he did the evil that he would not have
done. And this Verse contains in it an inference brought in, on that he said
Verse before, that the evil he would not do, that he did. Thereupon the
Apostle concludes, that it was not he that did the evil. If (says he) I do
that I would not, it is not I that do it. And he amplifies that by a note of
difference touching himself, in regard of his present condition compared with
his former, that howsoever in former times it was he that did it, yet now it
was no more he that did the evil that was done by him. If I do that I would
not, it is no more I that do it. And then he further shows, what it was that
did it, namely, his own indwelling corruption: but, says he, the sin that
dwells in me, that does it.

The Apostle here, as I said, repeates the selfsame thing he delivered
Verse 16, 17. and in the very same words: and therefore we need not stand on
the opening of them, but only call to mind and remember how they have been
formerly expounded. And thus, as you may remember, we expounded them, and thus
they are to be conceived, as if the Apostle had said,

Now then, if I do that evil which I would not do, Interpretation
it is no longer I as I am regenerate, and so far forth as I am regenerate,
that do that evil, but the sinful corruption that still in part remains in
me, and has a powerful and working presence in me, even forcibly crossing
the motions of the Spirit in me, and haling and pulling me to evil, that is
it that does the evil that is done.

Now this Verse being but a repetition of that which was before delivered, I
will pass by things formerly handled, and only speak of such things as may
hence be further gathered. The Papists, but to point at a note of theirs on
these two Verses 19, 20. have this annotation: say they, That which the Apostle
here speaks of himself, makes nothing against Free Will, but plainly proves
it: and how so? Why (say they) because the proper act of the will, namely, to
will or nill, to consent or dissent, is ever free in it self, as here we may
see in the Apostle, though the operation may be hindered by some external
force: yea, (say they) in that the Apostle says, How the will of man is free.
If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, it does most evidently
prove Free Will: that is their note on this place.

To this I answer, It is true indeed, that the act of the will, namely, to
will or nill, to consent or dissent, is ever free: but how? Surely thus; in the
unregenerate it is free from coaction and compulsion, but not from a necessity
always of willing that which is evil, and in the regenerate, of which state
the Apostle here speaks in his own person, the will is reformed by grace, and
made free to will that which is truly good, as Christ says, Ioh. 8.36. If the
Son make you free, Ioh. 8.36.
then ye shall be free indeed. And so this place makes nothing for the proof
of the natural strength and power of the will to that which is good, that the
will of man has a power in it self, and by it self, to will that which is
good, either in the state of Nature or Grace, which is the point in question
between us and the Papists. No, this place shows plainly, that the will
regenerate, is only by grace enabled to will that which is good, and that the
will has power, not in it self, or by it self, but by grace to will good,
and to nill evil, and that only in part, and not perfectly. So much these two
Verses will afford to us touching freedom of will, and no more.

I proceed: If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me. The Apostle still (which likewise I will note in a
word) calls concupiscence that remained in him, Sin, and he gives to it the
name of Sin. Yea, say the Papists, it is called sin, but not properly and
truly, but improperly, either because it is the effect of sin, as the
Writing is called the Hand, because it was written with the hand, or for that
it is the cause of sin; as Cold is called Slothful, because it makes a man
slothful. Concupiscence is both the effect of sin, the cause of sin, and
sin also truly and properly.
A silly shift! For concupiscence may be, and indeed is, both the effect of
sin, the cause of sin, and sin also truly and properly in diverse
respects.

In respect of the fall of Adam, it is the effect of sin; in regard of
actual sins, it is the mother and cause of sin; and it is also in it self
truly and properly sin, because it is not agreeable to Gods Law, but
directly contrary to it, and should not have been in man, if man had kept his
state of Innocence, and had not broken the Law of God. And as one says well,
What can be more absurd, then to deny that to be sin properly, that is
contrary to God, to his Spirit, and to the Law of God? Therefore this is but a
poor shift of the Papists, to say, that Concupiscence is the effect of sin, or
cause of sin, and therefore not properly sin. I leave them.

In the next place observe we, the Apostle blames his own corruption, as the
root and cause of the evil he did unwillingly; he lays the fault and blame
where it ought to lie, namely, on his own in-dwelling corruption, that he did
the evil he would not have done: says he, It is not I, but the sin that
dwells in me, that does it.

And indeed thus it ought to be with us: Our own corruption is the true proper
cause of every evil thing we do.
We are to lay the fault of every evil thing we do, on the rottenness and
corruption of our own hearts, and we are to blame that as the true and proper
cause of that evil: for why? as it is Iam. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he
is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is intised. It is a man's own
concupiscence, and the corruption of his own heart, that draws every man to
sin, and were there not corruption of nature still in part abiding in Gods
children, the Devil could never fasten any temptation on them, neither could
the world nor any thing in the world draw them on any sin.

The Devil set on Christ and tempted him, but in vain: for he found naught in
him, Ioh. 14.30. And so, if Gods children were altogether without corruption,
the Devil could not force any temptation on them, and they should never sin
at all: and therefore we are to lay the fault of every evil thing we do, on
the corruption of our own hearts, and blame that as the true and proper cause
of it. Lay not the fault of that evil thou do, on any thing out of thy self
as the cause of it. For example: thou being brought into poverty, or into some
trouble, it may be, thou fallest by indirect means to help thy self; thou
betrayest the good cause thou have in hand, if thou so do: lay not the fault of
that evil thou do, on thy poverty, or on the extreme hard dealing of men.
No, no: thy poverty, and the extreme dealing of men, may be an occasion of that
evil thou do, but certainly, the cause of it is in thy self, even in thine
own bosom, the corruption of thine own heart. It was not the want of the
fear of God in the place that caused ABRAHAM to lie, Genesis 20.2. That indeed
was the occasion of his lying; but the cause of it was his own thought, his
own doubting and fear, arising from the corruption of his own heart, as
appears plainly, Genesis 20.2, 11.
Verse. 11. Says ABRAHAM, I thought this surely, The fear of God is not in
this place, and they will slay me for my wives sake.

We must learn then, when we do any evil, not to blame any thing out of our
selves, but to lay the fault where it ought to lie, namely, on the naughtiness
of our own hearts, as the true and proper cause of it, and we are to be
humbled for that, as for the evil it self; that is our duty. I only point at
it in a word, because we spoke of it at large, Verse. 5.

Now lastly, in that the Apostle uses this phrase, Sin that dwells in me,
he gives us to understand,

That the corruption of nature is a different thing from the powers of the
soul: The corruption of nature is a different thing from the powers of the
soul.
for we know that the dweller differs, and is really distinguished from the
house where he dwells: and so the corruption of nature dwelling in us, it must
needs be conceived to be a real distinct thing from the soul, and from the
powers and faculties of it, and it is not a corruption of the substance of the
soul; for then the soul could not be immortal, if the substance of it were
corrupted, neither could Christ have taken on him man's Nature, without sin:
but the corruption of Nature is a thing that dwells and abides in the soul, and
a thing that cleaues to the faculties of it, and to the affections of the
heart, and it is such a thing as may be removed from the soul by the powerful
work of Gods Spirit. And hence it is called an evil that compasses us about.
Heb. 12. verse. 1. Cast away every thing, that presses down, and the sin
that hangs so fast on, or, does so easily compass about; for so the word
signifies. And those exhortations that are frequent in the Scripture, Cast, or
Put off the old man, do give us to understand as much, That the corruption of
Nature is not a corruption of the substance of the soul, but a real distinct
thing from the soul, and a thing that cleaues to the faculties of it, and to
the affections of the heart, and a thing that may be severed from the soul by
the powerful work of Gods Spirit. And this for the use of it,

Teaches us, Regeneration does not abolish any faculty of the soul or any
affection of the heart, but it only takes away the filthiness of them.
nor any natural affection of the heart, but it only takes away the
filthiness and corruption of them, even that corruption that dwells in the
soul and cleaues to the faculties and powers of it; and then indeed is a man
truly regenerate, when that corruption that is naturally in the powers of his
soul, and in the affections of his heart, is removed: And a man may know that
he is regenerate, by this, as by a special note; If so be a man find the
affections of his heart, especially the chief and ruling affections of it,
still as strong, and as powerful in him as ever they were, and yet the
corruption of them in a good measure removed and taken away, then he is truly
regenerate. For example: Do thou find thy natural affection of joy, of
delight, and rejoicing, as strong and as powerful in thee as ever it was, and
that the sinfulness and corruption of that affection is removed? Do thou
find now, that thou can as heartily rejoice and delight thy self as ever
thou could, not in sin and in outward things, not in carnal pleasure, in
Drunkenness, in Good-fellowship and merry meetings, and such like, but in the
love and favor of God in Christ, in obedience to his will, in the duties of
his worship, in hearing the Word, in Prayer, and such like, and it is now the
joy of thine heart to be exercised in holy things? Surely, that is a special
evidence and testimony that thou art truly regenerate, and that the Spirit of
God has wrought powerfully in thee.

So for the affection of anger: Do thou find that affection as strong in thee
as ever it was, and yet the sinnefulnesse of it removed? Do thou find that
now thine anger is stirred up not on every trifling occasion, nor expressed for
mere private causes concerning thine own person, but on weighty and great
causes, the manifest offense of God, and that it is kindled in thee through
desire to maintain the glory of God, and out of a love of virtue and justice,
and directed against sin, and not the person of the sinner? Surely, then thou
may thereupon conclude to the comfort of thine own soul, that thou art
truly regenerate, thy affection still remaynes, but the corruption of it is in
some good measure removed and taken away, and so we may try our selves in
other affections: and let us remember this, that the corruption of nature is
not a corruption of the substance of the soul, but a real distinct thing from
the soul, a thing that cleaues to the faculties of the soul, and the
affections of the heart, and may be severed from the soul, by the powerful
work of Gods Spirit; and so Regeneration does not abolish any faculty of the
soul, nor any affection of the heart, but only takes away the filthiness and
corruption that cleaues to them, and then indeed we are truly regenerate, when
the affections of our hearts remain in full force and strength, and the
sinfulness of them is removed.

VERSE. 21. I find then by the Law (or this Law: for so the words are to be
read) that when I would do good, evil is present with me.


IN this Verse our Apostle further strengthens his foregoing Proposition, that
though to will good was present with him, as he was regenerate, yet to
perform good he wanted power; by this that when he would have done good, he
was hindered by evil, that was ready and at hand, and stood up in his way. And
this Verse contaynes another conclusion, inferd on foregoing matter: and here
the Apostle further concludes, that he being willing to do good, as he was
regenerate, there was, as it were, a Law laid on him to the contrary, and he
was as it were enjoined to the contrary, and he was under such a condition, as
he could not do that good: and he makes known what that Law was, namely,
evil that was present with him: yea, he amplifies this from his own
experience, that he found it so in his own experience. I find, says he, when
I would do good, there is a Law, or this Law, to the contrary, even evil
present with me: and that hinders me that I cannot do it. That is the
general drift and purpose of the Apostle in this Verse.

I find then a Law. I find (says the Apostle:) that is, Interpretation
Mine own experience teaches me, and I am able to speak out of mine own
experience: I find it so in mine own experience: When I would do good (for
those words in the right order of the sentence are the next, and so the next to
be expounded) and the meaning of them is this: When I, as I am regenerate,
would do that which is truly good, a Law (or this Law.) The word Law is here
diversely taken by diverse Interpreters; some take it in the good part, for the
Law of God, others in the evil part, for the Law of sin and corruption. I
will not trouble you with variety of Interpretations, but give you that
meaning of it which I conceive to be most agreeable to the Context; and as I
take it, the word (Law) is here put to signify a strong and forcible power,
even such a power as has in it the force and strength of a Law, that is, a
commanding, a controlling, and a binding power.

And that the word Law in this place, is thus to be taken, may plainly appear
by the use of it, Verse. 23. where the Apostle speaks of the Law of the
members, and the Law of the mind, leading captive to the Law of sin: meaning
the power of sin in the mind, and the power of grace in the mind. And the
Apostle here puts it down indefinitely without any addition, (...), a Law, or
this law, and not the law of the flesh of sin, of death; because he
presently subioynes what law he meant, namely, the evil that was present with
him. Evil (says he) is present with me. And by evil here, we are to
understand evil motions, lusts, and desires arising from the corruption of
nature; and those were present with the Apostle, that is, they were ready and
at hand, to cross and to hinder the good purposes and desires of his heart.
Thus then, as I take it, we are to understand the Apostle in the words of this
Verse, as if he had said,

I find then in mine own experience, that thus it is with me; when I, as I am
regenerate, would do that which is truly good, then there is a strong and
forcible power, as it were a Law, commanding, and controlling, and binding me
to the contrary: I mean, the evil motions, lusts and desires that arise from
the corruption that still in part abides in me, which are ready and at hand
to cross and to hinder the good purposes and desires of my heart: and by them
I find my self yoked and hindered in the doing of good.

Here first observe we, that the Apostle does not barely affirm this, that
when he would do good, evil as a Law was present with him; but he affirms
it as a truth, whereof he had experience: and he says, he found it so in his
own experience; I find (says he) that when I would do good, evil, as a
law, is present with me. Hence take we notice of it,

That Gods Children find it in their own experience, Gods children have
experience of it, that when they would do good, evil is present with them.
evil, as a Law, is present with them, and hinders them. It is not only so
indeed, that when Gods Children purpose good, and set on the doing of good,
that evil is present, and ready at hand, and starts up in them, and hinders
them in the doing of it, but they also find it so to be, and GODS Children
are able to speak it out of their own experience, and to affirm it as an
experienced truth, the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
Gal. 5.17. and there being evil motions and lusts, stirring in the hearts of
Gods Children, they are able to mark and to observe them, and to take notice of
them, they being enlightened and having the light of the Lord in them, as it
is, Prou. 20.27. Prou. 20.27.
even that Light that searches all the bowels of the belly. They are able to
see and discern that evil that starts up in them, against the good they
purpose and desire to do, and they are able to mark and observe it, and so
they are able to affirm it out of their own observation and experience, that
so it is with them, that when they would do good, there is some evil starts
up and hinders them, so as either they do not that good they would, or they
do it very untowardly. Thus doubtless it is with every Child of God; Every
Child of God is able to say, that in some measure he has experience of it in
himself, that when he would do good, evil is present with him and hinders
him. And for the use of this,

They vainly boast that they are children of God, Familists confuted.
that find not this in themselves, and have not experience of it in some
measure. They that say, as the Familists and other proud spirits do, that they
do good things, and find no hinderance at all in the doing of them, but do
them perfectly, they contradict the common experience of all Gods Children: and
so it is a plain evidence against them, that they are not in the number of
GODS Children: And indeed, if we would approve our selves to be the Children
of God, and make it good to the comfort of our own souls, that we are so
indeed, we must be able to say, that in some measure we have experience of
this in our selves, that when we would do good, evil is present with us and
hinders us, yea, we must be able to say, I find this or that particular evil
starting up in me and hindering me, 2. Cor. 2.11.
as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 2.11. We must not be ignorant of Satan's
Enterprises, that is, of his wiles and fetches, of his secret conueyance of
sin into our hearts. So, doubtless, we must not be ignorant of the secret
working of sin in our selves, we must be able to see and discern the lusts
of our hearts that are stirring and working in us, and how they rise up and
hinder us when we would do good, and to say out of our own experience, I
find that thus and thus I am hindered when I would do good, this or that
evil starts up and hinders me, when I am about to do it. So it is with Gods
Children; yea, the more holy a man is, the more he sees and finds in his own
experience, that when he would do good, evil is present with him. And so it
must be with thee, if thou would approve thy self a Child of God: and this
is no matter of utter discouragement.

Now further: In that the Apostle says, When I would do good, evil. as a
Law, is present with me, some evil motion, lust or desire is ready and at
hand, countermanding and controlling the good I purpose, and desire in my
heart: Hence we are given to understand,

That it is the common condition of all Gods Children, The good motions that
are in Gods Children, are ever either interrupted, or troubled, or mingled with
some evil motions.
that the good motions that come from the Spirit of grace in them, are ever
either interrupted or troubled, or they are mingled with some evil motions
that arise from that corruption that still abides in them. In the best of Gods
Children there is ever some evil, ready and at hand to countermand and
control them, when they purpose and desire to do any good thing, and no
sooner do GODS Children purpose and desire to do any good thing, or attempt,
or set on the doing of it, but there is some evil motion or lust present and
ready to hinder them, presently either pride, or self-love, or Vain-glorie,
Hypocrisy, or doubt, or fear, or the like, starts up in them and looks them
in the face, and controlls them, and either hinders them from the doing of that
good, or intermingles it self with the doing of it.

And hence, no doubt, it was, that David, Psalm. 86.11. Psalm. 86.11.
having prayed that the Lord would teach him his way, and then he would walk
in his Truth, he presently subioynes, Knit or join mine heart unto thee, that
I may fear thy Name. As if he had said, Though I be taught of thee, O Lord,
and have in me, through thy grace, a will to walk in thy Truth, yet unless
thou knit my heart fast unto thee, it is ready to start aside, and by some
evil motion or lust to be transported, and to be carried away from thee, and
I am in danger to be crossed and hindered in respect of the good I would do;
and therefore, Lord, knit my heart, and tie it fast to thee, and keep it close
with thee.

And hence also it was, that David seeing the people to offer willingly and
with joy, he thus prayed for them, 1. Chron. 29.18. O Lord God (says he) of
ABRAHAM, 1. Chron. 29.18.
IZHAK and ISRAEL our fathers, keep this for ever in the purpose and the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. DAVID
knew well, that if the Lord did not keep that good purpose in them, it would
be lost and gone, some evil motion or lust would either hinder it, or thrust
it quite out of their hearts. And thus indeed it is with the best of Gods
Children; no sooner do they purpose to do any good thing, or set on the doing
of it, but there is some motion or lust starts up and looks them in the face,
and countermands them, and either hinders them from doing of that good, or
intermingles it self with the doing of it: and why? The reason of it is this,

There is flesh and corruption still in part abiding in the best of Gods
Children that live on the face of the earth, rebellious inclinations, or else
to deface and repress the good motions of the Spirit, and so it comes to
pass, that no sooner does a Child of God conceive a good thought and purpose
in his heart, to do any good thing, or set himself to do it, but there is
some evil motion or lust starts up, and looks him in the face, and controlls
him, and either hinders him from the doing of it, or intermingles it self with
that good that he does.

And this being a truth, The best works of the regenerate, are sinful in part.
that the best works of the regenerate are sinful, and come short of that
holiness that ought to be in them: for why? when a Child of God would do
good, there is some evil present with him, and ready at hand, and controlls
him, and either hinders him from doing of it, or intermingles it self with the
good he does, and so it must needs be in part sinful: and if the Lord
should examine it, according to the rigor of his Law and Justice, it is not
able to abide the trial.

Some objections are brought to the contrary; but of small moment, and
therefore I pass by them, and come to another use of this point.

Is it so, We are to cherish the good thoughts, purposes and desires of our
heart, and to labor to bring them forth into act.
or set on the doing of it, but there is some evil motion or lust starts up,
and looks them in the face, and countermands them, and either hinders them
from doing of it, or intermingles in the doing of it? Surely then it concerns
us, when any good thought is put into our hearts, and when we have a purpose
or desire of doing any good thing, to look to it, to watch over our own
hearts, and to make much of that good thought, purpose, and desire, and to
cherish it, and to labor by all good means to bring it forth into act. If we
do not so, certainly some evil motion or lust starting up in our hearts,
will outface it, and will bear it down. Happily thou have, in time of hearing
the Word, a good motion put into thine heart, and on the hearing of thine own
sin reproved, thou have a purpose to leave it; as to lay aside thy Pride,
thy Garishnesse in apparel, thy Drunkenness, thy Swearing, and such like. Oh,
make much of that good purpose, there will be some evil motion or lust ready
to countermand it, and when thou come abroad into the air of the World, a
thousand to one it will be quenched and gone, and it will vanish and come to
nothing; thine own heart will then furnish thee with a thousand excuses to the
contrary.

And so it may be, thou have a purpose to follow thy calling with diligence,
to serve God, and to show thy self religious and one truly fearing God. Well,
look to it, and watch thine own heart; thy heart will be ready to suggest
one excuse or other to the contrary, as the hardness, the impossibility, the
trouble and the danger of the matter; as that (forsooth) it will bring loss of
favor, of goods, of liberty, or the like: yea, that thou shall be mocked and
pointed at with the finger, and called a Puritan, or the like, as it is, Prou.
22.13. One Lion or other will be in the way. Oh, therefore look to it, when
thou have any good thought, purpose, or desire put into thine heart, of
forsaking evil, or doing any good, make much of it, cherish it, and pray to
the Lord to keep that good purpose in thine heart, as David did, 1. Chron.
29.18. No sooner have thou any good purpose put into thine heart, but some
evil motion or lust will be ready to control it: and therefore it concerns
thee to look to it, and to cherish it, and to make much of it, and to labor
by all good means to bring it forth into act.

VERSE. 22.23. For I delight in the Law of God, concerning the inner man:

But I see another Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind,
and leading me captive unto the Law of sin which is in my members.


IN these two Verses our Apostle lays before us the third degree of the
spiritual combat between the flesh and the Spirit, in them that are truly
regenerate, still insisting in his own example, namely, this, that his delight
was in good, touching his inner man, but yet he was led captive by the law of
his members to sin: so that here the Apostle makes known in his own person,
the spiritual Combat more fully and plainly, and in a further degree: for to
delight in the Law of God, is more then to will good, and to have the law of
the members rebelling against the Law of the mind, is more then simply to will
evil, or to do evil. For the connection of these Verses with foregoing
matter, we have here a proof of that the Apostle said, Verse. 21. That when he
would do good, evil, as a law, was present with him; from this, that the Law
of his members rebelled against the Law of his mind, and led him captive unto
the law of sin, which was in his members: and that is amplified by his
delight in the Law of God, that though he delighted in the Law of God in his
inner man, yet the law of his members rebelled against the Law of his mind:
and therefore when he would do good, evil, as a law, was present with him.
That is the dependence of these two Verses on the Verse foregoing, and the
general matter of them.

Come we to handle them severally. In the two and twentieth Verse the Apostle
makes known his delight in the Law of God; that he delighted in the Law of
God: and lest he should be mistaken, he explaines himself, by limiting his
speech to the Inner man, that is, was in his inner man that he delighted in the
Law of God. I delight (says he) in the Law of God, concerning the inner man.
And so the matter of this Verse, is the Apostles delight in the Law of God,
expressed with restraint of that delight to his Inner man.

For I delight in the Law of God: that is, Interpretation
I take pleasure and joy, yea much pleasure and great joy, I find much
sweetness and pleasure: for so the word signifies in the Original. And by
the Law of God we are here to understand the Moral Law, which the Apostle,
Verse 12. said, was holy, and just, and good: which makes known the good will
of God, touching all good duties, both of piety toward God, and of love, and
justice, and mercy toward men. In this Law the Apostle took pleasure and
delight, and that in the knowledge and meditation of it, and in the practice of
the duties therein required.

Concerning the Inner man. Some would have only the mind and understanding to
be meant: but indeed that comes too short of the purpose and meaning of that
Phrase. By Inner man, we are to understand the regenerat part throughout, both
in soul and in body, even whatsoever is either within in the powers of the
soul, or without in the parts and members of the body, being renewed by grace,
and so far forth as they be regenerate and renewed. And the regenerate part is
thus called the Inner man, because Regeneration is chiefly seated in the heart,
and in the mind, and in, in the inward powers and faculties of the soul, and
does diffuse and spread it self from thence, to the parts and members of the
body: Luke 17.2.
and therefore Christ says to the Pharisees, Luke 17.2. The Kingdom of God is
within you. Romans 2.29.
And the Apostle says, Romans 2.29. that true Circumcision is of the heart, and
in the Spirit. And hence it is called, The Hid man of the heart, 1. Pet. 3.4.
Let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt. That is one special reason why the
regenerate part is called The Inner man.

Now then, thus conceive we the Apostles meaning in the words of this Verse, as
if he had said: For I, as I am regenerate, and in that part of me that is
regenerate and renewed by grace throughout, both in my soul and in my body, in
the powers and faculties of the one, and in the parts and members of the other,
do take great pleasure and much joy in the good Law of God, commanding good
duties, both of piety toward God, and of love, justice, and mercy toward
men. I find much sweetness and pleasure in the knowledge of that Law, and in
meditating in the same, and in the practice of good duties that are therein
ce^tayned, according to that measure of grace that is given to me.

Now in that the Apostle here says of himself, that as he was regenerate, he
delighted in the Law of God: The point hence is this,

That Gods children, Gods Children believe the good Law of God, and in the
things therein commanded.
and in the things therein commanded, it is a matter of sweetness and much
pleasure to them, to be acquainted with the Law of God, and to meditate in it,
and according to the measure of grace given, and as occasion is offered them,
to yield obedience to it; it is even the joy of the hearts of Gods children, to
know the Law of God, to meditate in it, and to practice the duties therein
required, as any just occasion is offered. John 5.3.
And hence it is, that S. John says, 1. John 5.3. that the Commandments of
God are not grievous. His meaning is to them that have their hearts renewed by
grace, to them the Commandment of God was not grievous, but easy, sweet and
pleasant. David makes known a marvelous great delight he took in the Laws
and Commandments of God, Psalm. 119.97.
Psalm. 119.97. Oh how love I thy Law! it is my meditation continually. As if he
had said, I am not able to express the greatness of my love and delight in
thy Law: I want words to express it. And in that Psalm we find, that he
sets forth his love and delight in the Law and Commandments of God by many
notable similitudes, Verse 14. I have had as great delight in the way of thy
Testimonies, as in all riches. Verse 72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto
men, then thousands of gold and silver, Verse 111. Thy Testimonies ban^ I taken
as an heritage for ever: for they are the joy of mine heart. Verse 127.
Therefore love I thy Commandments about gold, yea, above most fine gold. Verse
162. I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds much spayle: and the like. And
Psalm 19.10. Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10.
he puts it down positiuely, that the Statutes and Judgments of the Lord are
more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then the
honey, and the honycombe.

Thus it was with David, and doubtless, thus it is with as many as have the
Spirit of DAVID, even with as many as have the Spirit of Grace and
Sanctification, and are truly regenerate: it is their joy, and their delight
is to know the Law of God, to meditate in it, and to practice the duties
therein required, as just occasion is offered: and the reasons and grounds of
their delight are these,

First, they are able to look on the Law of God with a spiritual eye, and to
see the beauty and excellency of it; even therein to behold most absolute
holiness and righteousness set before them, yea, the very image of God
Himself, in respect of his perfect Justice, manifested: and these things are
most lovely, and must needs affect and draw the hearts of Gods children to
them.

Again, secondly Gods children know, that howsoever the Moral Law is not the
cause of eternal life, yet it is the rule of good life, and the way in which
they are to walk that shall be saved: and therefore they joy and delight in
the knowledge of it, and in meditating in it, and in the practice of the duties
required in it, as just occasion is offered. Every child of God has his
measure of delight in these things, indeed some a greater, and some a less
measure, according to the measure of grace that is given them.

But happily here some may say,

I answer, David said, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me: for that is a
benefit unto me, and let him reprove me, and it shall be as a precious Oil
that shall not break mine head.

Gods children love the Law of God, because it discouers sin to them, and
they like those means best, that are most powerful and effectual to that
purpose. Thus it is with every child of God, and with every one that is truly
regenerate in some measure.

Now then let this, A ground of trial, by which men may know whether they be
the children of God or no.
By this, as one special note, we may know, whether we be Gods children, and
truly regenerate or no. Do thou find that thou have a measure of true
delight in the Law of God? Do thou take pleasure in the knowledge of it, in
meditating and musing on it? Do thou find sweetness in the practice of the
good duties therein required? Is it the joy of thine heart to be exercised in
the duties of piety, in hearing the Word of God, in praying, in the duties of
equity, justice, love and mercy to toward men? Are these things as meat and
drink to thee? Do thou find that thou can delight in these things, as at a
Feast or Banquet? Do thou find sweetness in the Word of God, when thy sins
are thereby discovered and rebuked? And can thou rejoice vnsaynedly and
bless God for it, when any thing thou take pleasure in, is discovered to be
a sin? And do thou love them that lovingly admonish thee of a manifest
sin? Is it thus with thee? Surely, that is an infallible evidence and
testimony that thou art truly regenerate, and have the Spirit of grace in
thee, and that thou art a child of God?

But on the other side, If so be thou find that thou have no delight in the Law
of God, thou carest not for the knowledge of it, the means to come by the
knowledge of it being offered, thou regardest not, and thou find no
sweetness in the practice of good duties, in hearing the Word, in Prayer, in
receiving the Sacraments, in sanctifying the Sabbath, and other holy duties, or
in duties of love toward men. Are these things tedious and irksome to thee?
and thou say as the people did, Amos 8.5 Amos. 8.5.
When will the Sabbath be gone? It is wearisome to thee to perform holy
duties, and thou performest them heavily and sleepily. And when the Law and
Word of God discouers thy sins, thou art so far from loving it, and
delighting in it, as in that respect thou hate it, and could wish there
were no such Law, yea, thou hate those that lovingly admonish thee of thy
sins, and justly reprove thee for the same, as it is the manner of too many;
Is it thus with thee? Deceive not thy self, whosoever thou art; thy case is
not good, thou art yet in the dregs of nature, the Spirit of God has not yet
wrought on thee, and thou can not comfort thy self in this, that thou art a
child of God. No, no: every child of God has some measure of true delight in
the Law of God, in the knowledge of it, in meditating on it, and in the
practice of good duties: and therefore hereby try thy self. Happily thou will
say, Wicked men and hypocrites sometimes delight in the Law and in the Word of
God, Mat. Matthew. 13.20.
13.20 Christ says, Temporaries, such as fall away in the time of trial,
receive the Word with joy: and it is said of Herod, Mar. 6.20. that he heard
JOHN gladly, and did many things.

How then shall I know that my delight in the Law and Word of God,

I answer thee,

First,

Again,

By these two notes then try thy self, and never rest, til thou find that
thou do delight in the whole Law and Word of God, whether it teach comfort,
or threaten, or rebuke, and that thy delight in the Word of God is a working
delight, working in thee an holy care and endeavor, to conform thy self to
the holy will of God in all things, as well in thy thoughts and inward
affections, as in thy outward actions: and thereupon thou may conclude clude
to thy comfort, that thy delight in the Law and Word of God goes beyond the
delight of an hypocrite, and thence also thou may conclude, that thou art
truly regenerate, and have in thee the Spirit of grace and sanctification.

Again, is it so, Gods children find unspeakable comfort in the Word of the
Gospel.
Do they find sweetness in that that reueales sin, and does accuse and
condemine for sin? Surely, much more do they find sweetness and comfort in
the Word of the Gospel, that discovering to them the riches of Gods mercy in
Christ for the pardon of their sins, without question their joy and delight
in that, in knowing it and believing it, is unspeakable and glorious. The world
commonly thinks that the life of a true beleening Christian, is without joy; an
heavy, lumpish, and uncomfortable life, and that there is no mirth in them that
truly fear God, they live a life without delight. Alas, poor souls! they are
deceived that so think; Gods children find sweetness and comfort in the Law
of God, humbling them and wounding them for their sins, and much more
sweetness do they find in the sweet promises of the Gospel: yea, they find
such sweetness in them (being known, believed, and applied to themselves by a
true faith) as they would not part withal for ten thousand worlds: for those
bind up their broken hearts and wounded souls, with heavenly comfort, and
they work in them peace of conscience, which is a continual feast, and they
settle them in assurance of right to eternal life, happiness, and glory in
heaven, and do give them a task and a beginning of that joy, eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, nor the heart of man conceived: and therefore thou
art deceived, that think they have no delight, and live a life without joy.

In that the Apostle here says, He delighted in the Law of God, concerning the
innerman; Hence also we gathered argument of his regeneration, that therefore
the Apostle was truly regenerate, because his delight was in the Law of God
concerning the inner man. As first this, in that he delighted in the knowledge
of the Law of God, and in obedience to it. Therefore he was a man truly
regenerate, and again in that here he speaks of his Inner man, thereby
meaning his regenerate part, that therefore also he was a man truly regenerate.

Now against this argument objections are brought: we have heretofore
propounded the objection that lies against the first, and answered it, Verse.
16. and therefore I pass by that, and I will now only propound the objection
made against the second argument, and answer that, and then proceed.

Thus then some do object; say they, The Inner man does not here signify the
regenerate part, but by Inner man, we are to understand the mind, as standing
in opposition to the body: and for this they bring 2. Cor. 4.16. where the
Apostle says, Though our outward manperish, yet the inward man is renewed daily.

Meaning, outward man, the body: and by inwardman, the mind: yea, say they,
the Apostle so expounds himself, Verse 25. of this Chapter: Then I my self in
my mind serve the Law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin. By his mind,
understanding the same that before he expressed, in saying the Inner man. Now
the mind is formed as well in unregenerate persons, as in them that be truly
regenerate; and therefore it is no good argument to prove the Apostle to be
regenerate, because he speaks of his inner man.

Now to this I answer: inner man, is here meant the mind; for the inner man
is here opposed not to the body, but to the members, and to the flesh, by which
the unregenerate part is signified: and therefore it must needs be, that by the
inner man, is here meant the regenerate part. And that this is no
misconstruction of these words, that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. makes it
clear, where he says, That ye may be strengthened by his Spirit in the Inner
man: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Showing plainly, that by
the Inner man, he means not only the mind, but the heart also, and the
affections of it, and the regenerate part throughout. As for the Text alleged,
2. Cor. 4.16. they misunderstand it, expounding the inward man to be the mind,
and the outward man, the body.

The Text it self is against that Exposition; for the Apostle says, The
inward man is renewed daily. Now renouation is not only of the mind, but it is
also of all other powers and faculties of the soul, yea of all the parts and
members of the body, and he says again, Though our outward man perish, or be
corrupted; meaning, whatsoever in true believers is by the Cross and by
afflictions weakened, and diminished, and purged out: and that is not only the
corruption of the body, but the corruption also of the soul, and that chiefly
even the sinful lusts and desires of the heart, love of the world, love of
pleasures, and carnal joy and delight: and so that Text makes rather against
them, then for them. And whereas they allege the Apostles own Exposition in
the last Verse of this Chapter, if the words be rightly understood, they make
nothing to their purpose: for certainly the mind serving God, is the part of
man that is spiritual and truly regenerate: the mind being not regenerate, but
in the natural state and condition, it is defiled, Tit. 1.15. and cannot serve
God. And therefore when the Apostle says, I my solfe in my mind serve the Law
of God, he means, in his mind regenerate, and renewed by grace: and the mind
is put for the whole Inner man, and for his regenerate part throughout, and so
it still remaynes a true note of the Apostles regeneration, that he here
speaks of his Inner man, and it is a true note to others, that they also are
truly regenerate, if they be able to speak it in truth, that they have in them
an Inner man, or new man, and that now they are so wrought on by the Spirit of
grace, as that they find themselves altered and changed throughout, that the
Image of God in some measure is set on all the powers of their souls, and on
all the parts and members of their bodies, and that now they are new creatures
in Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 5.17. That is a true note of their Regeneration: and
let that serve for answer to the Objection propounded.

Now further, in that the Apostle here speaking of his regenerate part, sets it
forth in these terms, and calls his regenerate part throughout both in soul
and body, his Inner man, and that for the reason which before I gave, because
Regeneration is chiefly seated in the heart and mind, and in the inward powers
and faculties of the soul: hence we may take up this conclusion,

That true Regeneration is chiefly seated in the heart and in the mind: True
regeneration is chiefly seated in the heart and mind of man,
a man or woman that would find true comfort in the work of grace in
themselves, must find it working and powerful, especially and principally in
their hearts and minds, howsoever the work of grace must be found in all the
powers of the soul, yea in all chapters and members of the body, yet it must
be found chiefly in the heart and in the mind. And hence it is that the Apostle
thus exhorts, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 4.23.
Romans 12.2. Be ye changed by the re^^^ing of your mind. And Ephesians. 4.23. he
uses an exhortation to the same purpose, Be renewed in the spirit of your
mind, 2. Cor. 2. Cor. 7.1.
7.1. That we may grow up in full holiness in the fear of God (says the
Apostle) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit. As if he had faid, We cannot grow up to full holiness or to sound and
true holiness, if we be not cleansed from all filthiness both of the flesh
and spirit, and especially of Spirit; for what is it for a man to cleanse his
hand, foot, eye, or tongue, or the like, and yet have his mind polluted and
filthy? Surely, that is with the Pharise to make clean the outside of the cup
and platter, when the inside is full of rottenness and corruption: and we
know, it is but in vain for a man to lop off the branches, or to cut down the
body of a Tree that he would have grow no more, and yet leave the root in the
earth; for that will sprout and grow up again; so it is to no purpose to cut
off as it were some branches of sin, and leave the root of it in the heart
and in the mind; for that will at one time or other send forth other bitter and
unsavory fruit. We must therefore labor to stock up the root of sin,
and to find the work of grace chiefly in our hearts and minds, if we would
have true comfort in the work of grace in our selves: and the reason of it may
be these.

First, as before the fall of man,

And again,

And therefore for the use of this. Outward reformation alone, is no ground of
true comfort.
think not to find true comfort to thine own soul, only because thy outward
man is in some measure reformed, and thy hands, eyes and other outward parts of
the body are reformed, and that in respect of thy outward carriage thou
walk unblameably and without repoofe. Alas, this thou may do, and yet
want the power of grace in thy heart and mind; yea, this thou may do, and
yet be ignorant of God, and of the ways of God, and be yet a man or woman of
an unreformed heart. We see it in common experience, that some that are
grossly ignorant, yet walk unblameably in respect of the World, they deal
justly and truly with every one, yea, and they perform some outward duties of
Piety and Religion, and an Hypocrite, one that is rotten at the heart, and
carries in him an heart full of wicked and noisome lusts, of Pride, Envy,
Covetousness, and the like, may make a goodly show, and may seem to be
religious, yea, he may carry himself so religiously in respect of his outward
carriage, as that they that are truly religious, and converse with him, cannot
discern him, but may be deceived by him. Thus did Judas, he carried himself
so smoothly as the rest of the Apostles could not discern him, no, when Christ
said, One of them should betray him, they could not presently point at Judas,
and say he was the man. No, no, doubtless Judas had behaved himself as
religiously in show, as the best of them, yet was he a notable Hypocrite, he
had a rotten heart within him, and a bitter root of covetousness was in his
heart: and therefore rest not in this, whosoever thou art, that thou art
outwardly reformed; that will deceive thee if thou rest in it. If thou would
have true comfort in the work of grace in thy self, labor to find it
powerful in thy heart and in thy mind principally, and to this purpose
consider, that if grace be not powerful and working specially in thine heart,
in time of trial it will deceive thee, and the Lord will at one time or other
discover thee and lay thee open to thy shame. And hence it is, that many fall
away from the profession they have made in former time, and return with the
Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her tumbling in the mire, because indeed
they were never sound at the root: grace was never powerful in their hearts.
Oh then, labor for this, and never rest till thou find it in thy self, even
grace working especially in thine heart and mind, never rest till thou find
thy mind truly enlightened, and thine heart truly reformed, and that thou
make conscience of thy very thoughts, and that thine heart is upright with
God, though thou have many faylings; and that indeed will yield thee true
comfort both in life and death.

One thing yet remains to be noted; in that the Apostle here calls his
regenerate part his Inner man, and gives to it the title of a whole man, not a
piece or part of a man; but as it were an entire and whole man. Hence we are
further taught,

That true Regeration is entyre, True Regeneration is entire, spreading it
self over the whole man.
and over all the parts and members of the body, and where sanctifying grace
is truly wrought, it is not found in one power or faculty of the soul, and
not in anoher, but it is found in a proportionable measure in every power and
faculty of the soul, and in every part and member of the body: for why? The
Spirit of GOD never works in any man or woman, but he goes through stitch with
his work, he works throughout; if he enlighten the mind with saving
knowledge, he also works on the will, and on the affections in like proportion,
and in all other faculties of the soul.

And hence it is, that regeneration is called a new Creation, 2. Cor. 5.17. If
any man be in Christ, 2. Cor. 5.17. Tit. 3.5.
let him be a new creature: and a new birth, Tit. 3.5. and therefore it must
needs be entyre, and of the whole man; for doubtless the Spirit of God brings
not forth a monstrous birth, all head and nothing else, but he brings forth a
perfect birth, I mean, perfect in respect of all the parts, and where he
sanctifies, he sanctifies throughout, as the Apostle prayed, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
in Spirit, in soul and in body.

Let no man then deceive himself, Illumination is not sufficient to prove
true Regeneration.
and because he has in him some knowledge of God and of good things, and is
able to speak of such things, and yet notwithstanding his heart is not
reformed, but he nourishes in his heart some corrupt lust, or some inordinate
affection of Pride, of Envy, of Covetousness or the like: if any so think,
he deceiues himself.

Herod knew much, and did many good things: yet he was a mere carnal man,
possessed with an inordinate love of his Brothers Wife. And therefore think
not that the Spirit of God has wrought in thee to thy Regeneration, unless
thou find that he has wrought on thee throughout. If thou would be sure
that thou art truly regenerate, thou must find a proportionable measure of
grace in every power and faculty of thy soul; thou must find not only thy
mind enlightened with knowledge, but thine heart also in like proportion
sanctified, and that now thou do not only know God as he has revealed
himself in his Word and Works, but do also acknowledge him, and put thy
confidence in him as a loving Father, and that now thou love God, his Word,
his Children, and do truly fear God, and endeavor to please him in all
things, leading a pure and unblameable life, as becomes a new creature: that
will give thee assurance, that thou art truly regenerate.

VERSE. 23. But I see another law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my
mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members.


THe Apostle having said in the Verse before, that he delighted in the Law of
God, concerning the Inner man, and as he was renewed by grace: here he makes
known how it was with him, in respect of the remainder of sin that still
abode in him (namely) thus, that there was an enmity between that remainder
of sin, and the Grace of Regeneration that was in him. And first, he sets
down the measure of that enmity, as that sin remaining in him, resisted and
rebelled against the grace that was wrought in him, it did violently resist it
as a Rebel his Prince. And he amplifies that by his own sense, feeling and
sight of it, that he saw it so to be; he says, I see another law in my
members rebelling against the Law of my mind. And then, secondly, he makes
known the issue and success of that resistance and that rebelling of sin,
which was this, That it led him captive to sin, and brought him under the
power of sin, in the words following: leading me captive unto the law of
sin, which is in my members. Thus we have the several parts of this Verse,
and the general matter of it.

Now for the first part of this Verse in these words: I see another law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind. I will stand awhile to clear
the words touching the sense and meaning of them: But I see another law in my
members.

I see. The word signifies, I behold, or look on. Interpretation
The meaning is, I plainly see and perceive, and I discern another law in my
members. The word (Law) is here put as before, Verse. 21. Metaphorically, to
signify the corruption of nature, and not that barely, but the power, and
force, and strength of it, having in it the power and force of a Law, as it
were ruling, governing and commanding. As if he had said, I see another power,
even the corruption of nature, which is as a Law that commands in my members.
Some would have the word (members) here to signify only the parts and members
of the body, but (as I take it) we are thereby to understand the same the
Apostle spoke of before, Verse 18. under the word flesh, namely, the
unregenerate part throughout, both in the powers of the soul, and in the parts
and members of the body. And the unregenerate part is thus called flesh, or
members, because when the corruption of nature breaks out, and brings forth
the effects and cursed fruits of it, it is seen and perceived rather in the
outward parts and members of the body, then in the inward powers and faculties
of the soul: and therefore the Apostle said, Romans 6.12.19.
Romans 6.12, 19. Let no sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof. Neither give your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity, to commit iniquity, but give your members
servants unto righteousness in holiness.

(Rebelling.) The word here rendered rebelling, is metaphorical, it is borrowed
and taken from such as openly rebel against their lawful Prince and
Sovereign, and take Weapons and bear Arms, and wage War against him, and
stand at open defiance with him; and it signifies not a weak, or secret, or
underhand resisting, but as it were an open and a violent opposing, even a
strong and powerful withstanding and striving against.

The Law of my mind. The word Law is here again put by way of similitude, for
the power and force of grace in the mind; and by (mind) we are to understand
the mind regenerate and renewed by grace; and by a Synechdoche, that is put
for the whole Inner man, and for the regenerate part throughout, both in soul
and in body; because here the mind is opposed to the members, or to the
flesh, by which the regenerate part is signified: and so by the Law of the
mind, is here meant the power of grace, as a Law commanding in the regenerate
part.

Thus then conceive we the Apostles meaning, when he says, But I see another
law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, as if he had said,

But I plainly see, and well perceive, and I discern another power and force,
I mean, the corruption of my nature, that still in part abides in me, which is
as a law that commands in that part of me that is unregenerate; I see, and I
discern, that mightily, violently, and strongly opposing, and striving against
the power of grace, that is in my whole Inner man, even the power of grace,
which is as a Law that commands to the contrary in that part of me that is
truly regenerate.

Now first, in that the Apostle having said in the Verse before, that he
delighted in the Law of God concerning the inner man, he presently subioynes
to it in this Verse, but I see another law in my members, rebelling against the
Law of my mind. As if he had said, But I see there is resistance, there is
opposition made against that delight of mine, by the remainder of sin still
abiding in me. Hence note we in a word the point was stood on before,

That Gods children have their delight they take in the Word of God, and in
good things, The delight that Gods children find in good things, is many times
crossed and hindered.
many times crossed and hindered, and besides outward things, as the world and
wicked men, and the like opposing them, in respect of their love and liking of
good things, and their delight in them, they have the remainder of sin still
abiding in them, to cross them, and to oppose against them: and when they
find sweetness and delight in good things, their own corruption is ready to
quash and quell that delight of theirs: because indeed (as heretofore I have
showed) corruption of nature still abiding in them, is stirring and working,
and one work of it is to defile and repress the good motions of the mind,
and the work of grace that is in them.

And hence it is, that no sooner does a child of God find delight in good
things, but his own corruption makes resistance and opposition against that
delight of his, and seeks to hinder it, and to shake it out of his heart. And
therefore know this, whosoever thou art, that thou can not look always to
find the like measure of delight in good things; thy delight in good things
will be sometimes greater, and sometimes less, for why? thine own corruption
makes resistance, and stands in opposition against that delight of thine, and
thou shall find it will sometimes hinder it, and weaken it, and lessen it in
the measure: and therefore when thou find in thee any measure of delight in
good things, make much of it, cherrish it, and labor to keep it in thine
heart, and to that purpose do these two things:

First, The least measure of delight in good things is to be cherished, how.
esteem of good things according to the worth and excellency of them, as Job
did, Job 23.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then mine
appointed food.

Secondly, establish thy delight by counsel, as it is Pro. 20.18. I mean, by
taking counsel with God: go to the Lord by prayer, be earnest and instant
with him to help and assist thee by his grace, that thou may continue
delighting in good things.

And if thou do these two things, doubtless thou shall be able to keep thine
heart in some good measure, delighting in good things, yea, thou shall find
thy delight in those things much increased.

Observe we in the next place, that the Apostle does not barely affirm this,
that there was a law in his members rebelling against the Law of his mind, but
he affirms it as a thing seen and discerned, and plainly perceived by him.
I see (says he) another law in my members rebelling against the Law of my
mind: I plainly see it, and I well perceive it. Hence then take we notice of
a special qualification of Gods children, and the point hence is this,

That thus it is with Gods children, Gods children are well acquainted with the
rebellion of their own hearts.
that they are well acquainted with the rebellion of their own hearts; Gods
children see, and well perceive the strong working of their own corruption
still in part abiding in them, how violently and mightily it opposes and
strives against the power of grace that is in them, they are not ignorant of
it, but they see and discern how far sin spreads it self in their nature,
and the great might and force it has in them. And hence it is, that the people
of God, and the children of God, many times complain of the rebellion of their
own hearts, and of the vileness of their corrupt nature; which they would
never do, if they had not a lively sense and feeling of it, and if they did
not clearly see it, and discern it. Isai. 63.17. The Prophet, in the behalf
of the people, complains of blindness of mind and hardness of heart; O
Lord, (says he) why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
heart from thy fear? And Isai. 64.6. We have all been as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes. And Psalm. 51.10. David cries
out, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and run a right Spirit within me.
Which he would not have done, but that he saw and discerned in him an
unclean heart, and a crooked spirit. And thus indeed it is with all Gods
children, they are well acquainted with the rebellion of their own hearts,
they plainly see, and perceive, and feel the strong working of sin in
themselves, and they discern the violent opposition that it makes against that
grace that is in them; Gods children painely see unbelief and doubting
opposing their faith, ignorance and erroneous conceits standing up against
their sound knowledge, hardness, and dullness, and deadness of Spirit,
standing against their delight and cheerfulness in good things and the like:
And the reason of it is this,

They have the life of grace in them, they have their eyes in their head, and
they have their spiritual senses about them, and they are apprehensiue, and
sensible of that opposition that is made against that life and power of grace
that is in them; and so they plainly see, and perceive, and feel the strong
working of sin in themselves, and they are well acquainted with the rebellion
of their own hearts.

Now then this for the Use: First, the rebellion of their own hearts; A
difference between the Regenerate and unregenerate discovered.
but (alas) it is far otherwise with the unregenerate, they have no manner of
sight, nor sense, nor feeling of the power and strong working of sin in
themselves; they have many sinful lusts ruling and reigning in them, and they
see them not, much less do they trouble them: you shall never hear a carnal
Gospeller, a carnal professor of the Gospel, complaining of his unbelief, of
his hardness of heart, of his deadnes and dullness in hearing the Word of God,
in praying, or the like; he has no sight of these things, he perceiues them
not: no, he perceiues not the temptations of Satan; the gross temptations of
Satan laid against him, never trouble him; which indeed is a plain evidence
that the strong man armed holds possession of him, Luke Luke 11.21.
11.21. And know it, whosoever thou art, if thou be ignorant, blind, and
unfeeling, in respect of the power of the sinful lusts that are in thee, it is
the more probable thou art still in thy natural blindness, and that thou art
not an haires-breadth beyond an unregenerate person.

Again, Comfort for such as are well acquainted with the rebellion of their
own hearts.
is it so with them, that they plainly see, and well perceive and feel the
strong working of sin in themselves, and how it opposes the power of grace
that is in them? Then here is comfort for thee, whosoever thou art that have a
sight of thine own inward rebellion, and do plainly see and discern the
strong working of sin, opposing against that power of grace that is in thee.

Do thou see unbelief and doubting opposing against thy faith, dullness and
deadnes of heart standing against thy delight and cheerfulness in good
things, and crossing and hindering thee in the performance of good duties?
Comfort thy self, it is no otherwise with thee then with the dearest of Gods
children, yea this is a plain evidence that thou art a child of God, and
truly regenerate; for certainly corruption never sees corruption, but grace
only sees it. And that thou have a true feeling of thine own inward
rebellion, it is from the life of grace, and from the Spirit of grace; and as
one says well, If thou feel the hardness of thine own heart, it is so much
comfort to thee, as it is a testimony that thine heart is not altogether
hardened: and therefore be not discouraged because thou see the inward
rebellion of thine own heart, and because thou feel a strong opposition
against that grace that is in thee. If thou see and feel these things with
grief, and desire to be freed from them, and to be better; and being
wearied and tired with sin, desire to please God in a simple obedience of
faith, comfort thy self; that seals up to thee, that thou art a child of
God: think on that to thy comfort.

The next thing that comes to be observed is this; the Apostle (as here we
see) speaking of the remainder of sin that still abode in him, and rebelling
against the power of grace that was in him, he expresses his mind under the
word [Law;] I see (says he) another law in my members, rebelling against the
Law of my mind. He compares the remainder of sin that was in him, to a law
ruling, governing, and commanding. Hence we are given to understand thus much,

That the corruption of nature does not only remain in GODS children in part,
The corruption of nature has great force in Gods children, in their
unregenerate part.
so long as they live in this world, but it has also great force in them; it
is as a Law that rules, and gouernes, and commands in that part of them that is
yet unregenerate, and so far forth as Gods children be unregenerate, the
remainder of sin does exercise a kind of authority in all the powers of
their souls, and in all the parts and members of their bodies, and it is as a
Law that commands and requires obedience to be given unto it; the corruption of
nature remaining in Gods children, is no weak and feeble thing, but it is a
thing that is strong and powerful in the best of them, in their unregenerate
part. And hence it is, that the corruption of nature that abides in true
believers, and in such as are truly regenerate, is still called The old man,
as Ephesians. 4.23. Put off the old man, says the Apostle, speaking to the Saints.
Even in Gods children it has the name and title of the old man, it is in them
as an old man, it is no tender weakling, but it is tough, and strong, and as it
were a man grown in years, and it carries with it some authority, and power,
and command in their unregenerate part.

And hence likewise it was, that the Apostle speaking to the Romans, of whom
he was persuaded that they were dead to sin, and quickened by grace to
newness of life, Romans 6.12.
Romans 6.12. he uses this disswasion or dehortation, Let not sin reign in
your mortal bod yes, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. As if he had
said, I know, and persuade my self, that you are truly regenerate, but yet I
know withal, that sin in part still abides in you, yea, it is not only in
you, but it is strong and powerful in you, so far forth as you are yet
unregenerate, and it will still look to rule, and reign, and command in you
as in former times; and therefore it concerns you to look to it: let not
sin rule and reign in you, that ye should obey in the lusts thereof. And to
these, many other testimonies might be added, confirming this truth: That the
corruption of nature does not only remain in Gods children in part, whilst
they live in this world, but it is as a Law that rules, and gouernes, and
commands in the best of them, in their unregenerate part, and so far forth as
they be unregenerate: yea, doubtless, Gods children find it so in their own
experience, that the corruption of nature that still abides in them in part,
sometimes commands in their understanding, sometimes in their will and
affections, sometimes in the parts and members of their bodies, yea, sometimes
they are ouercarried by it to some foul sin.

Now the reason and ground of it is this:

And this being a truth; first, The best actions of the Regenerate are
imperfectly good.
and will now only remember in a word, namely this, that the best actions of
the regenerate are imperfectly good, and they come short of that perfection
that ought to be in them: for why? The most holy and most regenerate that live
in the world, are throughout in part unregenerate, and so far forth as they
be unregenerate, the corruption of their own hearts has the command of them,
it rules, and gouernes, and commands as a Law in that part of them that is yet
unregenerate, and that being throughout, it cannot possibly be that their best
works should be perfect.

Again, is it so, The corruption of nature rules and commands in unregenerate
persons altogether and thorowout.
so long as they live in this world, but it is also as a Law ruling, and
gonerning, and commanding in their unregenerate part, and so far forth as
they be unregenerate? Is it thus with Gods children, and such as are truly
regenerate? How then, I beseech you, is it with unregenerate persons, and with
them that are yet in their natural state? Surely it must needs be, that the
corruption of nature, as a law, rules, and gouernes, and commands in them
altogether; in them there is no dram of sanctifying grace, there is nothing
but flesh in them; and therefore they are wholly and throughout ruled, and
governed, and commanded by the corruption of their own hearts; and that is a
miserable condition: yet so it is with every unregenerate person, his own
corruption has the whole command of him, and his own lusts are as laws unto
him, and the holy Ghost makes it known so to be in the Book of God. We read
Job 21.14. Job brings in the wicked, saying thus to God, Depart from us: we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways. And Ierem. 6.16. the Prophet brings in
the Lord, saying thus to his people, Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask
for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls. And he presently subioynes the answer of the people, We
will not walk therein. Now we may not think, that they were so forlorn, and
so shameless, as that they durst thus speak with their mouths; but the
meaning is, that thus they spoke in their hearts, and their affections spoke
thus, in that they purposed with themselves to cast off the yoke of the Lord,
and to live after their own lusts. And do not we find it in woeful
experience, that many cast off the Word of God, and the ways of God, and they
will not be guided by the will of God made known unto them? Yea, some stick
not to speak it, that they will follow their own ways, and will do what
seems good to themselves, say the Preachers what they will or can to the
contrary. And what is this but a plain evidence, that their own corruption
has the whole command of them, and that their own lusts are as laws to them,
and have the command of them altogether? and that is a fearful condition.

And take notice of it, whosoever thou art, that art yet in thy natural state
and condition; Have thou no evidence of sanctifying grace in thy heart? Do
thou not find and feel the power and the work of the Spirit in thy soul in
any measure? Surely, then this is thy case, then thine own corruption has the
whole command of thee, and the lusts of thine own heart are as laws to thee,
and they rule thee, and they command the, and thou art at their beck and
command, and a slave to them; and that is a miserable bondage: and if thou
tender the good of thy soul, hasten out of it with all possible speed.

Now further observe we, that the Apostle says, that remainder of sin that
dwelt in him, was as a law commanding in his members: I see another law in my
members: meaning, as I showed, his unregenerate part throughout, which is
expressed under the word (members,) because when the corruption of nature
breaks out, and brings forth the fruits of it, it is rather seen in the
parts and members of the body, then in the powers and faculties of the soul.
The point hence is this:

That the corruption of nature is especially seen and perceived by the fruits
of it, The corruption of nature is discerned, especially by the fruits of it,
breaking out by the parts and members of the body.
breaking out by the parts and members of the body, howsoever the corruption of
nature be strong and powerful in the powers and faculties of the soul, and
have a most strong working in them: and there is never any corrupt action in
the body, but there has been first a corrupt motion and sinful affection in
the soul, yet it shows it self as a law, ruling and commanding most
evidently and most apparently, in and by the sinful actions of the body, and
by the cursed frults of it that are brought forth in and by the parts and
members of the body: and hence it was that the Apostle, Romans 3.9. Romans 3.9.
having said that all both Jews and Gentiles were under sin, and that sin
had power over them, and was as a law ruling and commanding in them, and being
to prove that, and to make that manifest, he speaks of the power and working
of sin, and of the fruits of it in the several parts and members of their
bodies, Ver. 13.14, 15. Ver. 13.14.15.
Their throat (says he) is an open sepulcher, they have used their tongues to
deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness. Their feet are swift to shead blood: I am. 3.6. Iam. 3.6.
The Apostle says, The evil tongue is a world of wickedness. and Verse. 8. It
is full of deadly poison. to be seen in that part and member of the body. And
hence, doubtless, it was, that the Saints in former times labored to keep
the corruption of their hearts from breaking out by the parts and members of
their bodies, and to that purpose they made covenants with their eyes, and
tongues, and mouths, and lips, as Job 31.1. I made a covenant with mine eyes;
why then should I think on a maid? Psalm. 39.1. I thought (says DAVID) I will
take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth
bridled, while the wicked is in my sight. Psalm. 119.37. David prays, Turn
away mine eyes from regarding vanity, and Psul. 141.3. Set a watch, O Lord,
before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Thus did this Holy man pray,
and thus did he and others make covenants with the parts and members of their
bodies, because they knew well, that the corruption of their hearts is
especially seen and perceived by the fruits of it, breaking out by the parts
and members of the body. And the reasons of it are these:

First,

And secondly,

And therefore, on these grounds we may set this down as a certain truth, that
the corruption of nature is especially seen and perceived by the fruits of it,
breaking out by the parts and members of the body, and it shows it self as a
Law ruling and commanding, most evidently and most apparently in and by the
sinful actions of the body.

Now then this being a truth, it serves to teach us, We may safely judge sin
to be strong and powerful in whomsoever it breaks out in the fruits of it, by
the parts and members of the body.
and to be ruling and commanding in that man or woman, in whom we see it to
break out in the fruits of it, by the parts and members of the body: such as
declare their sins, as Sodom, and hide them not, as the Prophet speaks, Isai.
^.9. A man may see it, and even read it in their faces. Certainly in them
sin rules, and commands as a Law, and one may safely so judge. We have good
evidence for it: Common Drunkards and common Swearers, and such as utter out
whatsoever the malice, the pride, or lust of their hearts can suggest, and
proud persons, such as set out the vanity and pride of their hearts in their
shaggehaire, fore-tops, and garish attire, and the like, they think they are
hardly dealt withal, and there is wrong done them when they are thought to be
wicked and profane: but indeed there is good evidence for it, and we may
safely so judge of them, it is evident and apparent that sin rules and
commands in them as a Law, in that it breaks out in the fruits of it by the
parts and members of the body.

Yea but, says the proud person,

It may be so; yet that is but a mere conjecture, say some, are these so great
matters? Yea, they are so great, as they show plainly thou have no grace in
thy heart, but that the Devil sits in thy heart, and that sin has the
chief rule and command of thy whole man, and a man may so judge of thee.

Again, We must not only watch over our hearts, but also over the parts and
members of our bodies.
breaking out by the parts and members of the body? Surely, then we must not
only watch over our hearts, though over them chiefly, but we must also set a
watch over every part and member of our bodies, and not suffer our eyes to
wander after vanity, nor our tongues to roue and run at random, and to utter
forth whatsoever the lust of our hearts can suggest. I am. 1.26. says the
Apostle, If a man seemethreligious, and refrayneth not his tongue, but
deceineth his own heart, that man deceiues himself, his religion is but
vain. And on the contrary, if we narrowly watch over the parts and members of
our bodies, and suffer not sin to break out by any part or member of our
bodies, in the common practice of any known sin, this will be the comfort of
it, that sin does not rule and command our whole man.

In the next place comes to be considered, the measure of opposition and
resistance, that the remainder of sin made against that power of grace that
was in the Apostle, under the word (Rebelling.) I see another Law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind: that is, as I showed, The
remaynder of sin in Gods children makes a strong and violent opposition
against the power of grace, that is in them.
The point hence offered is this,

That the corruption of nature, that still in part abides in Gods children, is
as a Rebel against that power of grace that is in them, and as a Rebel it
does violently and strongly oppose and strive against it. The corruption of
nature that remaynes in Gods children, makes not a weak and feeble resistance
against the power of grace that is in them, but it makes a mighty, strong and
violent opposition against it, yea, it strives utterly to extinguish grace, to
root it out, and to destroy it, it fares with the remaynder of sin, and
with the lusts that arise thence, as it does with one that rises up in
rebellion against his natural and lawful Prince, and takes up arms against
him, under pretense of title to the Crown and Kingdom, as Absalom did against
his father David, 2. Sam. 15. 2. Sam. 15.
Such an one will not content himself only with this, to thrust his Prince
out of his Kingdom, and to put him from his government, and to overthrow his
Laws, that he may set up his own, but he will seek to deprive him of his
life also. So is it with the remaynder of sin that still abides in Gods
children, and with their rebellious lusts, they seek not only as it were to
depose grace, and to keep it under from ruling and reigning, but even to take
away the life of it, and utterly to root it out, and they do violently and
strongly oppose against it. 1. Pet. 2.11.
And this is that which the Apostle Peter intends and means, when he says, 1.
Pet. 2.11. that fleshly lusts fight against the soul. Dearly beloved (says
he) I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which
fight against the soul. As if he had said, which oppose against that grace and
goodness that is in the soul, and against the salvation and eternal good of
the soul, even to strip it of all grace, that it may perish by sin; as
Soldiers and enemies use to do, whose end and purpose in fighting, is to
spoil and kill.

And to this purpose also speaks the Apostle, Iam. 4.1. Iam. 4.1.
says he, Whence are wars and contentions among you? Are they not hence,
even of your lusts that fight in your members? that is, from those vile lusts
that war and fight in the powers of your souls, and in the parts and members
of your bodies, and as Rebels do oppose and strive against that grace that is
in you. And hence it is, that the Apostle compares himself and other Apostles
and Ministers of the Gospel, to Soldiers fighting against sin and Satan, 2.
Cor. 10.4.
and says, 2. Cor. 10.4. That the weapons of their warfare work not carnal,
but mighty through God to cast down holds: that is, the holds of sin and
Satan. He compares sin and Satan to enemies entrenched, and lying within
strong Towers, walls and holds, and so mightily opposing against grace and
goodness; and he subioynes Verse. 5. Casting down the imaginations, and every
high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity enery thought, even every rebellious thought, to the obedience of
Christ. Alluding, no doubt, to that, Ierem. Ierem. 1.10.
1.10. where the Lord says to the Prophet, Behold, this day I set thee over
the Nations and over the Kingdoms, to pluck up, and to root out, and to
destroy, and throw done, to build, and to plant. We see then this made clear
by evidence of Scripture, that the corruption of nature that still in part
abides in Gods children, is as a Rebel against the power of grace that is in
them, and as a Rebel does violently oppose and strive against it. And the
reason of it is this,

Grace and corruption are mingled together throughout, that is in them, and it
makes not a weak and feeble resistance, but a mighty, strong, and violent
opposition against it, and the lusts that arise thence, do mightily war and
rebel against the working, and the fruits of grace, as unbelief against
faith, ignorance against knowledge, despair against hope, hypocrisy against
singleness of heart, pride against humility, and so in other particulars.

Now this being a truth, for use, Gods children must set themselves against the
rebellion of their hearts, and seek to subdue the rebellious lusts of their
hearts.
hereupon they are to be warned and to be stirred up to set themselves against
the rebellion of their hearts, and the sinful lusts that arise from their
corruption, as against so many dangerous Rebels, yea, this must teach Gods
children always to stand on their guard, and to be watchful, for it is
certain, that a child of God is no longer safe then while he is watchful.
Will a King be secure and careless, having many strong Rebels up in arms
against him in his own Kingdom, seeking to pull the Crown from his head?
Surely no: If he tender his own safety, he will not, but he will with all
possible speed seek to subdue them, and to bring them down, yea to take away
their heads.

Thus must Gods children deal with the rebellious lusts of their own hearts:
Do thou find in thee the lust of Pride, of Envy, of Covetousness, of
Uncleanness, or any other sinful lust rising up and rebelling against that
power of grace that is in thee? Oh seek and labor to subdue it, yea, to kill
it, and to take away the life of it, and that with all possible speed; suffer
it not to harbor and to rest in thee, in hope hereafter to deal with it, and
to overcome it. No, no: the longer thou do suffer it, the stronger it will
be, and the more hard to ouer-master, yea it is a judgment of God on thee, if
thou suffer a known lust in thine heart, and use not means to subdue it, and
to mortify and to kill it: therefore betimes grapple with it, and seek to
subdue it, and to take away the life of it. How the rebellious lusts of the
heart are to be subdued.
Happily thou will say, How is it to be done? How shall I subdue the Pride, the
Envy, the Covetousness and Uncleanness of mine own heart? I answer. To
that purpose thou must do three things:

First, Gal. 2.19.

Secondly, Ephesians. 6.17.

Thirdly,

These things must thou do, if thou would subdue the rebellion of thine own
heart, and the sinful lusts of it: and be thou careful to use these means,
and ever remember this, that thou have a Rebel in thine own bosom, the
corruption of thine own heart, and the sinful lusts that are in thy heart, are
as dangerous Rebels, they fight strongly against that grace that is in thy
soul, yea, against the eternal good and salvation of thy soul, yea, they
secke to strip it of all grace, that it may perish by sin. Therefore stand on
thy guard, and betimes set thy self against them, and labor by all good means
to subdue them, and to mortify them, and to take away the life of them; that
is the duty of every child of God.

Again, Comfort to such as are ever complaining of the rebellion of their own
hearts.
that still in part abides in Gods children, is as a Rebel against that power
of grace that is in them, and as a Rebel, does violently oppose against it?
Then here is matter of comfort for thee whosoever thou art, that art ever
complaining of the rebellion of thine own heart. Oh, say some, I find the
rebellion of my heart to be great and strong, I have much ado with mine own
heart, and I can hardly stand against the rebellious lusts of it. Is it thus
with thee? Surely, then thy case is no other then the case of the holy Apostle,
he saw a Law in his members, rebelling against the Law of his mind. And thus
it is with the best of Gods children: yea, comfort thy self in this, that the
corruption of thy heart, and the sinful lusts of it, are as Rebels, opposing
against the power of grace that is in thee: for being as Rebels, they shall be
dealt with as Rebels; they shall never prosper: Therefore certainly the Lord
will not suffer them to prosper, but in the end he will ouerturne them and
bring them to naught.

The corruption of thy heart that still in part abides in thee, and the sinful
lusts of it, may for a time molest and trouble thee, opposing against that
grace that is in thee: yet know this to thy comfort, they shall never wholly
vanquish and overcome that grace. No, no; they vex and trouble thee unjustly,
and as Rebels, they oppose against that grace that is in thee, and they shall
be sure to be put to the worst in the end. Satan fought against Christ, but he
took the foil: and so sin, that fights against the grace of Christ in his
members, shall be foiled in the end, and that grace of Christ and power of his
Spirit shall at length wholly overcome it, and utterly destroy it. Let that be
thy comfort, and think on it to thy comfort.

Now here a question is to be answered, occasioned from this that the Apostle
says, he saw another law in his members, rebelling against the law of his
mind. I will briefly propound and answer it. The question is this:

Whether the Child of God may sin of Rebellion,

And to this I answer, Saul did, to whom Samuel said, 1. Sam. 15.23.
1. Sam. 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and transgression is
wickedness and Idolatry. Gods Children cannot so sin of Rebellion, and in
that degree rebelliously, but in part they may, and there is ground for it from
this Text; for there is in the best of Gods Children that live on the face of
the earth, the law of their members rebelling against the Law of their mind,
and leading them captive unto the law of sin, which is in their members;
there is rebellion in their corrupt flesh throughout in part, in their minds,
wills and affections, and that ouer-carries them sometimes to the doing of
evil, yea, as the Apostle adds, it leads them captive to the law of sin,
yea, to the doing of some foul evil, as we read of David, Peter, and others.
And such as the proper cause is, such must needs be the effect: and therefore
the proper cause of that evil that is done by them, being the inward rebellion
of their minds, wills and affections, the evil that is done by them, coming
from thence, especially being a foul evil, it must needs be, that it is
done in part rebelliously, and is in some degree a sin of rebellion. Dan.
9.5.9.
Dan. 9.5. The Prophet says plainly, We have rebelled. And Verse. 9. Albeit we
have rebelled.

That was but in the general confession of sin.

Doubtless, against knowledge and conscience? The combat that is in Gods
children, is between grace and corruption, and that combat is proper to Gods
children
but say some not against knowledge in that particular act? Yes, even in that
particular act, he not resisting the lust of his heart, but giving way to it,
nourishing it and consenting to it in his will that ouer-carries him even
against his knowledge, sometimes to do some foul evil: this was the case of
David, Peter, and others: and therefore, doubtless, a Child of God may sin
of rebellion, or rebelliously, sometimes in part not wholly.

We are further to mark, that the Apostle says, The law in his members
rebelled against the Law of his mind. The remainder of sin that still abode
in him, warred and fought against the power of grace that was in him, and so
the fight and war that was in him, was between corruption and grace. And
thus indeed it is in the Children of God, and such as are truly regenerate;
there is in them a strong fight and bitter combat between corruption and
grace; the flesh and the Spirit are at continual war and enmity, and they
fight and strive one against the other in the Children of God, that is the
fight and combat that is in them. And the combat between the flesh and the
Spirit is proper to Gods Children, and such as are truly regenerate, it is
found in them alone. Unregenerate persons are not acquainted with it, they know
not what it means. And therefore the Apostle speaking of it, Gal. 5.17. he
does appropriate it to such as have the Spirit of grace and sanctification, and
are able to walk in the Spirit. He says in the Verse before, 16. Walk in
the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And then he
subioynes, For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary one to the other. The fight and combat that is
sometimes in unregenerate persons.


Indeed unregenerate persons may have a kind of fight and combat in them,
and doubtless there is sometimes a kind of fight in the wicked, but it is
either between the appetite and reason, the appetite, and sense, and natural
passions fighting and warring against reason: or it is between sin and the
conscience enlightened by the light of nature, and by the Word of God, the
conscience carrying in it the light of nature, and that light being not
extinguished, nor weakened by sin, it smites, and checkes and controlls the
motions of sin, and it does warn and accuse men when they do any evil
against that light, as Romans 2.15. the Apostle says, The Gentiles show the
effect of the Law, written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing. There is one of
these two serts of fight and combat in such as be yet unregenerate: but as for
the fight between the flesh and the Spirit, and between grace and corruption,
they are not acquainted with it, they have no experience of it, because indeed
they have not the Spirit, they have not sanctified grace in them, but they are
wholly within and without, flesh, corruption and sin. Luke 11.18.
And as Christ says of Satan, Luke 11.18. that he is not divided against
himself: so it may be truly said, that sin is not divided against sin,
and flesh is not divided against flesh. Therefore, I say, unregenerate persons
are altogether unacquainted with the fight that is between the flesh and the
Spirit, and between grace and corruption; that is only found in Gods Children,
and such as are truly regenerate, and they that find it in themselves, may
conclude that they are regenerate.

Happily some will say, How shall we distinguish the combat that is between the
appetite and reason, or between sin and the natural light of conscience,
Difference between the combat that is in Gods Children, and that which is in
unregenerate persons.
from the fight that is between the flesh and the Spirit, and between grace
and corruption, how shall we put a difference between them? I answer the
difference between them; The combat between the appetite and reason, or
between sin and the natural light of conscience, is in several and distinct
faculties of the soul; in that combat, one faculty of the soul is carried
against another, the appetite against reason, the affections against
conscience: but the combat between the flesh and the Spirit, between grace
and corruption, is in one and the same power and faculty of the soul; in that
combat the mind is carried against it self, and the will against it self,
How we may know, that the combat that is in us, is between grace and
corruption.
and the affections against themselves: because they are partly spiritual, and
partly carnal: and thou shall know that this combat is in thee by this
especially: If thou find thine heart carried against it self, even against it
own liking, in respect of thy best-pleasing sin; if thou find in thy self
a true dislike and a lothing of that sin thou wast inclined to by nature;
that is a sure note, that there is sanctifying grace in thy heart; and by this
try thy self.

Now in the last place observe we, that the Apostle speaking of the power of
grace that was in his whole innerman, in his regenerate part, he calls it the
law of his mind: I see another law in my members, rebelling against the Law of
my mind. He gives to it the name and title of a Law. Hence we are given to
understand thus much:

That the grace of Regeneration that is in Gods Children and in true Believers,
is as a Law in them, Sanctifying grace has a great stroke and power in Gods
Children, in their whole inner man.
and it has a great stroke and power in them: sanctifying grace is as a Law
that rules, and gouernes, and commands in Gods Children, in their whole inner
man, in their regenerate part throughout; so far forth as Gods Children be
regenerate, sanctifying Grace has the rule, and government, and command of
them in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts and members of
their bodies: for why? It is in every Child of God in his measure, as it was
with the Apostle, who says of himself, Gal. 2.20. Thus I live, yet not I now,
but Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith
in the Son of God.

Thus it is with every Child of God, Christ lives in him, and he lives by
faith in Christ. Yea the Apostle puts it down in the general, Gal. 3.11.
Gal. 3.11. The just shall live, or lives by faith: every just and holy person
lives by faith, true saving faith and sanctifying grace, is the guide of his
life, and all his thoughts, words, and works are guided, ordered and governed
by it. And hence it was, that David said, Psalm. 16.7.
Psalm 16.7. that his reins did teach him in the night. Isai. 30.21.
And to this purpose speaks the Prophet, Isai. 30.21. Thine ear shall hear a
word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it. As if he had said,
Thou shall have one within thee to guide and to govern thee, even the Spirit
of grace and sanctification. And this is that the Lord promised to his people,
Ier. 31.33.
Ierem. 31.33. that he would put his Law in their inward parts, and write it
in their hearts. And so his Law written in the Book of God, should be also a
Law written in their hearts, and in their inward parts. Which plainly and
strongly confirms the truth of the point in hand, that the grace of
Regeneration is as a Law in Gods Children, and as a Law it rules, and gouernes,
and commands in their regenerate part; so far forth as they be regenerate, it
has the command of them in all the powers of their souls, and in all the
parts and members of their bodies: and the reason and ground of it is this,

In the regenerate part, the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
Ephesians. 4.18. and it is the power of the Spirit of Christ, even the power of
the Spirit that raised up Christ from the dead, called The virtue of his
Resurrection, Philip. 3.10. And therefore it must needs be strong, and
powerful, and as a Law ruling and commanding in their regenerate part, and
that throughout in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts and
members of their bodies.

Now then for use. faith and sanctifying grace in him or no, That opinion of
the Papists, that men cannot know whether they have faith sanctifying grace in
them, or no, confuted.
when they are pressed with it, that a true Believer may be assured of his own
salvation, by the testimony of the Spirit of grace in his heart: because as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, Romans 8.14. They
answer, that a man cannot know whether he have faith and grace in him, or no.
This opinion of theirs cannot stand with the truth now delivered: for why? Is
sanctifying grace strong and powerful in GODS Children, and as a Law ruling
and commanding in them? It is even the life of God in them, and the power of
the Spirit of Christ in them. Is it so? and yet is it not perceived by them?
Surely it is not possible, it cannot be, but that they must needs know it and
feel it themselves.

Yea, but (say they) it is in your own doctrine,

It is true indeed; we teach, Christ turns not away his face from such as
labor under the burden of their sins, but refreshes them, Mat. 11.28.

But does it hereupon follow, that a true Believer can never feel grace in
himself? No, no: that is no good consequent: doubtless, a Child of God, out
of the case of great trouble, or distress of conscience, may know and feel
sanctifying grace strong and powerful in him, and as a law ruling and
commanding in his regenerate part.

And so for a second use of the point. grace is strong and powerful in Gods
Children? Is it as a Law ruling and commanding in their regenerate part, and
that throughout in their minds, wills, and in all the powers of their souls,
and in all the parts and members of their bodies? Surely then it cannot be,
that a child of God should make a common practice of any kowne sin, he has a
Law within him, that commands him to the contrary, and that Law will not
suffer him so to do.

And if a Child of God fall into any sin, he falls not into it with full
consent of will, A Child of God cannot make a common practice of any known
sin.
the Law of grace that is in him, checkes him, and controlls him, and will not
suffer him to yield full consent of will to the doing of any known evil; yea,
on the ground of Doctrine now delivered, it follows, that as many as are Gods
Children, they yield willing and ready obedience to the will of God, made
known to them, they are such as are spoken of. Psalm. 110.3. Gods Children
yield willing and ready obedience to the will of God revealed to them.
They serve God, not of constraint, but willingly, as if there were no Law to
compel them: for why? the Law of God written, and the Law of their hearts is
all one in substance; the Law of God is written in their hearts, and the Law of
grace, even the grace of Regeneration, is strong and powerful in them, and as
a Law it rules and commands in their regenerate part throughout, it commands
not only their minds, but their wills also, so far forth as they be
regenerate, and so they are made free and voluntary in yielding obedience to
God, and they obey God willingly and readily, according to that measure of
grace that is in them.

And take this for a certain truth, that according to the measure of
sanctifying grace in any man or woman, so is the measure of their willingness
and readiness in doing good things. If thou will do no more good then thou
art compelled to do; for example: If thou will not keep the Sabbath, and
sanctify it further then thou art compelled by man's Law, thou art but a
formal Hypocrite. And so for evil things: If thou will abstain from evil,
no further then thou art restrained by the Laws of men, as it is with the
most, when they are told of Swearing, Railing, Sabbath-breaking: Oh, say they,
I hope it is no hanging matter, it is neither Felony nor Treason; and therefore
they make no bones of it. If it be thus with thee, thou art but a graceless
Wretch, whosoever thou art: thou have no dram of sanctifying grace in thee.
Gods Children will not break the Sabbath: and why? Grace ouer-rules them, and
is as a Law to them, yea, according to the measure of grace that is in them,
they willingly keep the Sabbath, and yield obedience to God in all his
Commandments.

And hereby try thy self; If thou have sanctifying grace in thee, thou art
ready and willing to do good things, thou art not haled and drawn to do
good, but thou do it willingly and of a ready mind, and from thy
willingness to do good things, thou may gather and conclude, that thou have
sanctifying grace in thine heart: and by this try thy self.

Now here a cavil of the Anabaptists is to be met withal: say they, A cavil
of the Anabaptists answered.
Sanctifying Grace is as a Law to Gods Children, and as a Law it rules, and
gouernes, and commands them: and therefore they need not the Laws of men to
govern them?

The answer is easy: If Gods Children were sanctified perfectly, and had a
perfection of grace and sanctification, then in respect of themselves they
should not need the Laws of men to govern them: but alas, there is no such
matter: they are sanctified but in part, in time of this life. Again the
visible Church of God contains as well Hypocrites and Wicked men, as true
Believers: therefore the best Churches need Magistracy for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the protection of the Church and Gods Children: therefore
the reason is naught, that sanctifying grace is as a Law to GODS Children, and
therefore they need not the Laws of men.

Come we now to the second part of this Verse, in the words following: And
leading me captive to the Law of sin, which is in my members. In these
words, our Apostle makes known to us the issue and success of the resistance
and rebelling of the remaynder of sin, that still abode in him, against the
power of grace that was in him, as, namely, that the success of it was this:
That he was thereby brought under the power of sin, and made to yield to
sin: which the Apostle (still continuing his former Metaphor and similitude,
taken from war or fighting) delivers under these terms, that he was led
captive to sin: and he sets down the power of sin as before, under the
word Law. Leading me captive to the Law of sin. And that is further amplified
by the subject of it, in his members, and leading me captive to the Law of
sin which is in my members.

Let us a little examine these words, that we may find out the true sense and
meaning of them, Interpretation
And leading me captive, in this word: for it is but one word in the
Original, or in this Phrase and form of speech, (Leading captive.) The
Apostle alludes to the manner of great and mighty Conquerors in war, such as
have gotten the victory over their enemies, and are wont to lead them whom
they have taken alive, as prisoners fast bound and tied, and to keep them
under their power as Vassals and Slaves.

To this the Apostle here has respect, and his meaning is, that sin rising
up in rebellion against the power of grace that was in him, and warring and
fighting against it, sometimes it prevailed against grace, and sometimes it
overcame him, and as it were took him prisoner, and carried him away like a
captive, and as a vanquished man (to the Law of sin.) The word (Law) is here
put, as before, to signify the power of sin, and by sin, we are to
understand the corruption of nature, even the remaynder of sin that still
abode in the Apostle, together with the evil motions and lusts arising from
thence. And therefore he adds, which is in my members: or as it is in the
Original, which has existence and being in my members. As if he had said, To
the force and to the power of sin which has an actual being in my members,
and the evil motions and lusts of it. By (Members) we are to understand, as
before, all the powers of the soul, and all the parts and members of the body.

Thus then conceive we the meaning of these words, And leading me captive to
the Law of sin which is in my members.

As if the Apostle had said, And sometimes preuayling against that grace that
is in me, and ouercomming me, and by the strength of it getting victory over
me, and carrying me as a captive, and as a vanquished man, and bringing me
under the force and power of that corruption that still in part abides in me,
and to the power of the evil motions and lusts of it, which lusts have their
actual being in all the powers of my soul, and in all the parts and members
of my body.

Come we to the matter of observation and doctrine; and first, in that the
Apostle says, The remainder of sin that still abode in him, rebelled, fought
and warred against the power of grace that was in him, and sometimes prevailed
against it, and led him as a captive, and brought him under the power of sin.

We are to take notice how it is with the best of Gods children sometimes,
namely thus: Though the remaynder of sin still abiding in Gods children, do
not for ever and wholly overcome the grace that is in them, yet sometimes in
part and for a time it gets victory over it


That the best of Gods children, the most holy, and the most regenerate that
live in the world, have not only sin in part abiding in them, and fighting,
and warring against that power of grace that is in them, but sometimes
preuayling against that grace, and getting the upper hand of it; sin that
abides in Gods children in part, though it do not for ever, and wholly
overcome the grace that is in them, that is not possible, yet sometimes in part
and for a time, it gets the victory over it, and does conquer it, and as it
were leads away a child of God, as a captive under the power of it. We read,
Exodus 17.11. that in the battle that was between Israel and Amalek, While
MOSES held up his hand, ISRAEL prevailed, but when he let his hand down,
AMALEK prevailed: So it is in the fight and combat between Grace and Sin in
Gods children: the victory and conquest is sometimes on one part, and
sometimes on the other; sometimes Grace is too strong for sin, and bears
down the motions of it, and keeps them under: and sometimes again Sin is
too strong for Grace, and bears it down in part for a time, and so far
preuailes over it, as sometimes it carries a child of God as a captive to it,
and to the lusts of it, and by the strength of it draws him to the doing of
some evil.

And to this purpose we have many examples in the Book of God, as of Noah, of
Lot, of Abraham, of Moses, of David, of Peter, and others. And doubtless, Gods
children are able to witness this to be a truth, out of their own experience,
though it be to their grief. Yea, if we observe it, we shall find, that sin
abiding in Gods children, has sometimes strangely prevailed over the power of
grace that was in them, and strangely ouercarryed them, yea, the very best of
them: as, have they not been strangely ouer-carryed and led away by their own
corruption, when they have cast forth doubtful speeches, touching Gods grace
and favor toward them, as if God had forsaken them, and quite cast them out
of his sight, and shut up his love from them, and reckoned them as enemies?

Thus it was with David, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord absent himself for
ever? and will he show no more favor? Is his morcy clean gone for ever? Does
his promise fail for enormore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has he
shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? And was not Job, that dear servant
and child of God, strangely ouer-carryed by the strength of his own
corruption, when he cursed the time and months of his life? Job 3.3, to 12.
And the like did the holy Prophet Jeremiah, Ierem. 20.14, 15. Cursed be the day
wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be
blessed. And Ierom. 12.1. he reasons the case with God, as if the Lord were not
righteous in his administration and government of the world, because of the
great prosperity of the wicked. And thus did David, Psalm. 73.13, 14.

Thus have these holy servants and children of God been strangely ouer-carryed
by the strength of their own corruption; and it plainly proves the point in
hand, That sin that abides in Gods children in part, sometimes preuailes over
that grace that is in them, and so ouercomes it, and conquers it, and so
sometimes it leads them away under the power of it, to the acting of some
evil. And the reason of it is this,

The grace that is in Gods children,

Now the Lord is pleased sometimes for causes known to himself, a little to
withdraw his assisting hand from that grace that is in Gods children: and
thence it is that sometimes sin that abides in them, preuailes over it, Gods
children are to be marvelous heedfull to themselves, and to live in continual
mistrust of their own corruption, still in part abiding in them
and that sometimes it leads oven the best of Gods children, as captives under
the power of it, to the doing of some evil. This then being a truth,

It may serve as a ground of admonition to every one of us, though we be the
children of God, and have a great measure of grace in us, yet this may admonish
us to be marvelous heedfull to our selves, and to live in continual mistrust
of the corruption that still in part abides in us, and to watch it narrowly,
lest it should ouercarry us to the doing of evil: for why? Is it so, that the
best of Gods children, even the Lords Worthies, as I may justly call them,
David, Peter, Paul, and such stout Champions and valiant Captains as these,
have been sometimes taken prisoners of sin, and carried away as captives
under the power of their own corruption? Is it thus sometimes with the best of
Gods children? Oh then, what need have we that are but as common Soldiers,
yea, but as Shrimps and poor weaklings, in respect of them, what need (I say)
have we to live in fear and trembling, and in continual mistrust of the
corruption of our own hearts, and narrowly to watch it, that we be not
ouer-carryed by it to the doing of evil?

And let us know this, that be we as watchful as possibly we can, yet
sometimes the corruption that still in part abides in us, will bear down the
grace that is in us, and will sometimes vanquish it in part, and sometimes
bring us under the power of sin. And therefore it concerns us to look to
the corruption of our own hearts: and when thou feel any evil motion, any
stirring to evil in thy heart, labor to stop it, and to stifle it in the
beginning, nip it in the very bud; if thou give way to it, and suffer it to get
head, it will bear down that grace that is in thee, though thouhaue a great
measure of grace: and therefore, I say, stop it in the beginning, and know
this, that the Devil cannot draw thee to the doing of any evil, but by the
consent of thine own heart, he has no power to enforce thee to sin, but a
slight he has to persuade thee to it, neither can he bring thee to the acting
of sin at the first, but by conuaying sin into thine heart by little and
little; therefore watch over thine own heart, and when any evil motion rises
up in it, set thy self against it, and suffer it not to gain the consent of
thy will: if thou do, it will bear down the grace that is in thee, and bring
thee under the power of it, to the doing of evil.

Again, Is it so, that the best of Gods children, Men are not to presume upon
the strength of grace that is in them, for the avoiding of sin.
have not only sin in part abiding in them, fighting and warring against the
power of grace that is in them, but sometimes preuayling against that grace, and
getting the victory over it, and leading them as captives under the power of
it? Let no man then deceive himself, let no man presume on the strength of
grace that is in him, for the avoiding of sin: let none think that he has in
him such strength of grace, as that no temptation can take hold of him,
especially that he cannot be drawn on any foul and gross sin. If any so
think, he deceiues himself, and those are too bold and too foole-hardy, that
tire themselves like wantons, and follow the fashions of the world, or keep
company unnecessarily with wicked persons, and yet think or say, Tush, they
shall take no hurt by them, and think that they have such strength of grace, as
that they shall not be tainted with any of their sins. Surely, such persons
know not themselves, they are unacquainted with the corruption of their own
hearts. Peter thought himself strong enough to stand out, and that he had
grace sufficient to carry him out, when he said, Matt. 26.33. that Though all
men should be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended. We know what
followed: He going into the High Priests Hall, and sitting there at the fire,
he was overtaken, and he denied his Master. And art thou stronger then Peter?
No, no; presume not on thine own strength for the avoiding of any sin, but
labor thou to be strong in the power of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10. Seek to him,
and sue to him for strength of grace, and especially when thou go into the
throng of the world to a feast, to the market, or the like.

Last of all; Is it so, that the best and the most holy that live in the world,
have not only sin in part abiding in them, but sometimes also preuayling
against that grace that is in them, and getting the victory over it, and
carrying them as captives under the power of it, to the doing of evil?

Here is then matter of comfort for thee, Comfort for such as are sometimes
overcome by the strength of their own corruption, to the doing of evil against
their purpose.
that art sometimes ouerborne by the strength of thine own corruption, against
thy purpose, to the doing of some evil; thy case is no other then the case of
the best of Gods children.

Thus it has been with Paul, Peter, and diverse others; they have been
sometimes, as it were, taken prisoners, and carried away as captives by their
own corruption, to the doing of evil, and yet still were they the children of
God, though they shrunk away from God in part, yet he never took his love
from them: and so it is with thee, though thou fall away from God in part by
thy sin, yet thou art still within the compass of his love, and he will
reach out his hand to thee, and raise thee up again. It is a comfort to a man
that is fallen into some grievous disease, when he hears that others have been
sick of the same disease, and yet have recovered. So let it cheer thee up,
when thou art sometimes led as a captive against thy purpose, to the doing of
some evil, that thy betters have been so, and yet have done well, and were
still the children of God. Think on that to thy comfort.

Now before I leave the point delivered, I think it needful to answer a
question that happily some may move (namely) this:

Some may demand why the Lord suffers his children sometimes to be overtaken
by gross sins? Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and others? what should be the
reason of that?

I answer: This the Lord does in great wisdom, Why the Lord sometimes
suffers his children to be overtaken by gross sins.
he being able to draw good out of the greatest evil, as (namely) for the
magnifying of his mercy toward his children, in passing by and pardoning their
great offenses, and to make them more thankful to him, for the abundance of
his grace and mercy vouchsafed unto them, having gotten the pardon of such
sins: yea, even by the gross sins of his children it pleases God (Which
indeed is admirable:) yet so it is, it pleases God to do his children good, as
thereby to humble them not only for the sin which now they are fallen into,
but it may be also for some other sin, whereof they were formerly guilty, and
have not thoroughly repented of, even by the sin now lying upon them, to make
them more seriously to think on that sin, and to be further humbled for it,
and thereby also to work in them more fear and wariness for the time to
come, and to make them take more heed of Satan's sleightes, and to gather more
strength against him; as we may see in David, who after his fall into Adultery
and Murder, being recovered, was able to bear the cursing of Shemei, when
Shemei barked at him like a dog, he let all pass in the Spirit of
meekness, 2. Sam. 16.10.

And so, through the wonderful wisdom and goodness of God, the gross sins
of his children turn greatly to their good, even to be as medicines for sins
past, and preuentions of sins to come; yea, we may observe, that the Lord often
suffers such to fall, as he has ordained for excellent use in the Church, as
he did Jonas and Peter, to this end, that they may be the more humbled, and
more fit to minister comfort to others afterward, that they may comfort others
with the comfort, wherewith themselves have been comforted of the Lord, 2. Cor.
1.4. and may be better able to strengthen others, as Christ said to Peter, Luke
22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

For these and the like good causes does the Lord suffer his dear children,
sometimes to be carried as captives under the power of their own corruption,
to do some foul evil.

Now proceed we, you may remember, in that the Apostle here says, he was led
captive unto the law of sin which was in his members: hence also an argument
was gathered to conclude the Apostles Regeneration, that therefore he was a man
truly regenerate, because he was led captive to the law of sin.

Now against this, he was led captive to the law of sin. For why? The Apostle
says of such as are yet in their natural state and condition, 2. Tim. 2.26
2. Tim. 2.26. that they are in the snare of the devil, and taken and held of
him as captives at his will.

To this I answer, Two sorts of captivity in respect of sin.
one, when men are wholly captiued under the power of their own corruption,
and that voluntarily, a voluntary captivity; and of that the Apostle speaks,
2. Tim. 2.26. and the other is, a forced captituitie, when men are led as
captives by the strength of their own corruption, and brought under the power
of it in part, and that unwillingly, and against their purpose; and that may
befall such as are truly regenerate: and of that the Apostle here speaks, and
so it still remains a true note of his Regeneration, that he was led captive
to the law of sin.

Now the point hence offered is this,

That there is a plain difference between the regenerate and the
unregenerate, The difference between the regenerate and unregenerate, in
regard of their captivity to sin.
in respect of their captivity to sin, as (namely) thus: Such as are truly
regenerate, are sometimes in part captiued, and brought under the power of
their own corruption; but it is unwillingly, and their captivity under the
power of sin is forced, and it is with a feeling of their bondage, and an
earnest desire to be freed from their captivity: but it is far otherwise with
unregenerate persons, they freely and with full consent of will, put themselves
under the power of their own vile lusts, and their captivity under sin is
voluntary, and they have no feeling of their bondage: no, they suspect it not,
much less do they truly desire liberty and freedom from it.

We know, that a Prince will not willingly be led away captive of a Rebel; and
if he be taken by the hands of a Rebel, it is against his will, and he is
never well, till he be freed: but a base fellow, one of mean condition, and a
debashed wretch, of wretched life and conversation, he will easily join hands
with a Rebel, and willingly suffer himself to be led by him to the same
Rebellion, and take pleasure in it: so is it in this case; one that is borne
anew of the Spirit, will not willingly be led away as a captive by his
rebelling flesh, and if sometimes he be surprised, and overcome by the lusts
of it, it is against his will, and he desires to be freed from that captivity,
yea, he takes any opportunity that is offered, to be freed from it, as Peter
did on the crowing of the Cock, Mat. 26.75. and on Christ his looking back on
him, Luke 22.61. and as David did, so soon as ever the Lord sent the Prophet
Nathan to him, 2. Sam. 12.13.

But on the other side, one that is wholly carnal, and as yet in his base
condition of nature, he willingly puts forth his hand to sin, and he yeeldes
to the evil motions and lusts of his own heart, and is led by them without
resistance, yea, he takes pleasure in them, as the Apostle says of the
Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.19. He gives himself to work wickedness, even with
greedines, he drinks iniquity like water, Job 15.16. and draws sin, as
with a cartrope, Isaiah 5.18.

Thus stands the difference between the regenerate and the unregenerate, in
respect of their captivity to sin: The regenerate, they are sometimes taken and
led as captives under the power of their own corruption, but it is
unwillingly, and they are weary of that bondage: But unregenerate persons, they
make themselves vassalls and slaves to the lusts of their own hearts, and they
yield to them with full consent of will, and they willingly fight under the
banner of sin and Satan, against God and against his Word: and the ground of
this difference is this:

Because there is grace in the one,

First, Who they be that may truly plead infirmity in sinning.
who they be that may truly plead infirmity in sinning, and may truly say, It
is of weakness that sometimes they fall into sin. Surely only the children of
God, and such as are truly regenerate: for why? they only are led captives
under the power of sin unwillingly, and they only are sometimes overcome of
the lusts of their own hearts, not because they are willing to yield to them,
but because they are weak to resist them, and are sometimes surprised by the
deceitfulnes of sin, and by the sleights of Satan.

Unregenerate persons cannot truly plead infirmity in sin, though indeed
sometimes the base Drunkard, and the most filthy person that lives in the
world, will plead infirmity, and say, Oh, his sin is his infirmity, and you
must bear with him, it is his infirmity. Poor souls! They deceive
themselves; can that be said to be a sin of infirmity, which they rush into
with full consent of will, and with much pleasure give themselves unto? No, no;
if they so think, they deceive themselves: that is a sin of weakness and
infirmity, when men purpose and resolve against it, strive against it, pray
against it, and use all good means to keep them from it; and yet sometimes
they are ouer-carryed by the strength of their own corruption, and do
sometimes unwillingly fall into it, and that is proper to the regenerate; and
therefore let no unregenerate person plead his infirmity in sinning.

Again, for a second use: Trial whether men be in the state of grace, or in
the state of nature.
in respect of their captivity to sin, be a ground of trial to every one
of us. We have often in this Chapter had occasion to urge it in the substance
of it: in a word therefore to press it.

Hereby try thy self, whosoever thou art, in what state and condition thou
art, whether in the state of grace, or in the state of nature. Do thou find
that thou art sometimes captiued and brought under the power of thine own
corruption, but yet unwillingly, and thou would not be brought under the
power of it, and thy captivity to sin is forced, and thou have a feeling of
thy bondage, and it is grievous to thee, and thou desire to be freed from
it, and being ouer-carryed by the strength of thy corruption, to the doing of
evil, thou never art quiet till thou have recovered thy self? Is it thus with
thee? Surely, then thou may hereupon conclude, to the comfort of thine own
soul, that thou art truly regenerate and in the state of grace.

But on the other side, if so be thou be ready to put forth thine hand to
sin, and thou do yield to the lusts of thine own heart willingly, and
take pleasure in fulfilling them, and it is even meat and drink to thee to
do evil, yea, thou rushest into sin, as a bard Horse into the Battle,
Ierem. 8.6. and thou art such a one as Christ speaks of, John 8.44. the lusts
of the Devil thou do: for thy sinful lusts are his lusts, he desires thou
should fulfill them; thou do evil things, and thou will do them; as many
there be of that sort, they do wickedly, and they will do it, and what has
any man to do with them? If it be thus with thee, deceive not thy self;
certainly thou art yet in the dregs of nature, thou art a captive and slave
to thine own lusts, and thou art willing so to be, and thou art under the
power of the Devil, and held of him at his will and pleasure: and that is a
miserable captivity.

One thing yet remains to be noted. The Apostle says, leading me captive to
the law of sin: (that is) to the power of sin, and the evil lusts rising
from thence. And he adds, which is in my members: which has existence and
being in my members. Whence note we,

That the corruption of nature sends forth evil lusts, The corruption of
nature has a real being.
And therefore doubtless it is not as some have thought, a mere privation a
mere absence of holiness and righteousness: but it is a positive thing, and
has a real being, and indeed it is the mother-sinn, as James speaks, Iam.
1.14, 15.
and all sins that are committed, are not done by imitation, as Pelagius his
followers thought; neither is it true, that children do evil only by
imitation, and because they see or hear others do evil. No no: there is a
root of bitterness, that has a real being in children, even a bundle of
folly bound up in their hearts, Pron. 22.15. and that gives being to all the
evils they commit. And Parents are to take notice of it, The duty of Parents
toward their Children.
and to labor by instruction, admonition, counsel, reproof, and seasonable
correction to drive it out, and to endeavor by all good means to weaken the
image of the old man in their children, and to labor to have them changed and
transformed daily more and more, into the blessed Image of Jesus Christ.

VERSE. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the the body
of this death!


Our Apostle having at large laid forth the Spiritual Combat, the Combat
between the flesh and the Spirit, from the fourteenth Verse, to this four and
twentieth, here he concludes and shuts up his speech touching that matter, with
an Epiphonema, with an exclamation; he breaks out and says, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

Now this exclamation, for the matter and substance of it, contains the issue
and success of the conflict that is between the flesh and the Spirit, in them
that are truly regenerate, that they are thereby brought to feel themselves
wretched and miserable, and to bewail their wretchedness, and to complain of
it, and to desire deliverance from it, which the Apostle delivers, still
insisting in his own person: O wretched man that I am (says he) who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! And to this exclamation or complaint
he subioynes a consolation, in respect of freedom and deliverance in and
through Christ, for which he gives thanks to God, Verse. 25. in the beginning
of it, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And to that he adds a
conclusion of all, briefly repeating the sum and substance of the spiritual
conflict, still giving instance of it in his own person in the words
following: Then I my self in my mind serve the Law of God, but in my flesh
the law of sin. Of these things in order.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

Here first the Apostle complains of his wretchedness, and bewailes it out of
a true sense and feeling of it: O wretched man that I am! And then makes known
his desire of deliverance, and from what he would be delivered, in the words
following: Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? That is the
general matter of this Verse. I will stand a while to clear the sense and
meaning of the words, Interpretation
O wretched man that I am! The word here rendered ( wretched, or miserable) does
not signify one in a cursed case and condition, as being out of the favor of
God, being here applied to the Apostle; but it signifies one tired and wearied
with continual conflicts and striving with sin, as it were a Champion that
has a long time fought and stood out against his enemies, at length he is
weary and tired, and like to be overcome of his Adversaries, unless he be
helped: as such an one cries out sometimes, Oh, how am I tired, and how am I
wearied! So was it with the Apostle, in respect of continual buffettings,
conflicts, and combats that he sustained, between the remainder of sin that
was in him, and the power of grace that was in him; thereupon it was he broke
out in this manner, O wretched man that I am! As if he had said, How am I
tired, and how am I wearied with continual conflicts and striving with sin!
Who shall deliver me? or, who shall rid me, or set me free?

And this the Apostle uttered not, as being ignorant who should deliver him, or
as doubting or despayring of deliverance, but thereby signifies his great
desire of it. It is as it were the voice of one panting, and breathing, and
desiring to be delivered. And withal the Apostle hereby signifies the
greatness of the combat, out of which he was not able to wind himself by
his own strength; and therefore he says, Who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? or from this body of death.

These words are diversely expounded. Some expound them thus, This mortal body
subject to death. As if the Apostle had desired to be delivered from his
conflicts with sin, by his bodily death. But (as I take it) that is not his
purpose and meaning: but rather by the word Body, we are to understand the
mass and lump of sin, still in part abiding in the Apostle, whereof he
complained. It is usual in Scripture, to style the corruption of nature, even
the whole mass or lump of sin, by the name and title of a body, as Romans
6.6. That the body of sin might be destroyed; and in many other places. And
it is called a body of death, because it is a deadly thing in it self, and
makes us liable to death; without Gods mercy, to death temporal, and to death
eternal: and therefore it is called a body of death.

Thus then conceive the Apostles meaning in this Verse, as if he had said,

O poor tired and wearied man that I am, I find my self in a miserable case,
being toyled and turmoyled with continual conflicts, and striving with the
relikes of sin that still abide in me, and I long and greatly desire
deliverance and freedom, and I am not able to wind out my self by mine own
strength: and therefore who shall deliver me from that massy lump of sin,
that still in part abides in me, which is a deadly thing in it self, and of it
self makes me liable to death, even death temporal and death eternal?

Now first, in that the Apostle out of the sense and feeling of sin in
himself, rebelling against the power of grace that was in him, and sometimes
leading him captive to the law of sin, breaks out in this manner, and cries
out: O wretched or miserable man, O poor tired and wearied man that I am, how
am I toyled and turmoyled with continual conflicts and combats! we may easily
gather and take up this conclusion,

That it is a miserable thing, that corruption; The dearest of Gods children
living in this world, are in some degree wretched, by reason of sin still
abiding in them in part, and still rebelling against the power of grace that is
in them.
even the dearest of Gods children that live on the face of the earth, are in
some degree wretched, by reason of sin still abiding in them in part, and
still rebelling against the power of grace that is in them, and by reason of
the continual conflicts they undergo, between grace and that corruption that
still remains in them in part; though the corruption of nature be in part
weakened and abolished in Gods children, yet it is a wretched and wearisome
thing to them, to carry about them but the remnants of sin, and to have that
stirring in them.

This (no doubt) was one cause, why the Apostle desired to be dissolved or
loosed, and to be with Christ, Philip. 1.23. I desire to be loosed, and to be
with Christ. Though indeed the chief cause of his desire was, that he might be
with Christ, as himself speaks, and enjoy the presence of Christ, and the
fullness of joy with him in Heaven, yet (no doubt) one cause of his desire was,
that he might be freed from his wretchedness and wearisomenesse, in respect of
the remainder of sin that still abode in him: And that the remainder of sin
makes Gods children in some degree wretched and miserable, may easily appear
to us, if we duly consider the effects of it in the dearest of Gods children
living in this world: For why? Sin still remaining in Gods children in part,
what does it? Surely it defiles them in part, both within and without, it
defiles them in part in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts
and members of their bodies; yea, it defiles their most holy and best actions,
it makes a blot and stain cleave to the best things they perform, and makes
all their righteousness as a menstruous cloth, Isai. 64.6.
Isai. 64.6. It makes them offend their good and gracious God and Father, whom
they would not willingly offend, yet it makes them to offend him, by doing
things contrary to his Will and Word; yea, it makes them many times grieve and
make sad the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
by whom they are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. And lastly,
it brings down on them many temporal chastisements, many sore and grievous
afflictions, as it did on David, 2. Sam. 2. Sam. 12.10, 11.
12.10, 11. The Sword shall never depart from thine house: And in it self, it
makes them liable to Gods wrath and everlasting perdition, and deserves
eternal punishment, if the Lord were not gracious and merciful to them. And
therefore from these effects, as on so many grounds, we may resolve on this as
a certain and clear truth, that it is a miserable thing, to carry about but
the relikes of sin, and it makes the best of Gods children in some degree
wretched, in that they carry about but the remainder of sin. And this being
a truth,

First, Our argument against the Papists, proving concupiscence to be properly
sin, confirmed.
to prove Concupiscence to be truly and properly sin; which they deny. We
argue thus from this Text: Concupiscence makes men miserable. Therefore it is
truly and properly sin: for nothing but sin makes men miserable. But to
elude and put off this Argument, the Papists have found out a shift: Say they,
The word here used, does not signify one in disgrace with God, and subject to
his heavy displeasure: for that which makes men miserable in that sense, is
sin indeed, say they: But the word here signifies an unhappy man, exposed to
the danger of sin, and to all the miseries of this world. These be their
words. A poor shift, and easily answered: For what is it that makes men
unhappy, and exposes them to the miseries of this world? Is it any thing else
but sin? Certainly, nothing but sin makes men unhappy, as forgiveness of
sins makes happy, Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1. So sin makes wretched.

Again it is true, that the word here applied to the Apostle, does not
signify one in disgrace with the Lord; but yet taken by it self, it has that
signification, as appears plainly, Iam. 5.1. Weep and howl for the miseries
that shall come upon you. What miseries? Surely, chiefly miseries in the world
to come. And therefore this is but a poor shift of the Papists, to elude our
Argument. Now for use of the point to our selves.

Is it so, The blessedness of Gods children is here mixed with some misery.
And that the best of Gods children are in some degree wretched, in that they
carry about but the remainder of sin? Surely then, Gods children have not a
perfection of blessedness in the time of this life, but their blessedness
here is mixed with some misery. Though they be in an happy and blessed
estate, and truly blessed in this life, having pardon of their sins,
assurance of Gods love, the first fruits of the Spirit, and right and title to
all the comforts of the Saints of God; yet their blessedness here is with a
mixture of some misery, in that they carry about the remainder of sin, and
shall carry it so long as they live in this world; and that defiles their best
actions, and makes them offend their good and gracious God, and grieve his
Spirit, and draws on them many times the afflicting hand of God; and so their
blessedness here is but in part, and shall not be made perfect in respect of
full freedom from sin, till their souls be removed out of their bodies. And
this should make Gods children willingly embrace death, when it comes; death
should be welcome to them, because that will set them at liberty, not only
from the miseries of this world, but also from sin, the greatest burden,
grief, and vexation to their souls all their life long, after their
effectual calling. In this respect therefore, when death comes, they are
willingly to yield to it, and as it were with both hands to embrace it.

Last of all, have in them the whole body of sin, in the full force and
strength of it? Surely, Their misery is marvelous great and intelerable, that
have sin reigning in them.
their misery must needs be exceeding great and intolerable; take we but a
short view of it; they are miserable within, without, and on every side. For
why? they are in bondage to Satan, and to the lusts of their own hearts; they
are led of the Devil, at his will and pleasure; they have in them an accusing
and guilty conscience, and that dogs them and follows them continually; and
though it may be for a time benumbed and asleep, yet at length it will awaken,
and sometimes they feel the flames of Hell flashing up in their souls. The
good things done by them, as hearing the Word, Praying, and the like, are not
only defiled with sin, but they are sins, and abominable in Gods sight;
they are subject to all the Plagues, Judgments, and Curses of God, denounced
against sin and sinners in this life, whereof we read Deuteronomy. 28. Yea, Deuteronomy.
28. Mal. 2.2.
the blessings of God are curses to them, Mal. 2.2. And when this life ends,
then they enter into a Sea and Gulf of unspeakable, inconceivable, and
endless misery. For then they shall be severed from the comfortable presence
of God, and from the glorious fellowship of Christ, and of his Angels and
Saints, and shall have eternal fellowship with the Devil and his Angels, and
feel the whole wrath of God on them: It had been better for them to have been
made Toades, then men or women, living and dying in that state and condition:
for when the Toade dies, there is an end of the misery of it; but when they
die, then begins their endless, easelesse, and remediless misery. And let
all such as are yet in their natural state and condition, and as yet live in
their sins, and will not be reformed, consider these things; and if Hell have
not taken full possession of their souls, it will make them bethink
themselves of speedy reformation.

Consider we in the next place, that the Apostle breaking out, and uttering
this exclamation, O wretched man that I am! It was (doubtless) out of a true
sense and feeling of his wretchedness, in regard of sin still abiding in
him, and rebelling against the power of grace that was in him, sometimes
leading him as a captive under the power of it. The Apostle, without question,
had a lively sense and feeling of his misery, and held himself in some degree
wretched and miserable, by reason of the remainder of sin that was in him,
continually fighting and warring against the power of grace that was in him:
and thereupon it was, that he broke out, and cried out, O wretched man that I
am!

Hence then we are further given to understand thus much,

That Gods children, Gods children account sin still abiding in them in part,
and felt by them rebelling against the power of grace that is in them, their
greatest misery.
and they account themselves wretched and miserable, in regard of the remainder
of sin that they find in themselves, ever rebelling against the power of
grace that is in them, and they grieve for that misery of theirs especially,
and complain of it, and desire to be delivered from it. Gods children feel
themselves tired and wearied, and as it were worn out with continual tugging
and striving against the corruption of their hearts, and nothing more troubles
them and grieves them, and nothing do they more complain of, then the relikes
of sin still abiding in them, and drawing them from their sound obedience to
the will of God, and making them sometimes to do evil. That which Gods
children account their greatest misery, is the sin that still in part abides
in them, and their rebellious lusts rising from that corruption, their
unbelief, their dullness and deadness, and the like: These are the things
that most of all trouble Gods children, which they most grieve for, and
complain of, and for which especially they feel and hold themselves wretched
and miserable.

We shall find, that Gods children have been able to bear their troubles,
even the greatest troubles, with patience, and they have quietly suffered
reproaches, afflictions, imprisonment, banishment, torment, and martyrdom, when
their bodies have been racked and rent in pieces by most cruel tortures,
howsoever they were not Stoical and senseless in regard of those torments, yet
they never thought themselves wretched and miserable in respect of them; they
never broke out on the feeling of them, and said, O poor wretched men that we
are! No: they have found matter of joy and of rejoicing in them, as the Holy
Ghost witnesses of them, Heb. 10.34. Heb. 10.34.
They suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing, that in Heaven
they had a better and an enduring substance. And the Apostle says of himself,
and of other Ministers of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. 2. Corinthians. 6.4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
That they found matter of rejoicing in necessities, in stripes, and in
prisons, in tumults, and in labors, etc. And he concludes, verse. 10. As
sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many rich; as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

Thus have Gods children been affected, in respect of the greatest troubles
that have befalne them in this world. But for the trouble of sin still
abiding in them, and felt rebelling against the power of grace in them, and
sometimes leading them as captives under the power of it, that they have
esteemed as their misery of all miseries, and that they have grieved for and
complained of especially.

When the Apostle Paul was troubled with temptations to sin, which Satan
suggested to his mind, and he felt his own corruption ready to stir him up
to pride, through the abundance of Revelations, he esteemed those things as
beatings and buffettings, and as pricks and thorns in his flesh, 2. Cor.
12.7. Lest I should be exalted out of measure, through the abundance of
Revelations, there was given me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan,
to buffet me, because I should not be exalted out of measure. Psalm. 119.136.
David says, His eyes gushed out with rivers of water, because men kept not the
Law of God. Was David thus grieved for other men's sins? Oh then, how was he
grieved on the feeling of his own corruption, still in part abiding in him,
and rebelling against the power of grace in him, and sometimes ouer-carrying
him to the doing of evil? Without question, that was a most bitter grief and
vexation to his soul. And if the righteous soul of just LOT was vexed from
day to day, in seeing and hearing the unlawful deeds of the Sodomites, as the
Apostle witnesses, 2. Pet. 2.8. Doubtless, his soul was much more vexed,
when he found that he had been so far ouer-carried, as that he had committed
Incest with his own daughters, Genesis 19.33. etc. Heb. 11.25. it is said, That
MOSES chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sins for a season. He would rather endure any adversity,
then he would yield to the corruption of his own heart, to live in sin; he
held and accounted that, of all miseries, the greatest; and therefore he made
choice rather to endure any hardness with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin. And thus (undoubtedly) it is with all that have the same
Spirit and Grace that Moses had, even with all Gods children; they esteem
sin still abiding in them, and rebelling against the power of grace in them,
and sometimes leading them captive under the power of it, their greatest
misery, and that is the thing they grieve for, and complain of, above all
things in the world. And the reasons of it are these:

First,

And again,

Now then, this being a truth, How Gods children, and the men of this world,
differ in their complains, touching their miseries.
Gods children hold sin still abiding in them, their greatest misery, and they
account their spiritual evils their greatest evils, and those most of all
trouble them, and of those they most of all complain: but (alas) it is far
otherwise with the men of this world; what do they commonly complain of? and
for what do they think themselves wretched and miserable; Surely, for nothing
but bodily evils; as because happily they are blind, or lame, or deaf, or they
are imprisoned, or they are extreme poor, or the like: and ye shall sometimes
hear a worldly man or woman cry out, and say, Oh! never did any endure such
misery, as I have, and do undergo! And why so? Surely, because they be under
some grievous sickness, or some extreme pain, or they are under extreme
poverty, or the like: but never shall you hear a carnal man or woman
complain of their wretchedness and misery, in respect of sin that is in
them, and because they are full of spiritual evils; as because they are
ignorant of God, and of the ways of God, because their hearts are hard, and
because they are full of vile sinful lusts, and such like. No, no: those
things never trouble them, a carnal man or woman never complains of those
things.

And that this note of difference may be more profitable, let us every one
examine our selves, whether we be affected as Gods children, or no, and whether
we have in us that Spirit and that Grace that is in Gods children or no. Do
thou find that when thou art under any bodily evil, thou art blind, or lame,
or deaf, or thou art extreme sick, extreme poor, or in prison, or the like?
yea, it may be, many bodily evils are on thee at once.

Do thou find, Trial of our selves, whether we have the affection, the
Spirit, and the life and grace of Gods children in us, or no.
but thou have a feeling of them, yet thou art most apprehensiue of thy
misery, in regard of sin, and of spiritual evils that are on thee, and thou
accountest the sin that is in thee, thy greatest misery? Do thou hold the
unbelief of thy heart, thy dulnes in good things, and such like, a greater
misery then thy poverty, or thy sickness, or any other bodily misery
whatsoever? And can thou rather desire rather the remouall of thy unbelief,
and thy dulnes in good things, then the remouall of thy poverty or sickness?
and, if the Lord were so pleased, that thy spiritual evils might be removed,
though thy bodily evils were continued on thee, then that thy bodily evils
should be taken away, and thy spiritual evils continued? is it thus with thee?
Certainly, that is a sure evidence that thou have in thee the affection, the
Spirit, and the life and grace of a child of God: but on the other side do
thou find, that when thou art pressed with any bodily evil, thou art blind,
or lame, or deaf, or such like, thou art altogether apprehensiue of thy bodily
evil, and that sits near thee, and thou can bewail that in the bitterness
of thy soul, and cry out in respect of that, O wretched man or woman that I
am! and, Never did any endure the like misery that I endure! but as for the
sin of thy soul, thy blindness of mind, thy hardness of heart, and vile lusts
of it, those never trouble thee, and of them thou never complainest, they are
no burden to thee, thou art a very poor man or woman, and withal thou art a
wicked, vile and sinful man or woman, thou art ignorant and graceless, and
thy poverty, that pincheth thee, and that lies hard on thee, and thou feel
the misery of it, and can weep for it; but thy vileness and sin, that
never troubles thee, and thou never bewailest thy self in respect of that.
Certainly that shows plainly that thou art of the world, and sauorest only
the things of the world, and thou art far from the affections of a child of
God; yea, know it whosoever thou art; art thou extreme poor and wicked also?
and do thou feel thy poverty, and have thou no feeling of thy vileness and
sin? know it for a truth, that the Lord has begun to sit in Judgment
against thee: and thy poverty, thou still continuing in thy vileness and
sin, is but a pledge of more fearful plagues and Judgments yet to come on
thee, and it is but a beginning of sorrows, Mat. 24.8.

Oh then, let us every one herein examine our selves, and see how we stand
affected in respect of the sin that is in us: and if we would approve our
selves to be Gods children, sin and the spiritual evils that be in us, must
be esteemed of us as our greatest misery, yea, though we have no bodily evil
on us, we are in health, and our outward estate is prosperous, yet then we
must be able out of a true feeling of sin, and the spiritual evils that be
in us, striving against grace, and hindering us in good things, to cry out
with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am! if we would be sure that we have in
us the life and grace of Gods children.

And so for further use of the point, Comfort for such as are ever complaining
of their spiritual evils, and groaning under the burden of sin.
whosoever thou art, that art ever complaining of thy spiritual evils still
cleaving unto thee, and art ever sighing, and groaning under the burden of thine
unbelief, thy dulnes of mind, accounting it thy greatest misery, to be
burdened with these sinful infirmities.

Do thou hold thy self wretched and miserable in respect of thy spiritual
evils, and are all other miseries thou endurest, thy poverty, thy sickness, and
such like, nothing to thee, in comparison of thy misery, because of sin
still abiding in thee, and still rebelling against the power of grace that is
in thee? And could thou be content to undergo any misery in the world, so
that thou might be freed from thy spiritual evils? Then comfort thy self,
thou have the Spirit, the life and grace of a child of God, and thou art in
the state of grace and of Gods children; think on it to thy comfort.

Note we farther: The Apostle here gives instance in himself, O wretched man
that I am! The Apostle was a man that had a great measure of Grace and
Sanctification, yet he held himself wretched and miserable, in regard of sin
still abiding in him, and rebelling against the power of grace that was in him,
teaching us by his example,

That the best of Gods Children ought to be far from that fond conceit, The
vanity of their opinion, discovered, who dream of perfection of grace in
degree in time of this life.
that they are come to perfection of grace in degree, and have fullness of joy,
and comfort, and need not any more to weep for their sins. That is a fond
and foolish opinion of some, who think they have howled and wept for their
sins, and they have bin sufficiently humbled for them, and they need not to
weep any more. That is to indent with God, how far they will proceed in
humiliation.

Though we have joy in believing, and in the apprehension of Gods love and
favor toward us in Christ, and that our sins are forgiven, and that we
have right and title to all the comforts of the Saints of God both in this
life, and in the life to come, and in this respect our hearts do rejoice with
joy unspeakable and glorious; yet in regard of sin still abiding in us, and
rebelling against the power of grace in us, the best of us all have cause to
cry out, O wretched man or woman that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death!

Come we now to the words following: Who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? These words, Who shall deliver me? as I showed, are not to be taken
as if the Apostle had been ignorant who should deliver him, or as uttered by
way of doubting or despayring of deliverance; but they are uttered by the
Apostle, as it were panting, and breathing, and earnestly desiring deliverance.
The Apostle was already in part freed from the power of his own corruption,
being a man truly regenerate and truly sanctified, yet feeling the remainder
of sin that was in him, still rebelling against the power of grace in him,
and finding himself in that respect wretched and miserable, he desires
further deliverance, and more and more to be delivered, yea, doubtless, he
earnestly desired a full and petfect deliverance. And as it was with the
Apostle, so is it with all Gods Children. And the point hence is this,

That Gods Children and such as are truly regenerate, Gods children sigh and
groan under the burden of sin still abiding in the^, and they earnestly desire
a full deliverance from it, as part of their happiness.
they sigh and groan under the burden of sin still abiding in them in part,
and still clogging and troubling them, and they desire deliverance from it,
yea, they earnestly pant, and breathe after a full and perfect deliverance from
the corruption of nature, and from the spiritual evils they find in
themselves: they would willingly shake them off, and be rid of them
altogether. GODS Children constantly and continually desire deliverance from
sin, and from sinful infirmities, still sticking in them and cleaving to
them, and they would think it their happiness in part, to be altogether
freed from them. And for this we have not only evidence in this Text, but in
other places of Scripture: read Psalm 51.12. David there prays thus to the
Lord, Stablish me with thy free Spirit. What is that? Why surely, with that
Spirit of thine that is every day more and more to set me at liberty from
under the power of Satan, and from under the power of mine own corruption: as
if he had said, O, vouchsafe to me that good Spirit of thine, and such a
measure of thy grace, as I may more and more be freed from the bondage of mine
own corruption. So again, Psalm. 143.10. he prays to the Lord on this manner,
Let thy good Spirit lead me into the Land of righteousness. As if he had
said, Let not the corruption of mine own heart hinder me in the way of
holiness and righteousness, but more and more free me from it by thy grace,
and let thy good Spirit so guide me, as I may know what is good, and just, and
righteous, and be able also to practice it. Psalm. 119.32.
And Psalm. 119.32. he desires enlargement of his heart, a setting of his heart
at liberty, no doubt, from the bondage of corruption, with a promise to run
the way of Gods Commandments, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when
thou shall enlarge mine heart. 1. John 3.3. says Saint John, Every one that
has this hope in him, purges himself: every one that has hope of glory
when the Christ shall appear to Judgment, purges himself, that is, he
desires and he endeavors more and more to purge out the corruption of his
heart, it is the earnest desire of his heart more and more to have it cleansed
out, and to be freed from it, it is the exhortation of the Holy Ghost, Heb.
12.1. to the believing Hebrews, and in them to all Believers, that they should
cast away, and throw off the sin that hangs so fast on, or easily
compasses about: meaning the corruption of their hearts, that they should
altogether disburden themselves of it. And Mat 6.13. Christ has taught all
that are able truly to call God Father, thus to pray, Deliver us from evil,
that is, not only from the Devil, but also from the power of their own
corruption, and from all evils in the World.

Now that which Christ teaches to pray for, and that which the LORD calls for
at the hands of his Children, doubtless, they desire to do, as David says,
Psalm. 40.8. I desired to do thy good will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within
mine heart. And therefore this conclusion has ground in Scripture, That Gods
Children sigh and groan under the burden of sin still abiding in them, and
they desire deliverance from it, yea, they breathe after a full and perfect
deliverance from the corruption of their nature, and from the spiritual evils
they find in themselves, and they would willingly be altogether rid of them: it
is the constant and continual desire of their hearts; and the reasons of it
are these,

First, Gods Children find,

Again, Gods Children find much sweetness in their liberty and freedom from
the corruption of nature in part, in that they are in part freed from it, and
they are able in part with freedom of Spirit to serve the Lord, and they would
not for all the World be again in their former bondage.

On these grounds then we may set this down for a truth, that Gods Children
pant and breathe after deliverance from the corruption of their nature, even
after a full and perfect deliverance from it, and from their spiritual evils,
and it is the constant and continual desire of their hearts, to be altogether
freed from them.

Now then first, Difference between Gods Children, and such as are yet in
their natural state, touching their desire of freedom from the corruption of
their hearts, discovered.
that is between Gods Children and such as are yet in their natural state and
condition: for why? Thus it is with Gods Children, they pant and breathe after
a full and perfect deliverance from the corruption of their hearts, and from
their spiritual evils, but it is far otherwise with them that are yet in
their filth and dregs of nature. Alas, they desire nothing less then
deliverance from the sin that is in them, and from the vile lusts of their
own hearts. No, no: they hold it their happiness to live in sin, and to
yield to the lusts of their hearts, and they account it even their chief
felicity, when they may follow the swinge of their own corrupt hearts, and
nothing grieves them more, then when they are crossed in their sensual
delights and pleasures. We find it so in woeful experience. How many have we,
that are given over to the vile lusts of their own hearts? And they cannot
abide such as will not power forth themselves to the same excess of Riot, and
they hate none more then such as go about to reform them, yea, such as are
yet in their natural state and condition, and also in the state of
reprobation, their desire to sin is infinite, they have in them a will to
sin for ever, therefore their punishment is eternal: that is one reason of
the eternity of it.

And let us every one try our selves by the ground of Doctrine now delivered: A
special note of trial, whether we be the Children of God or no.
Do thou hold thy self a Child of God? Every one no doubt is ready to
assume that to himself. Do thou, I say, whosoever thou art, hold thy self
a Child of God? Then try thy self by this particular note: and if thou
would indeed approve thy self so to be, thou must find thy self not
only in part freed from the power of thine own corruption, but that thou also
find sweetness in that freedom, and do pant and breathe after a further
deliverance, even after a full deliverance from it, and that thou do wish
and desire that above all things in the World.

This must be in thee, if thou would make it good to the comfort of thine
own soul, that thou art a Child of God: and though we cannot come to be
altogether freed from the corruption of nature, and though we cannot wholly
shake off all sinful infirmities whilst we live here in this World, yet if
we hold our selves Gods Children, we are to look to this, that it be the
desire of our hearts, to be altogether freed from them, and that we desire it
constantly and continually, and that our desire be not a light vanishing
motion, but that we second our desire with a careful use of all good means,
diligent hearing and reading in the Word of God, Prayer, and the like; yea, let
us be restless and discontent in this respect: that is an holy
coffeehouse, when we find our selves clogged with unbelief, with
doubting, with distrust, and the like, and we would feign shake them off, and
we cannot, then to be in a sort discontent, and even restless in our desire
to be rid of them, An holy and comfortable coffeehouse.
and in our care to use the means to that purpose, that is an holy
coffeehouse. And know it, whosoever thou art, that art thus restless, and
thus discontented, know it, I say, to thy comfort, that though thou can not
be altogether freed from that spiritual evil that lies heavy on thy soul, and
thou desire to shake off, and use all good means to that purpose, yet that
evil shall never be imputed to thee; though the Lord be pleased to keep thee
in exercise under it, yet he will never charge it on thy soul, but will
accept thy will and desire to be freed from it, as if thou were indeed freed
from it. Think on that to thy comfort.

Note we further, the Apostle says not, How shall I deliver my self? how
shall I set my self free from the body of this death? But, Who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? As if he had said, I am not able by mine own
strength and power to deliver my self: and therefore who shall deliver me? He
goes out of himself, to seek deliverance from the remaynder of sin that was
in him.

And thus it ought to be with all Gods children; Gods children cannot free
themselves from corruption, still abiding in them, by any power in themselves.
yet they are not able of themselves, by any power in themselves, further to
free themselves; no, they must still pray, as Christ has taught, Lord, deliver
us from evil; that is, from the evil of sin still abiding in us. It is Christ
that must further deliver them, as the Apostle subioynes: I thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

This I note, Confutation of the Papists.
who hold, that a man regenerate has such power in himself, as he is able to
keep himself free from mortal sin, as they call it, yea, perfectly to
fulfill the Law of God. Another vain conceit discovered.
whosoever they be that think they may, at their own time and pleasure,
deliver themselves from under the bondage of their own lusts, they are in
thraldom to the lusts of their own hearts, and they think they can at their
own time and pleasures deliver themselves: they that so think, are blinded by
the Devil, and are the Devils fools; he hood-winkes them, and makes them
neglect the timely using of means, by which God works the calling and
conversion of his Chosen, and deliverance from under the power of sin and
Satan, namely, diligent hearing, reading, and meditating in the Word of God,
and the like.

Come we now to the last words of this Verse, wherein the Apostle expresses
from what he would be delivered, namely, from the body of this death. Who shall
deliver me, (says he) from the body of this death? that is, as we showed, from
the massy lump of sin still abiding in me, which is deadly, and in it self
deserves death of body, and death of soul.

Now here in the first place observe we, that the Apostle desires to be
delivered and freed from the massy lump of sin he still felt in himself,
which he calls by the name of a body: he says, Who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? He says not, Who shall deliver me from some limme or
member of that corruption I still find in my self? But, from the body of it.
He desires to be delivered from the body of corruption that he still found in
himself, even from sin and corruption, extending it self still in part over
all the powers of his soul. Thus it was with the Apostle, and thus indeed it
ought to be with all that would be like the Apostle, A true and comfortable
desire of freedom from sin, is a desire to be freed from sin in all the
powers of the soul, and in all the parts and members of the body.
and freedom from the corruption of their own nature. And the point hence is
this,

If we desire to be freed from the corruption of our own nature truly, and
as we ought to do, and so as our desire may yield true comfort to us, then it
is our desire, and we endeavor, and we labor, and strive to be freed from the
body of sin, from the massy lump of corruption in all the powers of our
souls, and in all the parts and members of our bodies: our desire is to have
corruption and sin removed and taken away, not from our minds alone, or from
our wills alone, but from all and every power and faculty of our souls, and
from all and every part and member of our bodies. That the whole mass and body
of sin ouer-spreading all the powers of the one, and parts of the other, may
be removed, that is our desire, if we have in us a true desire: for indeed that
is such a desire, as is suitable and agreeable to that which the holy Ghost
requires of us. 2. Cor. 5.17.
2. Cor. 5.17. says the Apostle, If any man be in Christ Jesus, let him be a
new creature. Ephesians. 4.22.
And Ephesians. 4.22. he says again, Cast off the old man, which is corrupt
through the deceiuable lusts. And the like exhortations we have in many other
places of Scripture. And the holy Ghost requiring this of us, even a new
creation, and a casting off the old man, as it were a perfect man, with all the
parts and members of a perfect man, surely, our desire is answerable to it, if
it be a true desire. And so, if we desire freedom from our own corruption
truly, and as we ought, and so as we may find comfort in our desire, then we
desire, as the holy Ghost requires of us, freedom from the body of sin, from
the massy lump of sin in all the powers of our souls, and in all the parts
and members of our bodies. And the reason and ground of it is this,

True Regeneration or sanctification is entire, These. 5.23. The very God of
peace sanctify you throughout. And therefore it must needs be, that as many as
desire to be freed from the corruption of their own hearts truly, and as they
ought to desire; and so as they may find comfort in their desire, they desire,
and they endeavor, and they labor, and strive to be freed from the body of
sin, from sin throughout in all the powers of their souls, and in all the
parts and members of their bodies.

Let no man then, for use of this, deceive himself, Who they be that deceive
themselves, in their desire of freedom from sin.
because happily he desires to have the blindness of his mind removed, and
error taken away from his judgment, and yet has no desire to be freed from
the sinful lusts of his heart. Many there be that have a great desire after
knowledge, and that their ignorance may be dispelled and removed, their desire
in that respect is insatiable; which I discommend not: but in the mean time
their hearts are full of Pride, Envy, Self-loue, Self-conceit, Covetousness,
and the like, and they have no desire at all to have their hearts cleansed and
freed from those vile lusts. Now such persons, if they think they desire
freedom from sin truly and to their comfort, they deceive themselves, they
are far from that desire that was in the Apostle, and from that desire that
is found in Gods children. Gods children, doubtless, feel the weight of sin
pressing and lying heavy, not only on their minds, but on their hearts also,
and they desire to be disburdened, as from Ignorance, and Blindness of mind,
and Error of judgment: so from Pride, Self-love, Covetousness, and other
inordinate lusts and evil affections, and indeed from the whole body of sin,
from sin in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts and members of
their bodies.

And this must be thy desire; if thou would find comfort in thy desire, thou
must desire, and labor, and strive for the remouall of sin from thy mind,
will, affections, memory, conscience, appetite, senses; and that Grace may be
wrought in thee throughout, that is an holy and a sanctified desire, the desire
of a Child of God, and that will seal up to thee this comfort, that thou have
in thee the Spirit of grace and sanctification: and therefore never rest, till
thou find that it is the desire of thy heart, to be delivered from the body of
sin.

Now in that the Apostle here calls the corruption of nature still abiding in
him in part, by the name of a body, we are given to understand thus much: I
will but touch it briefly; we have heretofore handled the point.

That the corruption of nature is no light superficial thing, The corruption
of nature is, as it were, a massy and substantial body.
no shadow; but it is as it were a massy and substantial body, though indeed
it is no substance, as some have thought: for then could not the soul be
immortal. But it is as a body, and it has as it were all the dimensions and
all the parts of a foul, monstrous, and deformed body, in which are found all
sins bound up, as it were, in one body, which break out as any occasion is
offered. And hence it is, that the Apostle calls diverse foul sins breaking
out of this body, Coloss. 3.5.
members, Coloss. 3.5. Mortify your members which are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry. Yea, the corruption of nature contaynes in
it all sins; it is as a Root, or an Ocean Sea, sending out streams and
floods of sin; so that, as one says well, If all heresies and sins were
ceased in the world, yet if the Lord leave a man to himself, he has in him
sufficient matter and spawne to breed all kind of error and sin, Gal. 5.19.
Gal. 5.19.

The Apostle having reckoned up many works of the flesh, he is forced to
conclude, Verse. 21. and such like, as not able to reckon up all. And indeed, if
a man from his infancy were severed from the company of men, I am not able to
express the greatness of the corruption of man's degenerate nature. No surely,
if an Angel should come from heaven, he were not able to express it: and
therefore for the use of this,

Let no man think it a small matter, It is no small matter for a man to be in
his natural state and condition.
Some there be that please themselves, and think themselves in very good case,
only because they are free from some gross actual sins; they are no
Drunkards, no Whoremongers, or the like. Poor souls! they deceive themselves:
this they may be by restrayning grace, and yet lie wallowing in the puddle of
their own filthiness. And know it, whosoever thou art, it is not only thy
actual transgression of Gods Law, that makes thee liable to Gods wrath, but it
is also thy natural corruption, yea, that chiefly, that being the
mother-sinne, and the root of all other sins, that does stand up between
thee and Gods favor, and make thee liable to Gods curse and everlasting
perdition. And therefore labor thou to see the greatness of thy natural
corruption, and to see thy self under the wrath of God in regard of that, and
seeing it, bewail and lament for that above all things in the world, yea, when
thou humblest thy self for any known actual sin, then look thou bewail the
corruption of thine own heart, as the root and mother of that and all other
thy sins. For happily thou may acknowledge some known actual sin, out of
self-love, or for fear of shame, or punishment, or the like: and unless by
that sin thou be brought to have a sense and sorrow for the mother of that
and all other thy sins, thou shall never find ease and refreshing from
Christ. He came not to call the righteous, Matthew. 9.13. but sinners to
repentance: Matthew. 9.13.
and not every sinner, but that sinner that condemns sin in himself, and
especially the mother sin, and is weary, and laden, and groans under the
burden of it, Matthew. 11.28. Matthew. 11.28.


Now further, the Apostle adds, the body of this death, or, this body of
death, that is, which is deadly in it self, and of it self deserves death,
and makes me liable to death temporal, and death eternal.

We see then, The best of Gods children have that in them, that in it self,
and of it self, makes them liable to death temporal, and death eternal.
though they have but the remaynder of sin in them, yet they have that in
them, that of it self, and in it self deserves death of body, and death of
soul, they have in them a body of death, even that which in it self, and of
it self, makes them liable to death temporal, and death eternal: for why?
they have still abiding in them in part, that which is contrary to the perfect
purity and holiness that is required in the Law of God, and is in it self
truly and properly sin, and the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. Ezech.
18.4. Genesis 2.17.
Romans 6.23. And the soul that sins, and is guilty of sin, shall die,
Ezech. 18.4. according to that threatening, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou catest
thereof, thou shall die the death.

Objection. Iam. 1.15. the Apostle says, When lust has conceived, Iam. 1.15.
it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death.
Therefore natural corruption, of it self, and in it self, makes not liable
to death.

I answer, God tempts no man to sin, Iam. 1.13.
as it is Verse. 13. but that he is tempted, enticed, and drawn to sin by his
own concupiscence. And he puts down the fruits of concupiscence, or natural
corruption, that it enticeth and draws to sin, and that it brings forth
sin and death: and therefore still it remaynes a truth, that the best of Gods
children having but the remaynder of sin in them, they have that in them,
which in it self, and of it self, makes them liable to death temporal, and
death eternal. And therefore for the use of this,

Gods children, of Gods children have that in them that deserves hell, The best
of Gods children have that in them that deserves hell, and they that have sin
in them in the full force of it, have that in them that deserves the hottest
fire of hell.
what then have they that have the body of sin, in the full force and
strength of it breaking out with many foul actual sins? Surely, they have
that in them, that deserves the hottest fire of hell; and they are but under
Gods patience and long sufferance; and that they are suffered to live many
years on the face of the earth, it is but the patience of God toward them,
they are every moment subject to the strokes of Gods hand, to plagues and
Judgments in this world, and to everlasting perdition in the world to come;
and it is a foolish plea that some use, when they are told of their sins, and
that by the least of their sins, they deserve hell and damnation.

Oh, say they, I hope there is no such matter. Will the Lord damn my soul for
a little Swearing, for a little Idle and Foolish talking, and for a little
Merriment? No, no: I hope there is more mercy with the Lord then so: I pray God
I never do worse, and then I hope I shall do well enough. Poor soul! Thou
speak ignorantly and foolishly. Do thou not ill enough to provoke the Lord
to anger, and to damn thee body and soul? This thou do by the least of thy
sins; and though God be merciful, yet he is just also, and it stands with
his Justice, to damn thy soul for the least of thy sins, thou living and
dying in it without repentance. And therefore think not that the Lord should
deal hardly with thee, if he should damn thy soul and body for thy
Swearing, thy Idle and Foolish speaking, unless thou repent of those sins:
for the least of those sins deserves death and damnation, and it is Gods
mercy in Christ, that the best of Gods children are not thrown to hell, for the
remaynder of sin that is in them, though they had no other sins at all.

VERSE. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: then I my self in my
mind serve the Law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin.


Our Apostle having uttered his complaint, in regard of sin still abiding in
him, and rebelling against the power of grace in him, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! and made known his desire to
be delivered, and from what he would be delivered; here in the first words of
this verse, he subioynes matter of comfort and consolation in and through
Christ, for which he gives thanks to God, and he says, I thank God through
Jesus Christ: whom he further styles by his Title, (Lord) appropriating that
title to himself and other true believers, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now not to meddle with the words following, but to keep within the compass
of these words, containing matter of comfort, whereby the Apostle did cheer
up himself, I will briefly lay forth the sense and meaning of them.

I thank God. Interpretation
Some would have these words read thus: The grace of God through Jesus Christ.
But indeed they are mistaken. In the Original word, it is the same that we
have, Romans 1.8. (...): I thank my God. And it is rightly rendered, I thank
God: (that is) I bless God, I praise God, or I give him thanks. Through Jesus
Christ. These words have respect, and look back to that the Apostle said
verse before, Who shall deliver me? Which being uttered by him (as I told you)
as it were panting and breathing after deliverance. Here he subioynes matter
of comfort in and through Jesus Christ, that in him he should be delivered: for
so the sentence is to be supplied, to make up the full sense and meaning. As if
the Apostle had said, Through Jesus Christ, I shall be delivered, I certainly
expect and look for and full and perfect deliverance from the p were of sin
still abiding in me, and from the guilt of sin: for both these are here to be
understood, as may easily appear by the connection of this Text, with that
which follows, Chap. 8. Now then, there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus.

And so these words through Jesus Christ, they carry this sense; I am
persuaded, I rest on it, that through Jesus Christ, I shall have a full
deliverance from the power of sin, and from the guilt of sin, for which I
bless God, I thank God, through Jesus Christ.

The Apostle adds our Lord: (that is) our Lord, not only as he is Lord over
all creatures by right of creation, but in more special manner, and that in a
double respect: First, in respect of free donation from his Father, John 17.9.
John. 17.9.
Secondly, in respect of his work of Redemption, 1. Cor. 6.19.20. Ye are not
your own: 1 Cor. 6.19.20.
for ye are bought for a price. Christ has redeemed you with his own blood,
and therefore you are his, he is Lord over you.

Thus then conceive we these words; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
As if the Apostle had said, I bless God, I praise God, and I give God thanks,
that in and through Jesus Christ I certainly expect and look for deliverance,
yea I am fully persuaded, and I rest on it, that in and through him, I shall
have a full and perfect deliverance from the power of sin still abiding in
me, and from the guilt of sin, even in and through him who is my Lord and
yours, and the Lord of all true Believers, both by douation and free gift from
his Father, and by right of Redemption.

First, here we see, we may easily observe it, that the Apostle breaking out
into a complaint of his wretchedness in regard of sin still abiding in him in
part, and desiring deliverance from the power of sin, and from the guilt of
sin, even panting and breathing after it, he found no comfort in himself, or
in any thing that was in himself, or in any other, but only in Jesus Christ.

He found nothing that was able to free him from the power of sin, and that
might pacify his conscience, in respect of the guilt of sin, either in
himself, or elsewhere in the world, but only in Jesus Christ: and having
before cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death! Here he gathers comfort to himself, and cheeres up his soul,
that in Jesus Christ deliverance was to be found, and he says, I thank God
through Jesus Christ, I shall be delivered. The point hence is this:

That the soul of man or woman being troubled in respect of sin, The mind
and conscience weary, and laden, and groaning under the burden of sin, finds
no ease, comfort or refreshing, till it come to rest on Christ.
feeling the weight and burden of it pressing and lying heavy on it, yea, the
soul of man or woman feeling but the remainder of sin, and sinful
infirmities, that still stick and cleave to it, (for that was the Apostles
case) I say, feeling but the remainder of sin pressing, and lying heavy on it,
and being weary and laden with the burden of it, it finds no ease, no comfort,
no refreshing in it self, or in any thing elsewhere in the world, but only in
Jesus Christ, the mind and conscience weary, and laden, and groaning under the
burden of sin, cannot possibly be eased or comforted, and refreshed, till it
come to rest on Christ, in him alone is ease, comfort, and refreshing to be
found to the weary soul, and to the poor distressed mind and conscience.
And hence it is that Christ is called, Isai. 9.6.
The Prince of Peace, Isai. 9.6. Unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a Son
is given, and he shall call his name, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God,
The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

And he is called our peace, Ephesians. 2.14.
Ephesians. 2.14. He is our peace, who has made of both one, and has broken the
stop of the partition Wall. Romans 5.1.
Romans 5.1. The Apostle says, that being justified by faith, we have peace
toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And hence, doubtless, it was, that
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2.2.
1. Cor. 2.2. He esteemed to know nothing save Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.8, 9
and him crucified. and Philip. 3.8, 9. The Apostle says, He counted all
things loss, and judged them to be dung, in respect of this, that he might
win Christ, and be found in him. And Christ himself calls all that are
weary, and laden, and groan under the burden of their sins, to come to him,
with a promise that in him they shall find ease, comfort, and refreshing: Mat.
11.28. Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.

These and many other testimonies of Scripture do make this manifest, that in
Christ alone, the poor weary soul, and the distressed mind and conscience
finds ease, and comfort, and refreshing, in respect of freedom from the guilt
of sin: and the reason of it is this:

In Christ alone is found that which is able to answer the justice of God, and
to appease his anger for sin,

For use, it meets with a Popish error; That error of the Papists confuted,
that peace of conscience toward God, may be had by inherent holiness, and by
the merit of good works.
it is held and taught by the Papists, that peace and quietness of conscience,
even toward God, may be had by inherent holiness, and by the merit of good
works, that a man may have his conscience quieted and pacified in respect of
Justification, and freedom from guiltines of sin, by his own inherent
holiness, and by the merit of his own good works. That is a gross error, and
it cannot stand with the Truth now delivered. Luther reports, that he in his
time observed many Papists, that took great pains, and on mere conscience
did as much as was possible for them, in Fasting, Prayer, and other exercises;
and all to this end, that they might find quietness, and peace of conscience;
and yet the more they labored, the more they were stricken down with fear,
and especially when they came to the hour of death; then (says he) I have
seen them exceeding fearful, yea, I have seen sometimes Murderers and
others, executed as notorious Malefactors, dye more comfortably, then they did.

This Luther observed in his time. And no marvel though it were so: for it is
not possible, that the conscience should be pacified touching freedom from
guiltiness of sin, by any good thing found in us, or done by us for the
merit of it; no, I dare be bold to say, that Christ his fulfilling of the Law
of God cannot pacify the conscience, in respect of the guiltiness of sin:
for then Christ dyed in vain, and therefore it is a gross error to say, that
peace of conscience toward God may be had by inherent holiness, and by the
merit of good Works.

Again, for a second use: is it so, that in Christ alone is found ease,
comfort and refreshing to the weary soul, and to the poor distressed mind
and conscience? Cannot the soul that is wearied with the burden of sin, be
eased and comforted,

The learn we, Where Gods Children feeling their sinful infirmities lying
heavy, on their souls, are to seek for ease, comfort, and refreshing.
when sin lies heavy on our souls, and we feel the weight and the burden
of it, yea, we being Gods Children, and feeling sinful infirmities lying heavy
on our souls which we are weary of, and would willingly shake off, and
cannot; learn we, I say, where we are to seek and to look for ease,
comfort, and refreshing. Surely not in our selves, nor in any thing in our
selves, nor elsewhere in the World, but only in Jesus Christ the Storehouse
of all true comfort.

Some there be that much complain of their sinful infirmities, and it is a
good complaint; I doubt not but they are the dear Children of God that so
complain, and they say sometimes, Oh, if I might come to such a measure of
faith, or such a measure of trust in God, or such a measure of joy and delight
in good things, and such like, I should be well, my mind would then be at
ease and quiet.

Indeed, I grant, if thou had that measure of faith, of trust in God, and
delight in good things thou desire, it would yield thee much comfort, because
it would strongly seal up to thee thy being in Christ: yet thou must know,
that still thy comfort comes from Christ, it is not the measure of thy faith,
that yields thee comfort, but because faith has an eye to Christ, and from him
draws down comfort, and because other graces do evidence to thee thy being
in Christ; and so from Christ alone, still comes all thy comfort and peace to
thy soul. And therefore rest not in any grace or goodness in thy self, as
the ground of thy comfort, though it may yield thee much comfort, in that it
gives thee assurance that thou art in Christ; yet still for the ground of thy
comfort, go out of thy self, and seek for that in Christ alone: in him alone
shall thou find ease, comfort, rest, and refreshing to thy weary soul.

Note we further, the Apostle having cried out, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death! here he cheeres up himself
with this, that certainly in Christ he should have a full deliverance from the
power of sin.

Thus may Gods Children comfort and cheer up themselves: That howsoever they
now are troubled with many sinful infirmities, How Gods Children may comfort
and cheer up themselves, though they be troubled with many sinful
infirmities. Philip. 1.6. 1. Cor. 13.12.
that press them and lie heavy on them, yet one day in and through Christ
they shall be fully and altogether freed from them: The Lord has begun his
good work of grace in them, and he will perfect it, Philip. 1.6. and they
shall one day know as they are known, 1. Cor. 13.12. And therefore comfort thy
self, whosoever thou art, that feel the want of holiness and
sanctification, and art ever complaining of that want: here is ground of
comfort for thee. Have thou the first fruits of the Spirit? an hatred of all
sins, a constant purpose to please God, and a true fear of God, and hereby
evidence that thou art in Christ? Then comfort thy self: he will not only
free thee from the guiltiness of sin, and from the punishment due unto thee
for sin, but he will one day also free thee altogether from the power of
sin, and thou shall one day be fully and perfectly sanctified, and be
invested with the perfect and glorious Image of Jesus Christ.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle here speaking of his
deliverance from the power of sin, and from the guiltiness of sin through
JESUS CHRIST, he does not barely affirm it, and speak of it, but he
affirms it, and speaks of it with thanksgiving to God, he says not barely,
Through Jesus Christ I shall be delivered: but I thank God, I bless God, and
I give him thanks through Jesus Christ, I shall have deliverance. He
remembers this great benefit of deliverance from the power of sin, and from
the guiltiness of sin through Christ, and speaks of it with hearty thanks
to God for it.

Now, that which the Apostle did, that must we do, even as many as would
approve themselves to be such as the Apostle was, that is, truly regenerate,
and Gods Children: his example must be our pattern, and the duty hence is
this,

That we must never mention and speak of GODS benefits and mercies vouchsafed
unto us, We must bless God, and give him praise for good things past, present,
or to come, especially for the good things of the life to come, whenever we
either think or speak of the^.
and especially heavenly and spiritual benefits, as freedom from sin, hell,
death, and damnation, the favor of God, comfort in Christ or the like, but we
are to have our mouths opened in magnifying and praising God for the same;
whenever we either think or speak of Gods blessings, benefits and mercies
vouchsafed unto us, yea, the blessings and good things we hope for, and expect,
and look for at the hands of the Lord, and especially heavenly and spiritual
good things, such as concern life and salvation, and the everlasting good of
our souls, we are not barely to think or speak of them, but so to think,
and so to speak of them, as that we give the Lord his due praise and glory,
and in thinking and speaking of them, our hearts must be enlarged, and our
mouths opened, in giving praise and thanks to the Lord for the same; we must
bless God, and give him praise for good things past, present or to come,
especially for the good things of the life to come, whenever we either think
or speak of them.

Thus did the holy Apostle: we find it in the beginning of most of his
Epistles, that he breaks out into praise and thanks to God, for spiritual
good things bestowed on himself, and on the Church and Saints of God to whom
he writ, as Romans 1.8. I thank my God, Romans 1.8.
through Jesus Christ, for you all, because your faith is published throughout
the whole World. 1. Cor. 1.4. 1. Cor. 1.4.
I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given
you in Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.8. Blessed be God, Ephesians. 1.3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ. And so in other of his
Epistles. And thus did the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1.3. says he, 1. Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

And the holy man of God, David, though he made precious account and reckoning
of Prayer, and used it much and often, yet Praise and Thanksgiving to God he
held and accounted most excellent, and that he used seven times a day (that
is, often) a certain number being put for an uncertain. Psalm. 119.164.
Psalm. 119.164. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgments, and he composed and made many Psalms purposely of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God, Psalm. 103.1, 2.
Psalm 103.1, 2. he stirs up himself, and calls on his own soul, and all
that was within him, to praise the holy Name of the Lord, for his mercies and
benefits in pardoning his sins, in redeeming his life from the grave, and
crowning him with mercy and compassion.

This has been the practice of the holy Servants of God in all Ages, to
praise the Lord for his mercies and benefits bestowed on them, and especially
for spiritual and heavenly blessings: and this ought to be our practice, if
we would approve our selves to be guided by the same Spirit that they were;
whenever we either think or speak of good things past or present bestowed
upon us, or the good things we hope for from the Lord, especially good things
heavenly and spiritual, we are to have our hearts enlarged, and our mouths
opened in magnifying and praising God for the same; that is our duty, and
there is reason for it. The reason and ground of it is this,

The glory and praise of God is the principal end of all his actions, Prou.
16.4.
Prou. 16.4. The Lord made all things for his own sake: that is, for his
glories sake it is, that we are taught to pray for in the first place, that
his name may be glorified, and it is the shutting up of all our Petitions:
Thine, O Lord, is Kingdom, power, and glory. It is the end of all the
blessings of God bestowed upon us. Therefore are blessings and good things
bestowed on us, That we should set forth the virtues of God, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Pet. 2.9. 1. Pet. 2.9.
that we should magnify the Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Mercy of God, in
bestowing good things on us, and especially good things heavenly and spiritual.

And therefore doubtless, this is a duty incumbent, and lying on us, That
whenever we either think or speak of good things already bestowed on us,
or good things we expect and look for from the Lord, especially good things
heavenly and spiritual, our hearts are to be enlarged, and our mouths opened,
in magnifying and praising God for the same.

Now this is a duty little thought on, Reproof of such as are careless in
the practice of this duty of thanksgiving to God, for good things.
Where is (almost) that man, or woman, that gives true praise to God for the
good things of this life bestowed upon them? Happily, for form and fashion, they
utter sometimes a few words; I praise God, or I thank the Lord, for this or
that good thing. But where is that enlarging of the heart, and that feeling
affection, opening the mouth wide in praising God, that was in David? 1. Chr.
29.10, 11, 12, 13. 1. Chron. 29.10,
Blessed be thou, O Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever. Thine, O
Lord, is Greatness, and Power, and Glory, and Victory, and Praise: For all
that is in the Heaven and Earth, is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and
thou excellest as Head over all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou
reignest over all, and in thine hand is Power and Strength, and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we
thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. He could not find words sufficient
to set forth the affection of his heart.

Where is this manner of praising God to be found? Surely, it is hard to be
found amongst men. Well, as the Prophet says, Hosea 4.15. Though Israel play
the harlot, Hosea 4.15.
yet let not Judah sin.

So I say in this case, them with feeling hearts magnify the Name of the Lord
for good things bestowed upon them, Such as fear the Lord, are with seeling
hearts to magnify the Name of the Lord, for good things bestowed on them,
especially spiritual good things. Romans 8.17.
especially for spiritual good things. We are to praise God for the least bit
of bread we have to put into our mouths, much more are we to magnify his
Name, for freeing us from the power of Sin, Hell, Death, and Damnation, and
making us his Children, his Sons and Daughters, yea, heirs, even
ioint-heires with Christ, Romans 8.17. and by him giving us certain Title to an
Inheritance everlasting, in his own Kingdom.

Oh, these things are to affect our hearts and souls, and for these we are to
magnify the Name of the Lord especially: yea, not only in word to praise God
for these spiritual blessings, but to yield to him, in lieu of them, real
thanksgiving; Real thanksgiving is to be yielded to the Lord.
to labor to answer the Lords mercy in these things, by yielding to him all
holy obedience, and by walking humbly before him all the days of our life;
even out of a feeling acknowledgement of his goodness and mercy toward us in
these things, to break out and to say with David, 2. Sam. 7.18.
2. Sam. 7.18. Lord, what am I? And who am I, that thou should think on me,
and choose me to Life and Salvation, free me from Sin, and Hell, Death, and
Damnation, making me thy Child, and an Heir of Heaven? Oh what shall I render
to thee for these great and unspeakable mercies! Thus ought we to be affected,
in respect of spiritual good things and blessings bestowed on us; and out of a
feeling of them, to break out into magnifying and praising the Name of the
Lord.

And a little to quicken us up to this duty: Motives stirring us to the
practice of this duty.
know, that truly to praise God, is the most excellent thing we can do
whilst we live here in this world: It is that which the Angels do in Heaven,
and it is that we shall do for ever in the life to come; yea, it is the most
comfortable thing we can perform: Nothing seals up more comfort to the soul
then this, to be able from the bottom of the heart to praise the Lord, and to
give him the glory that is due to his Name.

And therefore, if thou would be exercised in that duty that is most
excellent, and will yield thee most comfort, remember to magnify and to praise
the Name of the Lord for good things bestowed on thee, and especially for good
things Heavenly and Spiritual; that is the duty of every child of God.

Now, in the last place, the Apostle adds, Our Lord: that is, as we showed,
my Lord, and your Lord, and the Lord of all true Believers, both by free
donation from his Father, and by right of Redemption. Hence I might stand to
show,

That as many as acknowledge Christ their Jesus, must also acknowledge him to
be their Lord, and must take his yoke on them. And therefore in vain do they
hold Christ to be their Savior, and to have borne the burden of their sins,
who never submit their necks to his yoke. But of this we have spoken
heretofore; therefore I pass by it: only note in a word,

That Christ is the Lord of all true Believers in special manner, they being
given to him of his Father, Christ is Lord of all true Believers in special
manner, and has a special care over them.
and he having redeemed them, he is Lord over them in special manner. And
therefore doubtless he carries a special hand over them, and he gouernes
them in special manner; he guides them in the way to Heaven; he exercises
them under afflictions and trials, to spiritual obedience; he supports them
in their troubles; he defends them against the rage of all enemies whatsoever.
And to this purpose speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.22. says he, Ephesians. 1.22.
Christ is made Head to his Church, to guide and govern it, as an Head in
special manner; but as for all other things, they are made subject under his
feet. So that out of all question, Christ has a special care of his Church,
and members of it; he guides and gouernes them in special manner.

And this for the use of it, Comfort to all true members of Christ; they need
not fear any adversary power. Matthew. 28.18.
is a ground of sweet comfort to all true believing members of Christ; and this
may cheer them up against the fear of any adversary power whatsoever. For
why? Christ, to whom all power is given, Matthew. 28.18. is their Lord in
special manner, and he will certainly guide them in the way to life and
salvation, and protect and defend them against the enemies of their salvation.
Ioh. 17.2.
Yea, himself says, John 17.2. All power was given him of his Father, over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to them that he has given him.

Let then the Devil, Antichrist, and all the enemies of the Church, rage and
swell, and do what they can against the Church and members of it, they shall
never prevail to the hurt of one soul that belongs to Christ; He has all the
enemies of his Church under his feet, to tread them down to Hell at his
pleasure; and they may as soon, and as easily, pull Christ out of his Seat in
Heaven, as one of his members out of his hands: And that is an excellent
comfort to all that truly believe in Christ.

NOw before we come to the words following, Romans 7. ver. 24.25.
an Objection is to be removed, that some bring against our Argument, by which
we prove the Apostle to be truly regenerate, gathered from his Exclamation, O
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death! And
his thanksgiving subioyned, I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For
hence we thus reasoned. The Apostle groned under his misery, in regard of
sin still abiding in him, and desired deliverance from it, and gave thanks to
God for deliverance through Jesus Christ our Lord. And therefore he was a man
truly regenerate.

Now against this Argument, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
and subioynes the grace of God through Jesus Christ; it shows, that he was a
man as yet not delivered from his sin, but that the grace of God, through
Jesus Christ, might in time deliver him: And therefore (say they) this is no
good Argument to prove the Apostle regenerate, and his being in the state of
grace, and that he was a man truly regenerate, because he cries out, O wretched
man, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! and then subioynes, The
grace of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So lies the Objection. The Answer
to it is easy.

It stands partly on a wrong translation of some part of the Text.

I answer to it, It appears plainly by the Context,

And again, the Apostle says not, the grace of God through Jesus Christ; but,
I thank God, I give thanks to God through Jesus Christ. He being able to
bless God, and to give him thanks, that in part he was delivered, and did
certainly expect full deliverance from the power of sin through Jesus Christ,
it is a plain evidence, that he was a man truly regenerate, and in the state
of grace: for indeed, none but such as be truly regenerate, and in the state of
grace, and none but such as be in Christ, can bless God for his mercy toward
them, in respect of any good thing bestowed on them, or any good thing that
they expect or look for, from the hands of God. And not to pass from this
without some use of it,

Know it, whosoever thou art, bless God, Men cannot bless God, for any good
thing bestowed on them, with comfort, unless they be in Christ.
and give him thanks for any good thing bestowed on thee, with comfort, unless
thou be in Christ; No, not for good things spiritual: As happily, thou art
enlightened, and thou know God, who is goodness it self, and thou have the
knowledge of many other good things; yet can thou not bless God with comfort
for that illumination and knowledge, unless thou be in Christ: Much less
can thou bless God with comfort for outward good things; as Meat, Drink,
Apparel, House, or Land, or the like. No, no; good things, whether spiritual,
or outward, bestowed on thee, they are but given thee, to leave thee without
excuse, and further to increase thy judgment, unless thou be in Christ, and
in the state of grace.

Therefore if thou would bless God, and give him thanks for good things
bestowed upon thee, with comfort, thou must be able to use the Apostles form
of praise and thanksgiving, Ephesians. 1.3.
Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, who has blessed me with spiritual, yea, with
those temporal blessings I do enjoy in Christ.

And if thou ask me,

I answer thee;

Come we now to the words following; Then I my self in my mind serve the Law
of God, but in my flesh the Law of Sin. In these words the Apostle concludes
his speech touching the Spiritual Combat, briefly setting down the sum and
substance of it, still giving instance of it in his own person, Then I my
self, etc. The connection of these words, with foregoing matter, is thus: The
Apostle having cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death! and then cheered up himself with comfort in and
through Christ: In these words he concludes to his comfort, that he was not
wholly captiued to sin: but though his flesh and corruption still in part
abiding in him, did much trouble him, yet in his mind he served the Law of
God. Then I my self (says he) in my mind serve the Law of God, but in my
flesh the law of sin.

Now here the Apostle insisting in his own person, I my self, diuides
himself into two parts, mind and flesh; In my mind, In my flesh. And then
he makes known what he did in respect of these two parts, as, namely, that in
his mind he served the Law of God, and in his flesh he served the Law of sin.
And so we see the dependence of these words on foregoing matter, and the
general matter and substance of them.

Now a little for the understanding of these words: Interpretation
Then I my self, or, then, namely, I my self, even I PAVL my self. It is
strange, says Beza, that some should think the Apostle spoke in the person of
another, when he so expressly sets it down that he meant himself (In my mind,
In my flesh.) The words (mind and flesh) do not here signify, as Bellarmine
and the Papists expound them, the Apostles soul and body; for he being truly
regenerate, was thorowout regenerate both in his soul and in his body in part;
But by mind we are to understand his mind renewed by grace, that is put, by a
Synechdoche, for his whole regenerate part thorowout, even the same which
before he calls the Inner man, Verse. 22. and which the Apostle Peter calls the
hid man of the heart, 1. Pet. 3.4. 1. Pet. 3.4.
And so also by the word (flesh) we are to understand his unregenerate part
thorowout both in body and soul, the corruption of nature abiding in him in
part, in all the powers of his soul, and in all the parts and members of his
body, which is usually called by the name of flesh in the Scripture.

Serve the Law of God: that is, yield obedience to the Law of God, know it,
delight in it, and do the good things it requires: and by the Law of God is
meant, as before I showed, the moral Law of God, which makes known Gods will
touching all good duties both toward God and men. The law of sin, that is,
the power of sin, the force and commanding power of that corruption that
still abides in me, and the evil motions of it: I yield to it, and am many
times ouercarryed by it. Thus then briefly understand we these words, as if
the Apostle had said,

Then namely I PAVL my self in mine own person, in my regenerate part, and as
I am regenerate, do yield obedience to the Law of God, which makes known the
good will of God touching all good duties; I know it, and I delight in it, and
I do the good things it requires. But in my unregenerate part, as I am
unregenerate, I yield to the commanding power of that corruption that still
abides in me, and the evil motions of it, and am many times ouercarryed by it.

First here we see, that the Apostle makes it clear, that he spoke of
himself, in setting forth the spiritual combat. Some make question and doubt
of it, yea some have flatly denied it, that the Apostle in this discourse
touching the spiritual combat, meant himself: but the Apostle puts it here
out of all question, and directly affirms it, that it was of himself that he
spoke, and he spoke not here of himself figuratively, as 1. Cor. 4.6. but
directly and plainly, 1. Cor. 4.6.
that he did not allow the evil which he did, that he did the evil he hated,
that he did not the good which he would, that the Law in his members rebelled
against the Law of his mind, and that in his mind he served the Law of God, and
in his flesh the Law of sin. That these things he found in himself. Hence
then we are given to understand, that it is a true conclusion,

That the best of Gods children, hate, and do not the good they would; Gods
dearest children living in this world, many times do the evil they hate, and
do not the good they would.
They are troubled with sinful infirmities, the power of sin rebels against
the power of grace that is in them, and leads them captive to the Law of
sin. We have here the Apostle an excellent instrument of Gods glory, an
eminent man in Gods Church, affirming these things of himself with his own
mouth, that thus it was with him. And from his example we may conclude, that
thus it is with the best of Gods children. For why? as it is, Romans 15.4. Romans
15.4.
Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written in the Book of God, for
our learning.

We must make use to our selves of the instructions of the Word, laid down
either generally in the doctrine of it, or particularly in the examples of it:
Therefore the Apostle thus setting himself before us, that thus it was with
him, he being a man truly regenerate, and an holy man of God, we may safely
conclude, that thus it is with the rest of Gods children. 1. Tim. 1.16. 1. Tim.
1.16.
The Apostle says, For this cause was he, being chief of sinners, as there he
speaks, received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should show on him all long
suffering, unto the example of them which should, in time to come believe in
him unto eternal life.

So then, the examples of holy men of GOD are set down in the Scripture for
our use, for our good, and for our comfort; and we may gather, that seeing it
was so with the Apostle, that he did the evil he would not have done,
therefore it is so with the rest of Gods children.

And this may serve to strengthen poor weak Christians in their comfort,
Comfort to poor weak Christians, troubled with their sinful infirmities.
when they are troubled with their sinful infirmities, and feel the rebelling
of their own flesh, and doubt whether it were thus with the dear children of
God or no.

We have here Paul affirming in plain terms, that thus it was with himself,
and from his example they may gather comfort to themselves, and thus conceive,
that surely it is no otherwise with them then with the rest of Gods children.
It is a subtilty of Satan, when the poor soul being pressed with the weight
of sinful infirmities that cleave to it, begins to gather some comfort, and to
cheer up it self by looking on the example of Paul, and thus to conceive with
it self: Thus it was with the holy Apostle; my case is no other then it was
with him, presently to snib and to check that comfort with this suggestion,
What art thou, compared to Paul? He was a man of rare gifts, and of great
grace, and a man that had a great measure of holiness and sanctification, and
dare thou compare thy self with him?

The poor soul may easily answer him, It is true indeed, I am nothing,
compared to Paul: but yet Paul has set himself before me for an example, that
thus it was with him, that he did the evil he hated, and the good he would
have done, he did not, and he being an excellent man, a man of rare gifts, and
of great grace, my comfort is the greater; I may from his example conclude,
that the best of Gods children have their weaknesses and sinful infirmities,
and therefore no marvel though it be so with me, even the Apostle, who had
such a measure of Faith, Romans 8.38.
that he could say, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yet he out of his
own mouth affirms thus much of himself, that he had his sinful infirmities,
and from his example I may conclude, that so it is with the best of Gods
children: and therefore I have no cause to be utterly dejected, and put out of
all hope, because of my weaknesses and sinful infirmities. No, no: I will
labor and strive against them, and in time I shall be able to overcome them in
Christ, I shall have a full victory and conquest over them.

In the next place observe we, speaking of himself, he diuides himself into
mind and flesh, in my mind; in my flesh: meaning by his mind, his regenerate
part, and by his unregenerate part the corruption of nature still in part
abiding in him. Hence then we are again put in mind of this we have had
occasion to speak of,

That the most holy, There is both flesh and Spirit in the best of Gods
children, living in this world.
have in them both flesh and Spirit; they have in them both grace and
corruption still in part abiding: the dearest of the Saints and Children of
God, are not freed from sin abiding in them altogether, but they have
corruption and sin still in part remaining in them, and they are partly
flesh, and partly Spirit; yet this is not so to be understood, as if GODS
Children were in distinct and several parts flesh and Spirit, as if they had
grace in one power, and faculty of the soul, and flesh and corruption in
another; no, but that they are wholly and thorowout, partly flesh, and partly
Spirit; the whole mind of a regenerate person is partly flesh and partly
Spirit, in part it is enlightened, and made able to understand and conceive
good things, and in part it remains blind and ignorant.

And so it is with his will and affections, and other powers and faculties of
his soul; they are thorowout partly spiritual, and partly carnal, and there
is flesh and Spirit thorowout in all the powers of the soul, and in all the
parts and members of the body, even in the best of Gods Children, so long as
they live on the face of the earth. Proverb. 20.9. Who can say, Prou. 20.9.
I have made mine heart clean, I am clean from my sin? I am in this World
free from all relikes of sin? As if he had said, None can say it. 1. King.
8.46. There is no man that sins not, 1. King. 8.46.
says Solomon. No man living but has sin in him, and it breaks out into
actual sin at one time or other. 1. Ioh. 1. Ioh. 1.8.
1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not
in us, Gal. 5.16. says the Apostle, Gal. 5.16.
Walk in the Spirit. He speaks to them that had the Spirit, and were able to
walk in the Spirit; and he subioynes, Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh: there is flesh and the lusts of it still in you.

These and many other testimonies clear and confirm this truth to us, that
the most holy, and most regenerate that live on the face of the earth, have in
them both flesh and Spirit, there is grace and corruption still in part abiding
in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts and members of their
bodies. Howsoever the Lord could free his children altogether from the
corruption of nature, whilst they live here in this world, by the powerful
work of his holy Spirit, yet he is pleased to suffer some relikes of it still
to abide in them, for special good causes.

As for the beating down of pride,

For the exercise of their faith,

For the stirring of them up to fervent Prayer.

For the manifestation of his own Power,

For these and the like good causes, is the Lord pleased to suffer some
remnants of corruption still to abide in his children, and so the best that
live on the face of the earth, have in them both flesh and Spirit, both grace
and corruption. And this, for the use of it,

First, Bellarmine and the Papists, Some Popish opinions confuted.
touching the liberty of the Gospel: They teach, That by the liberty of the
Gospel men are altogether freed from sin: so that, as they say, sin is
thoroughly dead, and not only not imputed, but not alive, not having any being
in the righteous: so they hold. Now that is a foul and gross error, directly
contrary to the Truth now delivered.

Again, of the Familists and others, Familists also confuted.
who dream of a perfection of inherent holiness, grace and sanctification in
the time of this life.

The best and the most holy have in them not only grace, but corruption still
abiding in part in all the powers of their souls, and in all the parts and
members of their bodies, and that keeps them, that they cannot possibly aspire
to perfection of holiness in the time of this life.

Again, is it so, that the most holy, The best of Gods children are still to
be purging out corruption, and still to be growing in grace.
have in them not only Spirit, but flesh also? have they in them as well a
measure of corruption, as a measure of grace? Surely, then it concerns the
best of us, whosoever we be, that have attained the greatest measure of grace,
still to be purging out corruption, and still to be growing in grace, and
still to be gathering increase of grace: and though we have as great a measure
of grace and holiness, as the best of Gods Children ever had, yet still we
have flesh in us, and still we have our weaknesses.

And be we sure of this, where we are weak, be it in knowledge, or be it in
affection; there at one time or other we shall be assaulted and tried, and
there the Tempter will come against us: and therefore we are every day more and
more to be purging out the old lump, and still to be casting off the old man
piece after piece, and every day to labor with our own hearts to empty out
the corruption of them; our work in this kind is never at an end, whilst we
live here in this world: and to this purpose we are to be constant in the use
of the means: In hearing the Word, In reading, In Prayer, In applying the
power of Christ his death to our own souls. And think not, because thou have
a great measure of knowledge and other good gifts, that therefore thou have no
need to attend on the ministry of the Word. No, no: thou have still flesh and
corruption in thee, and thou have need still to use good means, that may
serve to purge it out continually; that is thy duty.

Now further observe we, in his mind, in his regenerate part, he served the
Law of God: but in his flesh, in his part unregenerate, he served the law of
sin. The point hence is this,

That the Spirit, Grace and corruption carry Gods children contrary ways.
yea, contrary ways: One carries them to that which is holy and good, and the
other to that which is evil and sinful: grace in Gods children, that carries
them to think, will and affect, purpose, desire and endeavor the doing of good
and holy things: and the corruption that is in them, that carries them to the
clean contrary, to think, will, affect, purpose, desire, and endeavor the
doing of evil and wicked things.

Thus are Gods children diversely carried, Grace carries them one way, and
corruption, that hales and pulls them another way; and to this purpose the
Apostle speaks plainly, Gal. 5.17.
Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same
things that ye would. The flesh, that stirs up evil thoughts, motions and
lusts; The Spirit, that stirs up good thoughts, motions, purposes and
desires, Isai. 30.21.
says the Prophet, Isai. 30.21. Thine cares shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand,
and when thou turnest to the left. As if he had said, Thine own corruption
will be ready to suggest evil to thee, to turn thee out of the way of
holiness: but the Spirit of God in thee, that will suggest good things to
thee, and tell thee in what way thou ought to walk.

We see then, that grace and corruption, they carry Gods children diverse, yea,
contrary ways. And the reason is this,

They are contrary grounds and beginnings, Gal. 5.17. Gal. 5.17.
yea, they are as it were Lords and masters of contrary dispositions; one is
disposed to good, and the other to evil: and therefore no marvel though they
carry contrary ways, even to contrary thoughts, affections, purposes,
desires and endeavors.

Now here happily some may demand,

To this I answer, That in some sort they do, namely,

And on the other side, in an evil action, corruption carries forward to the
doing of it, and therein also grace has a working, not to the acting of it,
but to curb and restrain the flesh, so that a child of God cannot do evil
with full and habitual consent of will. 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
The seed of Grace remains in him, and he cannot sin, The best good thing
done by a child of God is stained with sin.


This serves to discover, that there is no good thing done by any Child of God,
but it is stained with sin, intermeddling corruption defiles it.

Then (say the Papists) it pleases not God,

Indeed, if it were absolutely sinful, pardons, and so accepts of it, in and
through Christ, as pleasing to him.

Again, We are not to think it strange, when we feel our selves carried
contrary-wayes.
grace carries them to good, and corruption to evil? Then we may not think it
strange when we feel our selves so carried, and when we would think of good
things, and delight in them, and do them, we are hindered, and we cannot think
of them, delight in them, and do them as we desire; it is the case of the
dearest of Gods children many times when they would think of good things,
their minds are carried from them, or they are dull and heavy in thinking of
them, and when they would believe the sweet promises of the Word of God, they
are oppressed with unbelief, and the like: it is a mercy of God when thou
feel thy self carried contrary ways, thou would think of good things,
delight in them, and do them, and thine own corruption carries thee a contrary
way, if thou feel it with grief; thousands in the world are carried but one
way, they go on in an evil course, their minds are carried after evil, they
affect it, and do it with pleasure, it never troubles them; and therefore, I
say, it is a mercy of God vouchsafed to thee, if thou feel thy self carried
away from God with great grief.

Thus it is with Gods Children, yea, doubtless Gods Children think their
present corruption ever the greatest: Because the more grace they have, the
more they feel their corruption. And as one says well; They that hold
themselves to be the Children of God, and yet feel not themselves carried
contrary ways, in respect of grace and corruption, they have either
Angelical perfection (which let them take to themselves that can) or they have
not as yet the Spirit of Christ. And therefore let not this trouble thee,
because thou feel thy self carried contrary ways, when thou would think
of good things, delight in them, and do them, thou art hindered and thou can
not think of them, delight in them, and do them as thou desire.

Lastly, this being so, Grace must be kept in continual exercise.
This must teach them to keep grace in continual exercise. For certainly if
grace be not stirring, and working, and in exercise, corruption will be
stirring and working: and therefore keep thy faith, thy love to God, to his
Children, thy Zeal to Gods glory, and such like graces, in continual exercise.

Now in that the Apostle says, In my mind I serve the Law of God, and in my
flesh the law of sin: The Papists have this note, (say they) Nothing done by
concupiscence, whereunto the Spirit, reason or mind of man consents not, can
make him guilty before God. A very absurd and gross conceit. For whatsoever
is done contrary to the Law of God, or swaruing from his Law, it is sin, and
makes a man guilty before God, yea, the least evil thought arising from a
man's own corruption, though he reject it and yield no consent to it at all,
yet it makes him guilty of sin, yea, any evil done of infirmity, when a
Child of God being carried aside by violence of temptation, or strength of
corruption, does the evil he would not do, and which he disallowes in his
judgment, yet it makes him guilty before God in it self. Indeed he is not
held guilty of that evil, because the Lord is pleased to look on him, in and
through Christ, and by his grace in him to acquit and discharge him of the
guiltiness of that sin, but in it self it makes him guilty and liable to
the curse of God, and to everlasting perdition.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table for the ready finding of the chief and most material
things contained in this Book.
A
MEn are to be familiarly Acquainted with the Doctrine of GODS Word taught
amongst them, page. 7 Adultery a foul sin condemned by the light of nature,
p. 38 Means to avoid Adultery, p. 41 How to be armed against the subtlety of
inbred corruption, p. 236 We are to be humbled for our best Actions, p. 366
Many times men are not Able to do the good things they purpose and desire to
do, p. 374 A cavil of Anabaptists consuted, p. 443
B
TRue Believers are in special manner under Christ his government, p. 54 True
Believers are not barren and fruitless, p. 75 True Believers are to bring
forth fruits answerable to their holy condition, p. 81 True Believers discern
the spiritual nature of Gods Word, p. 294 True Believers allow not the evil
they sometimes do, p. 318 True Believers sometimes do the evil they hate, p.
322 The perfection of Blessedness in this life, p. 462
C
ONly by Christ his death is the rigor and curse of the Law removed from true
Believers, p. 48 Only part in Christ his death most effectual to free from the
power of the Law, p. 51 Christ the husband of his Church, p. 56 How Christ
comes to be the husband of his Church, p. 58 Christ is an everliving husband
to his Church, p. 64 Ancient Christians must still be childbearing to Christ,
p. 72 The strong working of the corruption of nature discovered, p. 168. and p.
179 Corruption of nature has a real being, p. 174. and is as a massy
substantial body, p. 480 Children do not evil only by imitation, p. 176
Whence it is that men please themselves in their civil carriage, p. 192 Every
Commandment of God is carefully to be considered, p. 200 The terror of a
guilty Conscience, p. 212 Inbred Corruption is of a deceiving nature, p. 233
How many ways it deceiues men, ibid. Every Commandment of God is to be
esteemed holy, just, and good, page 250 The nature of malicious Cauillers p.
273 The best of Gods Children have cause to complain of carnalitie in
themselves, p. 296 Comfort for such as complain of their sinful infirmities,
p. 299 Gods Children are carnal in comparison of Gods Law, p. 301 Gods
Children are still carnal in respect of perfect Regeneration, p. 305 The best
of Gods Children are in some bondage to their own corruption, p. 307 A ground
of Contentation, p. 310 How far a Child of God may yield to the lust of his
own heart, p. 323 Comfort against falling into sin often, p. 325 How men may
know that they consent to the Word of God, p. 334 Gods Children have in them a
true love and liking of Gods Law, p. 338 Gods Children well discern that no
good thing is in themselves as of themselves, p. 358 Gods Children are ready
freely to acknowledge their own weakness and infirmities, p. 361 Gods
Children have in them a ready purpose of heart, and a ready desire to do
good things, p. 371 Comfort for such as find themselves unable to do the good
things they purpose to do, p. 377 Gods Children do not good things perfectly,
p. 378 Gods Children sometimes sin in doing things directly evil, p. 386
Concupiscence truly and properly sin, p. 390. p. 461 Corruption of nature
differs from the powers of the soul, p. 392 Gods Children are acquainted with
the rebellion of their own hearts, p. 420 Comfort for such as see and feel the
rebellion of their own hearts, p. 422 Natural Corruption is discerned
especially by the fruits of it, p. 427 A Child of God may sin of rebellion,
p. 436 The combat in Gods Children is between grace and corruption, p. 437 A
Child of God cannot make a common practice of any known sin, p. 442 Comfort
for such as are sometimes overcome by the strength of their corruption to do
evil against their purpose, p. 450 Comfort for such as complain of their
spiritual evils, p. 470 A note of a Child of God, page 475 Gods Children have
that in them that in it self and of it self, deserves death both temporal
and eternal, p. 482 How Gods Children may cheer up themselves,
notwithstanding their many sinful infirmities, p. 490. p. 501 Christ is Lord
of all true Believers in special manner, p. 495 Gods dearest Children in this
World many times do the evil they hate, and do not the good they would, p.
500 In the best of Gods Children, in this World, there is both flesh and
spirit, p. 503 Grace and corruption carry Gods Children contrary ways, p. 506
D
COmfort to Gods Children in their Distress, p. 227 Distemper and
disquietnesse of mind is not the proper effect of the good Word of God, p. 279
Some Doubting, may stand with true faith and true comfort, p. 298 Who be Devils
incarnate, p. 303 Difference between the regenerate and unregenerate, in
respect of the power of inbred corruption, p. 312 Degrees of yielding to the
evil lusts of the heart, p. 323 A Difference between Gods Children and others,
discovered, p. 341 p. 422. p. 474 Difference between Gods Children and the
unregenerate, in doing evil, p. 350 Sin Dwells in the best of Gods
Children, p. 351 Where no good thing Dwells, sin dwells, p. 362 Gods Children
Delight in the good Law of God, p. 404 How a man may know that his Delight in
Gods Law goes beyond the delight of an Hypocrite, p. 408 Delight in good
things, sometimes greater and sometimes less in Gods Children, p. 419 The
least measure of Delight in good things to be cherished, p. 420 Difference
between the combat that is in Gods Children, and that which is in
unregenerate persons, page 438 Difference between the regenerate and
unregenerate, in regard of their captiuitte to sin, p. 452 Gods Children and
the men of this world, Differ in their complaints touching their miseries, p.
467 An holy Coffeehouse, p. 475 A true desire to be freed from sin, what
it is, p. 477
E
A Popish Error confuted, page 95 Council, Admonition, Instruction, and
Comfort, is most effectual, coming from Experience, p. 146 Error discovered,
must be acknowledged, p. 159 Excuses and Extenuations of sins removed, p. 313
Evil done against a man's mind, and holy purpose, may in some fort be said not
to be his sin, p. 346 Gods children have experience of it, that when they
would do good, Evil is present with them, p. 396 A Popish Error confuted,
touching peace of conscience, p. 487
F
THat a man can at his own pleasure subdue the evil motions of his own
heart, is but a Fancy, p. 102 Familists confuted, p. 348 Comfort against the
Feeling of corruption, crossing us in good purposes and good things, p. 353
Comfort against Faylings cleaving to good actions, p. 380 The Force of natural
corruption in regenerate persons, p. 423 The Force of it in unregenerate
persons, p. 425
G
GOD must have glory for that goodness and holiness we have in us, p. 133
How God hardens the heart, p. 174 Good threefold, p. 327 No Goodness in the
best of Gods children of themselves, p. 364 Grace must be in continual
exercise, p. 367 Unspeakable comfort found in the Word of the Gospel, p. 409
Sanctifying Grace is powerful in Gods children, in their whole inner man, p.
439 Perfection of Grace in degree, not to be found in this life, p. 471 We must
bless God and praise him for good things past, present, and to come, p. 491
None can bless God with comfort, save only such as be in Christ, p. 498 Grace
must be kept in continual exercise, p. 509
H
THe Heart is chiefly to be purged, p. 90 Many men in their greatest
Happiness full of misery, p. 220 Man's wicked heart abuses the best things,
p. 281 Absolute perfection of Holiness in this life, not to be expected, p.
298 There is cause of Humiliation for our best works, p. 306 An Harmless
disposition no sufficient ground of comfort, p. 363 A special part of the
Happiness of Gods children, p. 472
I
IGnorance of the Principles of Religion, reproved, p. 9 Ignorant persons have
no true touch of conscience for inward corruptions, p. 185 Ignorant persons
please themselves in an outward conformity to Gods Law, p. 190 Whence it is,
that Ignorant persons are easily drawn to sin, p. 235 What is the rule of
Justice, p. 263 Justification in Gods sight by inherent holiness, a dotage, p.
304 Indifferency, in respect of sin, taxed, p. 329 Ignorance of Gods Law,
how fearful, p. 344 Who they be that sin of Infirmity, p. 454
K
SOund Knowledge of any part of Gods Word, what it is, page 14 How to come to
Know the particular use of any part of Gods word, p. 16 How men may Know that
they are freed from the rigor and curse of the Law, p. 120 How men may Know
that the strong working of sin is broken in them, p. 121 Sound Knowledge of
Gods Law brings men to a sight of inward corruption, p. 201 How men may Know
what they are within as well as without, p. 204 Trial of Knowledge, p. 295 Men
may Know that they have faith and sanctifying grace in them, page 441
L
MVtuall Love ought to be between Teachers of the Word and Gods people, p. 11
A man under the moral Law of God, is under the power of it, p. 17 Who are
under the Law, p. 18 How strictly men that are under the Law, are bound to the
rigor and curse of the Law, p. 23 True believers are as free from the rigor
and curse of the Law, as a wife is from her husband, being dead, p. 45 The Law
is not the cause of sin, p. 141 Only the moral Law of God does soundly and
thoroughly discover sin, p. 142 Learned men of themselves are ignorant of many
gross corruptions lurking in their hearts, p. 152 Only Gods Law discouers
lust to be sin, p. 160 It is needful that men should know the Law of God, p.
186 Gods Law discouers sin and wretchedness in regard of sin, p. 205
Difference between the Law and the Gospel, p. 206 Perfect fulfilling of the
Law of God, is the way to life and salvation, p. 222 The Law must bring men to
a sight of their sins, and to sorrow for them, p. 228 Gods Law wounds the
conscience upon the sight of sin, p. 243 Gods Law requires perfect obedience
to it in this life, p. 259 Gods Law unjustly charged to be the cause of death
and damnation, p. 277 Gods Law is of an heavenly nature, and requires a
proportionable obedience, p. 291
M
THe Marriage law binds the husband and the wife each to other, during life,
p. 28 Whether nothing but death dissolve the Marriage knot, p. 33 Evil Motions
stirring in the unregenerate heart, are strong and powerful, p. 98 Wherein
evil Motions stirring in the unregenerate, do show forth their powerful
working, p. 104 Ministers of the Word must dispense the Word justly and
impartially, p. 260 Merit of congruity confuted, p. 366 Good Motions in Gods
children are ever either interrupted or troubled, or mingled with some evil
Motions, p. 398 Good Motions in the heart are to be cherished, p. 400 The
Misery of such as have sin reigning in them, p. 463 What Gods children
account their greatest Misery, p. 464 The Mind troubled for sin, finds no
ease or refreshing, till it come to rest on Christ, p. 438
N
NO small matter for a man to be in his natural state, p. 171 How the
Naughtines of the heart may be discerned, p. 370
O
NEw and spiritual Obedience is to be yielded to God, page 125 The ground of
new and spiritual Obedience, p. 127 The doctrine of Opus operatum ouerturned,
p. 129 New Obedience and true holiness is the work of Gods Spirit in men, p.
131 New Obedience and old cannot stand together, p. 134 Sound and sincere
Obedience to Gods Commandments, yields much comfort, p. 224
P
PArents are to be wise in disposing their children in marriage, and wherein
that wisdom stands, p. 30 Polygamie utterly unlawful, p. 36 The Power of
sin broken in men what it proves, p. 118 How People are to hear the Word of
God, p. 261 How Professors of the Gospel are to carry themselves, p. 276 An
easier matter to Purpose then to Practice good things, p. 376 Men are not to
Presume upon the strength of grace that is in them, p. 449
R
THe virtue of Christ his Resurrection enables men to bring forth fruit unto
God, page 69 How the Rebellion of the heart may be found out, p. 163 Repentance
legal and Repentance Evangelical differ, p. 206 Diverse acceptions of the word
(Repentance,) p. 208. 209 Repentance properly taken, follows faith in the
order of nature, p. 210 A true note of Regeneration, p. 319 327, 338.360, 373,
393, 406. Repetitions in scripture are of good use, p. 383 Regeneration does
not abolish any faculty of the soul, p. 393 Regeneration is chiefly seated in
the heart and mind of men. p. 412 Outward Reformation alone yields no true
comfort, p. 413 True Regeneration is entire, p. 415 Natural corruption is as a
Rebel against grace in Gods children, p. 430 How the Rebellious lusts of the
heart are to be subdued, p. 434 Sinful lusts in Gods children shall be dealt
withal as Rebels, p. 435 The Remainder of sin in Gods children sometimes in
part, and for a time gets victory over grace that is in them, p. 445
S
Sin comes from a root within our selves, page 85 Where the blame of sin
ought to be laid, p. 88. p. 391 Scripture sufficient in it self, for the
answering and resolving of all necessary doubts, p. 96 Scripture best expounder
of Scripture, p. 97 Every Sin of it self is deadly, p. 107 Freedom from any
yoke of bondage, binds strongly to the Service of God, p. 114 Sin a tyrant
in unregenerate persons, p. 123 Divine, religious, and holy Service belongs to
God, p. 125 What true Spiritual Service of God is, and the kinds of it. p.
128 Sin is to be judged of, only by the Word of God, p. 143 No easy matter
to spy out secret (...), p. 154 (...) seeds of Sin in every (...), p. 177
Sin deceiving, and Sin wounding the conscience, ever follow one the other,
p. 238 An infallible note that the Scripture is the Word of God, p. 253 When
sin is most vile, p. 283 Sin must be odious to us, p. 238 In whom we may
judge sin to be strong and powerful, p. 429 Sin in the full force of it,
deserves the hotest fire of Hell, p. 483
T
GODS holy Truth is many times perverted, p. 140 Who is the best Teacher, p.
144 A Thought contrary to the love of God or man, without consent of will, is
sin, p. 156 Conscience is to be made of Thoughts, p. 158 Things appointed of
God in the proper use of them for the good of men, fall out to many to their
evil, p. 218 Vile things charged on Gods Truth p. 274 Comfort against
Temptations to strange evils, p. 349 Real Thanksgiving is to be yielded to
the Lord, p. 494
V
Unregenerate persons, are altogether fleshly, p. 84 How Unregenerate persons
are continually troubled, p. 92
W
THe condition of a Wife set forth, page 26 Freedom of Will confuted, p. 103.
180. 390 The Word of God without the Spirit but a dead letter, p. 134 How to
come to the hearing of the Word, p. 136. 172 Who they be that profitably hear
or read the Word of God, p. 147 The holy Word of God justified, though some be
hardened by it, p. 173 Where the Word of God is wanting, or not soundly known,
there natural corruption has not that strange working, as where it is known
and thoroughly considered, p. 181 Men are as without the Word of God, when they
do not rightly understand it, and duly consider it, p. 195 When it is that
men rightly understand the Word of God, p. 198 The whole Word of God is a most
excellent truth, p. 246 In what respects the Word of God is holy, p. 252 How
the Word of God must be thought on, spoken of, heard, or read, p. 254. 255 In
what respects the Word of God is just, p. 257 In what respects the Word of God
is good, p. 264 Gods Word must be acknowledged to be every way good, p. 267
VVatchfulnesse in the best of Gods children continually needful, p. 300. 354.
387. 447 How the Will of man is free, p. 389 Gods children living in this
world, in some degree VVretched, and how, p. 460
Z
MEn ought to be Zealous in speaking against sin, p. 331
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. lin. 30. for first, read, that is. p. 15. l. 25. for himself, r. thy
self. p. 19. l. 30. for of, r. in. p. 39. l. 29. for us, r. them. p. 44. l.
33. for therefore, r. thereby. p. 83. l. 21. for the wicked that express the,
r. thine own. p. 90. l. 18. put out wheat. p. 98. l. 8. for miss to apply,
r. misapply. p. 101. l. 24. for murders, r. motions. p. 110. l. 19. for part,
r. particular. p. 125. l. 15. for above, r. alone. p. 136. l. 22. for best, r.
left. p. 139. l. 20. for ten, r. tenth. p. 140. l. 4. for but, r. out. p. 152.
l. 7. for concupiscence, r. corruption, p. 156. in the Doct. in the margent,
for Law, r. love. p. 159. in the Doct. in the margent, for mis, r. unjust. p.
196. l. 3. for tame, r. came. p. 209. l. 34. for marks, r. works. p. 227. l.
25. for they, r. this. p. 269. l. 7. for if, r. of. p. 310. l. 8. for points,
r. prints. p. 318. l. 9. put cut, but. p. 337. l. 6. after the word, Wicked,
these words to be added, Or they are hypocrites, such as be openly wicked. p.
377. l. 1. for now, r. no. p. 380. Use, the 3. l. 7. for motions, r. actions.
p. 403. l. 1. for is, r. it. p. 404. in the margent l. 2. for believe, r.
delight. p. 409. l. 29. for task, r. taste. p. 410. l. 26. for formed, r.
found. p. 438. l. 1. after the words, between them, add, is this.


