The Copy of a letter sent in to Scotland, of the ariuall and landynge, and
most noble marryage of the most Illustre Prince Philippe, Prince of Spain,
to the most excellent Princes Marye Queen of England, solemnisated in the
City of Winchester: and how he was received and installed at Windsore, and of
his triumphyng entries in the noble City of London.

Whereunto, is added a brefe ouerture or openyng of the legacion of the most
reverend father in God Lord Cardinal Poole from the Sea Apostolyke of Rome
with the substance of his oracyon to the king and Queen's Magestie, for the
reconcilement of the Realm of England to the unity of the Catholyke church.

With the very copye also of the Supplycacio^ exhibited to their highnesses by
the three Estates assembled in the parlamente. Wherein they representing the
whole body of the Realm and dominions of the same, have submitted themselves
to the Popes Holiness

To the right reverend and his very especial good lord, lord Robert Stuarde
Bishop of Cathenes, and prouest of Du^britane College in Scotland, John
Elder his humble orator, wishes health, and prosperous felicity.
ALthough I have been minded diverse times (my very good lord) for to have
written to your Lordeship, such news as have occurred here, in time of peace,
or else where: yet nevertheless, by reason of unnatural wars betwixt both
these Realms of England and Scotland, at which time I would not presume to
write to fore^ places and partly, because I could mete with none, which had
access to the place where you remained, I have therefore been let ted from so
doing hitherto from time to time. And where as I have good occasion ministered
now to write, by reason of such most noble news as are in Eng land at this
present, I will so briefly as I may aduertis you of the same. Therefore your
Lordeship shall understand, That Philip by the grace of god king of England,
France Naples, Jerusalem and Irelande, and son to the most fortunate and
most victorious Monarche Charles the fifte of that name, now Emperor of rome,
arrived to the coast of England, with a navy of. vii The king landed at
southampto^ the. xx. of Iu ly* M Diiiii
score sail, and landed at South ha^pton in Hamshire, within ten ^le of the
City of Winchester on friday the. xx. day of July last at. iii. of the clock
at after none. At which town, the Queen's majesty being seven mile from
thens, the Lords of the counsel and diverse other Noble men, most louyngly
welcomed him: where in the mean season, my lord the Erll of Arundel, lord
Steward of England, put a very rich garter about his left leg. And there to
recreat him self after the Sea, with such noble men as came with him, he
continued friday, satterday, and Sundaye How long he remained at Southhamp ton.
Tha^ the next mu^day which was the. xxiii. of Iuli, his highness came to the
City of winchester at. vi. of the clock at night, the noble men of England
and his His cumming to the City of (...) chester.
nobles riding, one with an other before him, in good order through the City,
every one placed according to his vocacion and office, he riding on a fair
white horse in a rich coat embrodred with gold, his doubl^t, hosen, and hat
suite like, with a white fetherin his hat, very fair. And after he lighted* he
came the hie way toward the weast door of the cathedral ^owe he was
received with procession b^ my lord Chaunceller in the (...) be all church of
winchestre.
church, where he was most reverently received with profession by my lord the
Bishop of winchester now lord Chan^celler of England, and. v. other Bishops
mitred, coped, and staued, where also, after he had kneled, kissed ^he
Crucifix, and done his prayer ^e ascended from thens. v. steps upon a skafholde
which was ^ade for the solemnizacio^ of his ^ariage: and until he came to ^he
Quere door, the procession ^ong, Laus, honor, et Virtus. And after ^e had
entered the Quere, and per^eiued the most holy Sacrament, he put of his cap,
and went His humility and re uerence in sight of the most blessed ^ment of the
altar.
bare headed with great humility until he entered his seat or tra ues, as they
call it. where after he had kneled, my Lord Caunceller began Tedeum Laudamus,
and the Quere together with the Orga^s song and played the rest. Which beig
done, he was brought with torch light to the Deanes house, the lords going
before him, and the Queen's guard in their rich coats, standing all the way:
which house was very gorgeously prepared for him adioining to my lord the
Bishop of winchesters palaice, where the Queen's highness then lay, not passing a
pair How he was brought by the Lords of the counsel to the Queen's majesty
a privy ^ay.
of but lengthes between. This night, after he had sopped, at. x. of the
clock (as I am crediblye informed) he was brought by the counsel, a privy
way, to the queen, Where her grace very lovingly, yea and most ioyfullye
received him. And after that they had talked together half an hour they kissed,
and departed. I am credibly informed also that at his departing, he desired
the queen's highness to teach him what he should say to the lords in English at
his departing: and she told him he should say Good night my Lords all. And as
he came by the lords, he said as the Queen had taught him. So the ^ow he went
to the Queen o^enly where al m^ mighe see* him.
next Tuesdaye at three of the clock he went to the Queen from the Deanes
house a foot, where every body might see him, The Lord Steward, The Earl of
Darbey, the Erll of Penbroke, with diverse other lords and noble men, as well
English as others, went before him, he going alone in a cloak of black cloth
enbroidred with silver, and a pair of white hose. And after that he had entered
the Court, where all kind of Instruments played very melodiously, and came
with in the hal, where the Queen's ma gestie was standing on a skafhold, her
highness descended, and How joyful ly the Queen's mage stie received him in
presence of all the peo ple. ^
amiably receiving him, did kiss him in presense of all the people. And the^
taking him by the right hand, they went together in the chaumber of presence,
where after they had in sight of all the lords and ladies, a quarter of an
hour pleasantly talked and co^muned together, under the cloth of Estate, and
each of them merrily smylyng on other, to the great comfort and reioising of
the beholders, he took his leave of her grace, and departed toward the
Cathedral church to Euenso^g, all the lords (as I have said) going before
him: where also from the Court hal door to the court gate, all the
pensioners, and the guard (as he and the lords went) stood all along on both
sides the wape. ^uensong being done he was very princely brought from the
church with torche light unto the Deanes house again. Then wedins day being
^a^ct The day of their most Noble ma riage.
James day, and the. xxv. of Iu ly, his highness (at. x. of the clock) and his
nobles before him, went to the Cathedral church, and remained there (the doors
being very straightly kept) until the Queen's highness came: whose magestie
with all her counsel and nobility before her, came thither at half hour to a
leven. And entering at the west door of the said Cathedral church (where her
grace was received the satterday before, in like manner as his highness was the
monday following) her majesty ascended the fore said steps, and came toward
the quere door: where a little without the same door was made a round mount of
bordes, ascendyng also five steps above the skafholde. On which mount
immediatlye after her magestie and the king were shreuen, they were married by
my lord the bishop of winchester, The queen's magestie and the king were shreuen
before they were married.
lord chancellor of Inglande, her majesty standing on the right side of the
said most and the king of the left side. And this y^ marriage being ended and
sole^nizated which with y^ biddiges and banes thereof was declared and done by
y^ said lord Chauncelor both in latin, and in english, his lord ship declared
also there: How that the Emperors magestie re How the Emperor resigned the
king dome of Naples and Jerusalem to the kiges highness his son.
signed under his Emperial seal the kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem to his
son Philip Prince of Spain. whereby it might well appear to all men that the
Queen's highness was the^ married, not only to a Prince, but also un to a king.
The Queen's marriage ri^g was a plai^ hoope of gold with out any stone in it. For
that was as it is said her pleasure, because maidens were so married in old
times. This (as I have said) being ended and done, The earl of Darbey before
the queen's magestie, and the Earl of Penbroke The sweard ^earers the day of
their man.
before the kings highness did bear each of the^ aswerd of honor. And so both
their maiestes entered the Quere hand in hand under a canapye, borne by. iiii.
knights toward the hie altar, where after they had kneled a while with each
of them a Taper, they arose, and the Queen went to a seat or Traues of the
right hand of the altar, and the king to an other seat, of the left hand,
where they continued thus seue call in their meditacio^s and prayers until the
gospel was said: and then they came out, and kneled How ^od ly they used
themselves during h^ mass time to give example to al others
all the hie mass time, openly before the hie altar, the care clothe being
holden, as the manner is. Where during hie mass time the Queen's Chapel matched
with the quire, and the organs, used such sweet proporcyon of music and
harmonye, as the like (I suppose) was never before The hy^ mass was song by
the Lord chaun celer.
invented or hard. The hie mass being done, which was celebrated and said,
by my lord the Bishop of winchestre, having to his coadiutors y^ five bisshops
before said, y^ is to say the bisshops of Duresm, Ely, London* L^ncolne and
Chichestre. Wherein both the Princes offering rich Jewels, and deliueri^g their
Tapers, yea and the kings highness at the Agnusdei kis sing y^ celebrator
accordig to the ceremonies of marriages used in holy catholic churches, The
king of heroldes openly in presence of both their magesties and y^ whole
audience, solempnly proclaimed this their new style and Title in Latin, french
and in english.

The style in Latin.

Philippus et Marie dei gratia, Rex et Regina The kings highness and the
queen's* magesties new Style and title.
Anglie, ^rancie, Neapolis, Jerusalem et Hiberni^, fidei defensores, Principes
His paniarum et Secilie; Archiduces Austrie, Duces Mediolani, Bur gundie, et
Brabantie, comites Haspurgi, Flandrie, et Tyrolis.

And whereas this letter may come perhaps from your Lordships hands, in the
hands of of those which understand not the latin tongue, I will therefore by your
lordships leave, to satisfy and content their mi^des beig unlearned, not only
declare y^ same style and title in English, but also all such other things,
as shall follow in Latin

The style in English.

Philip and Marie by the grace of god king and Queen of England, France,
Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defe^ders of the faith, Princes of Spain and
Secyll Archidukes of Austria. Dukes of Milla^, Burgu^dy, and Braba^t, Counties
of Haspurge, Flanders and Tirol. Their (...) most rich abilime^tes the day
of their marriage


This style and title being thus proclaimed, the king and the Queen departed
hand in hand under the forsaid Canapie to my lord Chau^cellers place, where
the queen's grace was lodged: whose two most pri^cely, and most rich
Abilimentes, was of betin gold upon gold, and so rich set with preci ous
stones, as no man could esteem the value thereof. At which place during diner
time, as none could be in the world more sump tuous, where their magestyes
dined openly in the hal both together at one table, under the cloth of estate:
there was such sou^des and noise of al manner of Iustru mentes, as has been
seldom heard. where also, at the third course I perceived all the heraldes
of arms enter the hall two and two, in their heraldicall gar mentes, and
crying three times with an hye voice, Largess. The king of them commonly
called Garter, proclaimed there again the kings highness, and the Queen's new
style and title, in manner, form, and effect as he did in the Cathedral
church when hie mass was done. And so crying three times Larges, again they
departed.

And thus shortly to conclude, there was for certain days after this most
Noble marriage, such triumphing, bankating, singing, masking, and daunsing, as
was never in England here tofore, Mirth, joy and pastime at and after their
marriage.
by the report of all men. Wherefore, to see the kings magestie and the Queen
sitting under the cloth of estate, in the hall where they dyned, and also in
the Chamber of presence at dansing time, where both their magesties dansed, and
also to behold the dukes and noble men of Spain dau^se with the fair ladies
and most beutifull nymphs of England, it should seem to him that never see
such, to be an other world.

Now to trouble your Lordshyp, any further with the hole, and perfect
declaration of the rich and sundry apparelles which the nobility of
England and Spain used, and ware at and after the marriage of these two most
excellent Princes, it were but a fantasy and loss of paper and ynke: for no
mortal Princes (Emperoures and kings only except) were able surely to excel
them. And such brave liueries, as their servants had, The rich apparels of
then obi litie of England. and Spai
I never saw the like, in all the Countries that ever I trauayled. And finally
with what rich hanginges y^ Cathedral Church of Winchester and the Quyer was
hanged, and the two seats where both the Princes sat, it was a wonder to se.
And again to view and mark what Eligaunt verses in Latin of all kind of
sorts were affixed, and set up on the Cathedral Church doors, All kind of
verses set up by the scollers of winchester college in comme^ dacyon of their
most noble marriage.
and the ports of my Lord Chauncellers place where the king and the Queen
lay, by the Skollers of Winchester College, in praise and commendacion of
this most noble and rare marriage of Philip of Spain, and MARI of England, it
should quicken the spirits of al dull doltes to embrace good letters, and of
the best learned to favor the good will of al painful students. I purpose
for to send the Copy of some of them to your lordship (God willing)
hereafter. And i the mean season I will not omit two verses, which were
written in a white field which Heroldes call silver, with fair Romayne
letters of black, which they call sable above the inner port of the place,
where the two Princes lay, a month before they c^m thither: which verses (as I
am advertised) were made by my lord the Bishop of winchester now lord
chaunceller of England: whose excellent learning is well known every where,
yea, and he to be of most, exact Judgment in all kind of good letters.

These be the two verses.

O domus es felix minium, miniumque be^
Hospitio tales, nunc habitura tuo.
That is to say.

Thou art happy house, right bli^, and bli^ again
That shortly shall such noble geastes retayn.
ANd after that their majesty's Lauds and priui legis given to the City of
win chester and Southha^p ton.
had thus remained in the City of winchestre ten days (unto the which City
and to Southhampton in token and perpetual memory of this their most noble
marriage, solemn nizated in the one, and of the kiges first la^ding in the other,
they did give great priuilegis and lands for ever) they removed from thens on
tuesdaye the last of Iuli, and riding through the City in a very princelye
order, they went to Basing. xv. mile from winchestre Where at my lord
Treasurer of The day of their depa^ tyng from winchester
Englandes house they lay that night, and the next day folowi^g. where was
such noble Chere provided for them, and both their nobilities, as I have not
seen the like for the time, in my days. The next thursday being the second of
August, they departed from thens, and rode to Reding, where after they had line
but that night, they came to Windesore the next friday, at. vi. of y^ clock
at night.

And cumming in at the west end Their cu^ming to windsor and how they were
there received with procession and the king installed.
of the town, they came, with two swerdes borne before the^, straight way
toward the church weste door, where with procession they were received by my
lord Chaun celler, where also the lord Steward of England reuested the king
with the robe of the order of the garter, and the Queen's magestie put the
collar of the same order about his neck: which being done they both
proceeded under a Canapy toward the quere, y^ lords of the order going
before them in their robes and collars also. And after that the king was there
installed, and Te deum song and ended, they came out at the same door of the
quere where they entered, and went to a place of the north side of y^ same
where the kings highness and the lords put of their robes. Which being done,
the kings magestie and the Queen departed on horse back, to their lodging in
Windsor Castle. And to make an end here of their progres, your Lordship shall
understand, that after they had remained at wind Their cu^ming to Richemo^d
sor certain days, after the kings installacion, they came to Richemont.
Where being aduertysed that all such triumphs and pageants as were devised in
London against their cumming thither were finished and ended, they came from
thens by water on friday the xvii. of August, and la^ded at S. Ma Their cu^myng
to London.
rye Oueres stairs on Southwarke side. Where every corner keing so straight
kept as no man could pass, come, or go, but those which were appointed to
attend their la^ding, they passed through my Lord chauncellers house at
Suffolk place, which was prepared for their lying that night. This Suffolk
place, and your Lordshyp be remembered, is of the left hand, as we enter into
Southwarke cummyng from Hampton Court: which place was made by the old Duke
of Suffolk, immediately after that he married the godly and virtuous Princes,
Marye queen Dowager of France, and the second daughter of king Henry the.
vii. Their most triumphing entries into London


Now to begin and declare their cumming to London, and so make an end, your
reverend Lordship shall understand that both their most excellent Majesty's
made their most noble and Triumphinge entres into the noble City of London,
forth of Southwarke place, the next satterdaye, which was the. xviii. of
August, at. ii. of the clock at after none. Where, after all the lords of
their most honorable privy counsel, and the ambassadors of all nacyons, with
the nobility of England and Spain, and diverse other noble and ^entle me^, as
well Eng lish as strange, were al on horse back, two and two in a ra^ke, the
The lord Mayor of London de liuered his ma^e.
lord Mayor of London, as the two Princes came out at the gate, kne led and
delivered a mace, which signified his ^ower and authority within the city of
London, to the Queen's grace. Whose magestie delivering the said mace to the
lord Mayor again, the kings highness and she ascended their horses, and so
marchyng toward London bridge, the queen of the right hand, and the king of
the left, with two swerdes of honor before them, and before the swerdes the
Lord Mayor of London bearing the Mace, the Toure of London begins to shoot.
And when they came to the draw bridge, there they made the first stay, where
there was in the higth thereof, a fair table, holden up with two great
Giauntes: the one named Corineus Britannus, and the other Gogmagog Albionus. In
which table, in a field silver, with fair Roman The first stay.
letters of sable, these. xii. verses following were written.

Vnica caesareae stirpis ^pes Inclite princeps,
^ui deus imperium totius destinat orbis,
^ratus et optatus nostras accedis adoras.
Ecce sagittipotens tibi tota Britania dextr^
porrigit, et gremiu^ tibi nobilis anglia p^dit
Te tame^ in primis urbs Londonie^sis honor at
Incolumemque suu^ gaudet venisse Philippu^ These ver ses were set up above the
draw bridge of London.

Ipsa suis sentit charum te ciuibus esse
Et f^re foelicem tali se principe credit.
Teque putant omnes missum diuinitus urbi
C^ius men's, studiu^, uox, uirtus, atque uolu^tas
^det, et in clari co^sentit amore philippi.
That is to say.

O noble Prince sole hope of Cesars side
By god appointed all the world to gyde,
Rig^t ha^tely welcome art thou to our land
The archer Brit^yne yeldeth the her hand
And noble England opens her bosom
Of ^actie affection for to bid the welcome
But chiefly London does her love vouchsafe
Rejoicing that her Philip is come safe
She seith her Citisens love the on each side
And trustes they shall be happy of such a gide*
And al do think thou art sent to their city
By thonly mean of Gods paternall pity,
So that their mind, voice, study, power, and will
^s only set, to love the Philippe still.
HEre also the Toure of London (the sign given that the king and the Queen
were in syghte thereof) shot such peales of ordinance in, and about every
quarter thereof, and specially out of the top of the white four and of the
wharffe, as never was heard the like in England here to fore.

Which being done, they proceeded forward until they came in gracious street,
where in their way the conduit thereof was finely tri^med, whereon was painted
very ingeniouslye the nine worthies with many notable proverbs and adages,
written with fair Roman letters on every side there of. And at the sign of the
splaied The second Stay.
Egle, they made the second stay where the first page^t was devised and made
by the merchant strangers of the Stilliarde.

Where emo^gest diverse notable stories there was in the top thereof, the picture
of the king sitting on horse back, all armed very gorgeously and richly set
out to the quick. Under which picture were written in field silver with fair
Roman letters of sable, these words folowinge after this manner.

Diuo Phi. Aug. Max. The first pagiant in Gracious ^ete.

Hispaniarum principi exoptatissimo.
That is to say.

In honor of worthy Philip the fortunate, and most mighty,
Prince of Spain, most earnestly wyshed for.
And under that were written in a field blue, which Heroldes call azure, with
fair Roman letters of silver, these two verses folowinge.

Constantem, fortemque animum, ter mag^e Philippe.
Nec spes a recto, nec me^us acer agit.
That is to say.

Most mighty Philip, nether hope, nor fear ^ay fright,
Thy strong and valiant ha^t, away from ^ghte.
Which picture and al other notable stories and wrytinges in the said Pagent
pleasing their magesties very well, they marched forward until they came to
Cornwall, where the co^duite also there being very excellentlye painted, at
the west end of the sirete was the second The third Stay.
pagent which was right excellently handled and set out, where their magesties
made the third stay. In which pagente were four lively persons, which
represented the four most noble Philips, of whose most noble acts and
doings we read in ancient stories* That is to say Philip king of Macedonia.

Philip the Romayn Emperor. Philip Duke of Burgundy surnamed Bonus, and Philip
Duke of Burgundy surnamed Audax betwixt which four princes, two being of the
right side of the pagent, and two of the least, there was a fair table, wherein
were written in a field azure, with Roman letters of silver, these viii.
verses following.

Quatuor apriscis, accepimus esse philippos
Quoru^, per totum celebratur gloria mu^du^. The second pagent at the west end
o^ Cornwel.

Nobilitas primum, summo decorauit ^onore
prosperitate facit claru^ fortuna secundum.
Tertius aeterna bonitatis laud refulget,
Quartus, bellator fortis memoratur etaudax
Sed tua nobilitas, fortuna, audatia, uirtus,
Oi^bus hispre^tat, ui^cisque Philippe, Philippos
That is to say.

We read in time pa^ Philips have been four
Whose glory throughout all the world is blow^
The first through noble blood past all before,
The secondes match in good succes unknown.
The third for goodness g^t eternal fame.
The forth for boldues used against his fone.
In birth, in fortune, boldness, virtuous name,
Thou Philip passest these Philips four, alone.
THis page ante with the stories therein contained liking the kings highness
and the queen wondrous well, they passed toward Chepeside, and at the East
end thereof, the conduite there also being finely painted and trimed, they made
the fourth stay, where the third pagente was made. In y^ height whereof, was
one playing on a harp, who signified the most Excellent musician The forth
Stay.
Orpheus, of whom, and of Amphio^, we read in the fables of old Poetis. Where
also were nine fair ladies playing and singing on diverse sweet instruments,
signifying the nine muses.

And not far from them were men, and children decked up like wild beasts,
as Lions, wolfes, foxes and bears. So that the most sweet strokes, noise, and
soundes of Orpheus, with the nine Musis playing and singinge in the said
Pageant, and also the counterfeated beasts daunsing and leapinge, with Orpheus
harp, and the Musis melodye exhilarated and reioysed their majesty's very
much. Under Orpheus in a field silver, with fair roman letters of sable,
were written in a very fair table these. viii. verses followinge.

Eloquii claro ditatus munere princeps,
Voce sua ciues flectet, quocunque lubebit.
Hoc ueteres olim docuere per Orphea ^uates
Qui mouisse feras c^tus dulcedine fertur, The third pageant at the east end
of Chepe.

Sic tua sola tuos dicendi copia ciues
Excitat, et moestoe prebet solatio menti.
Ergo tibi merito magnas agit anglia grates
Anglia que solo gaudet dicente philippo.
That is to say,

The prince that has the gift of eloquenc^
May bend his subjects to his most be houe
Which in old time was showed by conert sense
In Orpheus whose song did wild beasts move,
In like case now thy grace of spech so frank
Does comfort us, whose minds before (...)
And therefore Eugland gives the hearty thank
Whose chiefest joy is to hear thee Philip speak.
THeir majesty's beig satisfied with the sight of that pageant, they marched
from thence, and passinge through Chepeside, where they perceuing the cross
thereof, which was with fine gold richely gilded, they stayed a little lokinge
thereon, which was (no doubt it is) unto them a right excellent view, where
also the kings highness perceauing the crucifix in the top thereof, very hum
blie put of his cap. This seen, they marched forward, and at the west end of
Chepe they made the fyft stay, where was ye fourth and most excellent pageant
of al. Wherein was contained, declared, and showed their most noble Their fifth
Stay.
Geneology from king Edward the third, which Geneologie was most exellently,
and most ingeniously set out, with a great Arboure or tree: under the root
whereof was an old man liinge on his left side, with a long white beard, a
close croune on his head, and a sceptour in his right hand and a ball Imperial
in his left. Which old man signified king Edward the third, of whom both
their majesty's are linially descended. which grene Arboure or tree grew up of
both the sides with branches, whereon did sit young fair children which
represe^ted the persons of such kings, queen's Princis, dukes, Earls, lords
and ladies as descended from y^ said king Edward the. iii. unto their days,
whose names were written above their heads in fields azure in fair tables
with Roman letters of ^iluer. Where also in the said top of the said arbor or
tree was a Queen of the right hand, and a king of ye left, which presented
their magesties. Above whose heads was written their new style and title, with
fair Roman letters of sable in a feilde gold. And above that, in the height
of al, were both their arms Joined in one under one Crown emperial. And finally
under the old man which lay under the rote of the Arbor and signified (as I
have said) king Edward the third, were written these. vi. verses folowinge in a
field silver, with letters of gold.

Site bellipotens ueteru^ iuuat Anglia Regu^ The fourth pagiant on the west
en^e of Chepe.

Gloria, que summis quond^te laudibus auxit
Illoru^ sobolem Mari^, magnumque Philippu^
D^ligere, et toto complecti pectore debes.
Quos deus ex uno communi font profectos
Connubio ueterem uoluit coniungere stirpe^.
That is to say.

England if thou delight in ancient men,
Whose glorious acts the fame a brod d^d blase,
Both Mary and Philip their offspring ought thou then
With all thy heart to love and to embrace
Which both descendeo of one ancient live
It has pleased God by marriage to combyne.
^Uhich pageant being throughlye vewed and much comm^ded of their majesty's,
they went hence toward s. Paul's Church. And in their way a skoller of
Paul's skoole decked up in cloth of gold, delivered unto the kings highness a
fair book, which he received very ientlie. Where also a fellow came slipping
upon a cord as an arrow out of a bow, from Paul's steple to the ground, and
lighted with his head forward on a great sort of fether beds: And after he
clame up the cord again, and done certain feats, They were received at poules
with procession by the Bishop of London.
their magesties lighted, and being in Paul's church received with procession
by the Bishop of London, and Te deum song and ended, they departed, and
marched toward fletestrete, at the condit whereof they made the sixth and last
stay, where was the fifth and hin dermost pagent of all. Wherein The la^te
Stay.
was a Queen and a king representing their highness, having of their right side
Iusticia with a swerd in her hand, and Equitas with a pair of ballaunce. And
of their left side Veritas with a book in her hand, whereon was written, Verbum
Dei and Misericordia with a heart of gold. Where also from the height of the
pageant descended one which signified Sapientia with a crown in each of her
hands, whereof the one she put on ye head of her that presented the queen, and
the other on the head of him that presented the king: under which two were
written in a field azure with fair Roman letters of silver these. vi. verses
folowig

Qui uer ax cleme^sque simul, ac iustus, et equus The fifte and last pagent.

Virtutisque suam compleuit lumine mentem
Si diadema uiro tali sapientia donet,
Ille gubernabit totum foeliciter orbem.
Et quia te talem cognouimus esse Philippe,
Nos fortunatos fore te regnante putamus.
That is to say,

When that a man is ^entle, just, and true
With virtuous gifts fulfilled plenteously,
If wisdom then him with her crown endue
He govern shall the whole world prosperously,
And since we know thee Philip to be such
While thou shall reign w^ think us happy much
ANd after ye their magesties had seen the effect of this pageant they
proceeded forward toward temple bar, where they stayed a little in viewinge a
certain Oracion in Latin, which was in a long table written with Romayne
Letters, above the part thereof as they passed and departed forth of y^ City.
Which oracio^ declared, that such triumphs and pagiantes as were devised and
made in the noble city of london by the Lord Mayor thereof, his brethren, and
the citisens, for their entries, whose most happy cumming, they most hertly so
long time desired, and wished for, and again the running The effect of an
oracion set up above the port of ^e^ ple bar.
and rejoicing of the great number of people as were there calling and crying
every where God save your graces, was an evident token, testimony and witness
of their faithful, and unfeigned hertes to the Queen's highness and the king. For
whose most excellent Majesty's they prayed unto almightye God long to live,
rule, and reygne over their most noble Empire of England.

ANd now making an end here of this their most triumphyng entries into y^ noble
city of London, they de parted from Temple Bar toward York place,
otherwise called the white hal: Where after they had lighted, they came hand in
hand into ye great chamber of presens. Where also, after they had talked a
little space, they took their leave each of other.

And so the Queen's magestie en tring that part of the court comenly called the
kings side, and the kings highness entryng the other part called the Queen's,
there they rested and remained for certain days.

Where in the mean season two princely presents came to their Magesties. The
one from the Emperor which is. xii. pieces of Arras work, so richly wrought
with Gold Silver and silk, as none in the world may excel them. In which
pieces be so excellentlye wroughte, and set out all the Emperoures majesty's
procedinges and victories against the Turks, as Apelles were not able (if he
were alive) to mende any parcel thereof with his pensell. And the other
present from the Queen of Polonia, which is a pair of Regalles, so curiouslye
made of gold and silver, and so set with precious stones, as like or none
such have been seldom seen. And after they had thus remained Two prin cely
and most excel lent presents.
at the white hall certain days (as I have said) and had been in
Westminster college, where their majesty's were received with Procession by
the Deane thereof, and had heard mass and perused all the monume^tes and to^bes
of such kings as be enterred they, their departed to Ha^pto^ Court, where
they continued until this Parliment. At which The beginning of the Parlame^t
time they came from thens, to white hall again. Which Par limente did begin
the. xii. day of Nou^ber last, on which day both their magesties, and all the
lords spiritual and temporal, as use and custum has ever been, rode to
westmister Abbey, with all Princely ensigns of honor, and so lempnities
appertayning to the Royal estate.

Further, your Lordeshippe The cummyng of my Lord Cardinal.
shall vndrestande that the. xviii. day of the said month, The Right
Reverend Father in GOD, LORD Cardinal Poole accompanied with my Lord Paget,
my lord Clynton, and sir Anthony Brown knight, late created Lord Montague,
and diverse other noble men, came from Grauesende to the white hall in one of
the kings barges. Where the kings majesty being aduertysed that he had
shot London bridge, his highness, with the sword of honor borne before him,
came down and received him very ^owe he was first re ceued of the ^yng.
amiably, as he landed at the com mon landynge bridge of the Court. And from
thence they both passed up to the Chamber of presence, where the Queen's
majesty was sittinge under the clothe of estate, whose highness ^ow he was
afterward received by the queen.
also received him very joyfully.

And after that both their majesty's and he had communed an hour very
Louinglye, my lord Cardinal took his leave of their highness. And the^ my lord
Chau^celer of his right hand, and the Earl of Shrewsbery of his left, they
went by water to Lambeth which is a place perteyninge to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, where his lordeship lies as yet. This Cardinal is an English man
borne, of whom (I am sure) your lordshyp has heard, and descended of the
blood Royal of England. For his mother was daughter to George Duke of
Clarence, which was brother to Edward ye fourth of that name, king of
England. Which My Lord Cardinal was an exile out of his country xxi. years.
Cardinal has been an exile out of England these. xxi. years. The cause
whereof was, that he would not assente to king king Henry the eight in the
matter The causes wherefore he was exiled
of divorce from his most lawful wife Queen Katherin mother to the queen that
now is.

And that he would not admit the said king to bear the title of Supreme head
of the Church of England, which by a new example he had lately (as it is
now said) usurped.

This opinion did not only purchase Diverse noble men have suffered in England
for his sake.
exile to this Cardinal himself but also was the death of the virtuous lady
the Countes of Salysbery his mother, ye lord Montegle his brother, and the
Marquis of Exester his cousin, with many other noble men being suspect as
adherentes to him in the same opinion.

Surely this cruelty was great, but that which exceded all the rest: this old
lady being at least lx. and.x. years of age, cousin to the king, and being (as
it is said) most innocent and giltles, was without judgment or process of
the law drawn by the hoar here is to ye block, not knowing any cause why to
dye.

Many like examples of cruelty followed in England by that alteracion, which
are out of my purpose: but this I have touched The queen's magestie has
restored the Lord Cardinal to the honor of his house
by occasion of this Cardinal, who now by the queen's goodness is restored to
the honor of his house. And now of late is arrived in England as Ambassador
and legate from the Popes holiness, with most ample commission to receive the e
Ralme of England unto the unity of the church, whereof your lordship shall
perceue more hereafter. He is, and se meth to be of nature sad and grave whose
good life may be an example to the rest of his profession, and his excellent
learning is well known through all Europe. For I assure your lordship, that at
my being in Rome. xvi. years agon, I have heard out of the mouths, as well of
my country men then being in Rome, as of the Romans them selfs no les, yea
and more then I have said. For it is commonly said of him by learned men in
Rome, My Lord Cardu^ls praise amongst learned m^ ^n strange countries.
and in other places where I have trauayled, Polus Cardinalis, natione Anglus,
pietatis et literarum testimonio, dignus, non qui Polus Anglus, sed qui polus
Angelus uocetur.

But now passinge over the praysinges of this noble, and virtuous prelate,
whom no man dispraiseth, I will proceed where I left.

Within few days after his cumminge to Lambeth, a day The three Estates of
Englan^e assembled before the king, the Queen ^ my Lord Cardinal.
was prefixed by appointment of the king and Queen's majesty's that the three
estates of England being called unto the parliament should be brought unto the
presence of the Cardinal for the better understanding of his legation. This
assemble was appointed in the great Chamber of the court at Westminster, where
as the king and Queen's majesty's sitting under the cloth of estate, and all the
three estates placed in their degrees, the Cardinal sytting in a Chair on ye
right hand, out of the cloth of estate, my lord Chaunceller of England began in
this manner.

MY lords of ye upper house My Lord Chauncellers words.
and you my masters of the nether house, here is present, y^ right reverend
father in god my lord Cardinal Pole come from the Apostolic Sea of Rome as
ambassador to the king and Queen's magesties upon one of the most weightiest
causes that ever happened in this Realm. And which pertains to the glo ry
of god and your universal benefit. The which embassage their magesties
pleasure is to be sign^ fied to you all by his own mouth Trustyng that you will
receive and accept it, in as beneuolent and thankful wise, as their
highnesses have done, and that you will give attente and inclynable ear to him.

When his Lordship had thus made an end, my Lord Cardinal taking the
occasion offered, without any study, as it seemed, spoke in effect as follows.

My lords all, and you that are ye My Lord (...) oracyon y^ king and Queen's
(...) being present, and y^ three Estates.
commons of this present Par liment assembled, which (...) effect is nothing
else but the stat^ and body of the whole Realm. As ye cause of my repair
hither has been both wisely and gravely declared by my lord Chaunceller, So
before ye I enter to ye particularities of my co^missio^, I have somewhat to say
touching my self, and to give most humble and harti thanks to the king and
Queen's magesties and after the^ to you all which of a man exiled and banished
from this co^ mon wealth, have restored me to a member of the same: and of a
man having no place nether here or else where within this realm, have admitted
me in place where to speak and to be heard. This I protest unto you al, that
though I was exiled my natyue country without just cause, as god knows yet y^
ingratitude could not pull from me the affeccion and desire that I had to
proffit and do you good. If the offer of my service might have been received,
it was never to seek: and where that could not be taken, you never failed of my
prayer, nor never shall. But leaving the rehersall thereof, and cumming more
nere to the matter of my commission, I signify unto you all, that my
principal trauayl is, for the restitucion of this noble Realm to the ancient
nobility, and to declare unto you, that the Sea Apostolic from whens I come,
has a special respect to this Realm above al other, and not without cause,
sei^g that god himself, as it were by providence, has given this Realm
prerogative of nobility above other: which to make more plain unto you, it is
to be considered that this Island first of al Ila^des received the light of
Christ's religion. For as stories testify, it was prima prouinciarum quae
amplexaest fidem Christi. For the Britto^s being first inhabitau^tes of this
realm (not withstandyng the subieccion of the Emperors, and heathen Princes)
did receive Christ's faith from the Apostolic Sea universally, and not in
parts as other England of al Ilan des received fyr^te the faith of Christ.
countries, nor by one and one as clockes increase their hours by distinction
of times, but al together at ones as it were in a moment. But after that their
ill merits or forgeatfulnes of god had deserved expulsio^, and that Strangers
being infidels had possessed this land, yet god of his goodness, not leaving
where he ones loved, so illumined y^ hearts of the Saxons being heathen m^,
that they forsook the darkness of heathen errors, and enbraced the light of
Christ's religion. So that within small space Idolatry and heathen supersticion
was utterly aba^doned i^ this Ila^d. This was a great prerogative of
nobility, whereof though the benefit be to be ascribed to god: yet the mean
occasion of the same came from the Church of Rome. In ye faith of which
church, we have ever since continued and consented with the rest of the world
in unity of religion. And to show further the fervent devotion of the
inhabitauntes of this Island toward the Church of Rome, We read y^ diverse
Princes in the Saxons time with great travel and expenses went personally to
Rome, as Offa and Adulpbus which thought it not enough to show the^ selfs
obedient to the said see, un les y^ in their own persons they had gone to that
same place from whence they had receued so great a grace and benefit. In the
time of Carolus magnus, who first founded the university of Paris, he sent into
England for Alcuinus a great learned man, which first brought learning to that
university. Whereby it seems that the greatest part of y^ world fet the light
of religion from England. Adria^ y^ fourth being an English man converted
norway from infidelity, which Adria^ afterward upon great affection and love
that he bare to this realm being his native country gave to henry the. ii king
of England y^ right and seniory of the dominion of Ireland, which pertained to
ye see of Rome. I will not rehearse y^ manifold benefits y^ this realm has
received from y^ Apostolic sea, nor how ready the same has been to reliue us
in all our necessities. Nor I will not re hearse the manifold miseries and
calamities, that this Realm has suffered by swaruing from that unity. And
even as in this Realm so in all other countries which refusing the unity of
the Catholic faith, have followed fa^tastical doctrine, y^ like plages have
happened. Let Asia, and the Empire of Greece be a spectacle unto y^ world, who
by swaruing from the unity of the Church of Rome, are brought into
captivity and subieccion of the Turk. All stories be full of like examples.
And to cum unto latter time, look upon our nie neigh bours of germany, who by
swarving from this unity, are miserablye afflicted with diversity of sects,
and divided in faccions. What shall I rehearse unto you the ^umultes and
effusion of blood that has happened there in late days. Or trouble you with
the rehearsal of those plages y^ have happened sins this Innouacion of religion,
whereof you have felt the bitterness, and I have heard the report? Of al which
matters I can say no more but such was the misery of the time. And see how
far forth this fury went. For those that live under the Turk, may freely
live after their conscience, and so was it not lawful here. If men examined
well upon what grounds these Innouations began, they shall well find, that the
rote of this, as of many other mischieffes, was avarice: And that the lust and
Carnal affeccion of one man confounded all laws, both divine and humane. And
notwithstanding all these devises and policies practiced within this Realm
against the church of Rome, they neded not to have lost you, but that they
sought rather as fre^des to reconcile you, then as enemies to enfeaste you. For
they wanted not great offers of the most mighty Potentates in all Europe to
have aided the church in that quarrel. Then mark the sequel, there seemed by
these chaun ges to rise a great face of riches and gain, which in proof came to
great misery and lack. Se how god then can confound the wisdom of the wise,
and turn unjust policy to mere folly, and that thing that seemed to be done
for relief was cause of plain ruin, and decay. Yet see that goodness of God,
which at no time failed us, but most benignlye offered his grace, when it was
of our parts least sought, and worste deserved.

And when all light of true religion seamed utterly exti^cte, as the churches
defaced, the aulters overthrown, the ministers corrupted ^euen like as in a
lamp the light being cou^red, yet it is not quenched, eue^ so in a few
remained the confession of Christ's faith, namely in the breast of the Queen's
excellency, of whom to speak without adulacyon, the saing of the Prophet may
be verified. Ecce quasi der elicta.

And see how miraculouslye GOD of his goodness preserved her hyghenes contrary
to the expectacyon of man. That when numbers conspyred against her, and
policies were devised to disherit her, and armed power prepared to destroy
her, yet she being a Uirgin, helples, naked and unarmed, prevailed, and had the
victory over tyrauntes, which is not to be ascribed to any pollici of man, but
to the almighty great goodness and providence of God, to whom the honor is
to be given. And therefore it may be said: Da gloriam deo. For in man's
judgment, on her graces part was nothing in appearance, but despair. And
yet for all these practices and devises of ill me^, here you se her grace
established in her estate, being your lawful Queen and Gouernes, borne among
you, whom God has appointed to reign over you, for the restitucion of true
religion, and extirpacion of all erroures and sects. And to confirm her grace
the more stronglye in this enterprise, Lo how the providence of God has
joined her in marriage with a Prince of like religion, who being a king of
great might, armor and force, yet uses toward you neither Armor nor force,
but seeks you by the way of love and amity: in which respect great cause
you have to give thanks to almighty God that has sent you such Catholyke
Governors. It shall be therefore your part again to love, obey and serve them.
And as it was a synguler favor of God to conioyue them in marriage: so it is
not to be doubted but that he shall send them issue for the comfort and suerty
of this common wealth. Of all Princes in Europe, the Emperors has trauayled
most in the cause of religion, as it appears by his acts in Germany* yet
happly by some secret judgment of god he has not atchiued the end, with whom
in my journey hetherwardes I had conference touching my Legation, whereof when
he had understanding, he showed great apperaunce of most ernest joy and
gladness: saying that it reioysed him no les, of there concileme^t of this
realm unto christian unity, then that his son was placed by marriage in y^
king dome. And most glad of all, that the occasion thereof should come by me,
being an English manne borne, which is, as it were to call home our selves.
I can well compare him to David, which though he were a man elect of GOD:
yet for that he was contaminate with blood and war, could not build the
temple of I^rusalem, but left the finishynge thereof to Solomon which was Rex
pacificus, So may it be thought, that the appeasing of controversies of
religion in Christianity, is not appointed to this Emperor but rather to his
son, who shall perform the buildyng that his father has begun: which church
cannot be perfitly builded without universally in all Realms we adhere to one
head, and do acknowledge him to be the vica^ of god, and to have power from a
boue. For all power is of God according to the saying. Non est potestas nisi
adeo. And therefore I consider that all power being in god yet for the
conseruacion of quiet and godly life in the world, he has derived that power
from above into two parts here in earth: which is in the power Imperial Two
powers in earth, the Ecclesiastical power, and ye Imperial
and ecclesiastical. And these two powers, as they be several and distinct,
so have they two several effects and operacions. For seculer Princes, to whom
the Te^porall sword is committed, be ministers of god to execute vengeance
upon transgressors and ill livers, and to preserve the well doers and
innocents from injury and violence. Which power is represented in these two
most excellence persons, the king and Queen's Magesties here preese^t who have
this power committed unto them Immediatlye from god, without any superioure in
that behalf.

The other power is of ministracyon which is the power of the keys, and order
in the Ecclesiastical state, which is by the authority of gods word and
examples of the Apostles, and of all old holy fathers from Christ hitherto
attributed and given to the Apostolic Sea of Rome, by special prerogative.
From which Sea, I am here deputed Legate and Ambassador, having full and ample
commission from thence, and have the keys committed to my hands. I confess to
you that I have the keys not as mine own keys, but as ye keys of him that
sent me: and yet cannot open: not for want of power in me to give, but for
certain impedimentes in you to receive, which must be taken away before my
commission can take effect. This I protest unto you, my commyssion is not of
prejudice to any person. I cum not to destroy but to build, I cum to
reconcyle, not to condemn, I cum not to compel, but to call again: I am not
cum to call anything in question, already done, But my commission is of grace
and clemencye to such as will receive it. For touching al matters that be
past, they shall be as things cast into the Sea of forgetfulness. But the mean
whereby you shall receive this benefit, is to revoke and repeal those laws and
statutes which be impedymentes, blocks and bars to the execution of my
commission. For like as I my self had neither place nor voice to speak here
among you, but was to all respects a banished man, til such time as ye had
repealed those laws that lay in my way: euenso can not you receive the
benifite, and grace offered from the Apostolic Sea, until the abrogacion of
such laws whereby you have disioyned and disseue red your selves from the
unity of Christ's Church, it remains therefore that you like true Christians
and prouydente men for the weal of your souls, and bodies, ponder what is to
be don in this so weightye a cause. And so to frame your acts and
procedinges, as they may tend first to the glory of GOD, and next to the
conseruacion of your common wealth, suertye and quietness.

This was the substance of my Lord Cardinals oration, or rather his tale,
which he pronounsed in such sort, as no man could judge it any studied
matter, but a thing spoken Ex tempore. Whereof a friend of mine beeinge a
Burges of the Parliamente, and present at the same time, took the notes, and
gave me the same in writing, so (as I believe) nothing that he spoke in effect,
is omitted.

And after that the assemble was broken, my lord Cardinal taking leave of the
king and Queen's magesties, went to his house at Lambeth. Then shortly after the
foresaid three Estates assembled The three Estates assembled again be fore the
king and Queen's magesties and my lord Cardynall.
again in the great Chamber of the Court at Westmister, where the king and
queen's magestyes and also my Lord Cardynal being present, they did exhibit
syttyng al on their knees a supplicacion to their highnesses. Which
supplicacion being read their ma How they did exhibit a supplicacyon to their
magesties
gesties exhibited the same unto my Lord Cardinal. Whose reverence,
perceiving the effect thereof to be correspo^dyng to his expectacion, did not
only receive the same most humbly from their magesties, but also after he had
in few words given thanks to GOD, and had declared what great cause he
had to rejoice, above al others that his cu^myng from Rome into England had
taken most happy success, he representyng there the Popes holiness, and
having the keys, and his full power for the time, did give them his
Benediccion. Which being done, they all departed.

The Copy of which supplycacion, I have sent here also to your Lordeship in
manner form, and effect as follows word by word.

We the Lords Spiritual and The (...) of the submission.
temporal and the Commons of this present Parlyment ass^bled, representing
the whole body of the Realm of England and dominions of the same, in our
own names particulerly, and also, of the said body universally in this
supplycacion dyrected to your Magestyes, with most humble suite: That it may
by your gracious intercession and mean be exhybyted to the most reverend
father in God, the Lord Cardinal Poole Legate, sent specially hither from
our most holy Father Pope Iulio the third, and the SEA Apostolyke of Rome:
do declare our selves very sorye and repenrante of the Scisme and
disobedyence committed in this Realm and the dominions of the same against
the said Sea Apostolyke, either by making, agreing, or executynge any laws,
ordynaunces or commandments against the Supremacye of the said SEA, or
otherwise dooynge or speaking that might impugn the same. Offering our
selves, and promising by this our Supplicacyon, that for a token and knowledge
of our said repentance, we be, and shall be always ready under, and with the
authorities of your magesties to the vttermoste of our power, to do that
shall be in us for the abrogacyon and repealynge of the said laws and
ordinances in this present Parlyment as well for our selves, as for the
whole body, whom we represente.

Whereupon we most humblye beseech your majesty's as persons vndetiled in the
offense of this body toward the said Sea, which nevertheless God by his
providence has made subject to your majesty's: so to set fourth this our
most humble suit that we may obtain from the Sea Apostolic, by the said
most reverend father, as well particularlye as universally Absolution,
Release, and discharge, from all danger of such censures, and sentences, as
by the laws of the Church we be fallen in. And that we may, as Childeren
repentaunte, be received in to the bosom and unity of Christ's Church. So as
this noble realm, with all the members thereof, may in unity and perfect
obedience to the Sea Apostolic, and (...) for the time being, serve God, and
your majesty's to the furderance and aduan^cement of his honor, and glory.
Amen.

THen the first Sundaye in Aduent followinge, my How the kings magesty and
the Lord, (...) dynall came to Poles the first Sun day in (...) uente.
Lord Cardinal came at ten of the clock from Lambeth by water, and landed
at Poles wharfe. And cu^mynge from thence to Poles Church with a cross, ii.
pyllers, and two pollaxes of Silver borne before him, he was there received by
my Lord Chaunceller, with Procession, Where he tarried until the kings
cummynge: whose hyghnes came from westmynster by land. and all his nobles
before him to Poles also at a leven of the clock. And so the kings majesty
and my lord Cardinal with all the lords of the privy counsel being present
with such an audience of people as was never seen in that place before, my
Lord Chaunceller My Lord Chauncel (...) (...) (...) (...) mo^ at Poles cross
that day.
entered Poles cross. And after that the people ceased, that so much as a
whispering could not be heard amongst them, more then amongst those of whom
the Poet Virgil speaks, Conticuere omnes intentique or a tenebant. But every
manne bente hartelye with ears to here, eyes to perceive, and hands to write,
his Lordshyp proceeded: and took to his theme these words of the Epistle of
that day written by Sayncte Paul the holy Apostle in the. xiii. Chapter to
the Romans. Fratres scientes, quia bora est iam, nos de somno surgere. and
caet.

Which parcel of Scripture was so Godly, and so clearkelye handeled by him,
as no man alive (all flattery doutles set aparte) was able to meande it. And
there as saint Paul exhorted the Romans to cast away the works of
darkness, and to put on the Armoure of light. etc. Euenso his Lordshippe
exhorted, wished, and willed: yea, and with all his heart desyered and prayed
all Englysh men and others, which had slepte in England these one and twenty
years in detestable Here^yes, and erroneous Doctrines, to forsake the deuel,
the flesh and the world, which was the occa^yon of all evil, and to embrace
God and his holy Catholyke faith, which faith was tau^hte by him, preached by
his Apostles, and receued of the^ by the ancient old fathers in the primitive
church. Which faith also has continued through al Christendom from age to
age, and also in England, until king Henry the Eight took on him to be Supreme
head of the church. From which time unto the reygne of the Queen's magestie y^
now is, his lordshippe declared what miseries, what calamities, what sorrows
and griefs England What miseries eng land has sustained sins it swar ued
from the unity of the Ca (...) ^ayth.
had susteaned.

What malice what envy, and ha tred, what falshed what craft and subtlety
had reigned amongst all degrees in England. What abominable Herisyes, what
synistrat and erroneous opinions were ill England, without any restreynt
taught and received, what tumultes and insurrections, to the castinge away of
many, and to the empoueryshynge of all, were in diverse quarters of the same.
And finallye, unto what ruin and decaie the realm of England was like to
come, if almyghtye god of his goodness had not blessed the same in time, with his
most holy hands. These, with many other notable yea and lamentable lessons,
to long here to be rehearsed, his Lordeshyppe there declared, which moved a
great number of the audience, with sorrowful syghes, and weeping tears to
change their cheer.

In this same self sermon he declared also, how. xix. years ago, at that
time when the insurreccion was in the north of How king Henry the Light. xix.
years agon thought to have ge uen over the supremacye.
England in defense of religion, that king Henry the eight was minded to have
given over the Supremacy to the Popes Holiness, but the leat thereof was then
because he thought it would be said it should have been done for fear.

He declared also how the said How he sent to the Em perour for the same e^
fecte.
king sent him and Sir Henry Kneuet Knight to the Emperor, exhorting his
Imperial majesty to be intercessour for him to the Poope to receive the
supremacye: but it took none effect because the time was not. He declared
further, how in king Edwardes days, the counsel were once minded to have
the Pope restored to ye Supremacy, but the let thereof was in those days,
because as it was supposed it would have been said that the Realm could not be
defended during the kings minority without the Popes adsistaunce. And
finally he declared how the Queen's magestie at her coronacyo^ thought for to
have restored the Popes holiness to his Supremacy, but the time (he said) was
not then. But now (said he the time is cum that the kings and Queen's magesties
have restored our holy father the Pope to his Supremacy: And the three Estates
assembled in the parliament representing ye whole body of this noble Empire of
England and dominions of the same, have submitted them selves to his holiness,
and his successors forever. He declared also how that the most Reverend
Father in God Lord Cardinal Poole, being there put by the king, was sent in
England as deputed Legate and Ambassadoure from the Sea Apostolyke of Rome,
having full and ample commission from the Popes holiness to bless the realm
of England. And here also he declared, how much bound England is to thank
God, who of his divine prou^dence has appointed such a godly and virtuous
Prince as the king that now is, he being son to loo victorious and most
rich an Emperor, and he being also so rich a Prince him self, to join in
marriage with the Queen's Majesty. Who for the most hartye love that he had to
her hyghenes, left his own countries, realms, and regions to strengthen her
most noble grace and to enriche her Empire of England. And so to conclude, his
lord ship declared, that all the premises being well remembered and
considered of all the audience, And also the king and Queen's majesty's Godly
procedinges being of them, and all other their true subjects heartily
embraced, and faithfully followed, They al then might sing with the Angel
which appeared to the shepherde at the natyuytie and birth of our savior
Jesus Christ, Gloria in excelsis deo, et in terra pax hominibus, etc. And
finally to say with the Prophet and Psalmist David, Haec es^ dies quam fecit
dominus, exultemus etletemur in ea.

Which sermon being done, the kings magestie departed to wards Westminster,
and with his highness my lord Cardinal with the cross only borne before him.
Syns the day of which sermon, all such things as were amiss and out of order
here, begin now to cum in rule and square, and occupye their auncyente and
accustomed places.

And the most holy Catholic faith and true relygion of Christ which in
England has been this long time behind the post and in Captivity, is now,
being delivered and cummyng home again, of all both young and old,
embraced, worshipped and honored. And all erroneous doctrine and heretical
books with the teachers and setters fourth of the same, are co^uicted,
abolished, yea, explosed and driven out of England for ever. And finallye all
they which were herers and favorers of them, now layinge their hands to
their hearts, and perceauinge them selves seduced and deceived by such
means, are sorry, and do hartlye repent, mynding faithfully from hensforth
their fautes to amend. Amongst whom I can no les do (^y very good lord)
then number my self as one. For although I was never (praised by god)
associated with any which were erroneous, or suspected to be fautours and
defendours of heretical, and sinistrate opinions: but living under silence
during the two late kings procedinges have kept my self clear on every side,
Yet nevertheless, as often as I have, and do remember we my self how
lasciuiously I lived in Eng la^d these. xx. years, and ye most part thereof
have followed the same trade of liberty and voluptuous living as a great nu^bre
have done: where I might have had endeavored myself in the mean season, to
virtuous learning and study: I can no les do, then lament* and be sorry: yea
and with all my heart to repent as others do, Purposinge (by Gods grace) with
them to mend my most miserable, and sinful life, and so to continue to my
lives end.

In which doing I with those which have thus offended, and they with me, may
be assured, that our Savior Christ according unto his own infallible words,
spoken of one in the name of al sinners, will have mercy, pity and compassion on
us, saying: Nolo mortem peccatoris, sed magis ut co^uertatur et uiuat

And thus England, and al we that dwell therein, accoumpt our selves not only
happy, yea and most happy, which from so many outrageous storms of errors,
cares, and calamities, are thus called home again to the sure haven and port
of the most holy Catholyke faith: But also we do believe with our very hearts,
and do confess with all our mouths, that almighty God of his divine providence
has preserved and kept. iii. persons, as lode*star res and chief guydes, for
the defending, inbringinge, and restoring of England thus to the unity of
Christ's church.

The first is the Queen's majesty, who being from her infa^cye a Uirgin, and
immaculate from all spots of heresies: it has pleased God to defend her,
aid her, and save her from the hands, power and might of her enemies. And
giving he^ y^ victory over them in twinkelinge of an iye, which as roaryng
Lions would have devoured her. The second is my lord Cardinal, who being an
exile out of his native countreth England, these xxi. years, for the two
causes before mentioned, and in the mean season, so abhorred, so hated, and so
detested as no man durst scars ones name him, who^ the queen's magestie now
has restored to his blood, and to the honor of his house. And the third is my
lord the Bishop of wynchester Lord Chaunceller of England, against whom, from
time to time such sharp snares have been laid, and such ordinance leueled,
for that he favored, and would have had to his power defended y^ most holy
Catholic faith that it is a wounder how he, hathescaped, and specially at
his late being in London Toure.

But such are the works of GOD the author of all goodness, who always when
it pleases him plucketh down and deposes the proud and high minded, and
defends and exalts the humble, and low of Spirit. So that now all Christ
ndo^ as well as England, does con fesse that these forenamed iii. per sons
have been thus, through the providence of god most hap ply defended,
preserved, and kept from their enemies hands, above the expectacion and
judgment of all men, for the restoring of England again to the unity of
Christ's religion. Which (no dout it is) shall be to the glory of God, the
wealth of England, and to the perpetual peace, love, and quietness of this
most noble, and hole isle of Britayn.

Other news I have none, but those news, which most Ioifully reioyseth all
England, That the Queen's magestie is conceived with Child whom our Lord long
preserve, and send her highness a gracyous delyueraunce. And also that in
Christmasse holidays, the Prince of Piemont arrived in England, and shortly
after him the prince of Ore^ge which are very pryncely entreated with the king
and Queen's Magesties. And because I thought your lordeship would be somewhat
desirous to know the stature and shape of this noble prince the kings
magestie of England that now is, who^ you have not yet seen, I thought it not
much amysse to descrybe his person by writing that your mind may conceive
that which your iye has not seen. As for the queen's most excellent magesties
person whose person you have so often times seen, I shall not greatly need to
depai^te unto you: Understande therefore, that touching his highth, I can well
compare The kiges form and stature.
him to John Hume my lord of Iedwardes kinsman. Of visage, he is well favored,
with a brod forhead, and gray iyes, straight nosed, and manly countenance.
From the forhead to the point of his chynne, his face grows small: his pace is
pri^cely, and gate so straight and upright, as he leseth no inche of his
higthe, with a yeallowe head, and a yeallowe berde. And thus to conclude, he is
so well proporcioned of bodi, arm leg and every other Limme to the same, as
nature cannot work a more parfite pattern. And as I have learned, of the age
of. xxviii years. Whose majesty I judge to be of a stout stomach, pregnaunt
witted and of most ientel nature.

I have also sent your lordship certain verses and adages writ ten with the
hand of the Lord Henry Stuarde, lord Dernley, your nephew, which he wrote
this time twelve month: I being with him then at Temple Newsome in Yorkshire.
And what praise your Lordship may think him worthy, for this his towardnes in
wrighting, being yet not fully. ix. years of age, The like praise is he
worthy (suerlye) in his towardnes in the latin tou^ge and the french, and in
sundry other virtuous qualities: whom also, God and nature has endued with a
good wit, ientilnes, beutie and favor. So if it may please God to lend him
long life, he shall prove a witty, virtuous, and an active well learned gentle
man. Whose noble parents are my singular good patrons. And thustrusting that
your good Lordship, of your accustomed humanity and ientilnes, will accept this
my simple letter in good part, sent unto you for this new years gift,
although it be rude and destitute of wit, lerning and eloquence, I most humbly
beseech the king of kings, and lord of lords, long to preserve and keep your
Reverend Lordeship in health, wealth, and fortunate felicity, with a meri and
mani new years.

From the City of London this new years day and the first of ye kalenders of
January. 1555. By your Reverend Lordeships humble orator, John Elder.

The copy of the Queen's Magesties letters Patentes.
MArye by the grace of God, queen of Eng land France and Ireland. etc.

To al printers of books and bokesellers, and to al other our Officers,
ministers, and subjects these our letters patentes hearing or seeing, gretyng.
Know ye that we of our especial grace and meare mocion, have given and
granted, and by these presents do give and grant full power, license,
authority, and privilege unto our well-beloved Subject John Waylande, Citizen
and Scriuenous of London, that he and his Assigns only, and none other person
or persons shall fro^hensforth have authority, and liberty to printe al and
every such usual Primers or Manuel of prayers, by whatsoever other title the
same shall or may be called, which by us, our heirs, successors, or by our
clergy by our assent shall be auctorised, set forth, and devised for to be used
of all our loving Subjects, throughout all our Realms, and domini ons, during
the full time and term of seven years next ensuing the date of these our
letters Pate^tes And farther that it shall not be lawful for any manner of
other person or persons of our said Subjects, to print or to procure to be
imprinted, any Primers or Manuell of prayers by whatsoever title the same shall
or may be called, or set forth, during the said term, nor any book, or
books, which the said John Wa^lande or his Assigns at his or their costs and
charges shall first Prynte, or set forth during the said term of seven years
next ensuing the printing of the same book or books, upon pain of forfature,
and confi^cacio^ of the same Primers, Manual of prayers and books, to thuse of
us and our successous. Wh^rfore we will and command al you our Printers and
other our subjects that ye nor any of you do presume procure, or attempt to
prynt or setteforth any manner Primers, Manual of prayers, book or books,
which the said John Waylande or his assigns shall first printe during the time
of this our privilege, and license, upon pain of forfature and confiscacion
of the same Primers, Manual of prayers, and books, as aforsayd. And as ye
tender our pleasure, and will avoid the contrary. In witness whereof we have
caused these our letters to be made Patentes. Wytnes our self at Westminster
the four and twentieth day of October, in the first year of our reign.

Per breue depriuato sigillo et de data predicta.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun over against the
Conduit by John Waylande.

Cum priuilegio per septenium.


