ARISTOTLE'S POLITIQVES, OR DISCOURSES OF GOVERNMENT.

TRANSLATED OVT OF GREEK into French, with Expositions taken out of the best
Authors, specially out of Aristotle himself, and out of Plato, conferred
together where occasion of matter treated of by them both does offer it self:
The observations and reasons whereof are illustrated and confirmed by
innumerable Examples, both old and new, gathered out of the most renowned
Empires, Kingdoms, Seignories, and Commonweals that ever have been, and whereof
the knowledge could be had in writing, or by faithful report,

Concerning the beginning, proceeding, and excellency of Civil Government.

By LOYS LE ROY, called REGIVS.

Translated out of French into English.

QVIBVS RESPVBLICA CONSERVETVR
At London printed by Adam Islip. Anno Dom. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND RENOWNED GENTLEMAN, SIR ROBERT SIDNEY KNIGHT, LORD
GOVERNOR OF THE CAVTIONARIE TOWN OF VLISSING AND CASTLE OF RAMAKINS.
Since that most barbarous and Gothish opinion (right noble Sir) of the
contrariety of Learning and Arms, and the impossibility of their concurring
in the same person to any perfection, is largely confuted by the many examples
of those worthy Grecians and Romans who did not only flourish in both, but did
therefore far excel all others in martial glory, because they had sacrificed
unto the Muses: I hope there is none so grossly ignorant, or so peruersly
envious, that will condemn my want of judgment for choosing a patron whose
profession may seem contrary to the nature of this subject: in which hope I
am the more confirmed, because sundry of your Lordships public emploiments,
besides your private studies, do amply witness, that as your noble brother
(the true knight of Minerua) has to his eternal honor augmented the number of
those few who in this last age of the declining and degenerating world, have
honorably emulated those ancient Worthies: so your self treading the same
path of Virtue, have by like desert purchased to your name and house, a second
eternity. And as I doubt not that all indifferent persons will forbear
unfriendly carping, so likewise when I consider either the subject, or the
first and chiefest author thereof, I presume of your Lordships acceptance. For
what more excellent matter or more worthy of a Philosophers pen can be
treated of, then that which is he bond of humane society, and the perfector of
our reasons use, which while men wanted they seemed not men, because wholy
resembling beasts? Or what Philosopher can in depth of knowledge equal
Aristotle, whose works may be justly tearmd, The Treasury of humane wisdom?
all which as they savor of divineness, so amongst them all, these his
Discourses of Government have not the meanest relish thereof; especially where
he handles the changes and destructions of every Commonweal, with their
causes, and sets down several precepts for the upholding and preserving of
each: which whosoever does advisedly read, can do no other than say of him
as Cornelius Nepos in the life of Atticus does say of Tully, Prudentiam esse
quodammodo diuinationem: for what he so many years since did write, has been
in all points exactly verefied by Examples of following times, descending even
to our present age. I will therefore refer the further consideration of his
general worth and this particular work, unto your Lordships wisdom, humbly
suing that if his French attire become him better than his English fashion,
wherein my pen has for the most part suited, you will vouchsafe the
harshnesse of the style for the hardness of the matter, and deigne to shadow
the disgraces of my defects by the grace of your protection: in which desire
and hope I stay my pen, beseeching the Almighty to multiply in you all earthly
and heavenly blessings.

Your Lordships most humble at command I. D.

To the courteous Reader.
LVcilius (gentle Reader) was wont to wish that his Writings might escape the
sight and censure both of the Learned, and of the most unlearned; least the
one seeing too much should discover some defects, and the other understanding
nothing, or very little, condemn all. But as in every other thing wishes do
but argue want, and yield no warrant for the accomplishing of men's desires: so
in this especially, because the fortune of Books published resembles that of
Ships at sea, the one subject to all sorts of Readers as the other to all kinds
of Weather. By the sorts of Readers I mean not only as Lucilius did, who
distinguished them by learning, ignorance, and mean knowledge; but there is yet
a farther difference no less to be respected: for often where Learning discouers
faults, Courtesy does shadow them: but far more often where no faults are,
discourtesie (I use too gentle a term) does impute them: so mightily are the
most men's minds infected with the bitter humor of Zoilisme, a thing not
greatly to be merueild, since that which is easiest is still most usual. It
were folly in me to wish with Lucilius for things impossible, and mere
madness to hope for them. It shall suffice briefly to acquaint you with some
things which being absolutely considered and the truth thereof unknown, may
seem to yield large and just occasion of reproof: as first, the harshnesse of
the phrase and rough conueiance of the style, which if any does dislike, as
doubtless some will, I entreat them to remember (for I can hardly think they
know not) that no translation is capable of Elegance as the original, because
the one has full liberty of invention, and the other is by necessity tied to
observation: next I desire them to consider Aristotle's manner of writing, the
obscurity, compacting and unusual composing of his style, which if they weigh
uprightly, they needs must grant that though Tullies honorable Encomium which
he does generally give it, calling it Aureum flumen orationis, be in respect
of the purity thereof, and of the excellency of the matter most true, yet
that they cannot with any reason look for a fluent and flourishing style in
the translation of such a subject, either out of the original or any other
language whereinto it has been since translated. I wish them farther to
consider that many places of the Comment (wherein are set down whole
discourses touching Astrology, Cosmographie, and other deep points of the
mathematical sciences, lightly touched by Aristotle) are more obscure than the
text it self. Touching the diversity that may be found in the translation, it
is not to be meruelled at, since some part of the book was performed by
another, before I undertook the rest. But I hope, that though we differ in
the manner, yet that we swerve not from the truth of the matter, howsoever the
Compositors mistaking has therein somewhat wronged us, and the often and thick
enterlining of the copy, hastily written, deceived him; but the cheifest of
those ouersights are noted in the end. As for the difference of the English in
some places from the French, I answer, that when upon any obscurity I
resorted to the Greek, and found the rendering thereof in French not so
significant as might be, I have been bold to follow the original, unless it
did so depend on the Comment, that I could not alter it. And touching the
difference of it from the Latin, I hope none will accuse me for not following
that whereto I was not bound, and besides if they confer the Latin with the
French, and both with the Greek, they shall (I doubt not) find that the French
does approach far nearer to Aristotle. Lastly, touching the extraordinary
harshnesse that may in some places be found, I say thus much only, that the
difficulty of the thing, wherein even learned men themselves have sometimes
faild, with the small time and leisure which I had both to do and reuiew it
may suffice if not to excuse me, yet at least to purchase pardon. But since my
present have allows me not sufficient time to touch every particular, I will
commit unto your courtesies the further consideration both of this and
whatsoever else may be objected, humbly entreating you to measure my labor not
by it self, for it is worthless, but by my good will and earnest desire to
please, which is therefore the greater, because I fear that my former toies
have displeasd, which were they again to pen and publish, should rather sleep
in silence, than I through them be accused of time misspent.

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN King, Henry king of France and Poleland, the third of
that name.
SIr, the books of Government and Commonweal matters which I have set forth
heretofore under your authority, do now return to your Majesty reviewed and
amended, for the good account you made of them, and for the pleasure you take
sometimes in looking upon them, and in causing them to be read unto you. And
soothly although your Highness being brought up and exercised from your tender
age in affairs of Peace and War, and other matters of state, can skill by
experience of the chief things that are requisite to the government of your
realm, and do ordinarily retain men about you of your counsel, a great
number of wise and skillful personages: yet notwithstanding, the reading of
Books that treat of Government, may greatly delight you at times of
recreation, when as you shall see in them many goodly and profitable
aduertisements, concerning the government of Princes. Many Kings and Emperors
set their whole felicity on war, and in conquering new countries, but if
they look well hereinto, they shall find it better for a Prince to govern
wisely, and to order their estate conveniently, than to invade and conquer
another Princes realm; considering that the chief cause why he is set up of
God, and why God is so gracious to him, as to put innumerable persons in
subjection to him, is that he should hold them together in the knowledge and
observation of the true Religion, rule them with good laws, defend them by
force of arms, and in all cases be so careful of their welfare, as they may
regard him as their father and Sheapheard. It is not for him to apply
himself alonly to the preparing of great and puissant Armies, to cover the Sea
with Ships, Galleys, and other vessels furnished for the wars, to give
battle, to make conquests, to win Cities, to subdue new Kingdoms, and to
set up his flags and banners of Arms in the uttermost bounds of the World: but
to provide for the welfare of his Subjects, to remedy their harms, to relieve
their wrongful oppressions, to yield and show himself meeld and gentle in
hearing the requests and complaints of the inferior sort, modest and upright
in answering them, ready to minister justice to every man, as well by
appointing reward for virtue, as punishment for vice, and finally so to behave
himself as he may be loved, feared, and praised of all men. Most true it is
Sir, that whereas at your coming to the Crown, you found this your realm of
France long forworne with the civil broils which were at that instant far
greater than ever they had been before, and sore impouer^shed by the former
calamities; you could not then fully show to your subjects the good dealing
which you were desirous to show toward them, because you were let by the
wickedness of the time. But now that the troubles are laid asleep by the
peace which you have accorded of desire to relieve your afflicted people; all
men look for all manner of happiness hereafter by means of your clemency,
and that God pittieng this realm, as one whereof he has showed himself to
have a singular regard above all others, will by your means rid it from al
former dangers, turning the miserable discord wherewith it has been infinitely
disquieted, into sure concord; and the horrible tempest of civil war, into
perpetual calmness of Peace. Howbeit letting that matter alone, I return to
Aristotle's matters of Government, whereunto I hope to ad Platos also, at
leastwise if I may have opportunity to do it, and that my health will give me
leave: not only translating them both out of Greek into French, but also
moreover enlightening them with expositions, that the work may be the more
delightful to your Majesty, and the easier to be understood of others which
shall look into it under your protection. And forasmuch as the skill of the
governing of Commonweals consists chiefly in the practice, I have where need
requires, alleged diverse examples, both old and new, gathered out of the
famousest states of the world, especially of the nearest unto us to our
knowledge; assaying to set down the causes and reasons of their events,
according to the observations of the Philosophers, and other means devised
afterterward by long experience, and put in practice by the space of two
thousand years or thereabouts: Surely it has ^ene no small travel to be the
setter forth of so high and grave discourses in French, and especially to
express the elegancie of the one, and the propriety of the other. But I will
never count it painful to undertake the thing that may benefit my Country, or
which I think may please your Majesty, to whom I dedicat and consecrat this
whole work of Government, a matter of as great importance as ever any has
hitherto been done in French; whether it be in respect of the worthiness of
the master it self, which is the goodliest and profitablest that can be, or in
respect of the excellency of the authors thereof, who were of the skilfullest
that ever lived among men. Sir, I beseech God long to preserve your Majesty,
and to give you a happy reign in good peace, both at home and abroad, to his
honor and your contentment, to the welfare of France, and the benefit of al
Christendom. At Paris in the month of July, Anno. 1596.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient subject and servant LOYS LE ROY.

Interpres ad Lectorem.
Est sua laus illis qui summa perotia scribunt:
Otia amant Musae, nec inani Fabula sensu
Virgineo semota choro sacrauit amoena:
Otia amant arts, nec frustra Pallas oliuam
(Sit licet armipotens) pacis tutatur amore,
Pacis amore dedit, celebri certamine victrix.
At neque turbati transmittunt lumina fontes,
Nec restant medijs Typhi sua iura procellis,
Sit sua laus illis qui summa per otia scribunt;
Sit venia and nobis queis sors nulla otia praestat.
OF GOVERNMENT AND OF THE MOST RENOWNED LAWMAKERS THAT HAVE PVT IT IN PROOF,
AND of the most famous Authors that have written thereof, specially of PLATO
and ARISTOTLE; together with a Sum and comparison of their Commonweals.
WHo so vouchsafes to consider the restitution of good learning which has
happened in this age, and the ornament which all Arts and Sciences have
recovered by the diligence of diverse men of skill: shall have cause to wonder
to see, how almost the meanest sciences are set again in their perfection; and
the skill of government, being the worthiest, the behoofullest, and the
needfullest of all others, is left alone behind: without the which, men who
naturally be companiable, cannot in any wise maintain their companying and
society together. Grammar, Poetry, Rhethorick and Logic, have been handled
by infinite persons, and enlightened with innumerable expositions, annotations,
corrections, and translations. The mathematical sciences were never better
known, neither were Astrology and Cosmography ever better understood. What is
more to be wondered at at this day tha^ to see the whole world discovered,
whereof the most part has continued so long unknown? And to see the uttermost
coasts of East and West, North and South, intercommune together, and men that
are separated with so many seas, and so far distant one from another, to meet
together by the means of sailing, made safer and easier by many new
inventions? As for natural Philosophy and Physic, I may well uphold that
they were never in greater perfection among the ancient Greeks and Arabians,
then they be at this time, wherein a great number of beasts, roots, herbs,
trees^ gums, liquors, fruits, minerals and other simples have been brought to
light, whereof men have made many wholesome remedies that were not put in
practice aforetimes. Who knows not the change that is befallen in the Art of
Chivalry, as well by Sea as by Land, and that the manner both of besieging
and of defending Fortresses, is far differing from that which has been of
old time? Yet notvvithstanding the Cannons, Harquebushes, Pistolets, and other
Artillery of fireworke being brought to such perfection as they be, are no
impediment, but that there be as brave Soldiers and valiant captains as
ever there were. Building, painting, and music are set again vvelneere in
their first state: and men have taken so great pains in eloquence of pleading,
and knowledge of Law, that it is not possible to attain to more. But as for
government, which deserved to be more labored in than they all, as which
comprehends and rules them all, it has been let alone, without receiving
any light of learning unto this day. The cause hereof in mine opinion is, that
the men of skill which could have beautified it with their vvritings, have
utterly forborne the dealing with matters of State, to give themselves wholy
to the searching out of the truth, setting their sovereign felicity in
contemplation: and that those which have been called to public charge and
offices, have commonly had no great skill, or if they have had any, they have
vvanted leisure to write. Insomuch, that by the forbearing of the learned to
practice, and by the forbearing of the practisers to study, this science
(which is imperfect without skill and experience joined together) has come
behind hand as I said before.

As for my self, although I be not of any excellent skill, nor of any great
experience: yet notwithstanding, foras^uch as I have spent my whole life in
study to the least disauantage that I possibly could, and long time
frequented the courts of great Princes, abiding ordinarily about such persons
as have had the charge and managing of matters of State, to the intent, to
match my mean knowledge of learning with some experience of practice: I have
applied my mind chiefly to this science, attempting to further it to the
uttermost of my power. Therefore having determined to treat thereof, I thought
it not to be from the matter, to show first of all the dignity, profit, and
antiquity thereof. Secondly, I will speak of the Lawmakers that have put it
in practice, and finally, of the Authors that have written thereof; specially
of Plato and Aristotle, repeating breefly the substance of their Co^mon-weales,
the which I will compare together, to show the fruit that may be reaped by
matching the^ together. The which matters being high, weighty, very
profitable, and hitherto not treated of in French, I vvil lay forth as easily,
briefly, and fitly as I possibly can: praying the readers of the^ to give
themselves attentively to the understanding of so goodly and profitable a
matter.

First of all therefore to come to the worthiness and profitablenesse of
government, it is the science which teaches how to govern mankind aright,
according to the nature of each country and people, and according to the
diversity of the times: how states are to be founded, maintained and reformed
when need requires: how Commonweals, Kingdoms and Empires are to be ordered
to the benefit of the subjects, and to the honor of the Magistrates. It is the
science which has the understanding of all affairs, directing all men what
to do or leave undone, which ouerlooketh all estates, beholding the means of
their changes, ruins and preseruations: which maintains all other arts and
trades, as well the Liberal Sciences as handicrafts, setting down whether
they be to be received or no; commanding even the most honorable of them, as
the professions of chivalry, of Oratorie, of Justice, and of housekeeping; and
in at one end (which is the sovereign vvelfare of man) comprehending the ends
of all the others. That is it which has first showed unto us the form of Law
both natural and civil, humane and divine, private and public, written and
unwritten; which has invited us to live friendly together for the remedy of
common wants: which has taught us both the beginning and the end of humane
society, and that there was an universal and everlasting Law printed in men's
hearts, and sown in their breasts long time before there was any ordinances
written, or any city founded; upon the which Law all other particular,
local, and temporal Laws ought to be grounded, and by the same also ruled,
moderated and expounded. It has derived equity from nature, to the intent to
apply it to all cases that happen from day to day, and has made us truly to
understand, that Law and Justice consist not in opinion, but are naturally
graffed in humane creatures. By this Science we know the duty of Princes
toward their Subjects, of Magistrates toward their Princes, and also
toward private persons: What Offices are most necessary and most honorable:
what obedience honor and reverence the inferiors owe to their superiors: how
men ought to behave themselves in buying, in selling, in exchanging, in
prizing, in giving, in receiving, in promising, in bargaining, and in pleading.
In great disorder should we be, if it had not knit us together by marriages,
kinreds, alliances, and households, divided inheritances, stablished
successions, and ordained seats of Justice. For otherwise we could not have
known our own from other men's, or kinsman from a stranger, or the servant from
the master. To be short, without this science it were not possible to live
either publicly or privately, nor in any wise to deal well with men or men's
matters. For by the honoring and rewarding of virtue, by the discommending and
punishing of vice, and by the reducing of all our doings to an uprightness, it
has procured us a mean to live happily in quietness and concord with
contentation. And it is the more perfect, in that it procures the vvelfare,
not of some particular persons or companies only, as other trades do, but
also universally of all mankind, and of the whole world, which according to
the opinion of the Stoikes, is the true City, and as you would say, the
Commonweal of all men living.

Thus have you heard the excellency and profitablenesse of Government:
consider ye now the antiquity thereof, and by the same means consider also
the law-giuers, which did first put it in practice, and afterward the Authors
that have written thereof. Aristotle (who thought the world to be eternal)
does in the seventh book of his Commonweal, deem this science to have been
invented long ago, and also many or rather infinite times since to have been
forgone and lost. Plato in his third and sixth books of laws, affirms that
it began when towns and ordinances of towns first began, at such time as men
were multiplied upon the earth. And he supposes, that in unaccountable and
almost infinite length of time, innumerable cities have been builded and also
destroyed, and become one while of small, great; and another while of great,
small; one while evil of good, and another while good of evil: which change
has befallen not only in Cities and Towns, but also in Nations and
Countries, yea and even in mighty kingdoms and Empires, founded at the
beginning with great prowess of the first lords of them, and afterward marred
by the laziness of their successors, or else diminished by little and little
through the long continuance of time which makes an end of all things. Plato
in his Timeus and in his Commonweal, Aristotle in his Meteores, and Seneca in
his Natural Questions, think it to have come to pass through the fatal Law
of the World, as well by the moving of the first Heaven, vvhereupon all other
mouings and the whole course of nature depends, as by the meetings and
goings asunder of the plannets, to whom the Elements and all things compounded
of the elements, are obedient. And peremptorily they father the destructions
upon them: imputing the most general sort of them unto excessive vvaterfloods
and burnings by fire, and the lesser sort to vvarres, plagues, famines, and
earthquakes, of purpose to cleanse countries from wicked inhabitants, when the
naughtiness of them is grown up to the highest pitch. After which riddances,
the men that come up next, were very simple and ignorant. Then some one or
two being found among them to be of greater wit then the rest, did purchase
great reputation by teaching the^ good behauior with some show of Religion, as
Mercury and Sesostris did in old time in AEgipt, Saturn in Italy, and Orpheus
and Amphion in Greece. On the other side, need taught them by little and little
things necessary, after the which followed the things that serve for honor
and pomp, until at length, the former superfluity succeeded again. Those
excellent personages stayed upon the having of such interchangeable intercourse
of Arts, states, and other inferior things: With whom the most renowned
Astrologers agree; insomuch, that they will needs determine not only the
lives and fortunes of men, but also the prosperities and adversities of cities
and Nations, as Ptolomie has done in his Quadripartite according to the
ancient Chaldees and Egyptians, and after him the Arabians and also some
Christians: adding thereunto the continuance of sects, as did Peter Ally a
divine of Paris and Cardinal of Cambray, in his concordance of Divinity and
Astrology: against whom did set themselves John Earl of Mirandula in his
fifth book against Astrologers, and Viues in his second book of Christian
truth. But to return again to our matter. If we look thoroughly into all
antiquity, whereof any remembrance remains unto us, we shall find, that
the people which inhabited in old time the Country where we dwell now,
were as rude and uncivil three thousand years ago, as are Savages that have
lately been discovered by the Spaniards and Portingales toward the West and
South parts of the world. They dwelt scattered here and there in caves of
mountains, and in Forests under Cabines, without law, without Justice,
without Counsel, without Magistrate, without Religion, and without any
form of marriage. Afterward being increased by little and little, they
communicated one with another, and began to draw into companies, whereupon
insued Hamlets, Villages, Towns, and finally Cities; the good men being not
only induced to such meeting for friendships sake, but also enforced by the
necessities and adversities that pinched them, which drove them to help one
another. At the beginning they lived together in a certain natural
simplicity, as yet uncorrupted by ambition or covetousness, and vnmarred of
false opinions. Every company obeyed the eldest among them, using his will
for their Law, and demeaning themselves simply according to use and custom.
Afterward, as lewdness did increase, it stood them on hand to make laws, and
for the obeying of them to create Magistrates with authority, that they might
repress the ouer-lustinesse and malapartnesse of the wicked. For although man
be naturally Civil, and more companiable than any other mortal vvight, and to
that purpose is endued with reason and speech, that he might communicate with
others: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as he is subject to passions which
oftentimes do trouble him, and to leaud lusts which incessantly restrain him
from the good, it was needful to set him down some commandments, whereby
to bridle such affections, and to set them again in the right way of Justice.
Whereunto some excellent personages having the skill of government have
strained themselves to provide a remedy by appointing trades of living and
laws to folk in diverse countries at diverse times; and for that cause they
were called Lawmakers. And these have always furthered that invention of
theirs upon God, the first cause and original fountain of all goodness: as
who would say, it is not possible to restrain ignorant and froward folk,
without Religion and the fear of God, which is the foundation, stablishment,
and maintenance of all Commonvveales. The famousest Lawgiver that we know
of, was Moses the Prophet of God, who by Gods commandment gave the Law to
the Hebrews at their departure out of Egypt. There have been other
Lavv-giuers in other places, who likewise have fathered their Laws upon God
under diverse names, according to the diverse opinions of the Countries where
they were: As for example, Zoroastres the Lavv-maker of the Bactrians and
Persians, fathered his Laws upon Oromases: Trismegist the Lavv-giuer of the
Egyptians upon Mercury: Zamolxis the Lavv-giuer of the Scythians upon Vesi:
Charondas the Chalcidian upon Saturn: Minos the Candian upon Jupiter: Lycurgus
the Lacedemonian upon Apollo: Draco and Solon the Lavv-giuers of Athens upon
Minerua: And Numa the Lavv-giuer of the Romans upon Egeria: all of them
mingling their temporal government with Religion, which in old time was
accounted the only wisdom; and none other were taken for wise, but such as
delivered forth Religion, and interpreted it unto men. A good while after the
decease of Numa, because his laws and the Laws of other men, as well before
him as after him, were found imperfect; ten men were appointed in Rome with
absolute authority for the time, to ouerlooke them and amend them, and to add
unto them such other Laws as they knew to be needful for the government of
their State. And to that end they sent to Athens, Lacedemon, and other places,
where they heard there was any good State of good government: From which
places they took many constitutions which they mingled with their own, and
brought them all into twelve Tables, wherein they comprised the whole body of
the Roman Law, and the whole order of civil government. Cicero in his first
Book of his Orator, affirms that they far passed all the books of the
Philosophers both in authority and profit. And Titus Liuius in his third Book
of the first Decade, complaining of the excessive multitude of the Laws that
were in Rome in his time, vvriteth that the Fountain of all Justice both
public and private, was contained in the twelve Tables.

After the making, publishing, and receiving of those Laws, there came up
Lawiers, who understanding the laws and customs that were used particulerly
in the city, and the forms of pleading, gave counsel in every several
matter, and showed men how they should bring their actions, as well in
criminal cases, as in matters of trespass. They showed the order of
commencing their actions, of taking exceptions, of seeking delays, of giving
warnings, and taking defaults, of making inquisitions and informations, of
pronouncing sentences, of putting in and drawing back of Appeals, and of
giving definitive judgment: vvherethrough their authority grew so great,
specially at Room, that no Testament or last Will, no Stipulation or
Suretiship, no Obligation or bond, no covenant, no composition, no bargain, no
contract of Marriage, nor any other matter of importance passed without their
priuitie. And men resorted unto them, not only in cases concerning the civil
Law, but also for all their other affairs and dealings. They were of counsel
with the Emperors, with the Senators, with the assemblies of the people,
and with the cases of their freindes: They were called to counsel both in
peace and war. By reason whereof, they were called men of skill, and their
profession was called the skill of Law; because that that profession could not
be demeaned without very great skill and discretion; nor without much
seeing, hearing, reading, and understanding, nor without the knovving of
things done in old time, nor without the knowledge of the common disposition
of mankind, and the nature of right and equity, nor without marking the
manners and customs of diverse Nations, specially of their own. These
Lawyers had their chief scope and sway in Italy, and vvrote infinite Books
concerning that matter; as Seuerus, Sulpicius, Scaeuola, Papinian, Vlpian,
Modestine and others. Their very Office was to expound the true meaning of
the Pretorian proclamation, of the constitution of the Senate, of the decrees
of the people, of the ordinances of Princes, and of all other Laws: to show
the reason of every of them, to inform men which of them were to be kept, or
renewed, or abrogated, according to place, time, person, and other
circumstances, after the same manner that the Thesmothets did in Athens. The
Historiographers wrote the wars, and registered the other public doings, as
Herodotus, Thucidides, Polybius, Salust, Titus Liuius, Tacitus, and innumerable
others did in all Languages. Some Orators governed States, and were assistants
in consultaions of public affairs, whereof they wrote Orations, as did
Demosthenes and Cicero.

Other some being more given to contemplation, applied not themselves so much
to dealing with the people and with the City matters, as the former sort
did, who commonly meddled in all things: But forasmuch as they were endued with
great wit, and had attained to great skill, by mean of the great rest and
leisure which they had, they sought out the truth of all things concerning God
and man. And as touching Commonweals, they conferred them one with another,
and by so doing, endeavored to yield causes and reasons of their continuances
and decaies, and to show by what means every of them was stablished, why some
were better governed and some worse; which was the best Commonweal, who was
the perfect Common-wealeman, and who is the true Prince and Magistrate. Such
were Plato, Aristotle, Heraclides of Pont, Theophrastus, Dicaerchus, and
Plutarke.

The first professors of Philosophy, vvondering at the heavens and the
Stars, and at their reuolutions and effects; and beholding the earth, the
waters fresh and salt, the air variable, the burning fire, and all things as
well simple as compounded contained within the compass of the whole world,
in multitude innumerable, and in beauty vvonderfull: bent their wits to the
finding out of their properties, agreeings, and disagreeings, to know whereof
they were made or engendered, how long they continued, where they became,
when and how they perished, and what in them was mortal and corruptible,
and what divine and everlasting. They marked the moouings of the Stars,
their meetings, their oppositions, their distances, their appearings, their
hidings of themselves, their greatness, their swiftness, their flovvnesse,
their colors, and the marvelous accidents both general and particular which
they cause, according to the ansvvereablenesse of the parts of Heaven and Earth
one to another, the disposition of the matter which they meet vvithall, and
the diversities of the seasons wherein they reign and work. The Bramines
and Gymnosophists in India, the Magies in Persia, the D^uids in Gallond and in
great Brittaigne, and the wise men among the AEthiopians, Chaldeans, and
Egyptians followed all that manner of Philosophy. Afterward the Greeks, as
Pythagoras, Thales, Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Melissus,
Xenophanes, Eudoxus, and Anaxagoras, employed their wits about the searching
out of the secrets of the world. Nevertheless, forasmuch as they thought it
odious both to God and nature, to blaze abroad those things differently to all
men, for fear least the making of them too common, might cause them to be
despised of the rascal sort, some of them did darken them expressly, with
numbers and figures of Geometry: and other some wrapped them up in couerts of
fables, and set them down in measured verses, to the intent, to make their
works the more durable through the delightfulness of the fables and the
sweetness of the verse. Plato changet^ ^his fabling into making of Dialogues,
retaining still the using of fables also in many places. Aristotle left both
versifying and fabling, and chose rather to write in whole continued Oration,
than in dialogue wise, at leastwise for ought of his that is come unto us to
this day. But as touching natural Philosophy and Astrology, Socrates makes
very small reckoning of them, but gives himself chiefly to reasoning of
manners, of virtue, of vice, and altogether of good and evil. He was the first
of all the Greek Philosophers, that drew Philosophy from gazing upon the
Heavens and upon Nature, to apply it to the government of Housesholds and
Commonweals, as Xenophon reports, who in the first Book of his
Commentaries, writes thus of him.

Socrates (says he) spoke not of the matter or stuff of all things, ass
many Philosophers do, neither occupied he his wits in considering how the
world was created, and by what necessity the Heavenly things are made: but
showed, that such as gave themselves to such kind of gazing or contemplation,
were fools. First he demanded of them whether they thought themselves so
sufficiently skillful in humane things already, as to proceed from them to
the speculation of the other: if not, then whether they thought themselves to
do well, in leaving humane matters to gaze upon the heavens. He wondered that
they perceived it not to be impossible for them to attain to the knowledge of
those things, considering how those which seem most skillful in them, agree
not among themselves, but behave themselves like mad men one toward another.
For as of fools, some fear not the things that are to be feared, and some
are afraid where no cause is, some are not ashamed to do and say openly
whatsoever comes in their head, and other some dare not disclose themselves
in company, some yield no reverence at all neither to Temple nor to Altar, nor
to any divine thing, and other some worship both blocks and stones and brute
beasts: so among them which busy themselves about the searching out of the
nature of all things, some think there is but only one Being or Beeer, and
some think there are infinite multitudes of the^ without number. Some think
that all things are moved, and some that nothing is moved: some that all things
are created and do perish, and other some that nothing was created, nor any
thing does perish. He demanded of them yet further after this manner; namely,
whether that as they that have the knowledge of things belonging to men, can
skill to do them themselves, and to teach them unto others; so whether the
searchers of the heavenly things do think, that by their knowing by what
necessity each thing is ordained, can when they list make the vvind to blow,
and the shoures to rain, or alter the seasonablenesse of the year when need
is: or whether they had no such hope, but rested within their only bare
knowledge how every thing was made. After that manner spoke he to such as did
set their minds upon such curiosities. Unto other men he disputed ordinarily
of things pertaining to man, discussing what was godliness, and what was
ungodliness; what was honest, and what dishonest; what was right and what
vvrong; what vvisdome, and what folly; what manliness, and what
covvardlinesse; what was a Common-vveale, and who is a Commonweal man;
what it is to reign, and what manner of one he ought to be that should
command. Many other things also did he discourse, vvherof the knowledge might
(in his judgment) make me^ good and honest: esteeming them vvorthie the name
of slaves, which were ignorant of them. And in the fourth book of the same
his Commentaries, Xenophon says of him again: He deemed those men to have a
good understanding, which soon conceived of the thing which they studied,
and bare well away the things which they learned, and were desirous of
those Sciences which teach us how to live well in a house and in a
Commonweal, and generally to use all men and all things as becomes us. For
he was of opinion, that if those persons were well instructed, they would not
only be happy men in their private behauior, and in the well ordering of their
own houses, but also make the whole cities and Commonweals happy where they
dwell. Notwithstanding, Aulus Gellius witnesses, that even unto his days the
men of Athens had opinion, that Xenophon (of hatred to Plato) wrote the
aforesaid words purposely against Plato, because that in his books he brought
in Socrates, discoursing of Natural Philosophy, Geometry, and Music. But in
very deed Plato himself makes him to speak well nigh the like things in his
Phedon. When I was young (says Socrates) I had a marvelous desire to learn
the Science which is called the History of Nature: For I thought it to be a
very excellent thing to understand the causes why all things are done,
wherefore they perish, and by what means they be maintained. Oftentimes tossed
I my self up and down in considering such doings from the beginning: as for
example, to know whether that after heat and cold have received some
putrefaction, thereupon (as some have said) living creatures are engendered and
sustained. And again, whether the cause of wisdom in us be blood, or air,
or fire, or none of them all: but rather that our hearing, seeing, and smelling
do come of the brain: of the which senses spring memory and opinion, and
likewise of memory and opinion taking their rest, do spring up skill by the
same means. Again in considering the corrupting of those things, and the
inconveniences that happen in the skies and earth, I was utterly grauelled in
the end, because I was feign still to unlearn the same things, which I
thought I had learned before. Also Plutarke vvriteth of him in Solons life, that
he loved chiefly that part of moral Philosophy which treats of the
government of Commonweals, as the most part of the wise men of that time
did, who sought to have no further insight than of the things that are in
common use among men, vvherethrough they purchased the renown of wisdom, by
being well seen alonely in matters of state and government.

As for Socrates, although he was of excellent skill, vvisdome, and sharpness
of wit, and very eloquent, yet did he not write any thing. But Plato,
Xenophon, and other of his Disciples conveyed into their books the discourses
which he had made at diverse times, or rather for the reverence which they
bare unto him, they published the most part of their own inventions under his
name, to give the more authority unto them. The Greeks affirm Plato to have
been the first among them that vvrote any books of Common-vveale matters. He
imagining that we cannot know any thing ce^tainely by the bodily senses,
because they fill us with many errors and false imaginations, but only by the
understanding and reason of the mind, held opinion, that there were certain
universal forms, shapes, or patterns of all nature and artificial things,
which he termed Idaea, whereof the things themselves took their beeings,
upholding that they abode everlastingly severed from the matter or stuff,
always in the very singleness and pureness of the godhead it self, and are
conceiuable only by understanding: and that the other shapes which were
produced of them, were but shadows and Images of them, subject to continual
alteration, ever breeding, ever dying, ever increasing, ever deminishing, ever
gliding, ever falling, ever beginning, and ever ending. According to this
opinion, he did cast in his imagination a certain Idaea of a perfect
Commonwealth, and rather divine then humane: for that perceiving mankind to be
alvvaies traveled and troubled with dissension, that those whom in times
past by innumerable laws and ordinances invented to remedy and redress the
same, had nothing profited therein, but to the contrary, all things rather
seemed to impair: he esteemed that to pluck up and extirpe the hatreds and
partialities of men, there could be nothing more expedient then to set before
their eyes a community, not only of all good things, but also of things namely
which Nature it self has made and framed proper to every man, as of eyes,
ears, and hands, to the end, that whosoever should see, hear, or do any
things should employ all his actions whatsoever unto the use and common
profit of all men, thinking also that both women and children ought likewise
to be common, thereby to breed and intertaine love among the citizens: who by
that means having nothing in particular, should thereby be touched with one
like joy and grief, according to the occurrence, and effect of their affairs.
Not that in any sort he esteems it an easy thing to be done (as he himself
affirms in the beginning of his first book of the Commonwealth, as also
about the end of the ninth) but rather for the nouelty thereof, that it should
be found a thing most strange and admirable, as not being used or once allowed
of in any place whatsoever, but that the example and form of polliticke
perfection, whereupon in argument and word he had framed this Commonwealth,
peradventure being in heaven, and visible only to those that would
attentively behold the same with the eyes of good intelligence, to the end,
that having seen and beheld it, they should by imitation assay all means to
conform themselves unto it. Representing therefore this form of a
Commonwealth, framed and devised according to the patron by him conceived
within his high and divine spirit, he was much more pleased and satisfied
therewith then in all his other works, as it well appears by the beginning of
Timee, wherein having collected the principal points of all his politic
discourse, he shows his great and singular affection unto the work, withal
wishing to find some excellent Ora^^r or learned Poet, to give it the true
praise and commendation which it worthily deserves. For that therein there is
such gravity of sentences, eloquence of words, and variety of exquisite
proposition, that it is impossible to find a thing more artificially wrought.
Now having purposed to represent unto us the image of a most perfect, true, and
just Commonwealth, he has entitled his work by the name of Policy or
Justice, principally enforcing himself to show that it is Justice, because he
esteemed it to be the true and only rule of Politic institution, whereunto
all humane actions ought wholly to be referred. The Heavens by their continual
moving, running and compassing about this earthly mould, stirs up and
quickens the seeds of all things whatsoever that are enclosed and cast into
the superficial part thereof, which being and remaining within the earth, are
nourished by the water, brought forth and sprung up by the force of air and
fire, and then to make them ripe, are quickened by the natural influences of
the celestial plannets, specially the sun and moon: who by their admirable
and strange virtues do still disperse and cast forth in every place a
perpetual and continual desire of natural production, thereby at all times
and seasons to fill and to replenish the world with new creatures, plants,
herbs, trees, stones, and metals, and to continue them in their kinds for
the use of man, for who^ only all things on earth are made and created. Who
notwithstanding their reasonable and polliticke production, cannot receive or
reap any fruit thereof without Justice, Law, and Magistrates, who by good
reason are rightly termed the Ministers of God, ordained and appointed for the
government and conservation of mankind, in due and reasonable proportion to
distribute and divide among them those goods and things which daily by the
most divine providence of God are given and sent unto them: seeing then that
Justice is of such force and efficary, there can be no better nor more
necessary work done nor procured unto man, then by all means to move and
stir him up unto the same, without the which, they neither can nor may live
either solitary or in company whatsoever. Therefore does Plato deserve great
praise among all such as have either stablished Commonweals or written of
the form of Government; specially, for that he groundeth not the principles
of his Commonweal upon richesse, power of men, or conquests, as most men do;
but upon Justice, the which he prefers before all things: in
consideration, that in whatsoever countries and States of Government it is
duly known, and sincerely observed, with true Religion and the pure serving
of God, it makes all troubles, suits in Law, and dissentions to cease, and
procures great happiness to the persons that follow it. Socrates disputing
with Thrasymachus, Glaucus, and Adimant, does in his first Book and in a
part of his second, examine certain definitions of Justice, and compare it
with injustice by laying them together, to the intent, that being the better
known, the one may be the more reuenced, and the other the more misliked and
hated. The which manner of teaching by contra^^^s, is observed in many
Sciences, and is of vvonderfull force. As for example, Physic speaks not
only of health, but also of Sickness: and Music speaks not only of
Concords, but also of Discords: to the intent, to do the contraries the
better: namely, to maintain health, and to keep good tune. Likewise, Morrall
Philosopie gives us knowledge, not only of the things that are delightful
and profitable in very deed, but also of the things that are dishonest,
unpleasant, and hurtful. For the good cannot be perfectly perceived, no^
vvorthilie esteemed, but by conferring it with the evil: neither can the
evil be well eschewed and subdued, without the help of the known good.

Therefore Socrates treating of the Justice that is to be in a Commonvveale,
and in man, seeks it first in the Commonweal where it is most apparent, as
in the greater thing, and afterward in man, where it is less apparent, as in
the lesser thing. And upon that occasion, he declares the Original of
Commonweals, Kinreds. Degrees, States, Trades, and exercises of people, in
what sort they may mainetaine Justice amoug them, and wherein consists the
commodity of a Commonweal, by comparing a well ordered Commonweal with a
corrupt one. And because the government of all Commonweals depends upon the
bringing up of the commoners: throughout his whole third Book, and in a good
part of his fourth, he traineth them up from their very infancy, according to
their natural inclinations and dispositions: but specially the keepers, that is
to say, the Magistrates and men of war, whom above all men he will have to be
well instructed in true religion, without corruption of poetical fables.
Then returns he again to his discourse of Justice, affirming it to be the
union of the four principal virtues, wisdom, stoutnes, temperance, and
particular Justice.

And that the Commonweal is just or rightful, where every virtue does his
proper duty, as well toward the commanders as toward the obeyers, of what
sort or quality soever they be: and likewise that the man is just where the
like consent of the foresaid virtues is found, because there is the selfsame
behavior required in every several person, which is to be required in a whole
Commonweal. That in the soul of man there are three parts, Reason, Wrath,
and Lust: that Wisdom serves to guide Reason, Stoutnesse to restrain Wrath,
and Temperance to bridle Lust. That in a Commonweal the Governors do
represent the image of Reason and Wisdom: the defenders resemble Wrath and
Stoutnes, and the handicrafts and merchants are like to Lust and Temperance.
And therefore the Commonweal or the Man is then just, when in the Commonweal
the virtues, and in the Man the parts of the Soul, do their duties duly
without incroching one upon another: and that the Commonweal and the Man are
unjust where the contrary befalls, forasmuch as injustice is nothing else
but the transgressing of the said duties and offices: like as the sickness of
the body is the disorder and disagreement of the four humors, and the health
of the body is their good agreement in due proportion together.

In the fifth book he treats of the community of goods, wives, and
children. Having set his Commonweal in that order, in his sixth book he
describes the office of the Princes which are to rule it. The which he
continues on withal in the seventh book, rehearsing particularly what
sciences they ought to learn, and in what order. And forasmuch as he
considered that there be many sorts of Commonweals differing from his, he
compares them with it, in the eight and ninth books, declaring very
cunningly the changes of the one sort unto the other, and therewithal also
their vices and discommodities. Finally, because most men are so bent to their
own profit, that they forget all duty and conscience, to the intent to induce
^ll men to do well, in his tenth and last book he declares that rewards are
appointed for the righteous, and punishments for the unrighteous, not only in
this present life, but also in the life to come. At the first he did put forth
no more but the first two books, against the whichh Xenophon (beating him a
little grudge) did set himself, and vvrote the Institution or bringing up of
Cyrus, wherein he expressed the image of a rightful kingdom and a martial
King, of purpose to set forth the kingly government, differing from that which
Plato did set down in his Commonweal. Whereat Plato was so sore offended,
that afterward taking occasion in his third book to treat of the kingdom of
the Persians, and coming of purpose to Cyrus, to the intent to pick a
quarrel to Xenophons work, he acknowledged Cyrus to be a hardy and valiant
Prince, howbeit that he never had any honorable bringing up. After that Plato
had finished his Commonweal, he made also twelve books of Laws, wherein he
speaks himself under the name of his host of Athens. And in pretending to
give laws to the Greeks, he examineth three Commonweals, which flourished
at that time in Greece: namely, the Candian, the Lacedemonian, and the
Athenian; abating, adding, and altering many points in them, to make one better
of them all. Moreover, to the same purpose, he vvrote two other Treatises, the
one entitled Minos, wherein he defines and deuideth Law; and the other
Government, as wherein consists the skill of governing, and how the same
ought to be used. Cicero affirming himself to be a follovver of Plato, and
glorying of himself for his matching of eloquence with Philosophy, made six
books of Common-vveale in dialogue wise in the Roman tongue, applied chiefly
to the Roman State, which books are lost by the injury of time: and as many
of Laws, conformable to the twelve Tables, of which there remain but only
three, and those imperfect and corrupted.

Now then, whereas the first Sages gave themselves wholy to the beholding
of the heavens, and of nature; and Socrates and Plato bent themselves chiefly
to Moral Philosophy, Aristotle succeeding them, comprised all the parts of
Philosophy most happily. I vvil not at this present meddle with any other of
his vvritings, but reserve my treating of them to some more convenient time. I
vvil speak but only of those which serve my present turn. First of all he
gathers the institutions of two hundred and fifty Common-vveales, as well
Strangers as Greeks. Then vvriteth he to Alexander the great, concerning
Reigning: Afterward he made eight books of government full of great Learning
and Wisdom, in the which he has brought all the skill of governing into
form of Art. In his first Book he shows from whence Civil society
proceeds, wherein it consists, and to what end it is to be referred;
beginning at the first and singlest parts thereof. Next he treats of the
means whereby to get goods, which serve to mainetaine both households and
Common-vveales, and fetches the true causes of gouernements from Nature. In
the second place, before he enter into the principal matter, he examineth the
most Renowned Common-vveales of his time, and bevvraieth the wants of them
all. Then coming to the third point, which is the right beginning of his
Government, he shows what a City is, who is a Citizen, and what a
Common-vveale is, how many sorts of Commonvveales there are, how every of
them is stablished, and how men be disposed to be governed by some one sort
rather than by another, which things he goes through vvithall in his fourth
book. In the fifth book are set down the alterations, decaies, and
preseruations of States. In the sixth he speaks interchangeably of the
Government by a fevv, and of Government by the multitude; of either of their
vnderkinds, resemblances, proprieties, and communicatings: of the Magistrates
needful for either state, and of their charges. In the seventh, which
absolutely is the perfect Commonweal, and wherein consists the happiness of
cities: he treats of the situation, commodity, and ornament of a City: of
the condition of the territory about it: of the number and quantities of the
inhabitants, of marriage, and of procreation and bringing up of children: the
training of whom he touches in the eight and last book which is imperfect,
where he discourses particularly in what exercises and what trades they ought
to be entered at the first.

Now that I have briefly rehearsed the principal matters set down in the
Commonweals of Plato and Aristotle, I am to tell you wherefore I determined
to join them together, and to show you the importance and profit of that
joining. Certain it is that there was never any man fully and wholly perfect
in this world, how great grace soever God bestowed upon him, but that with
notable virtues, always some notable vices have been matched. Therefore no
marvel though Plato and Aristotle being excellent personages, and such as had
gained the prize of knowledge among men, have now and then erred, specially in
this matter of Government. Out of doubt Plato had done the better if he had
contented himself with the order, elegancie, and gravity which he kept in
the description of his Common-vveale, and not meddled with the community of
goods, wives, and children, nor taken upon him to appoint men and women their
several charges and offices. For doing whereof he is blamed, not only by
them of his own time, but also by all those that have come after him, of what
religion soever they have held, who with one consent have rejected that
fashion as too too strange and impossible. Likewise Aristotle had avoided
many rebukes if he had shevved himself more careful of religion, whereof he
seems to have small regard, and not served men's turns more to profit and
ease than to godliness, whereof Plato has great care in all his books. For
every well ordered State or Commonvveale has such need of religion to be
matched with civil government, that they seem too inseperable. Religion
printeth and sets the fear of God and the love of their neighbors in men's
hearts, ruling the exposition of the holy Scriptures, and the offices of the
persons that are appointed to the service of God. And civil government
directs the affairs of peace and war, wherein there would be neither
uprightness nor faithfulness, without the fear of God and the love of man,
which are chiefly enjoined in all religions. And therefore it shall be very
requisite to read both Plato and Aristotle, that we may learn of the one the
things that pertain to God and godliness (I mean next unto the holy
Scriptures:) and of the other the things that belong to the governing of men
and men's affairs.

If it be objected, that many excellent personages have been forward in times
past, and are to be found still at this present, who being destitute of
schoole^learning, have by the only natural drift of experience, fitly ordered
public affairs, and happily governed their dominions. I answer, that if this
natural good gift and experience of theirs had been matched with learning,
they had b^^n more cleer-sighted and better assured of their doings. Soothly in
all Arts three things are necessary to the purchasing of perfection: namely,
Nature, Learning, and Experience. Nature is an inclination and forwardnes;
Learning quickneth up nature, and being aided with order and method, guides
it by general precepts and universal grounds; and Experience assisted with
imitation, confirms both the other by the continual holding on of many
particular actions. Any one of them alone has very small force: Nature of it
self is insufficient, Learning without nature is fondness, and without
Experience unprofitable: like water that stands sodding in a marrish, or like
herbs and fruits that are always ouershadowed. But when all three of them
do meet together, then bring they forth the excellency which we so greatly
commend and wonder at in all things. In Leachcraft although the bare
practitioner do by his experience sometimes hit well upon the healing of some
disease, yet is it evident, that having Art and cunning matched with his
experience, so as he discern the nature and cause of the disease, marking the
complexion, age, and manner of living of his patient, and thereunto considering
the quality and quantity of his medicines, and applying them in due time, he
shall the better perform the duty of his science, and commonly the rather
attain to the end thereof. Also in like case, the pilot that can skill of the
Art of sailing, and knows the diversities of the seasons of the year, the
nature of the Sea and of the winds, the alterations of the air, and the
moouings of the heavens, shall ordinarily perform his voyage better and more
sa^ely than he that goes to it but by rote, and can no further skill than of
the mariners Card, floting which way soever the tide and fortune drives him.
Also that the General of a field shall the more wisely govern an army, give or
receive battle, besiege fortresses, and such other things, which matcheth the
skill of martial learning with the experience of war. So likewise
whosoever takes upon him to found a new State, to restore a decayed, to
preserve a long continued, to reform a corrupted, or to govern a stablished,
if he be a politic fellow by nature, and moreover well instructed and
experienced in the case, so as he have judgment to consider advisedly the
natures of every of them, and to discern their beginnings, increasings,
strengths, decaies, changes, and instants of ending one in another, he shall
fare much the better by being so schooled and prepared aforehand. Nay (which
more is) I say that otherwise he shall see nothing at all in that behalf for
the most part of his time, but shall go groping like a blind man, and commit
many worse errors than the ignorant physician and pilot, because the case
which he undertakes is of far greater importance and concerns more folk,
as namely the tranquillity, welfare, and honor of a whole country or Nation,
or of a State sore attainted with the diseases of excess and covetousness, or
laid open to the great torments and perrillous storms of wars both at home
and abroad, or tired with infinite fluds and waves of troubles beating upon it
incessantly: by means whereof it has need of great vvisdome and continual
watchfulnes to provide for the safety thereof.

I think I have now performed almost that I promised, for ye have here the
excellency and profitablenesse of Civil government, and therewithal ye have been certefied what men of old time have set up states of government or written
of them, and ye have seen the Commonweals of Plato and Aristotle compared
together: By which means I think ye be become very well affectioned toward
this noble science, so as I shall not need to exho^t you any further thereunto.
For if ye have respect to honor, what science is there that behighteth
greater honor than civil government does, which calls you to the ruling of
cities, lordships, and kingdoms, wherein the sovereign authority among men
consists? If ye be desirous of profit and riches, it is the way to get
great goods, and to increase the wealth of good houses. If ye covet to be
mighty, how may a man be more advanced or come to greater credit and
authority, than by the managing of Public affairs? If ye like of knowledge
and skill, what other faculty shall ye find that has more excellent grounds,
or which aims at a more commendable end? If ye desire pleasure and
contentment of mind, what can be more pleasant to a man that is well borne,
or what can more become him, then to know the manners, laws, customs,
ordinances, alliances, confederations, forces, revenues, and antiquities of his
own country? If ye would purchase endless praise by well doing, and continue
your name euerlastlingly to posterity, where shall ye meet with fitter and
goodlier matter to work it on, than to give laws to Nations; considering
the glory that Minos, Licurgus, and other Lavv-makers have obtained, who were
canonized for gods after their deaths, and honored with Temples, Prayers, and
yearly feasts? Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic, serve but only to speak
well and to reason well. Poetry serves but for pleasure, the searching of
Antiquities, the knowledge of Languages, and the conferring and correcting of
copies, are more curious than profitable, and carry a man but a little beyond
the training of youth and the custom of schools. The vvriters of histories
are often reproved of untruth, and agree not together. Eloquence has evermore
ben suspected: insomuch, that eue^ in Athens where it flourished most, they
were forbidden to move affections, and to use Proems and Perorations. The
contemplation of the Mathematical sciences, and the considering of the natural
mouings, are for themselves, and not for others. The judgments of Astrology be
uncertain. In the judgment of Plutarke, the metaphisicks do small good. Physic
serves the turn of the rich rather then of the poor, who be not able to buy
the strange droogs, or to pay the Apothecary. The civil law has an eye but to
particular cases, and if it be not well handled, it does more harm then good,
feeding men with formalities and long processes. But as for Government, it is
the principal rule of all Liberal sciences and handicraftes, the orderer of
all worldly exercises, the mother of discipline, the mistres of manners;
behoouefull for schools, behoouefull for occupations; beneficial to the
field, beneficial to the town; needful on sea, needful on land; profitable
for war and profitable for peace. There is not that house, that floting
ship, that City, that Nation, or that people be it never so rude and
barbarous, which consists not of commanders and obeyers, and consequently
retains not some form of government. It is to be found even in the whole
world, and in every particular person, so as the superior commmaundeth the
inferior, and the soul the body. It traineth up children after a free manner
in good manners and sciences, it quickens the courages of young men with hope
of offices and promotions in time to come, it assuageth the griefs even of the
most aged, with the authority and reputation of their counsel and
experience: it relieueth the poor, maintains the rich, pleases the good,
contenteth the wise, guides Magistrates, directs Kings and Emperors,
rules States, linketh the inferiors and superiors together with vprightnes,
adorneth prosperity, comfort adversity, promising everlasting praise to
true Governors in recompense of their extreme pains, and of the griefs and
displeasures which they receive by underminers of their state and envious
persons. It maintains justice, defends right, observes laws, appeaseth
suits and quarrels, brings in gentleness, drives away rudenes, vpholdeth good
will, puts away ill will, quickneth up diligence, blames idleness,
banisheth superfluity, riddeth away covetousness, honors virtue, punishes
vice, is mild in deeds, grave in words, easy to hearken, discrete in giving
answer, wary in execution, stout in public dealings, constant in perils,
unflexible to favor, unflexible to partiality, incorruptible by money,
invincible against force and fear, the holder of humane fellowship in mutual
concord, amiable conversation, and quiet safety: the ground of public peace,
the vvelspring of equity, and the very life, order, counsel, and quickener
of Commonweals: in respect whereof it ought to be learned, practiced, and
honored in all places, and of all persons. Receive therefore, receive this
noble Science, which is offered unto you at this day: study, wake, and take
pains to compass it, to know it, and to understand it, that by applying it to
the right use, ye may become profitable to your country, helpefull to your
friends, and serviceable to your rulers, whose good and loiall subjects you be.

THE ARGUMENT OR CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK OF GOVERNMENT.
THe direct manner of proceeding in all Sciences, is to begin at their firct
principles and grounds, and to proce^d on from the most single to the composed,
because we may then be well said to know a thing, when we know the first causes
and the first principles thereof, even to the very bottom and ground thereof,
as is written in the beginning of his Natural Philosophy. Forasmuch therefore
as the duty of him that deals with matters of State, is to treat of civil
Society and to seek out the causes thereof, from Nature; Aristotle purposing
to write thereof, shows first of all from whence this society proceeds,
wherein it consists, and to what end it is ordained: beginning at the first
and simplest parts thereof, that is to wit, the company of man and wife,
master and servant, father and children: of which companies a household is
compacted. Afterward by increasing many households into a street or hamlet, and
many streets into a City, Corporation, or Commonweal: he shows the same to
have a natural constitution, and to be the most perfect company, and the end
thereof to be of the best sort, as which comprehends all the other ends, and
whereunto they be all referred. Then forasmuch as no company can maintain
themselves without goods, he treats of the manner of getting them, serving to
the maintenance as well of household as of Commonweal, of which manners of
getting he sets down diverse sorts both natural and artificial: among the
which he utterly discommendeth interest and usury. Moreover, because no
company can continue unless it be held together by some government, he
fetches the first causes of Governments from out of nature, beginning at the
Governments of household, and affirming that the husbands commanding of the
wife, is Citie-like or Commonweale-like: the fathers commanding of his
children, is Kinglike or Princelike: and the masters commanding of his
servants and slaves is tyrant-like: disputing there at large whether there be
any slavery or bondage by nature or no. Insomuch that from these first three
Governments of Household, he deriueth all sorts of public government, as well
voluntary as violent, resembling their first original to man, who is composed
of body, soul, and mind: the soul having masterlike authority over the
body, and the mind having Commonweale-like and Kinglike sovereignty over the
soul. And therefore he affirms that the ordinance of Governments, and of
obedience unto magistrates, is no less natural than is the beginning and
maintaining of civil society. Howbeit as the Philosophers of old time spoke
of matters more stately and cunningly than the common people, so did they use
many words and phrases far differing from the common use of speech. But yet
of all others Aristotle labored to show himself most obscure, using short
speeches, and most commonly doubtful, which makes him very hard to be
understood, and more hard to be translated. Nevertheless, for the great profit
that is to be received by the reading of him, he has been translated into
Latin, Arabicke, Hebrew, and many other Tongues: a sure token that for
knowledge and cunning, he holds the chief room in common reputation, and by
universal consent of all men. The which thing has moved me likewise to
translate this work of his into French, which I take to be very profitable and
agreeable to the manner of our country. And if this my translation be not
found to be so smooth and elegant as many other men's are, let them which shall
look upon it, vouchsafe to consider, that in Aristotle not eloquence but
substance is to be looked for: and that it is not possible to deliver him other
than he is in his own original Greek: and yet that it were very much to
have delivered him as he is there, and to have set down his meaning
faithfully, keeping the propriety of both the Languages. Notwithstanding to
the intent he might be the better understood and the easier to be dealt with, I
have added expositions taken out of the best Authors, and interlaced them
throughout where need was, with examples of things done within man's
remembrance, specially such as were nearest to our present age, and to mine
own country, in hope to make this work of Civil Government the more perfect
by comparing things of old time with the things of late time in every sort of
Government.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE GOVERNMENT OF A COMMONWEAL.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of a City or Commonwealth, and the parts thereof.
FOrasmuch as we see that every City or Commonweal

In this entrance is showed the excellency and original of a Commonweal, of
what parts it consists, and to what end it is naturally ordained.

FORASMVCH as we see that every Commonweal is a company.] Aristotle proves
the

company is ordained for some good.] A company, society, or fellowship, is

most chief^y and specially that the principal and most excellent company of
all companies does tend to the principal and chief good of all others.]
Forasmuch (says Aristotle in the eight Chapter of the third book of his
matters of State) as the end of all Arts and Sciences, is some good; and the
greatest and principallest good is in the science of Government, as in the
chiefest of all sciences. And again, forasmuch as in all Arts and Sciences
the end that they aim at is some good or other, and the greatest and chiefest
good is aimed at by the chiefest of all Sciences, that is to say, the welfare
of the public state. The nature of things is known chiefly by the end
whereto they be ordained. Nichomachus. For the more common that a good thing
is, the more excellent also is it; like as it is more honorable and worthy of
love to provide for whole Nations and Commonweals, than for peculiar persons.

the City or civil society.] That is to say, a multitude of people of unlike
sorts, (for so does he himself say in the first chapter of his matters of
State, and in the

THEY therefore think not aright, which think that the governor of a City
or Commonweal, and a King, a householder, and a lord or master over servants
are all one thing, esteeming them to differ one from another but only in
respect of more or fewer in number (but not in kind and scope of government) so
as if a man have the commanding of few folk, he shall be but a Master; if of
more, an Householder; and if yet of a greater number, the Governor of a City or
Commonweal, or a King: as though a great house differed nothing at all from a
little City

ARISTOTLE having showed the Civil company (which is called a City or
Commonweal) to be better than all other particular societies of peculiar
houses, hamlets, borowes, and other inferior companies: all which, the civil
society or company of a City or Commonweal comprehends, being perfecter
than all the rest, for that it is more common and referred to a better end. He
finds fault with such as confound the Aristot. 3. Polit. ca. 12.
who resembles the householder Plato in his Co^monweale. lib. 1. and Arist.
Polit. 3. cap. 5.
as the father does of his children: Arist. Pol. 1. cap. vlt. and Lib. 3. cap.
4.
and also so far forth as concerns the commanding of his wife, he
resembles the governor of the City or Commonweal, in which there is a
certain interchangeable course of obeying and of comma^nding by turns. Arist
lib. 1. cap. vlt.
The lordly or masterly commmanding pricketh very near unto tyranny, unless
the master and the servant be naturally disposed to the same: that is to say,
vnless^ the one be borne to command and the other to obey, so as the one can
not be without the other. Arist. lib. 1. cap. 3.


THE thing that I speak of will manifestly appear, if we consider the method
going before:

HERE the Philosopher shows the method or manner of handling which he
intends to use in treating of this matter of Government: that is to wit, his
own ordinary, which is to begin his books at the first grounds and principles
of the things which he undertakes to speak of: as for example, intending in
natural Philosophy to speak of Nature, he begins at substance and shape:
and in his book of Wights, he speaks

we know a Common weal by considering the parts whereof it is composed.]
Like as a Wight may be divided into head, breast, arms, feet, legs, heart,
liver, lights, and kidneys; and these again into other parts till a man come
even to the first grounds which are the smallest and simplest parts of all:
Likewise a City is divided into streets, streets into houses, houses into
sorts of companies, and so forth to several persons,

THEN if a man consider from the beginning how things are produced by nature,
the order of proceeding in this behalf will be very good, as it is in all
other cases. First it is requisite to join these parts together, which can
not be one without the other, as the man and the woman for procrcation: and
that not by way of choice, but in such sort as that there is a certain
natural desire in all other living wights, and even in the very plants, to
leave a like of their own kind

HITHERTO has continued the Preface of the book, whereby we have understood
the excellency of a Commonweal, and the order which the Philosopher
intends to keep in treating of Government. Now to declare the better what a
Commonweal is, he enters into the matter, and showing that men are carried by
a certain natural instinct to gather themselves together into one place and
into one company, for the mutual succouring one of another in their
necessities: he treats first of the principal parts of a Commonweal: that
is to wit, of a house, and of a street, lane, or hamlet; declaring that those
have a being by nature, and therefore that in all reason, a City or

requisite to join those parts together which can not be one without
another.] The first assembly necessary for the constitution of a house or
family, is the company of the man and woman, for the continual and perpetual
continuance of mankind by the mean of generation: for else there could be no mo
families nor cities for want of men and women.

that not by way of choice.] Not through reason and counsel which join not
man and wife together, but natural desire. Plato in his Banquet says thus:
See ye not

BUT in such sort as there is a natural desire in all other living Wightes,
and even in ] Plato in the fourth book of his laws faith thus much: Every man
ought to take a wife from the thirtieth till the five and thirtieth year of
his age, in consideration that through a certain nature, mankind in some sort
obtains immortality (a thing that all men by nature are greatly desirous of)
insomuch that there is no man living but desires the continuance of his name
for ever to the posterity which comes after him. Thus mankind being in this
provided through marvelous skill, in substituting continually one new wight in
steed

NEXT of all it is expedient to join together, one that commands by nature,
and another that obayeth, for their mutual preservation. For he that is able
by reason and the forecasting of his mind to foresee and provide aptly in
affairs, commands by nature, and bears the maistership by nature: and
whosoever i^ able by the strength of his body to put those commandments in
execution, is a subject and ser^ant by nature. Therefore one and the selfsame
thing, is behoofefull for the master and servant.

THE second assembly necessary for the constitution of a house or family
proceeding from nature, as the former; is that of the master and servant
naturally affected one to another: which the Philosopher terms, Lordly or
maisterly. For even as natural desire is that that ioineth the man and the
woman together, so does that unite the master by nature, and the servant by
nature, for their enterchangeable succor and aid, and to provide for their
mutual preservation; the one by commanding, that has most understanding: the
other by obeying, who is most mighty and stronger of body. Hereafter in the
fourth Chapter of this first book, he will show by many and most certain
reasons,

THEREFORE the wi^e and servant differ by nature: for nature works not like
to cutlers,

HAVING set down the two first ass^mblies of man and wife, and of the master
and servant, necessary by nature for the est^blishment of a house, he shows
what difference is naturally b^tweene the wife and servant: The wife is for the
most part tender and weak, and the servant strong and sturdy.

knife of Delphos fit for many purposes.] It was a kind of knife fit for many
uses, as to cut, file, and cleave, like those that in these days are made with
edge, point, and file, Apollo, who was had in great reverence. Strabo in the
nineteenth book of his Geographie or description of the earth writes, that
this place called Delphos was almost in the midst of all Greece, tearming it,
The navel of the earth: and that by reason of the commodious situation
thereof, they gladly resorted thither from all parts of the

BUT appoint^th every thing to a proper office and exercise for the same.]
Plato in the second

NOTVVITHSTANDING the barbarous people.] Plato in Menexenus writes, that in

HAVE the wife and servant in equal estimation.] The Barbarians not rightly
observing

THE occasion whereof is, because they have no man amongst them commanding by
nature.]

THEREFORE the Poets affirm, that the Grecians ought to have dominion over the
Barbarians.] whereof she continues in her liberty and is well governed: and
that she might rule Menexenus and Isocrates in his P^negyricall oration,
greatly commends this Nation, which then flourished in learning and feats of
arms, and in all Liberal sciences and handy occupations: but after, their
chance turned clean contrary, in as much as they were brought in subjection,
first by the Macedonians, next by the Romans a long time, so far, that they
changed their name after the translating of the Empire to Constantinople, and
in stead of Grecians were called Romans, and the country of Greece was named
ROMANIA, and at this day they remain under the dominion of the Northern
Turks of Asia, who are a very barbarous kind of people. Plutarch in his book
of the Defection

the Barbarian the self same by nature that a bondsman is.] As though the
Barbarian were not borne with reason and understanding, but only strong and
sturdie like him which naturally is a slave.

OF these two assemblies, a house or family is first compacted: and rightly
said Hesiodus the Poet, how it was expedient before any other kind of work,
to have a house, a wife, and an Ox to till the ground: for an Ox serves
poor folk in stead of a servant. So then the assembly

OF the societies of man and wife, of the master and servant, a household or
family is naturally compact, to communicate in necessities daily happening: as
to eat, drink, warm, rest, and sleep: (...) in Greek, and Domus in Latin,
and also the French word Maison, signify not only the walls and covering of
a building, but also must be taken Cic. de Senectute. Tantam domum Appius
regebat and senex and caecus. Virg. 4. AEneid. Miserere domus labentis.

BUT the first assembly consisting of many houses, not for things daily
necessary, is called a Street or company of neighbors dwelling together in
one precinct or place, which also according

AS the house is by nature made of the two assemblies afore-declared, so is the
Borough, Street, Village, or Parish, according to natural order framed of
many houses or families, which by reason they are so greatly increased in
number, can not any longer communicate together in their daily necessities of
taking their food and rest together, which must be done every day: but being
separated by reason of their multitude, must follow merchandise, contract, go
to law, and confer together of the Commonwealth, which be no matters that are
done every day, but at certain times prefixed or convenient, as we see faires
and markets, Terms for pleading, and assizes.

also according to nature seems to proceed from the house, and such persons
as ] Cicero in the first Book of his Offices, writes after this sort: As the
desire of procreation is by nature common to all living wightes^ the first
society is in marriage, the next in children, then a house where all is
common, which is the beginning of a town, and as it were, the seed of the
commonwealth: the linkings together of brethren follow, then cosen germans
and such as are further off in kindred: who when they can dwell no longer
together in one house, sever themselves

THEREFORE at the first, Cities were governed by Kings, and so still at this
day are

As the house or family is ordinarily governed by the most ancient of the race,
which it reuerenceth as a King, even so is the Borough or Village, and
consequently the City, by reason they took their beginning from men
accustomed to such

THEREFORE at first, Cities were governed by Kings.] Cicero in his third book
Vexores king of Egypt, and Tanais king of Scithia were ancients: the one of
them conquered Minus established the large and ample dominions that he had
gotten, for a continual possession; in such sort, that having tamed and
overcome his neighbors: waxing the stronger thereby to assail others, and
making every victory an instrument to get another after, he subdued all the
people of the East to his rule and dominion.

so still at this day are such Nations.] In a manner all the ancient, most
famous

every family is governed by him that is most aged in years, as if it were
by a King, and also the towns which proceed therefrom.] Even as a house or
family is ordinarily governed De Legibus.

all supposed that the gods had a King.] Isocrates in his Oration to Nicocles
or Symmachus says: If we search antiquity, we shall find that it is held,
that the gods are governed by Jupiter: The which opinion if it be true, we
must be persuaded that the gods themselves preferred this estate of government
before all others: But if it be a matter altogether uncertain and doubtful,
depending only upon opinion grounded upon hearesay, yet it is a great argument
for the pre-eminence of a Monarchy, seeing that

FOR as they imagined the shapes of their gods to be like unto theirs.]
Aristotle in the De Legib: declares the similitude which man has with God:
and in his first book De nature. Deor. he says thus: You have no want of
reasons to demonstrate that the forms of the gods are like to men, because we
are so fore-enformed and forestalled in our minds, that as soon as we think
of God, presently the shape and figure of a man comes into our minds.
Moreover, because that the divine nature Thaeetet. says thus: Wisdom,
justice, and holiness, conform us like unto God. And a little after: God is
at no time nor in no respect unjust, Lib. 2. cap. 11. entreats of the
Creation of man, and how he was made after the image of God. So Mercurius
Tresmegistus also, who not only says so,

CHAP. II. What is a City: and that it consists by nature: and that man is
naturally a sociable and civil creature.
A City is a perfect and absolute assembly or communion of many

A CITY is an assembly of many towns sufficiently furnished of all things
requisite,

De Legib. complains of many Commonwealths that were not Cities, but
certain habitations in villages where the weaker yielded service to the
stronger, and the whole government was denominated of the part that ouer-ruled.
Aristotle Lib. 3. Polit. restrains the name of a Citizen to those only that
partake public honors and offices, as those which have right to enter into
the Council and to give judgment, excluding all Mechanical

nature is to this.] Nature sometimes signifies the principles and beginnings
of natural substances, as in Natural Philosophy: sometimes also the
perfection and consummation of them. Arist. de generat. Animal. Lib. 2. cap. 1.

such as is each thing, the generation thereof being perfected, such say we the
nature thereof to be.] He declares that which he propounded before, to wit,
that nature is the end, because the nature of every thing is principally
perceived in the end, and the end is to come unto a generality and perfection.
Also the generation of things is not perfect, before they be come to that pass
that they grow no more: so that the form is the

that for which cause other things are done, and which is the end, is good.]
The End and Good are but one and the selfsame thing. Arist. Polit. Lib. 3.
Cap. 8. In all Arts and Sciences their Good is their end, and in the greatest
and principallest of Ethic. Lib. 1. Cap. 182. says, that the end Political
compriseth in it all other ends, and is the chief and sovereign good of man.

SELF- sufficiency is the end.] To have all things, and to want or desire
nothing, is Polit. Lib. 7. Cap. 5. This autarchie or selfe-sufficiencie, is the
end and the good contained in the form of a City, and consequently is the end
of all other societies.

OVT of all which it appears that a City is by nature.] A City is yet
further by nature,

MAN therefore is more sociable then any Be, or other creature whatsoever that
desires society: which is manifest by this, that Nature who has bestowed the
power of Speech upon man, makes nothing in vain. Voice which is the signifier
of joy and sadness, is bestowed for

NATVRALLY all living creatures Terrestrial, Aquaticall, Aeriall, or winged,
both domestical and sauadge, tame and wild, desire to live together in
companies and assemblies of their own kind. Thus we see flocks of sheep,
herds of cattle, Hearts and Dear to feed by troops; Horses, Asses, and
Mules by droues: Crows, Stares, and Cranes by flights: Fishes both of salt and
fresh water by skulles: Bees to dwell in hiues, Pigeons in douehouses, Pismiers
in hollow places: But men adorned more singularly companies like great walking
Cities, under the guiding and conduction of diverse

THE voice which is the signifier of sadness and joy, was bestowed for this
cause upon other ] There is a diffe^ence between the Voice and Speech: For the
beast^ have a voice wherewith they can express their sadness and joy one to
another, and proceed no furthe^^ ^^t man

HOWBEIT the City is before the house and every one of us: for of necessity
the (...) is

A CITY not only consists by nature, as has been declared, but also by
nature the eight book of Natural Philosophy, and in the first book of
Supernatural Philosophy.

is either a beast or a God.] (...). Aristotle in his Ethickes, Lib. 7. cap. 1.
mentions, (...): that is, a certain Heroical and divine virtue, surpassing
the ordinary virtue of men in excellency and perfection of goodness: to the
which he opposes (...), that is, brutishnes or sauagenes, a vice that
exceeds the common malice and naughtines of men.

WHEREFORE all men desire such society, and he which first invented and
instituted it,

A CITY being proved to be a thing natural by the fore-alledged reasons, all
men are naturally enflamed to desire it: and he which first ordained it,
deserves high commendation, as the author of great good: the which praise is
ascribed by Virgill AEnead. lib. 8. to Saturn: by Horace in his Art of Poetry
to Orpheus and Amphion: and in lib. 1. de Oratore to Eloquence and eloquent
men: who also in his 6. book de Repub. or Dream of Scipio, says thus: To the
end you may be more affectioned to defend the Commonweal, know, that there
is a certain place in heaven designed to those which shall preserve, relieve,
or amplify their country, where they shall enjoy everlasting happiness: For
there is nothing here below more agreeable unto the great God that governs
the world, than the societies and assemblies of men covnited together by
lawful equity, which men call, Cities: The governors and preseruers of them,
as they first descended from heaven, so shall they return thither again. And
in his Oration for P. Se^tius: Who knows not (says he) that the lib. 3. and
6. de Leg. rehearses the beginning and proceeding of policy. Arist. Pol. Lib.
7. Cap. 10. is of opinion, that matters belonging to policy have been long time
since devised, and after lost again many times, as they shall be hereafter in
like sor^, as it has happened in all Arts.

FOR even as man in perfection is the best of all living creatures.] A man well
shaped, together, in such sort, that no substance disdaineth to minister aid
and succor unto

being void of law and justice, is the worst.] As a man absolutely just, is the
best of all; so the unjust m^n is most wicked and pernicious, what good soever
he otherwise has. Plato de Legib. Lib. 2. says thus: To enjoy health, to
see, hear, and perceive sensibly all things, and to live long, even to the
attaining of immortality, is a thing utterly evil, if a man be withal
deprived of justice and other virtues: and that to live a little while is a
less evil to him that is so disposed. And yet lower: It may be I shall not
persuade you, that the unjust and reproachful man is so far from happiness,
that he is rather

armed improbitie is unsupportable.] As if you should say, a licentious
tyrannical liberty, or a witty fitnes and ability applying it self to
commit evil. According to that which he says afterward, That a man is
naturally armed with understanding and virtue: that is to say, with such
natural aptitudes, as may be applied as well to evil as Lib. 6. Cap. vlt.

man is from his birth armed by nature with the armor of wisdom and virtue,
which he may use to contrary effects.] To wit, to good and evil, designing
that virtue and wisdom which is natural, or certain habits acquired, like
unto them: which may be used both towares vice and virtue: as for example,
Craftines in stead of wisdom, rashness in stead of fortitude, rigor in stead of
justice, softnes and cowardlines in stead of temperance. To understand the
better this place, it is to be observed, that virtue is taken in a double
sense, the one properly, as it is defined in the 2. book of Ethickes, namely
to be Lib. 3. De nature. Deor. says thus: Sure it had been far better for
mankind if this quick and prompt motion of thinking, together with that
subtlety and ability which is called Reason, had never in some sort been
given unto man, because it is hurtful unto so many and helpful unto so few,
then to have been Dolus malus, guilefull dealing; in a word of all
wickednesses, which has been not long since propounded by our friend C.
Aquilius, who affirms, That such kind of deceit consists in feigning one
thing and doing another. Think we then that such store of hurtful seeds
came from the gods immortal? for if it be they that have granted Reason to
men, then

AND by that means forsaking virtue, he becomes wicked and cruel.] Plato De
Legib. 7. says thus: The child that as yet has not attained to the fountain
of perfect But if he have not sufficient and good education he becomes the
most cruel of all

over to all manner of lust.] Abusing indifferently all sorts of women
contrary to the law of God and man, and committing that most detestable vice of
buggerie against nature.

insatiable pleasure of gluttony.] Seneca writes thus of the abominable
prodigality of the Roman Emperor Caligula, who succeeded Tiberius: It
seems unto me that nature had brought forth this Prince, to show what
extreme vices

justice is a thing belonging to policy.] For as much as the maintenance of
States depends principally on the observation of justice, there is no doubt
but justice is a thing worthy to be had in chief regard in a Commonwealth, and
to be esteemed as the sinew and chain of the whole City or Commonwealth,
retaining

SINCE the order of civil society is the law.] That justice is fit for a
Commonwealth,

AND judgment is nothing else but the discussing of that which is just.] And
in his


NOW for as much as it has been declared of what parts a

BEFORE he wadeth any deeper into the discourse of a City or Commonwealth,

defined.] That is, which consist in some certain thing, and have their nature
as it were defined and determined.

Instruments some have life, and some are without.] Instruments living, as
servants,

AS it is reported of the statues of Dedalus.] The Greeks call such
Instruments (...), Menon and Eutiphron, makes mention of Dedalus and his
works.

THESE therefore which are called instruments are operative and working
instruments, but (...).] Instruments Operative, and Active: these are
Philosophers terms little understood, and less used of

MOREOVER since that operation differs from action in kind, (...).] Aristotle
somewhat intelligible without going astray from his own sense and method.

AN active and separate instrument, (...).] Some instruments

BUT whether there be any bondslaue by nature or no, or whether it be better
and iuster for

whether there be any bondslaue by nature or no.] The Philosopher here enters
into

of them that command and obey, there are many and diverse kinds.] Plato de
legib. lib. 3. has this Dialogue. ATHENIEN, Ought there not be authority and
obedience in a City? CLINIAS, Yea. ATH. And I pray you what reasons and how
many are there for

in all things which are compounded of many, and are reduced to one in common,
whether ] All things consisting of many parts, and combined in one common
mean, whether they be conioined as a living creature, consisting of a soul
and a body united, in one common band by the participation of the soul and the
body together, or whether they be divided as a society betwixt the male and
female, I say in all these things there appears to be a commander and an
obeyer by nature: for in those that enjoy life, it is certain that the mind
commands, and the body obayeth. In other things which want life, there is
nevertheless an appearance of an Empire, as among the Elements the fire
seems to possess a kind of superiority, and the earth seems

also in things void of life there is a certain Empire and predominance.] To
command and to obey, are things so natural in all things, compounded of
matter and form, that even things void of life, do carry in them a certain
show thereof, as in Musical harmonye, consisting of voices or soundes, the
treble seems to command the Base. First of all, we see that all this
inferior world

A LIVING Creature first of all is compounded of a body and a soul, whereof
the one by nature rules, the other obeys: Now, we must consider the reason
of nature, not in things corrupted and depraved, but in things of the most
perfect and entire constitution. Wherefore it is behoof^full to consider man
being well disposed both in body and soul, in whom this most manifestly
appears. And forasmuch as in vicious and naughty persons, because they are
naughtily and

FIRST as I said, there appears in man both these gouernements, the maisterly
and polliticke: ] By the two principal parts of man, it is evident that
superiority and obedience, are things natural. For even as in a man the soul,
which is the better part, sits as president and governor; and the body as the
worser, waits and obeys as a servant: so in like manner in every humane
society or assembly, the wisest ought to sit in the chair of authority, and
the unadvised to stand and attend at then beasts that are chained are in the
power of their leader to follow him, nill they will De Legib. lib. 3. and
Isocrates in his Panegerick, and as is at this day the authority of the great
Turk, who does all things at his pleasure without the controulement of Law or
Counsel, and whose subjects are constrained to obey him like brute beasts, and
to do whatsoever he commands. The Therap. lib. 13. calls this
principality lib. 2 and De fi^ibus. lib. 5. so also Themistius, De Anima, lib.
3. understanding thereby the common sense, which as Judge and Arbitrator
moderateth the other senses, and they as servants obey it: according to Budeus
in his Annotations upon the Pandects. Plato de Repub. lib. 4. 8. and 9.
compares a Commonwealth to a man, and the parts thereof to the faculties and
powers of the soul. And first as he places in the soul five faculties, the
Nutritive, Vegetative, Motive, Sensitive, and Rationatiue: So in like manner in
a Commonwealth, he propounds five forms of governments; Regal,
Aristocraticall, Oligarchicall, Timeus, as in the forealledged, he sets
down three parts of a humane soul, differing in substance, place, and action:
Reason in the brain, which is the highest place of the body; to the which he
ascribes the principality and cheefedome: Anger in the heart, as in the
midst, to serve for defense and succor; all strength and choler consisting
therein: And concupiscence in the Liver, which procures the universal
nourishment of the whole

Understanding.] This is the most divine and excellent part of the soul, by
the which Men's or Animus, and of us, either understanding or mind. But even as
the soul does far excel the body in dignity, so the mind does excel the
soul, and is more noble, and therefore has authority over it. Plato in Timeo
says thus: Almighty God considered, that in things visible, that which was
naturally void of understanding, were not at all, nor in any respect so perfect
as that which was partaker thereof: and that of the understanding or mind, none
could De leg. lib. 10. says, The soul taking hold of the mind, which is
always divine, governs it self in all things lawfully and prosperously: but
if it be matched with ignorance, then does it clean contrary. The mind is
that in the soul, that the sight is in the body. Ethick. lib. 1. cap. 6. The
soul by the mind, sees God, and the intelligences or Angels, Metaphis. lib.
2. cap. 9. Considers principles and first causes of the essences,
universalities, eternities, and abstract forms of things. Ethiq. Lib. 6. chap.
1. and 6. True it is, that in this humane infirmity our mind cannot well
attain unto the truth, but demeaneth it self in things that be most evident
in Nature, as the Bats Metaphisiq. lib. 2. cap. 1. And often it befalls to
men, who study too deeply of nature, as it does to them which consider the
Sun eclipsed, whose eyes dazell at the sight thereof, Plato in Phedon. Now as
the sense discerns things sensible, so does the mind things intelligible:
sensible things are the Accidents and affections of things; things intelligible
are their forms and natures. Certain of the which come to the soul by natural
instinct without learning: As for example, that the whole is greater then his
part, that two contraries cannot stand together in one subject, and diverse
like principles: others of them come by reasonable discourse and demonstratiue
knowledge: As for example, such be the considerations of Logic, Philosophy,
natural and Aristot. Metaphis. lib. 12. cap. 5. writes, that every
intellectual science, or that any wise pertaketh of understanding, is directed
toward the causes and beginnings; which be either most certain, or most
simple. In the 6. book. chap. 1. 8. In the 11. book, chap 6. he lays
forth three sciences belonging to speculation, to wit, natural Philosophy,
the Mathematical Science, De Annimal. lib. 1. cap. 2. reports that Plato
thought certain things to be discerned by the mind, others by knowledge or
Science, some by opinion, and the rest by the senses. Notwithstanding Plato in
the first question of Timeus, confounds the mind with science or knowledge,
and the sense with opinion: declaring how everlasting things may be
comprehended by the mind with the help of reason, and how of them scienc^s are
ordained, as himself affirms in Th^letus, Parmenides, and Phedon, and how
corruptible things are comprehended De Repub. lib. 5.6. and 7. Aristotle
Posterior lib. 1. cap. 26. etc. Considering that the truth is drawn from
things which are always alike, and receive no change. Metaph. lib. 11. cap. 5.
In this manner is the difference between the mind and the sense: for the one is
corporal or united to the body, the other simple without mixture, and may be
without the body. Further, the sense is in all living creatures, but the mind
or understanding only in those which are endued with reason, and yet not in
all them neither, as is affirmed by Anaxagoras and Plato, who in his Timeus
writes thus: The understanding and opinion are two several things, forasmuch
as Metaphi. lib. 1. cap. 3. Plutarke, of Philosophical sentences, Lib. 1. cap.
3. and in the life of Pericles. Galen in the Philosophical Hystory. Cicero
Academ. quest. Lib. 2. and De natura deor. Lib. 1. Aristo. in his Ethicke, lib.
10. cap. 7. recommendeth the mind and contemplation in such manner as ensues:
If felicity De Animal. lib. 1. cap. 4. proves the immorta^ity of the soul by
the mind. The mind (says he) seems to come into man as being some substance
divine, and not subject to perish or decay: For if it were, that would perish
chiefly, through the imbecility or weakness of old age. Now, this
imbecility is only as it were in the Organ or Instrument: Metaphis. Lib. 12.
That every soul suruiueth not his body, but the intellectual mind does
survive, and that minds abstracted are coeternall with God. In the second
book De Generat. Animal. having disputed of the other faculties of the soul
conjoined with the body, he concludes, that the mind only comes from without
and alone is divine, because the bodily action has nothing common with the
action of the mind: For every virtue and power of the soul seems to Metaph.
Lib^ 6. Cap. 1. Otherwise thus: Every intellectual mind, is either Active or
Contemplative: Active, is that which is applied to Consultation and Action:
That which we call Contemplative, is sufficiently known by the name, and by
that which has been already spoken touching the same: It is divided into a
Possible or Potentiall power, called by Arist. (...): and into the Agent or
Actual, called (...). The Potentiall mind has nothing as yet of that which it
is ordained to understand, being De Anim. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. As there is in every
nature some one thing serving for ^^tter to every kind, which contains all
by a power or possibility: The other Effectiue or Causat^^e, to do all the
same reason that Art has in respect of the matter: the like differences are
necessarily found in the soul: The one mind is such, that it retains all:
the other such, that it does all: which is as it were, a certain ability
resembling light, which after a sort brings colors from power into act. The
which mind is ^eparable and not mixed, impatible, being by the very substance
thereof an act: for the doer must always be preferred before the sufferer,
him mean whereby to see as long as they be open. If the mind (says
Themistius) De Anima and Idaeis, specially in the sixth Chapter. Cicero in his
Dialogue De Senectute, and 1. de Legib. Manilius the Poet in the 4. book of
Astronomy: Galen in the 17^ book Of the use of man's body. The vilest part of
the world is that, which is nearest to the earth, and yet the mind seems to
descend even so low from the superior bodies, by the sight whereof we are
compelled to extol the beauty of their substance: first and principally of
the Sun, and secondly of the Moon and Stars: and because the substance of
their bodies is more pure, it is meet that the mind which dwells in them
should be better and

therefore in whom the like difference is to be found as there is between the
soul and the body, between a man and a beast (as we see in them all whose
work consists in the bare use of their body, and no better thing can be
driven from them) are servants by nature, for whom it is best to be governed
under this kind of government, as it is for the

THEY therefore in whom the like difference is to be found, that there is
between the soul ] Those men which excel others as far as the soul
excels the body, and man excels beasts; to wit, in understanding,
reason, and witte^ are naturally free, and right worthy to bear rule as well
privately as publicly.

WHICH may belong to another man.] Whosoever willingly submits himself to

UNDERSTANDS reason.] Perceives and understands what he is commanded

THE contrary happens.] Nature does not always bring to pass what she
would

SOME have the bodies.] Some have only a body and not a ^oule, fit for a
freeman,

OTHERS are endued with understanding.] Prudence and understanding matched

AS excellent in the body only as are the images of the gods.] Which the
painters and

THEREFORE may we conclude, that some men are borne to liberty, and others to
bondage, ] There be not only particular men disposed to servitude, by reason
of the rudeness of their wit and small understanding, unable to do any
service but by the strength of their bodies: but also there be whole Nations
naturally more servile then others: as Aristotle in his 3. book of Government,
Chap. 10. and Hippocrates in his book of the Air, of Waters, and Difference
of places, do report of the people of Asia to be.

CHAP. IIII. Of a Bondsman, and Bondage, by Nature and by Law.
But there be some men that speak against this, whose opinion is unreasonable,
that he which is vanquished by force, should become servant and subject

To serve, is taken in a double sense; either by nature, or by law. It has
been already

BUT there be some that sp^ake against this.] Aristotle here confuteth those
that contend,

those things that are taken in the wars, belong to the takers.] Alexander
the

accuse this law.] Ordaining that the vanquished in war, should be bondslaue
to the Conqueror; because it may so fall out, that the war may be unjustly
undertaken, and so consequently the servitude proceeding from it, must needs be
unjust:

they do an Orator that persuadeth unjust decrees.] At that time the Orators
throughout all Greece, and specially at Athens, were of great credit and
authority in the government of the Commonwealth, so far forth as no statutes
nor ordinances were made but by their advise. Now sometimes it fell out that
they persuaded decrees that were unlawful and repugnant to good manners, and
to the

among the wisest themselves.] As Pindarus alleged by Plato in his books De
Legib. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. using these verses: That Empire is agreeable to nature,
and that it is justice, that the most puissant command the weak and feeble.
Thrasimachus de Repub. Lib. 1. affirming, that that which is most commodious to
the most mighty in power, is always just. And Callicles alleges by the same
Plato in his book called G^rgias; where he discourses on this manner that
follows: It is said, that it is an unjust and filthy thing, by law for one
to have more then others; which the common people vulgarly call Injury:
nevertheless, as I suppose, nature declares that it is both lawful and just,
that the most mighty and most excellent have a superiority in every thing:
the which she manifests diverse ways, as well in other living creatures as
in all Cities and Nations of men, where it is held for equity, that the most
mighty have not only dominion over the weak, but also possess more goods
then they: for by what right did Xerxes wage war against the Greeks, and his
father against the Scithians, and innumerable other which would be too long for
me to rehearse? Surely in mine opinion, in these actions they follow the
nature of equity, and the example of

THEREFORE some account that to be equity and right which is wrought by love.]
When

OTHERS, that which he that is most mighty, commands.] Cyrus in Xenophon, De
8. speaking to his Captains and friends says thus: You must not think that
ye do wrong or injury to any, or retain by force other men's goods; for this
is a durable and perpetual Law amongst men, That in a City taken or
surprised by right of War, all the treasures, goods, houses, and persons,
belong unto the Conquerours: so that if you will be Lords and Owners of all,
your possession is not unjust, for it appertains unto you as your own: and
if you leave them any thing for their necessity, it is of your courtesy, and
not of any lawful claim of theirs.

that servitude arising from war is just.] They which affirm that bondage

good men to beget good children.] Even as from a good and well dressed Tree De
Rhethor. says: That witty and wise men degenerate into mad and furious:
and modest and sober, into lasie naughty packes. And in his Problemes, he
propounded this Question: Wherefore it is, that wise and learned men beget
commonly dull and blockish children. Augustus Caesar wished he had li^ed
wiuelesse, and died childlesse, seeing his daughters and Neeces so dissolute.

Thus we see.] Here he resolves and decideth the present contro^^rsi^,
reducing natural amity betwixt the master and servant, which are so by
nature, as is betwixt the

of all which it appears, that the maisterly government and political, are
not all one.] He draws further from the former reasons a difference of
gouernements, touched before in the first and third Chapters of this first
book, and signally of the Maisterly and Political, saying political
government to be in regard of them only which are free and equal by nature,
amongst whom there is certain mutual intercourse of commanding and obaying:
but maisterly, to be over servants by nature.

then has not that denomination by reason of any particular science belonging
] A Master or Lord is not so termed by reason of any Science required to the
right use of servants, as Plato said, but only in regard of using them
actually: neither in like manner ought he to be termed a servant, that
knows how to serve, if so be he do not withal really and actually serve.
Albeit, there be a certain belonging to master, and another belonging to a
servant: As to prepare victuals for meat, to brush and keep clean garments,
to trim Gardens, to ouersee Laborers, and other like Offices: whereof some
are less slavish and servile then others.

the Acquisitiue faculty, (...).] The Art of acquiring and getting goods
Perspectiue, in Geometry.

that which is a certain lawful discipline of war.] Otherwise, he that
gets goods and booties by unjust and unlawful war, ought not to be called
a warrior, but a Robber.

CHAP. V. Of possession, and of the natural acquisition of goods necessary for
life: withal of the variety of livings and trades of men: and of true riches.
IT follows now that we consider generally of every kind of possession, that
serves as well for Housekeepers, as for governors of Cities and
Commonweals, and for

FORASMVCH as neither private nor public society can live without goods and
possessours, there is a mean how to get them, serving to Housekeeping and
Government, which mean is eit^er natural or artificial. First of all, here
is speech of the natural mean, which is ordained by nature, for the
preparation of things needful, for food, clothing, and other uses
pertaining to the body: and consists in breeding of Cattle, Tillage,
Fishing, Hunting, Hawking, which trades men use diversely, according to the
difference and scituations of the Countries wherein they live: for in some
Regions

follows.] After that Aristotle has ^eckoned up the parts of a family, and
disputed

AND manner of getting household goods and possessions, (...).] Pecunia in
Latin,

to our first intent and purpose.] As in the first Chapter of this first

NOW there be diverse sorts of victuals.] The natural skill of getting
consisting in

AND also in like sort do the lives of men.] At the beginning men were in all
things

BUT of all, those that give themselves to the trade of grasing of cattle, are
most sluggish.] M.

OTHERS live by prey and spoil, but after diverse sorts.] Under the name of
prey and spoil, Plat. de Leg. li. 7. says: That this preying (so I translate
that which he and Aristotle calls (...)) which verbally signifies Hunting,
because this word does not express the generalnesse Venet. lib. 1. cap. 60.
writes of the Medites, that they are a savage and clownish people, that live
by beasts which they catching by Hunting, namely by Hearts, whereof their
Country abounds, which they know so well how to tame and bring to hand,
that they make their flesh serve for meat to eat, and use their back to ride
on, as other do on Horses and Asses: They have neither Corn nor

The diversity of livings according to the several Countries.
Before I oue^passe this passage, in my opinion it will not be impertinent, to
collect briefly the diverse and different manners of livings of men, such as I
could either by private reading or mutual conference and hearesay come to the
knowledge of, to the end, this discourse may be both more pleasing to the
Reader; and also more fit for the understanding of Tascalpachon. Besides, of
the same past of Mahiz they make also tartes and cakes: and when they sail in
the South seas, they carry with them for provision of vittaile, the meal of
Mahiz roasted, which being mingled with water and stirred well together, serves
them for drink, being like unto a ^leare^ panade, and for nourishment also;
having nothing else to satisfy hunger: for it is both bread and water, both
meat and drink, altogether: Yea over and above, it has this quality, t^^t
if the water be les Chartreux.
the ancient Priests of Egypt esteemed it a heinous sin to taste fish, as
Herodotus reports, Lib. 2. The Egyptians abstained from Swines flesh, as also
the Jews and the Mahumetists doe^ and also from all manner of wine. The
Malha^bians and Guzeratz eat nothing that has in it blood, neither kill they
any thing which has life: for which cause they abstain from green herbs and
all young fruit, supposing that there is life in them; which to deprive them

them which bring forth worms and eggs.] (...). In living De Genesis Anim. Lib.
3. Cap. 1. For the chicken has her beginning of being, from the white of the
egg, and is nourished with the yolke by the navel. Arist. De Hist. Anim. Lib.
6. Cap. 3.

is called milk.] Plutarch in his book entitled, De amore Parentum erga that
is, The natural love of parents toward their children, says thus: The
ordaining and dispensation of milk in the breasts, is sufficient to
demonstrate the providence and care of nature, for all which is superfluous
blood in women, through the own heaviness and the small quantity of spirit
that swimmeth in the top, wandreth up and down and aggrauateth the body:
whereupon it is accustomed monthly at certain just reuolutions and periods,
to distill downewardes; Nature opening unto it conduits and pores for issue: By
this means it not only refreshes and purges the residue of the body, but
also provoke in the matrice a desire of ingendring; even as we use to prepare
the ground by the plough to receive seed: The seed being once reaped,

plants are ordained for living creatures.] Whereas there are four Elements;
to Plat. in Timeo.

for men.] Plants, beasts, and all other inferior creatures, are subjected
under man's dominion, and made for his provision. Cicero De Nature. Deor. Lib. 2.
declares this most elegantly.

beasts serve as well for use as for food.] As oxen and kine to plough the
earth, to bring forth calves, to yield milk and butter: after, when they be
fat, they are killed and eaten, and of their hides tanned, are made shoes and
boots, and in like sort of other beasts.

Science military shall be in some respect an Art of getting.] It is certain,
that by the skill of Chivalry or Military discipline, are gotten the chiefest
things of this world; as

is there one kind of getting agreeable to nature, which is a part of the
skill of housekeeping.] Here is the resolution of the question before
propounded, whether

MEN have no certain measure or end of riches,] Solon did affirm in his
verses, according the parable of King Solomon, who was the richest and wisest
of all men; that the

CHAP. VI. Of artificial getting by way of exchange: and of the invention of
money.
THere is another kind of acquiring and getting, which is exercised in the
trade of exchaunging ^ by means whereof there seems to be no end in
richesse and gathering of goods: which diverse men deem to be the same that
vee have before spoken of ^ by reason of their likeness and affinity; though
indeed it be not the same, and yet not much discrepant from it. The one is
natural, the other not, but rather artificial and practiced by use and
industry: For stoutnesse and valiancie of courage, is not ordained to get
goods, but to procure boldness;

THE other manner of getting is exercised in Exchanging: first of ware for
ware;

is another kind of acquiring and getting.] There be two sorts of getting and
preparing of goods: the one altogether natural, which has been largely
entreated of in the Chapter going before: as Tillage, Hunting, Fishing: The
other consists in Exchange, and is practiced by Aptnes and Experience, and
might well be called Natural, if it were practiced for none other purpose but
for needful and bountiful provision for the maintenance of life. But
forasmuch as ordinarily it is referred to the gain and profit of money,
passing beyond the necessary use of life; therefore is it not natural but
artificial, and differs from the skill of housekeeping, which consists in
the

things possessed have a double use.] The trade of Exchanging is practiced two
manner of ways: either by exchange of ware for ware, as a shoe for bread; or
ware for money, as a shoe for money: which two kinds of exchanging appertain
not to the proper use of a shoe, which is to be worn, and for that purpose is
it made, and not to be exchanged, though the shoemaker abuse it to exchange, to
the end he may by that mean get what he lacks with the recompense of his
labor.

drew the beginnings from that which was agreeable to nature.] Of natural
necessity: whereby the trade of exchanging of commodious and profitable things
was brought up.

and engrossing up of commodities to sell again, does not appertain to that
skill of getting which agrees with nature.] The trade of Merchandise that is
used for the getting of money and richesse sake and not for the relieuing of
man's need, or for the furtherance of honest living, is to be called
artificial or crafty getting, and not natural, as he will prove hereafter.

exchange was not needful in the first assembly.] The husband and wife,
master and servant, parents and children, use not amongst themselves such
exchanging, but when they are multiplied dwelling in hamlets, villages,
boroughes, towns, and Cities; then do they use it through necessity, for
the getting of such commodities as they

at this day many barbarous nations do.] As the Tartarians and Arabians and
the wild people which have been of late discovered, who are unskillful of all
manner of occupations, and change ware for ware in their traffiques.

this proceeded the other, by reason.] After he has reasoned about that kind
of

BY reason.] By industry and dexterity, not through natural necessity: for
Merchandise

OF necessity they invented the use of money.] Here is declared the invention
and right Pliny affirms Seruius was the first that stamped and coined money of
brass, as Timeus writes. Notwithstanding, before his time money was in use at
Rome, howbeit not fully come to perfection at that time. The first print or
mark of the same, was Pecus, That is the Image of a sheep or ox.
and therefore all money made and marked with any stamp, was called Pecunia.
It is reported that one Phidon in the Island of Egina, first coined silver
money, and that Saturnus after his arrival in Italy, made brass money, and
stamped it with the Image of the hinder part of a ship. The people of Rome used
brass money, till the time of king Pyrrhus, and from thence forward began to
make silver money: and after the ouercomming of Carthage, made gold monyes. God
in the 25 Chapter of

SOME profitable thing ^^sie to be tra^^^^^^ed.] As Iron, Gold, Silver, Brass
and Copper, Country of Pe^ou has been found to have in use.

the inuenting of money for the necessary exchanging of commodities, there came
up another kind of getting of money.] The first kind of exchanging commodities
for money, is in some respect agreeable to nature, namely, for the obtaining of
such things as are necessary for man's life, and uneasy to be transported:
which the Philosopher thinks to stand with reason. From thence issued the
other kind of exchange by money, which Merchants and Brokers use for gains sake
only, and differs from the former, as being against Nature and endless, and
therefore blameworthy.

this cause wise men seek out some other kind of richesse.] The best husbands
stay not themselves only upon getting of money, but besides that, purchase a
safer wealth,

as much as money is the beginning and the end of such chopping and changing.]
At the beginning money was coined to serve for an instrument in trades of
Merchandise; but now it seems to be the mark whereat these trades do shoot:
for Merchants aim at no other thing, but only the getting of great store of
money.

as Physic tends infinitely to health.] Physic desires without end to
procure health, and is not only content with setting the patient again in his
former health, but

the skill of housekeeping has a certain scope and end.] The skill of
housekeeping has certain means of Acquiring and getting, which it does not
exceed. So has not the skill of getting money, which continually hoordeth up
without measure.

by reason their practice consists in one kind of thing, the one is taken
for the other. (...), etc.] Whereas there be two faculties concerning money;
the one which the housekeeper uses, the other belonging to the merchant: the
office of either of them

of the body.] The inioying whereof is taken with some sense, as touching
smelling, seeing, hearing, whereby the body is as much recreated, as the soul
is by understanding, learning, and contemplation.2. of Ethickes.

whence has proceeded another kind of getting of money.] This third kind of
getting of money differs from the other two afo^egoing, as well in regard of
the mean of

CHAP. VII. That the skill of acquiring and getting is servant to the skill of
housekeeping, called Oeconomie, and to the skill of political governing:
HEreby is resolved the doubt put forth in the beginning, namely, Whether Art
acquisitiue, or the skill of getting money, do belong to the governor of a
family, and to the governor of a Commonweal, or not. But this must be first
prepared: For



NAMELY, whether the skill of providing money do belong to the governor of a
family or ] Although this present question had been decided before, yet
neuetthelesse, here the Philosopher makes a final resolution of the same:
co^cluding that this skill is no part of house government and governing of a
City or Commonweal, but rather a servant or Minister to each of them, as
the Spurriours, Smithes, and Sadlers occupations, serve to the use of horses;
melting and casting of metal, making of gunne powder, and carriage, to
artillery: and that this art of getting must be in time before the Art of
Governing,

THE skill of government does not make men.] Aristotle in his Politickes, Lib.
7. cap. 4.

IT is the office of the governor of the family to ouersee the orderings and
bestowings of these ] The Purueyour or prouider in a family, prepares victuals
either by sea or by

FOR a question might be asked: Wherefore the skill to get money should be
parcel of the household ] Because a family cannot be maintained without
victuals and health, it should seem, that the skill of getting, and Physic,
should be parcels of housekeeping: Nevertheless, each of them do but only
serve thereto.

ABOE all the rest, usury deserves to be hated.] Usury is reproved in the old
and new out. By reason whereof, the Persians accounted lending upon usury, to
be a tradefull of

for the augmentation of it self, which has the name of (...).] (...), to
engender:

things engendered are like the engendrers.] As Plants bring forth like
plants, and living creatures other living creatures, every one in his kind,
commonly like their Parents, as a man, a horse, and a bull do: so in usury,
the engendrer, and the thing, is money: which notwithstanding seems contary to
nature, that a dead thing, as money, should engender.

as we have sufficiently decided what concerns the knowledge, now let us
come to the practice.] The reasons hitherto set down touching the matter of
house government,

principal point in this art.) The first natural richesse does consist in
the breeding and feeding of Cattle, in Corn, and in fruits of Trees. The
chief point in such matters, is to know what places are best and fittest for
them.

the breed of one Country is better than another.) Every Country has a
particular grace and singularity given unto it by Nature, Particular graces and
singularities of coun^ries.
who regards the Commonwealth of the whole world, which cannot continue in
perfection, without such variety: L^zarnes are certain Wolves somewhat like
Hearts, having a sweet savor, and fair skins. Gesner. in Latin called Lupi
^er^^^^^^ in French Loup^ c^r^ier^, and in English L^zarnes.
Luzarnes, Wildcats, Martens

AS concerning that way and mean of getting of money which consists in
exchange.]

AMONGST occupations.] Cicero in his first Book of Offices toward the also all
Mercenary Trades, and generally of all them whose labors (not whose

most noisome, (...).] The Latins call those vile trades, which the Grecians
call (...), which word properly does signify those occupations which use the
furnace, as the name notes. Notwithstanding, use transferreth and applies it
to all handie occupations: So does Lucian use it in his dream, and Xenophon
in his book of housekeeping, Who speaking of these Sciences, says: That
(...) are vile and foul, and that upon good cause they are out of estimation,
for that they weaken and mar the bodies of the exercisers of the same, by
constraining them to sit and remain close, and to be always by the fire
side: and when the bodies are weakened, the souls

and Apollodorus.] Likewise diverse have written in Latin of Tillage, as Cato,
Varro, Palladius, Columella, Pliny in his natural Hystory, Virgill in his
Georgikes, and Mago in the Punike tongue.

the manuring of grounds both unplanted and planted.] Of fields that are fit
for tillage, and of planting and graffing of fruit trees, trimming of vines,
and making gardens

were very good to gather further means.] Whosoever desires to get good, must
not only read books set forth ^oncerning such matters, but also mark the
doings and sayings of good husbands.

the doing of Thales.] Cicero in his first book of divination, rehearses this
notable providence of Thales, to get unto himself the sale of oil: which
Pliny fathereth upon Democritus in the eight and twenty Chapter of the
eighteenth book of his Natural History. They were both great Physicians, and
might with their wonderful skill have the same devise.

man does obtain unto himself the Monopoly and whole sale.] (...), etc. The
word Monopoly is used and meant in French, when any particular man, or any
company, obtains a privilege or license to have the only sale of any
necessary Merchandise, compelling them that have need thereof, to buy it at his
own tax or price: which is an evil thing, and prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, and not meet to be permitted or put in ure, except it be by
public States, and that not at all times, but upon

THEREFORE diverse Cities when they stand in public need of money.] There is
extant

CHAP. VIII. Of the other parts of house government which belong to the husband
NOw forasmuch as we have alleged before, that there be and just: and the
child intemperate, or temperate, or not. And universally, the like

THERE were three parties of household government propounded: the first of the
Master, the second of the Father, the third of the Husband. Upon the
discussing of the Masters part with the skill of getting which was added unto
them, now those parts which belong to the Father and the Husband are laid
forth. In that part which belongs to the Father, the children are governed
by the Father regally, as well

NOW forasmuch as we have alleged, that there be three parts whereof the ]
From the first Chapter to the last of this present

THE good man of the house governs his wife and children, but his wife
ciuilly, and ] That the likenesses of three gouernements do appear in the
ordering of a family, Aristotle does show in his eight book of Moral
Philosophy to Nicomachus. The similitudes (says he) and as ye would say,
the examples of governments, may be taken out of familes: for the assembly of
the father and his children is like a kingdom, forasmuch as the father has a
care of his chidre^: Upon the which occasion Homer calls Jupiter Father, for
that the fathers government will be a kingdom. but amongst the Persians the
fathers government is Tyrant-like, in that they use their

Amasis answered concerning the basin wherein he used to wash his feet.] Amasis
as Herodotus writes in the third book of his Hystory, having overthrown
Apries in battle, made himself king of Egypt: but in the beginning of his
reign the AEgiptians made small account of him by reason he had been but a
simple Citizen, and

THE ARGUMENT OR CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK OF ARISTOLES GOVERNMENT.
IN all matters that Aristotle takes in hand to treat of, his custom is in
the beginning, to rehearse what opinions other men have had therein, who
aforetime had spoken of the same to; the intent, after the examination thereof,
to take what is good, and refuse that is bad, as himself witnesses in his
first book of the soul: because as Isocrates affirms in Euagoras, Arts and
Sciences receive their perfection, not by relying upon the sayings and opinions
of men of former ages, of how great authority soever they were, but by
correcting of the same, and changing in them whatsoever is found not to be
good. So for the more certain discovery of the high secrets of nature, he
confuteth in his natural and supernatural Philosophy, the errors of
Democritus, Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Anaximander, Thales, Melissus, Parmenides,
and Heraclitus, being all excellent personages: And more, when occasion was
offered, has not spared his own Master Plato, of whom he made so great
account, Judging (as himself affirms in the first book of his Ethickes) the
honor of truth whereunto he had wholly vowed himself, worthy to be
preferred before all other duties and Offices. Likewise, at his beginning to
treat of the institution and government of a City or Commonweal, he first
sets down the most renowned Commonweals of his time, as well those that
were in use, as the Candian, Lacedemonian, Athenian, Carthaginian, and Milesian
Commonweals; as those that were written of, as Platoes, both the first and
second: finding in every of them somewhat requiring correction. Those Authors
that had entreated or written of public gouernements, of whom Aristotle here
makes mention, are Socrates, Plato, Phaleas, Phidon, Hippodamus, Lycurgus,
Minos, Solon, Draco, Zaleucus, Charondas, Onomacrites, Philolas, Diocles,
Pittacus, and Androdamas. Many others wrote of the same matters after them:
but the chief commendation remained to Plato and Aristotle, as the most
skillful and diligent Writers. Now forasmuch as Aristotle does here allege
none but certain Commonweales of Greece, which were very small ones, and
neither touches any strange Commonweales, saving that of Carthage, (the
Roman Commonweal at that time remaining unknown unto the Grecians) nor
speaks of the great kingdoms and Empires, wherein notwithstanding, the
dexterity and skill of government does most appear: Therefore I have gathered
a history of Government, or a register of all sorts of States, both old and
new, whereof I could have knowledge by reading, or by any other search or
inquiry: beginning at the kingdoms of Assyria, Egypt, and Persia, which are
the most ancient and most renowned. Then have I follovved the times and
Countries, conferring their likenesses and differences together, with
observation of their ordinances, disciplines, laws, and customs, laying
forth their beginnings, proceedings, encreasings, diminishings, chaunges, and
decaies; and endeavoring to yield the causes and reasons of such accidents,
according to the rules and precepts of this Science^ all the which I have
collected, to the intent to add the same to the gouernements of Plato and
Aristotle, as a thing most necessary for the understanding of their books, and
for the knowledge of the faculty of Government, which is not all so
manifest in their observations, how learned and elegant soever they be, but
there does and will remain many precepts and observations behind for learned
men to join thereunto, and that without losing their labor. Truth shows
herself to all such as will seek for her, and are of capacity to receive
her: She is not yet all taken up and engrosed, great things come slackly
forvvard, and shevve not themselves manifestly together at one instant, but are
from time to time augmented or brought to better order and elegancie. And so
may it fall out in this Science, after the help that we receive by the
observations of the ancients, after so many examples wherewith we are
instructed by them that have been before us, after so long experience and
practice of two thousands years or therabouts, which have passed since the time
wherein our Authors wrote till this present.

THE SECOND BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED OVT OF GREEK LATIN AND
FRENCH INTO ENGLISH. With an exposition of the hard places: Wherein he
examineth the principal Commonweals of his time.
CHAP. I. That all the Common-vveales of his time deserved correction: and
first of all Platoes, reproving that community of things which Socrates
devised in it.
BECAUSE our intent and purpose is to consider of civil

IN this second book are exam^ned the principal Commonweals, that were in
that time found either in writing, or in practice: every one of them deserving
correction. First of all Platoes Commonweal is found fault-worthie, for that
it did bring in the community of goods, wives, and children, for the better
uniting of the City, and for the better maintenance of natural love amongst
Citizens: Which course is not only unfit and inconvenient, but also
unreasonable, for that it is not possible by the

our intent and purpose is to consider.] Aristotle purposing to examine those
Commonweals that were in his time, or had been written off before, being a
matter of it self odious: for the avoiding of the dislike and evil will of
his auditors, does modestly excuse himself unto them, affirming that he does
it not through unprofitable curiosity or vaineglorie, (being vices that a true
Philosopher should greatly eschew)

is the best of all for them, specially that are furnished with the means and
commodities to live according to their own wish and desire.] That form of
Commonweal that is simply and absolutely good, is not good for all Cities,
but rather only for those that have the means to live at their ease and
pleasure. Which means diverse Cities want, insomuch, that they are driven to
take some other manner of government, not as the best, but as the most fit for
them. For as Aristotle shows in the first Chapter of the fourth book of this
work, The office of the Lawmakers and true Governor is, to

other forms of Commonweals.] As that of the Candeans, Lacedaemonians, and
Carthaginians, which he accounts the best in the tenth Chap. of this book,
though he find not one of them entirely and wholly perfect.

seeking for somewhat besides the former, should not be imputed unto us for
curiosity or ostentation.] Lactantius in the eight Chapter of his second
book: God (says he) has

Platoes Commonweal.
NOW let us begin and enter on this discourse, in such sort as shall be most
convenient for this consideration: It is necessary for Citizens to have either
all things, or none at all, in common: or else some common, and some not. That
they should have nothing in common, it is impossible; since the Commonweal is a
community, and that first of all the place where the City stands

SINCE the City is some community, the question is, Whether all things
therein

IN Platoes Commonweal.] Forasmuch as Plato saw mankind continually
encumbred De prepar. Epiphanius in the 1. and 3. books of his second tome.
Chrysostom in his first Homily upon Saint Matthew, and the second Chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles. Lactantius in the 21 and 22 Chapters of his 3.
book. Saint Ambrose speaking of Platoes Commonweal and laws, affirmetth that
he did not discribe a true Commonwealth indeed, but one that was fained and
devised in his own brain. Polibius in the sixth book of his Hystory,
reasoning about Commonweals, gives this judgment of Platoes: Peradventure
(says he) All the skill and reason of government has been more cunningly
and subtly considered of and examined by Plato and other Philosophers
touching the natural conversion and alteration of Commonweals:
Notwithstanding deserve commendation: yet for all that the comparing of dead
and living things together,

BUT whether it be best to be as it is used at this present, or according to
the law there written. There be many difficulties in this matter of
community of wives: He means that it does not ^ollow, that therefore wives
ought to be common, because Cittize^s ought to rejoice and ^^^^ue for the same
things: and because concord is the bo^d of Co^m^^ wealths, and because it ^s to
be wishe^ that al should say with one voice of all things. This is mine and
thine.
and the cause it self wherefore Socrates vpholdeth that a law to that effect
should be established, seems not to redound of his reasons. Again if we
look unto the end wherefore he maintains that such order ought to be taken
in a City or Commonweal, as is there disputed, it will be found impossible.
Also it is not there determined and set down after what manner it should be
done and

ARISTOTLE with four reasons reprooueth that community propounded by Socrates
in Platoes Commonweal. The first reason is taken from the difficulty arising
of that constitution: the second from the end that moved Socrates to ordain
it, which is not reasonable: the third, that the contrary resulteth and
redoundeth upon Socrates by his suppositions: the fourth, that it is altogether
insufficient.

that a City or Commonweal should be one, as the greatest good that can
happen unto it.] SOCRATES in the fifth book of Platoes Commonwealth,
reasoning with GLAVCVS, endeavors to prove, that the greatest good which can
come to a City or Commonweal is unity: and the greatest harm, is division:
that is, of one to make it diverse. SOCRA. Is there any more dangerous evil in
a City than that which deuideth it, and of one makes many: or any thing
better than that which knitteth it together, and does make it one? GLAVC. None
at all. SOCR. Does not the community of pleasure and sorrow unite, when all
the Citizens rejoice or mourn for the coming Diod. Sicilian in the 15. Chapter
of his 11. book.

FOR there is a difference between a league or confederacy in War, and a
City of peace: for a league is profitable in quantity or multitude, though
it consist of one and the selfsame sort and kind, and is naturally ordained
for enterchangeable aid in the wars: Like as if the weight and number did
draw and carry away more. By the like reason a City

THERE be three assemblies or societies of men, which are diverse and
differing one from another: namely, a City, a League, and a Nation: A City
is compact of many men differing in their Vocations, degrees and Trades,
assembled together in one place, and within the selfsame walls, of purpose to
live commodiously and happily, as is affirmed in the first book of this work,
the first Chapter: and in the fourth Book, the second, third, and fourth
Chapter: and in the sixth book, the fourth of one and the selfsame sort and
kind, and is naturally ordained for enterchangeable of some Prince tha^ will
retain them for pay in his enterprises, as in this age the same

the like reason a City does differ from a Nation, where men dwell not in
streets and boroughes, but dispersed.] A City is less one, than a league or
Nation compacted of one sort of men. A Nation which is not distributed into
castles and boroughes, but dispersed in Hamlets here and there in the fields,
and having only certain Magistrates in common, does differ from a City by
the like difference, that is to say,

the Arcadians.] In old time the Arcadians dwelt in the Land of Morea, or
Peloponesus, dispersed in Fields, in Mountains, and Forests, by Hamlets,
being accounted for most honest people, as Polybius writes in the fourth book
of his History, as well for their honest behavior and peaceable manner of
living toward Music in Arcadia.
that they caused it to be taught, not only to their children, but also to
young folk, until they came to the age of thirty years, who by nature being
sturdie and rude persons, did by that means moderate and temperate their
manners. They accustomed to sing songs and hymmes of the praise of God, of
Noblemen, and virtuous personages, making yearly sights and shows with such
songs and daunces, at the charge of the Commonweal: a thing most wisely
ordained by their ancestors, not for pleasure sake, but for the assuaging of
the continual labor which the people took in tilling the earth, with
rudeness

NOW those things whereof the union is to be made, do differ in diverse
respects: insomuch, that recompense or mutual preferment equally bestowed,
does preserve and desend

HE proves here by another reason, that there may be no such union in a
City as Socrates has set down, because a City does necessarily consist
of commanders and obeyers enterchangeably, and of others differing in sundry
respects: as Gentlemen, Commoners, Poor, Rich, Crafts-men, Merchants,
Laborers, and Soldiers:

RECOMPENSE or mutual preferment equally bestowed, does preserve and defend
Cities.] in giving every man his place, and handling him according to his
quality and deserts.

reward or mutual preferring, necessarily ought to be observed among them
that be free and equal, because they cannot all command and have
Magistrateships together, but are to govern by years or some other order of
time.] A perrillouser and hurtfuller pestilence cannot creep into a
Commonweal, then if any part of the same grow stronger than the rest. For it
is impossible for society and unity to continue amongst Citizens, if
uprightness be not equally observed therein; as a mixed and compounded body
does decay, if any element whereof it is compact, do exceed the rest: And
every

were more expedient that the selfsame men should always govern.] Like as
in a City there be always the same Shoemakers or Carpenters, who in their
youth learn their occupations and Trades, and exercise the same as long as they
can, so if there might be continually the same Magistrates, that were the best
course in the Philosophers opinion. For where (as Isocrates affirms in his
Oration to Symachus) they continue but for a year or some other prefixed time,
for the most part they go out of office before they

the former Magistrates did give place unto them.] As at the beginning other
men gave over their Magistrateships unto them, so ought they give them over to
others, since all together cannot possess them, but one after another by turns.

as if there were a diversity and difference between them.] They that of
private persons become Magistrates, and of Magistrates private persons, seem
to be diverse

which means diverse rulers do obtain diverse Magistrateships.] By giving
place one to another by turns, every man as his turn falls, does exercise
some Magistrateship

there is another reason proving that it is not best to procure the uniting of
a City too ] This is the reason: Since the happiness of a City consists in
sufficiency, and where most diversity of things is, there is most
sufficiency; therefore diversity is more to be desired in a City than that
to great Platonicall union.

THEN commonly do men think there is a City properly.] In the second Chapter
of

CHAP. II. The reproof of the community of wives and children, brought in by
Socrates in Platoes Commonweal.
But now put case it were a very great good thing to unite a City as much as
might be, yet seems not that to be proved by this reason, if all men
together say, mine, and not mine: which Socrates supposes to be a manifest
sign and argument, that a City is perfectly united. For why, this word must
necessarily make trial one of another, as diverse Cosmographers do affirm to
be used in

Timeus, was not, that women should be absolutely common, prostitute to the
company of all men without difference, and so by means thereof

THIS word All has a double understanding.] This reason with the other that
follows, That is, Aristotle is well seen in Sophistry.
Therefore this is a dark word, and is taken and understood sometimes by way of
collection, comprising all those that be of a multitude together: and
sometimes by way of distribution, signifying every one of the multitude
severally by it self. Now Socrates imagined that he had stablished unity in
a City, when all men might say of one selfsame woman, child, or house, This
is mine,

ALL and Both, are even and odd, because they have a double signification.] In
Latin, Omnes, the English cannot so well express them, yet we will show the
meaning of them as we may. All and Both are taken two manner of ways, and in
the Ambo or Vtraque is understood only of two, and Omnes signifies many.
Therefore All and Both are sometimes even and odd in number: as for example,
twelve persons divided into four threes, are the selfsame even and odd: for
being taken together, and collectiuely, they are even in number, for that they
are twelve: but being taken severally by threes, they are all odd. Likewise,
six taken together, is even, and severally odd. This is alleged by
Aristotle, to show that this word All has a double and doubtful
understanding, and now and then may be drawn to such significations as are
directly opposite one against another.

one, fellow or brother of a fraternity, by another companion of the same
tribe.] The people of Athens being divided into sundry parts, the greatest of
them were called (...), which in Latin signifies Tribus: of the which, every
one divided into three parts, did make (...), called also (...), which
signifies a pit; the which the same neighbors, to wit, they of the selfsame
brotherhood, used in common. Harpocration and Pollux in the eight book.

the higher Africa.] Namely, the farthest from the sea, for a Country is
deemed low because it lies next to the sea. In the same signification we say
low Almaine, low Normandy and Brittanie, low Poytou and Languadocke. The sea
is contained in the Meteors. So that as the sea is higher than the under
superficies of the earth, so is it lower than the shore, and consequently
lower than the countries that are farthest from it, the rivers whereof go
downward by natural course.

that children are there discerned by their likenesses and shapes.] There is a
great disputation between natural Philosophers and Physicians, from whence
the likeness of children to their Parents proceeds. Some hold opinion, that
the seed descending

Mare of Pharsalia, who therefore was termed just.] Pharsalia is a Town of
Thessalie, well known by reason of the civil Wars between Caesar and
Pompey. The Country adioining unto it, did breed very good horses, from whence
came Bucephale, Alexander the great his horse, and the Mare so much spoken of,
whereof Aristotle makes mention in this place, that brought colts like their
sires, and peradventure was therefore

amongst them that be known, if any such offenses should happen, they might be
reconciled and purged with accustomed rites and ceremonies.] The Gentiles of
old time used sacrifices of reconciliation or purgations (whereof we have
spoken in the second book of Platoes Commonweal) when any man had iniuried,
beaten, or slain, either his father or mother, or any other of his near
kindred, much like the secret confessions and pennances, which the
penitentiaries and other Priests, were wont to limite and assign.

subjects ought to be kept in such terms, as that they may be holden under
obedience, ] It were more tolerable, that the wives and children of subjects
should be rather common, than of Lords and Governors: because that course
would diminish the friendship and affinity that grows amongst them by reason
of marriages, and makes them the readiar to stir up sedition and rebellion.
Now the means to keep States in safety, and restrain subjects from
sedition, are set down by Aristotle in his fifth book of his Pollitickes,
cap. 11. in manner ensuing: The first mean is to keep down and cut short by
all possible means those personages which are highest in degree and authority,
and to rid away and destroy such as be courageous and high minded. The second
is to permit no banquets, assemblies, intelligencies, nor any like

FOR we judge that amity and friendship is the greatest good that any City can
attain unto.]

the first Dialogue or Treatise of love.] We have translated this book out of
Greek

AND of two make themselves one.] Aristophanes in the fourth Oration of the
Treatise

AS a small quantity of sweetness mingled with a great deal of water.] As ye
would say,

the transporting of children from husbandmen and artificers to keepers.]
Platoes

CHAP. III. The reproouing of the community of goods and possessions.
NOw it follows, that we treat after what manner, goods, and possessions are
to be ordered in a good Commonweal, namely, whether they ought to be common or
not. This question may severally be considered by it self by that which has
been decided touching children and wives. I mean as concerning possessions,
Whether it were more expedient that they continue in such seueralty and
propriety as they remain in at this day, and that the use of them should be
common, as for example, the lands and grounds to be proper, and the fruits
thereof as in taking of pains, it cannot otherwise fall out, but tha^ they who
reap little and labor much, beasts are not fit for, nor capable for the
ordering of household affairs, it is impertinent

PLATO his mind and intent was as himself writes in the third and seventh
books of his Commonweal, and at the beginning of his Timeus, that the
keepers and rulers of Cities and Commonweals should possess nothing in
propriety: as for example, neither houses, gold, silver, nor any other kind
of mooueables: but should have all those commodities in common, and as
servant and Ministers of the Commonweal receive their sustenance of other
men for their yearly anuitie and wages. Aristotle having already declared
those inconueniencies which proceed from the community of wives and children,
does here show by many excellent reasons, that there is no less
discommoditie in the community of possessions,

any other then the Citizens should till the ground.] As in France, the

that friendship which every man bears to himself, is not vain, but
natural.] Plato in his fifth book De Legibus, says: There is a great evil
engraffed in diverse men's minds, for the remedy whereof they take no regard,
but flatter themselves: namely this, (as it is commonly said) that every man
is by nature a friend Eihicks, Lib. 9. Cap. 8. declares what lover of himself
deserves

FOR welneare all things have been invented, howbeit, some have not been
received, and ] Aristotle in his seventh book of this Pollitickes, and the
tenth Chapter: Peradventure (says he) it is credible, that many other things
have been long ago, diverse times, or rather infinitely found out: and it is
likely, that need first taught the use of necessary things, and that
afterward those commodities which serve to honor and pomp were increased.
We must suppose, that the like has befallen in Commonweals. Therefore it is
meet and convenient to take the use of those things that have been well
invented, and to endeavor the Timeus, and in his third and sixth books De
Legibus, and Plutarke at the beginning of Sertorius his life.

WITHOUT dividing and parting those things into public feasts, and into
pieces ] The Lacedaemonians and Candians in old time used such manner of
assemblies, which in their own tongues they called Si^syties, Phidities, and
Andryes, whereof-mention is often made in these books of government.

UNLESS they deal as the Candians did^ who permitting all other things to ]

there is scant any need of laws for their training and direction.] Plato
deemed,

that elsewhere are called Ilotians, Penestians, and other sorts of villains.]
The Ilotes in Lacedemonia, were men brought into bondage and slavery by right
of War, who plowed and tilled the ground of the Lacedaemonians, and made a
yearly revenue to arise therefrom. These because they oftentimes revolted
against their Masters, are here by Aristotle called proud, and also for the
same cause they were kept as

or Penestians.] These as their name notifieth, were poor Husbandmen and
Laborers, that served the Thessalians to till their land. Even as the Periaeces
in Candie did, of whom it has already been spoken. Plato in the sixth book De
Legib. speaks of this Ilotie and Penestie, showing how men ought to behave
themselves toward such kind of people.

forasmuch as brute beasts are not fit for, nor capable of house government,
it is impertinent and against all reason to draw a comparison from them,
whereby to appoint both to ] Like as Bitches naturally are led to do the same
things which dogs do, to safeguard the flocks of sheep from wolves; and other
noisome beasts, to defend with equal affection their masters houses, and to
hunt or course the Hare the one as well as the other: so likewise, Plato in the
fifth book of his Commonwealth goes about to prove, that all discipline of
government ought to be common to men and women, and also all exercises both of
peace and war, saving that men ought to be used as the stronger, and women as
weaker and more tender and delicate. The which reason Aristotle utterly
rejects, because brute beasts are not Oeconomical, as men are: Whereupon it
comes to pass, that women as the weaker sex, abide ordinarily within

his manner of ordaining and establishing of Magistrates is dangerous, in that
he keeps the selfsame men always in office and authority.] He said before,
that in a Commonwealth where the Citizens and subjects are equal and free,
there ought be a mutual

that gold is not mingled by Gods grace, one while in one mind, and another
while in another, but always in the selfsame.] Plato following the steps of
Hesiodus in his book De operibus and diebus (works and days:) says toward
the end of his third book De Repub. in fable wise by comparison of metals,
that men were so created by God, that he

bereauing the rulers of all felicity.] Reducing and bringing them into such an

FOR it is not all one to be happy and even.] An even number is that which is
divided

CHAP. IIII. Of the insufficiency of the second form of Commonwealth,
propounded by Plato in his fifth book De Legibus.
NOw for as much as the like imperfection is near band found in the laws
described by him afterward, it shall not be amiss to consider a little of that
form of Commonwealth also: For Socrates in in particular nor in public: yet
notwithstanding the Citizens ought to be fearful to their



FOR Socrates in his first Commonweal, has but slightly touched a few
matters.]

As for his book of laws.] Although this book be enriched with many goodly

THE which also endeavoring to make it common to other Cities.] To make it
fitter for

exemption from necessary works.] As for example, from tillage of the ground,
and other mean occupations necessary for men's use. He uses this word in the
like signification in the third Book, and third Chapter.

will have in the one Commonweal a thousand men at arms, and in the other
five thousand.] Aristotle has ouerskipped forty, for Plato in his fifth book
of Laws, supposes a great commodity in the number of 5040, both in Wars
and peace, and also in leagues and succors: because it contains in it
diverse divisions or distributions

the whole speech of Socrates.] Plato bringing in Socrates in his writings
causes him to dispute in Dialogue-wise, confuting other men's opinions, without
declaring his own: and using diverse inductions, and other arguments cunningly
handled, which make the understanding thereof very hard, as having in some
places apparent ambiguities, and in others superfluity: and in some other he
seems curious of new and wonderful matters, as in treating of the Ideas of
the community of Wives, Children, and Goods, and likewise of other strange and
unusual things. Notwithstanding, all affection and parciality laid aside, if
they be read with judgment, and that men

Land of Babylon.] A Region near unto the great and famous City of Babylon,
very large and fertile, containing a part of Assyria and Mesopotomia.
Aristotle makes mention of Babylon in the third book of this work, and the
second Chapter.

and liberally together.] Forasmuch as the society of a City is not only to
live, but to live well, that is to say, happily with sufficiency: in the second
Chapter of the first book, and fifth Chapter of the seventh Book of this
work, he says: That it should have the territories and goods sufficient for
the temperate and bountiful maintenance thereof, that is to say, moderate and
delightful.

it is impertinent and absurd in that where he brings in equality of goods.]
Plato in his fifth and sixth books of laws does not make inheritances so
equal, that one shall not possess more than another: For he appoints four
degrees or orders according to the difference of revenues. Notwithstanding, in
his first institution of a City, and

when they remain undivided, of necessity, such persons as exceed the rated
number, or be extraordinary, shall have nothing, (...).] Socrates would not
have every man's goods and patrimony divided amongst all his children: but that
the father might dispose and leave it wholly to any one of them whom he liked
or loved best. Whereby it

engenders sedition.] Plato in his fifth book of Laws, by the word Poverty,
De Legibus.

he has omitted to set down how Magistrates shall differ from private
persons.] De Legib. discourses concerning Magistrates^ what manner of men they
ought to be, how and by whom they shall be chosen, and that every of them
shall yield account of his charge and Office: except those, that after the
manner of kings appoint the end of all affairs. Now fetching a comparison from
the Weauer, who makes not the Woue and the Warpe of like yearne, but puts
the strongest in the Warpe, and the slendrest in the Woue, that it may be the
apter for workmanship: he says that after the like sort, they which shall
be Magistrates, ought to be discerned from others, that there may be
authority on the one side, and obedience on the other, as De Legib.

FVRTHER the whole form of this State seems neither a popular government,
nor the ] Every City is governed by one or many: if by one, it is called a
Monarchy: if by many, a Commonweal. Again, where it is governed by one,
either that one does all alone after his own pleasure, or else uses good men's
counsel and exercise: if he do all alone, it is tyranny: if with others, a
kingdom. Further, every City is governed by one, or many, or a few folk,
and that either well or evil: if well by one, it is a kingdom: if evil, a
tyranny: if by a few men well, an Aristocratie: if evil, an Oligarchie: if by
many well,

IF then he have pretended this form of Commonweal, as that which is most
common to ] Which may be convenient or applied to more Cities than the first,
as not the furthest from men's common custom and manner of living.

SOME hold opinion, that a good Commonweal should be mingled of all sorts.]
Every sort of the mightiest men conspiring together, do take upon them the
managing of all public

The Lacedemonian Commonweal, mingled therein these three kinds of States, so
aptly that it continued about seven hundred years after one manner, always
keeping the integrity and perfection of the first institution thereof: Wherein
the kings, the Ephores, and the Senate, had their preheminences and authorities
so entermingled and balanced together, that it could not well be discerned
under what kind of government it was stablished.

The Commonweal of Carthage was thus ordained at the beginning: It had kings,
and the Aristocratical power of Senators, and the Communaltie, which had also
their prerogative in matters that concerned them: so that as far as touches
the assembling

The Commonweal of Rome had these three parts so euenly and fitly entermixed
that a man cannot tell whether it were all an Aristocratie, or a Democraty, or
a Monarchy: if one consider the power and authority of the Consuls, he might
judge it for a Monarchy and kingly estate: and having an eye to the Senators,
he might deem it for an Aristocratie: or a popular Democratie.

The Venetians establishing their Commonweal, have so ordered the three
estates, that it sets our the kingly dominion, the government of
Aristocratie, and the authority of the people. Their high or great Counsel
having the sovereign authority,

Forasmuch as in the kingdom of France, the Possessions, Honors, and Offices
of the Commonweal are divided and parted amongst all the Estates
proportionablie unto their degrees, and every of them kept in his pre-eminence
and calling, there ensues of the same such a consent and agreement, as has
been the occasion of the continuance

therefore do they commend the form of the Lacedaemonians Commonweal, which ]
The seventh Chapter of this book is wholly assigned for the Lacedemonian
Commonweal: whereof also there is mention in diverse places of this work, as
for example, in the third book and tenth Chapter: and in the fourth book and
ninth Chapter: and in the seventh book and foureteenth Chapter: and also in
the first, third, and fourth books of Platoes laws: in the life of Lycurgus
written by Plutarke: in the sixth and seventh books of Polybius histories:
Xenophon has written a Treatise thereof: Cicero has commended it in diverse
places.

Kingly state being the Monarchy.] Aristotle in his third book of Politics,

THE Senate, the Oligarchie, and the Ephori or Tribunes, the Democratie, for
that the ] Aristotle in the fourth book of his Politickes, cap. 9. has these
words: Many men uphold, that the Commonweal of the Lacedaemonians is a
Democratie, because their institution has

OTHERS are of opinion, that the Tribuneship or Ephorian authority, is
tyranny.] Plato De Legibus says: When I consider the Lacedemonian
Commonweal, I cannot well tell how I should call it: for the power of the
Magistrates there called Ephores, is Tyrannical. Sometimes it seems above
all other Cities, most like the Democratie. Now, it were altogether
impertinent to deny, that it is no Aristocratie: also that the kingdom which
is perpetual therein, is as well by others, as by our selves deemed the
ancientest of all others. Therefore being thus upon the sudden asked the De
Legibus. King Theopompus devised this Magistrate to bridle the liberty of the
Kings, as Aristotle writes in the fifth book of his Politickes, cap. II. They
were two Kings continuing perpetually, and five Ephores remaining in Office for
a year, who were chosen by the people, yea of the meanest and basest sort, and
appeals might be made from the Kings unto

THE best Commonweal, which is compact of the most sorts.] Namely, that which

is the mean that the greatest part of the rich men do obtain the
Magistrateships, ] Diverse men have thought, that they could orderly frame a
Commonweal, so that the right and power of government might be limited
according to the revenues and plenty of goods and possessions: yet have they
fallen into most great inconueniencies. For it most often falls out, that men
of very base and mean calling attain to great richesse, insomuch, that for
the gathering of richesse, and increasing their substance by the gain of their
mean exercises and vile occupations, they spare not themselves, but beguile
their own nature, as well in victuals, as in taking their rest: to the end, to
rake the more wealth together. On the contrary side, some that be well borne,
and have been brought

he makes the election of the Senate and Co^nsell answereably to the authority
of a few.] Plato (as he writes in his sixth book De Legibus) would in his
Commonweal have the Senators chosen in such manner, that yearly, three
hundred and three score should be elected out of all the Orders, which were
four, by taking four score and ten out of every Order. And that first of
all, there should be chosen foure^core and ten of them out of the first
Order, by the voices of all them of the other Orders, with a fine set upon his
head, that should not give his voice. And next of all, as many out of the
second Order in the selfsame manner: consequently, out of

CHAP. V.
THere have been other forms of Commonweales brought in, some by men of no
learning, others by Philosophers, and men of experience in Government. All the
which forms draw nearer than the two former before spoken of, to those that in
time past have been established, and to such also as are goods, but also of
honors: howbeit, after a diverse and contrary manner about both of them.

CHALCEDON a sea town of Bythinia, situate right over against Constantinople,
still retaining the same name to this day.

MANY shall of rich become poor.] For if one rich father have many sons, and
the

AS for example, Solon made a law in that behalf.] Solon appointed not
possessions to

THAT forbid the possessing of so much land as every man list.] As for example,
at Rome

THE neglecting of which law in Leucadia.] Forasmuch as in Leucadia, the
alienation

MEN of reputation, (...).] Aristotle often uses this word, meaning thereby

FOR things needful.] Men do not fall to committing of unlawful acts, as to
tobbe,

without sorrow.] Which come without any greedy desire going before,

REMEDY for these three.] He means by these three, the desires of necessary
things,

FVRTHER, he has not taken good order in the equalities of goods, by reason he
only makes ] Appian lands and other goods as should remain above that
quantity and measure, would by

Artificers be public.] Namely slaves or thrals of the Commonweal, and not
any members of the Communalty of the City, nor accounted for Citizens. This
would make the City a very small one.

Epidamne.] A Town lying on the right hand as ye come by sea from Candia to
Ionia, and bordering upon the Talancians a barbarous people of the Country of
Ilyria, as Damnum signifies damage.

CHAP. VI. Of the several Commonweales of Hippodamus, and of the Milesians.
HIpppodamus the Milesian, Euriphones son, who found out the division of
Cities,

Hippodamus framed his City and Commonweal in such sort, that it being
ordained

Hippodamus. He was not only a Lawmaker, but also a builder, and invented a
fashion

SEPARATED Pyreus.] Pyreus was the principal Haven of the City of Athens, of
a good height and breadth. The commodity of this port was by experience found
so

reason of his long heir and of his costly and sumptuous apparel.] He was
curious in trimming his head and beard, and full of pomp in his garments.
Thucidides in the first book of his history writes, that of all the Grecians,
the Athenians were the first that began to lead a more civil and delicate life
then the rest: and tells how it was not long ago since the ancients of that
Country, yea and the honestest sort did wear linen clothes, and trinkets and
small things of gold work, with their hairs curled at the ends, and trimmed
in-curious manner.

decreed that judgments should not be given in courts by lots.] The Venetians
to the

every Judge to have a tablet therein to write his sentence.] To the end, the
Judges should not speak when they judged, but give their opinion in Tablets of
wax, or other st^ffe noted with letters, signifying either Absolution, or
Condemnation, or Delay. After that manner did the Areopagites in Athens, and
the Romans in public judgments and matters of great importance give
judgment, writing their opinions in the said Tablets, which they did
afterwa^ds cast into a pot, so that none of them knew another opinion,
neither did they all know the opinion of the whole company. The mark or note of
condemnation at Rome was this letter C. That of Absolution, this letter A. And
the note of delay, were these letters, N.L. which signified Non liquere, that
is to say,

is at this present a law to that effect in Athens.] The Athenians did
publickely bury those that died in their wars with pomp and funeral
Orations, and brought up the children of them that were slain, at the charges
of the Commonweal. This was

OF Orphans.] Such be Saint Marks Proctors at Venice, whose Office and duty

FIRST of all a man may move a doubt as touching the division of the multitude
of Citizens, for that his Commonweal is communicated to Artificers and to
Hu^bandmen, and to Soldiers, of a cause, the Judge shall divide the sentence,
and of a Judge become an arbitrator. For although

ARISTOTLE having first recited the principal articles contained in Hippodamus
the Milesian his Commonweal, does confute diverse of them, as the dividing of
the

for the rewarding and honoring of them that invent any thing to the benefit
of the Commonweal: it carries a fair show in words, and yet very dangerous
to be put in execution,

AS for the rewarding and honoring of them that invent any thing to the
benefit of the ] The men of old time living in great rudeness and want of
things needful for life, did so highly esteem the finders out of profitable
inventions, that diverse of them were cannonized for gods after their deceases:
as for example, Ceres, Triptolemus, Bacchus, Vulcan, Aesculapius, Lycurgus, and
diverse others, as is witnessed by Polydor Virgil in his book of the inuenters
of new things. In these days there

IT causes quarrels, and ministers occasion of some stir and alteration in
the State.] Although

FOR it is a question and doubt whether it be good or evil to change the laws
of the country.] De Legib. Lib. 7. writes thus: I say that alteration and
change in all things, (saving those that be leaud) is most dangerous at all
times and seasons, as well in the diet of bodies, as in the manners and
customs of souls, and absolute^y in all cases (saving the bad) specially by
one that he rehearses to this effect. At such time as King Darius reigned,

as we are by the way fallen into this matter.] Aristotle taking occasion at
that decree of Hippodamus, which appoints reward to the inuenters of any
thing M^l^m notum, and cui iam assueueris, tolerabile maximae, that is to say,
A known evil, and wherein a man is already accustomed, is most tolerable.

other sciences it has done good.] First of all he defends one of the parts
of the question, to wit, that it is expedient to change Laws after the example
of Arts and Sciences, which through corrections and additions have in
continuance of time ben amended and brought to perfection.

as the skill of civil government is to be reckoned amongst these.] Aristotle
De Legibus, and how it has been often invented, and lost and forgone again:
and in Polybius, Lib. ^.

in those days the Grecians ordinarily went armed with swords and weapons.]
Thucidides says in his first book: That the custom of going armed, was
general throughout

THE other old and ancient ordinances be very fond and gross.] Plato in Minos
says:

NOW all men do wholly bend themselves to seek, not for those things which
have been left by ] Socrates in Euagoras says: That Arts and Sciences came to
their perfection, not by staying only upon the sayings of our predecessors, but
by correcting and altering what was not aright in them. And in his Panegyricall
Oration, I think (says he) that by this means both other Arts, and also
eloquence would receive greatest increase, if not they who were the Authors,
but

THE first men.] The Jews, Christians, and Sarazens, do believe, that
accordingly

AND it is very likely, that those first men were engendered of the earth, or of
some corruption.] De Regno, says thus: (...), etc. that is, It is manifest, O
Socrates, that in those times this kind did bring forth nothing by propagation:
effect, (...), etc. that is, We inhabit this land, as not having dispossessed
De Generat. Animal. lib. 3. toward the end of the book shows: that by the
opinion of some persons, men might be engendered of the earth. Cicero De
Legibus, lib. 1. says thus: When the nature of all things is looked into, then
these things are wont to be so discussed as they are now: that by the
continual courses and reuolutions of the heavens, there came at length a
certain maturity of sowing the seed of mankind: which being scattered and
sowed on the earth, was increased and inspired with the divine blessing of
souls: and whereas men derive those other lib. 2. cap. 12. where he says
thus: They say that by certain conuersions and motions of the stars, there
arose a certain ripe and fit seede-time of men: therefore, that the new earth
retaining in it the procreatiue seed, brought forth certain hollow bladders
or bags, like bellies in form: which waxing ripe (nature compelling) burst in
sunder, and so poured forth young and tender creatures: then that the earth
abounding with a certain humor or moisture like to milk, nourished therewith
these new-bred creatures. Eusebius in his Treatise of the preparation of the
Gospel, makes mention

OR left behind of some corruption.] Plato in his Timeus, Critias, Menexemus,
and Politic,

WERE like the vulgar and ignorant sort.] Being rude and wild, and little
di^fering from brute De Leg. lib. 3. reasoning of the beginning and proceeding
of civil government or reigning, does most elegantly set out the state and
condition of the world renewed, and the needinesse, simplicity, rudeness, and
ignorance of the men of that time. In Timeus, upon occasion he touches the
same matters, and in his dialogue of government or of reign.

SO that it stands with no reason that we should satisfy our selves with
their decrees.] As fond, gross, blockish, and barbarous, the most part being
unjust and unlawful through the ignorance of the makers.

it is best not to leave the written laws unaltered.] It were a most goodly, a

in the skill of government (like as in other Arts) it is impossible to
describe all things perfectly.] Plato in his Politickes or Dialogue of
reigning: The unlikeness (says he) of

they must needs be written universally, and doings consist in particular
things.] Plato in his Dialogue of reigning writes thus: They think it not
possible to ordain what is cap. 11. reasoning whether it be more expedient to
be governed by one good man, than by good

it appears, that some laws are to be changed, and that now and then they
may be altered.] This is not the final conclusion, but of one part of the
question only, affirming that laws may be altered. Those laws that wholly
repugne the judgment and sense of nature, or that corrupt nature, and contain
manifest iniquity, ought to be changed or rather abrogated.

the contrary side, if we do advise our selves well in that behalf, it
seems that we ought ] Here is the other part of the question, that those
laws which have been allowed, and by custom established, should not upon light
cause be altered, though they contain in them some discommoditie or
imperfection. Aristotle, Ethics, lib. 5: shows how the faults of laws ought
to be dissembled and winked at.

FOR the alteration of them will not do so much good.] Vlpian a Roman Lawyer
says:

AS harm, by accustoming men to disobey.] There does nothing more debase and
weaken

THE example fetched from Arts, is false.] He has the same saying in the third
book cap. 12. These examples of Arts are set down by Plato in his Dialogue of
reigning, and in Minos.

FOR the law has no force to procure obedience to it self, saving custom.]
The chief authority

WEAKENETH the virtue and power of the law.] Often changing of laws decays

laws are to be changed, and whether all in every Commonweal, or not.] It

AND whether is it lawful for every body to change them, or to certain
personages.] They De Legibus, forbids all persons under the age of forty
years, to enquire whether the laws be well or evil ordained.

THEREFORE for this present we will lay aside this question, as not properly
belonging to ] Aristotle's drift and meaning in this second brook, is to
examine the Commonweales of his own time, as well those that were used in
Countries and Cities, as those that were written by any Philosophers or
Lawgiuers: and not to deal with laws,

CHAP. VII. Of the Commonweal of the Lacedaemonians.
IN the Lacedaemonians Commonweal, and also in the Cretane, and almost in all
others, two things are to be considered: the one, whether there be any thing
well or ill ordained, according to the right form and description of a
Commonweal: the

There were in Greece three notable Commonweales, the Cretane, the
Lacedemonian, and the Athenian; ordained by three notable Lawgiuers, Minos,
Lycurgus, and Solon: of which three he begins to entreat, and first of the
Lacedemonian, which surpassed the rest, as well in regard of the firm
establishment thereof (the like whereof was never seen) for it continued about
seven hundred years, as also in regard of the glory of the martial deeds
thereof, having a great while possessed the Empire of Greece. Aristotle, a
severe and strict examiner of all things, finds fault with certain notable
articles in the same, to wit, the conversation and demeanure of the Ilotians,
the liberty of women, and footing to the state of the Commonweal, by reason
the eight and twenty Senators, After thou shall have builded a Temple to
Jupiter Syllanvan, and to Minerua Syllanyan, and divided the people into
Afterward the kings Polydore and Theopompe added thereunto, that where the
people would in any wise alter the advice propounded to the Counsel by the
Senate, it should be lawful for the kings and the Sena^ours to break of the
Council, and disanull the decree thereof: as having altered, disguised, and
changed to worse, the sentences and propositions set forth by the Senate:
Andria, and the Lacedaemonians Phiditia: and this last, either because these
were such places wherein a man might learn to live soberly and thriftily (for
thrift or sparing, in the Greek tongue is called Phido) or because in those
places mutual amities and friendships were engendered, as if they would have
called them Philitia ( i.) places or feasts of love, putting a d for an l. It
might also be, that the first letter was ouer-added as superfluous, and then
it should be Editia: because men assembled together in these places to eat
and take their repast. Thus they assembled together by fifteenes or thereabouts
in every hall, and every one of them brought at the beginning of each month, a
bushel of meal, eight gallons of Wine, five pound of cheese, and two pound
and a half of figs: and over and above, a little piece of their money to buy
their meat. But besides all this, when any of them sacrificed in his house, he
sent the first fruits of his sacrifice into the public hall. Likewise, if any
had taken any Venison in Hunting, he sent one piece thereof thither: for in
these two cases only Phiditia, or meat assemblies, or love feasts, as we may
fitly term them. As concerning other light matters, touching contracts and
bargains betwixt man and man, being things which often change and alter,
sometimes on this, sometimes on that fashion, as necessity requires; he
thought best not to tie or reduce them under any written edicts or constraints,
nor yet to establish in them any settled custom not to be changed: but rather
to leave them to the discretion and arbitrament of men which had been well
instructed and brought up, to the end, to take from or add unto them,
according as the occurrence and occasion Retres, which is as much to say, as
grave sentences, or Oracles given by the god Apollo: neither would he ever
suffer that any of these should be put in writing: but it is expressly
mentioned in one place, that his meaning was not that any of his decrees should
be committed to writing. For as touching that which is of principal power and
force to make a City happy and virtuous, he thought that it ought to be
imprinted in the hearts by education, and in the manners of men by custom, that
it might there remain

NOW it is fully resolved and concluded amongst all^ that in a well governed
state^ the principals ] Plato and Aristotle are both of this opinion, that the
chief men of a country ought not to exercise any vile or base Trade, nor any
craft of hands, as mercenary hirelings. And so Lycurgus also ordained in Sparta
or Lacedemonia. Of which matter Plutarch in the life of Solon writes thus:
Lycurgus (says he) who inhabited a City, wherein there was no resort nor
ariuall of any strangers, and which had so large territories that might
sufficiently furnish

THE Ilotians conspired against the Lacedaemonians.] These Ilotians were men
enthralled dance filthy daunces, unbeseeming honest persons, and full of
derision and mockery, forbid^ing De Legibus, lib. 6. speaking of bondslaues,
mentions these Ilotes, Penests, and Periaeces of the Cretans.

MOREOVER, the liberty which was given unto women, is hurtful and
incommodious,

The Lacedaemonians have ever affied and ascribed very much unto their women,
suffering them to look into and to meddle more with the affairs of the
Commonweal, then they themselves did with the affairs of the house. Plutarch
in the life of Agis and Cleomene. And because the greatest part of their riches
was under the hands and custody

that in any City where the ordering and discipline of women is not good.]
Aristotle in his first book of Rhethoricke affirms, that in all Cities
where the estate and affairs of women is not well ordered and governed, as
among the Lacedaemonians, the one

FOR the Lawgiuer desiring to make all the City temperate and able to sustain
labor, has ] Of the education and nurture of men has been spoken before,
that of women was such as follows: First, the Lawgiuer willed and commanded,
that the young women should harden and inure their bodies to labor, by
exercising running, wrestling, throwing the bar, and whirling the dart: to
the end, that both the fruit of their wombes which they should conceive, taking
deep root in a lusty and strong body, might burnish and grow the better: and
also that they themselves being enabled and made strong by such exercises,
might with more De Republib. 5. allows in his Commonweal such public
exercise of young maids naked with young men, attributing the same works to
both of them, willing also that the old men

ESPECIALLY where men are in subjection to women, as for the most part amongst
] Great warriors are ordinarily great whorehunters, and Nations most warlike,
are commonly most given over to most licentious luxuriousnes, whence arose that
fable, which fained that the god Mars lay with the goddess Venus, and that
they were enwrapped and entangled in a chain by Vulcan her husband, as is
recorded by Homer and Ovid.

the Cel^es, (...).] Budeus in his first Annotations upon the vltra Celtas,
that is to say, beyond the Celtes. Philip Mel^ncthon in his Chronicles, li. 2.
is of opinion, that in ancient Greece the Galatians and these Celtians were the
people that inhabited on each side of the river Rhine. Other suppose, that the
name of the Celtians contained all the western people, as at this day the
Asians, Affricans, Moors, Turks, Sarasins, Abissines, Agiamesquians, and
Indians, call us Western people by the name of France: because that the first
that ever visited them with armies, and overcame them, were the free French
men, who always have made the greatest expeditions toward the eastern
countries. Therefore, from the cheef captains which were French, they have
translated the name to all other Christians of

some other which openly approve the unnatural fellowship with their own
sex.] The Celtians in old time were noted of the horrible sin of buggerie,
wherewith at this day they are not infected. Amongst the Turks and the Mores,
and even among the Persians also, this detestable and horrible vice is not
punished by the fire, as with us it is, but is permitted and tolerated to the
great scandale of mankind, and reproach to their law. De Legib. 8. severely
forbids men to abuse males in steed of females, calling to witness the
nature of brute beasts, amongst whom the males do not commit such filthiness
with each other, because it is a thing contrary to nature. He detesteth also
this same vice in his book of the same work, alleging the fabulous story
of Ganimedes, devised by the wicked Cretans, to the end, to cloak the villainy
whereunto they were then (and with them all ancient Greece) inclined.

the Lacedaemonians, where the most part of their affairs were ordered by the
direction of women.] For which cause they were named in Greek (...), that is,
Men governed by women, like as Pliny also in his sixth book calls certain
people,

they evidently made proof off at the invasion of the Thebanes.] At the
battle of Leuctres, wherein the Lacedaemonians were conquered by Epaminondas,
and lost

seems that such liberty was permitted to the Lacedemonian women not without
just ] The Lacedaemonians abode ten years obstinately at the siege of
Messenia, having sworn a solemn oath, never to depart from thence until such
time as they had taken the City. Wherefore in this their absence, they chose
out a certain number of young men, which came into the army after the oath, and
sent them back to dwell with their wives, and to repeople the City,
permitting them (as reports Iustine) indifferently to enjoy the company of
them all. Which deed, though done upon necessity, yet

SOME say, that Lycurgus attempted to bring women in subjection to his laws:
but when ] Plutarch in the life of Lycurgus: As touching that (says he) which
Aristotle reports that Lycurgns went about to reform women, and surceassed
presently, when he perceived that he could not attain his purpose, because of
the too great liberty, which in the absence of their husbands they had
usurped: who were constrained often to be at the wars: during which time,
they were left as mistresses and rulers at home: and their husbands also when
they were at home, honored and pampe^ed them above measure,

BESIDES the matters already alleged, a man may reprehend the inequality of
possessions also: for it comes to pass, that some possess great store of
goods, and others again very little, so that the whole country of Sparta is
grown into few men's hands: which thing was not well provided and looked unto
by their laws: For albeit, the Lawgiver ordained it to be a dishonest part,
and that well, to buy or sell a man's patrimony: Nevertheless, he has given
liberty to give it away, or to be bequeath it by Testament, although it m^st
needs be, that the same discommodity will arise by this means, as well as by
that. Now, the whole country being distributed into five parts, two of them
five are come into women's hands, by the means of the great inheritances

was accompanied with covetousness and niggardise, and the use with pleasures
and delights,

it comes to pass, that that country which could nourish a thousand and
five hundred horsemen, and thirty thousand footmen, can scarce now nourish a
thousand.] Strabo in his Geographie, lib. 8. speaking of the Lacedaemonians,
says thus: We shall be to prolixe in the description of this Country, if we
pursue many things that are mentioned in hystories, and leave others, the
Country being long ago desolate and unpeopled in comparison of that ancient
estate wherein it flourished of old time with a great multitude of noble
people: for besides Sparta, there remain now no more then thirty villages,
whereas in ancient time by commanding over a hundred Cities, it was called
(...), from whence every year were sent a hundred Beeues to that great solemn
lib. 6. describes the virtue and magnanimity of the Lacedaemonians: Seneca in
his S^asories, 2. writes thus: Every thing has his ornament: Athens was
renowned for eloquence, Thebes for sacrifices, Sparta for arms, because the
river Eurotas runs fast by it, which hardens and emboldeneth youth to the
exercise of future warfare.

many strangers into the City.] Contrary to the first institution of Lycurgus,
Coel. Rhodiginus de lect. Antiq. lib. 10. cap. 5. Neither only that, but more,
he allowed not his Citizens to frequent the company of ^^^angers abroad. He
permits not (says Plutarch) every one that list to go out of their

MOREOVER, the office of the Ephorie or the Tribuneship, is not well ordained:
for albeit

MOREOVER, the office of the Ephorie.] Ephorie ^ignifies as much as controling,
taken a peculiar precinct and place of audience, where they were informed of
the cheifest Lib. 4. writes: That Cleomones being dead, the Lacedaemonians
chose two kings, the one, Agesipolus, the other called Licurgus^ extract from a
lineage whence there was never hope that ever king should proceed. This man made
men believe, that he was of the race of Hercules, and caused himself to be
created king, by giving to every one of the officers six hundred crowns.

authority was very great and even equal to a tyranny.] Plato has the like
saying in his fourth book De Legibus, discoursing of the Lacedemonian
Commonweal.

changed from an Aristocratie to a Democratie.] If the Ephores had demeaned
themselves according to their duties, the Lacedemonian form of government was
an Aristocratie, directed by the counsel of the kings, and the Senate. Such
was the government of Rome, before the erection of the Tribuneship, which made
the power of the people greater then the power of the Senate: as Cicero writes
in his third book of Laws, and Salust in his histories.

which whether it were brought in by the providence of the Lawgiuer or by
fortune.] Here Aristotle seems to doubt, whether the Ephores were ordained by
the Law of Clio, says: That they were ordained by Lycurgus. Xenophon in his
Treatise of the Lacedemonian Commonweal, says it is very likely, that they
were brought in by the chief of the City, yet he affirms nothing.
Cleomenes, who overthrew them, in his information which he gave to the
Lacedaemonians touching their affairs, rehearses another original of the
Ephores, as Plutarke writes in his life, namely, that when the kings were
long occupied in the wars of Messena, they did choose certain of their
friends to minister law and justice in

being taken out from amongst them all.] The Ephories were chosen out of all
the Orders or Estates of the City, namely, out of the Senators, Gentlemen,
and Commoners. When Cleomenes had slain the Ephories, and thrown down their
seats and chaires, he for the proclaiming of the suppression of their state and
office, caused an assembly to be made of the people, to sh^we a reason of his
doing, saying:

BUT yet not after the same manner that is used now adays.] Like the election
of the Senators,

IT were better they should not judge after their own wills, but according to
the tenor of ] The Courts of Parliament in France, do judge almost as the
Ephores did, after their own wills, without tying themselves to the Law
written, or to any ordinances: but there is some difference between them: For
the Ephores were men of no skill, but the counselors and Presidents have
studied, and are well seen in the Laws.

manner of living of the Ephores does not agree with the intention of the
City.] The

IN like sort the estate of their Senate is not rightly ordained. For admit,
they were

BESIDES the former points, Aristotle in the Commonweal of the Lacedaemonians
does find fault with the ordaining of their Senators, who had too great
perpetual power, hearing and determining matters of life and death, and of
infamy, as Plutarke recites, without being subject to yield account of their
doings. And therefore the election which they made of them, was childish and
ambitious.

Senate, (...).] The Senate was welneere the very same thing at Rome, that
(...) was in Sparta, so termed of the ancients called in Greek (...). Of
which

yield unto them such perpetual power, and for term of life.] It is a
question that in all ages has been debated amongst wise men, whether the
principal Magistrates ought to remain in office during a certain prefixed
time, or for term of their lives. And there is an inconvenience either way:
For if they be for a time prefixed, they are not so much respected: and it
falls out, that they go out of office before they have

there is an oldnesse, as well of the mind as of the body. (...), etc.] In
very old age, not only the force of the body, but also the quickness of the
understanding and ripeness and integrity of judgment do decay; and when a
man is come to his doting days, he is no more fit to exercise any Magistracy.

were better they should not be exempted from correction as now they be,
(...).] Not subject to yield a reason of their doings. It is allowed by the
customs of France, contrary

Magistrates of the Ephores seems to be a correcter of all others.] Such
manner of correction is made two manner of ways, to wit, either by appeal
when a higher court, or the prince, or people does amend the sentences of the
vnderiudges, or else when a reckoning is required of him that is gone out of
office: and after that manner, it seems that Aristotle would have Judges
corrected. In old time they used this manner at Rome, as they do still at this
day in diverse places of Italy, toward diverse vnderlegates and

the election of the Senators which they make by suffrages and voices, is
childish.] Lycurgus at the first, established the Senate of those personages
that were adherents to him in his enterprise: But he ordained, that when any
of their rooms should fall void from time to time afterward, he should be
preferred thereinto that was found to be the honestest man, and of best report
in all the Town; so that he were above threescore

How Lysander attempted by all means to procure the abolishing of the
privilege of Hercules his stock: which was that none might be chosen king,
except he were of Diod Sicilian in the foureteenth book, cap. 4.

As touching the kingly state, whether it be best or not for Cities to be
governed by kings, we will speak thereof in another place: but soothly, it were
better to judge the worthiness of every king^ by his life and virtuous and
honest actions, then as they do in these days, by their races. Also that the
lawgiuer himself has not thought that he could make them perfect in bounty
and goodness, it appears in that he distrusted them as not being good
enough. Therefore they used to send such Ambassadors together with the king,
which bore evil will one to another, and thought

THE kingly state in Lacedemon, was Hereditarie, in the race of them that
descended from Hercules, serving for the ordering of the wars, and having the
pre-eminence in the sacrifices. Two kings reigned and governed there together,
not after their own wills, but according to the Laws of the Country: saving
that in the Wars they had absolute power. Aristotle, Polit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
says thus: The kingdom in the Lacedemonian Commonweal seems to be most
just: yet has not the king absolute power there in

MOREOVER, their assemblies at meals, which they call Phidities, have not
been well ordained at the beginning: for it had been better to have assembled
at the public charges, as they do in Candia: but amongst the Lacedaemonians,
every man is bound to bring his portion to the feast: notwithstanding, that
there be some so poor, that they are not able to furnish this charge,
insomuch, that the contrary to that which the Lawgiver intended, resulteth and
happens unto him, who would have the institution of such feasts
Democraticall: howbeit, as it is ordained, it is in no wise Democraticall,
because it is not easy for very poor folk to be there. Also

THIS manner of assembling at meat, has been already declared, Every man
furnished a certain quantity of victuals in these assemblies consisting of
fifteenes. And whosoever could not furnish his rate, was excluded from the
honors and Offices of the Commonweal. This course Aristotle blames,
affirming it better to have made those feasts at the charge of the Commonweal.

SOME men also have justly blamed the law touching their admirals, as a law
that is the cause

FORASMVCH as they have sought in this Commonweal to abase the kingly state,
and to moderate it by diverse means, they forgot themselves when they added
unto it the perpetual authority of the sea, which was in a manner, to double
the authority and power by sea and by land.

YET further, the Lawmakers invention may be blamed, as also Plato has found
fault with

PLATO in his first book De Legibus, Aristotle in the seventh book of his
Politics, chap. 2. 3. and 14. and Polybye of his history, lib. 6. do blame
the Commonweal of Lycurgus, as too warlike, saying, that all his Laws were
well ordained to make men valiant, but not to make them just nor upright.
Notwithstanding, Plutarke answering them, says: That Lycurgus shot at no such
mark, as to leave his City commanding over many, but rather deeming, that the
felicity as well of a City as of a particular man, does

THEREFORE they preserved themselves by warring, and after they had conquered
and gotten ] Aristotle, Polit. lib. 7. cap. 14. writes thus: That the
Lawgiver ought rather to bend his Scipio Nasica.
who was of opinion, that Carthage (albeit it was envious of the renown and
name of Rome, and a perpetual enemy thereto) should not be rased and
destroyed, to the end, they might always have an enemy against whom to fight
and show themselves in arms. For all enemies and envious persons being wholly
overthrown and destroyed, it were a danger that the Commonweal of Rome being
instructed and furnished for the Wars, and the Roman youth brought up in
martial

NEITHER is the error less.] The Lacedaemonians err also, in that they
esteem not

AGAIN, the public treasures and taxes are not well ordered in Sparta, where
they are constrained to maintain great wars, without having a common stock,
and do also contribute with evil wills: For whereas the most part of the
Country does appertain to the Lacedaemonians, they do not exact subsidies one
of another with care and diligence. By means whereof, the

THE Commonweal of Lacedemon as Polybius writes in his sixth book, was well
ordained, to retain the Citizens in concord and modesty, and to preserve
their liberty a long time, insomuch, that they that publickely aim at that
mark, cannot possibly find a better order. For the equalities of possessions
and their plain and common manner

made the City poor and particular persons covetous. (...), etc.] Although

CHAP. VIII. Of the Commonweal of Crete ordained by Minos.
THe Commonweal of Crete is somewhat like the former, and has certain things
that are no worse ordained, and in diverse others again, it is less adorned
and polished: for the Lacedemonian Commonweal (as it seems, and is reported)
has in many points imitated the Commonweal of Crete. Also the most part of
old ancient things, are less corrected, then those that be new. For the
report goes, that Lycurgus sorts of men, does desire the conservation of the
state: but here in Crete they choose not the Cosmi

Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Callisthenes, Ephorus, and diverse other Greek
Authors in conferring the Commonweal of Crete with the Lacedemonian, have
written, that they were welneere both alike. Which Polybius refuteth in the
sixth book of his history, showing their difference. First, in that amongst the
Lacedaemonians it was not lawful for one to be a greater landed man then
another, but every one was to have an equal portion of lands of the signorie.
Contrary thereto, in Crete, every man was allowed by the law to possess as
much of the Country as he could come by, without any manner of limitation. For
by the amplenesse of possessions, excellency was esteemed and

FOR the report goes, that Lycurgus.] It has been already recited, how
Lycurgus before

THE Lictians.] Licte was a town of Crete, and the Lictians inhabitants of the
same, who

Perioecians, (...).] A word affected in the country of Crete, signifying
husba^dmen that tilled the lands, as the Ilotians did to the Lacedaemonians:
notwithstanding, the Perioecians were not thrals and slaves as the Ilotians,
but farmers or tribute payers: the word according to the Greek propriety
signifies as much as dwellers about, or neighbors adjoining.

Minos.] Plato reasoning of the nature and definition of the law, has
entitled that

THIS Island has such a situation as is natural and fit to rule.] The
situation of the cap. 7. Likewise Cicero has spoken thereof in his 2. book of
the nature of gods, and in his treatise of destiny: and also Varro in his first
book of husbandry according to Eratosthenes^ Philip de Comines in his history
of king Lewis the eleventh, does show the aptness and commodity of the
situation of France, and the

THE description and ordaining of the Commonweal of Crete.] Here are declared
certain affairs and Magistrateships, to answer directly in all points one to
another in diverse

of his Dynastie.] That is to say, extreme and wicked Oligarchie, so called of
the verb (...), which signifies to be able, and therefore (...) is as much to
say, as Potentateship: but Potentate in Italian is taken in good part, and
(...) in Greek in evil part. Whereof there is mention in the fifth chapter of
the fourth of these books.

be better done according to law, then after men's wills, which is no sure rule.]
Aristotle

is preserved by the situation of the place, which defends strangers from
approaching ] In all countries compassed about with the sea, as Crete or Candie
is, the access and entrance is uncertain and dangerous, which hinders
strangers from coming thither with their armies, and therefore does serve for
safety and defense. We may say that by the like reason Venice has been
preserved to this day above the space of eleven hundred years since it was
first founded, without falling into the hands of strangers, or changing the
fo^me of their Commonweal, or religion. The like whereof we do not read to
have happened to any other cities: notwithstanding, that she abounding in all
wealth, and being full of gold and silver and all other kinds of riches, might
have provoked lib. 1. of the Venetian Co^monweal.

THEREFORE the Perioecians obey.] The Paizants or countrymen in Crete being
enclosed

CHAP. IX.
THe Carthaginians seem also to have a good form of Commonweal, and to
excel others in many things, and in diverse points to come near the
Lacedaemonians: for these three Commonweales d^ resemble one another, and are
far better then the rest, to wit, the Cretan, the Lacedemonian, and the third
which is of the Carthaginians, wherein there be many things well ordained. That
this Commonweal is duly and rightly instituted, it appears by the continual
perseverance of the people in their order and form all causes are judged by
all the Magistrates, and not certain causes by certain M^gistrates, and

Forasmuch as Carthage has been one of the most triumphant Cities that ever
was, as well in respect of the commodious situation of the place and fair
buildings therein, as in regard of the large Empire and good government, we
will set down these excellencies as breefly as we can. Therefore one part of the
City of Carthage stood in a great gulf of Mare mort^^m on the other side. And
the same was enclosed The Arsenal of Carthage.
But at the end of the said long and narrow piece of land whereof we have
spoken that lies between the sea and the pond, there was for want of a wall a
point that turned toward the haven which was very low and weak, by reason
there had been no account made of it at the beginning. Now the ponds on the
land side were nauigable from one to another, and had the entry of the sea
about threescore and ten footes broad, which was shut up with chains of iron.
The Merchants ships lay chiefly in this place, and therefore The beginning and
increase of the Empire of Carthage.
which by reason thereof was called Byrsa. Afterward in continuance of time
these Tyrians having exercised themselves in trade of merchandise every where,
being more painful and diligent then their neighbors, did prepare many ships,
and by that mean builded the city: and having subdued the country of Lybia,
held a great part of the sea in their subjection, and then warring with their
neighbors, one after another, conquered Scicily, Sardinia, with all the other
Islands in that sea, and sent part of their people

CHAP. X. Of the Commonweal of Athens, ordained by Solon.
OF them that have entreated of Commonweales, some never had the managing and
guiding of public affairs, but evermore did lead a private life: and we
have spoken almost of as many of them as have set down any thing worthy the
remembering. Others have been Lawgiuers, some in their own Cities, others in
strange Cities. Of these, some have been only Authors of laws, others founders
of Commonweales: as for example, Lycurgus and Solon, who stablished both laws
and Commonweales. The Commonweal of the Lacedaemonians has been spoken of. As
for Solon, some think he was a virtuous Lawgiver, and abrogated the
Oligarchie (being then very immoderate and unreasonable) and delivered the
people from thraldom, and established the Democratie or popular

THE City of Athens was long vexed with civil dissension about the
government of the Commonweal, and divided into as many factions and
pa^tialities, as there were

counsel in the Areopage, pertains to the Oligarchie.] The most part of
Authors They that were banished or noted of infamy before Solon established
his laws, shall be restored to their goods and good name, except those that
were condemned by sentence of the court of Areopage, or by the Ephetes, or by
the kings, in the place of audience of the palace, and in These words seem to
prove, that the court of Areopage was erected before Solon was chosen reformer
of the Laws. For how could any offenders have been condemned by sentence of
the court of Areopage before Solons time, if Solon were the first that gave it
authority to judge of matters? Except they will say, that the letter of the
law which is dark must be helped, and somewhat supplied therein that wants,
by giving such interpretation as follows unto it, to wit, They that shall be
attainted and convict of any matter whereof the court of Areopage, the Ephetes,
or governors of the City have the hearing and determination, upon the
publishing of this law, shall remain

EPHIALTES and Perycles brake the lims of the counsel of Areopage.] When
Perycles this court of Areopage, that he caused the hearing and determination
of many matters

far, that they have brought the Commonweal into that form of Democratie
wherein it now remains.] Plutarke in the life of Cymon writes, That as long
as he was in the City, he always bridled and kept under the ouerlustinesse
of the people, that invaded the authority of the honest and upright men, and
drew into their hands the souerainty of power and rule: But as soon as he was
gone into the wars, the common sort having no body to gainesay their doings,
ouerturned the whole government of the Town, and confounded all the ancient
Laws and customs which they had used at all times, and that by the
provocation and practice of Ephialtes. For they took the hearing and

ordained, that none should bear office, but such noble and rich men as could
levy yearly five hundred bushels.] Solon determining that Offices and
Magistrateships should remain in the ^ands of rich Citizens, as they were,
and to mingle the authority of government in such sort, that the common people
should be interessed to a part therein, which prerogative they had not
aforetime, he made a general valuation of the possessions

Zaleucus to the Locrians and Epizephyriens, and Charondas of Catania to his
Citizens

Caele Rodigin, de Antiq. lectionibus, lib. 10. cap. 19. makes mention of many
old Lawgiuers.

Zaleucus.] He was so severe a Lawgiuer, that when his own son had offended
a

CHARONDE or Charondas.] Valerius the great in his 6. book and 5. chapter, and

OF the race of the Bacchians.] It was a most noble race in Corinthe, fetching
their

laws, they called positive laws, (...).] As being the principal grounds of

the number of inheritances should be maintained.] That they should not be
divided amongst Coheres, but remain wholly to the eldest, or best liked or
dutifullest of the children, for that the number of the said inheritances does
not increase by the dividing of the same.

Draco.] This man, a great while after the establishing of the Commonweal of
Athens,

Pyttacus.] Was of Methelin in the Isle of Lesbos, reckoned for one of the
seven wise men of Greece. Who after he had possessed the dominion of his
City by the space of ten years (his Citizens offering and yielding it
into his hands) and had given them laws, gave it up of his own accord and
good will, contenting himself with

the doing of good.] To terrify other persons from drunkenness, through the
sharpness of the punishment.

Rhegium.] Rhegium a City of Italy, situate in the straits of Scicilie, over
against Messana. It is a very ancient Town, retayning her old name at this
day.

in Thrace.] Chalcis a City builded upon the hill of Athos in Thrace,
according to the old extent of the Country. For by others it is attributed to
Macedonia.

THE THIRD BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED OVT OF GREEK, AND
FRENCH, INTO ENGLISH. The Argument.
Since the Commonvveale is the life of the City, and the City a multitude of
Citizens, the reason of the Commonvveale

CHAP. I. Of a City, and of a Citizen.
WHo so undertakes to treat of a Commonweal, and to show what every
Commonweal is, and of what quality and sort; ought first to have consideration
of a City, to the end, it may be understood what a City is: multitude of
Citizens, it is expedient to learn, who ought to be called a Citizen, and who
is a

Here is the very entrance and beginning of the discourse touching the matter
of government. For the attaining whereof, it is needful to know aforehand,
what a policy and a^e admitted into the high counsel at the age of five and
twenty years, the common

children, who by reason of their age, are not yet enroulled.] This was the
order at Rome, that every one of the Citizens children within three days
after their births and namings, were carried to the Temple of Saturn, where
the treasure and receipt of the revenues of the Commonweal was kept: At which
place the childrens names were registered in the records of the masters and
disposers of the treasure, by which means, every child's age, and the number of
children was known, and this was called the profession of children. No child
was accounted for a man, until he came to the age of seventeen

AS Clisthenes did at Athens, after he had driven out the Tyrans.] After the
Athenians

CHAP. II. When any alteration happens in a City, in what case the City
shall be said to remain: the same that it was before, or otherwise.
IT seems also a matter pertaining to this question, to consider in wha^ case
a City is to be called, the same, or not the same, but another: that is,
whether he may be changed or no. The cheef resolution of this doubt consists
in the place, and in the men. For the place may be severed, and the men also,
and some may dwell in one place, and others in another, which is but a slight
doubt: for in as much as a City is taken and understood and now and then
after the Phrygyan fashion. If it be thus, it appears that a City is to be
called

Aristotle taking occasion upon the propounded question, (to wit, whether the
form of government being changed, a man is bound to observe the bargains and
covenants which were contracted before) discourses how a City when any
change or alteration happens unto it ought to be esteemed, one and the same,
or another and diverse: Libic. cap. 9.

in as much as a City is taken and understood diverse ways, (...).] This word
(...) in Greek signifies sometimes the place, walls, and buildings of a
City, sometimes a City it self, that is to say, A company of men
associated de Deuinat. lib. 1. Look what Socrates says in the Politic of
Plato, (...), that is, Politic, or belonging to a City. Cicero De finibus,
lib. 5. says thus: As a man has engrafted in him by nature, I know not what
seed of ciuility and popularity, which the Greeks call Political. In his book
De Oratore, lib. 3. thus: In time past Philosophers De corona, or of the
Crown, uses it so, (...). And Aristotle in his Pol. lib. 7. (...). And in the
fourth Chapter of this third book. (...). ciuitas, is not only taken for a
Town or City, wherein some Archbishop or Bishop keep their seat, as
Ecclesiastical persons usurp the same, but for signorie or publik government,
or for an assembly of men, subject to the same laws and Magistrates. Cicero
De somnio Scipiones, or Scipioes dream, has this saying: Nihil est illi
principi deo, etc. That is, Nothing that is done upon earth, is more acceptable
and pleasant to the cheifest Quis ignorant ita naturam rerum tulisse, vt quodam
tempore, etc. Who does not know (says he) that such was sometimes the
necessity of nature, that men in former times did wander up and down
scattered and dispersed in the fields, no natural nor civil law being as
then described: and that they possessed no more as their own, but that which
they could take away and keep by strength and violence, or by slaughter and
wounds? They therefore which first excelled in any eminent wisdom and virtue,
perceiving the docility and capacity of man's nature, gathered together these
scattered people, and from that inciuilitie and savageness, lib. 1. says
thus: Every City of the Heluetians is divided into four boroughes. Also in
the beginning of the fourth book he says: That the Nations of the Swissers
had a hundred boroughes or Towns. Also in the seventh, That there was one
City of the Hedurans which prolonged and hindered the certain victory of all
France, and that by the authority of it the other Cities were vpholden in
authority, Lib. 1. Principes vero, etc. Cn Pompey, and Julius Caesar were the
cheifest Captains of those factions, being both patrones of the City, one of
whom had publickely granted unto it the possessions of the Volcans,
Atrecomians, and Iluans: the other had bestowed on it the French Nation, being
conquered: and augmented their tributes. Titus Liuius Lib. 10. Decad. 3. Nulla
magna, etc. No great City can endure long in quiet and tranquillity: if it
have no enemy abroad, it shall find some at home.

Babylon.] This beautiful City was in old time reckoned amongst the seven
miracles lib. 1. Diodor. Sicil. lib. 2. Iustine lib. 2. Quintus Curtius. lib.
5. Plinius, lib. 6. cap. 26. Strabor, lib. 6. Paul. Orosius, lib. 2. and is
much renowned in many places of the old Testament.

AS we say, that the quier or chorus, being one while comicall, and another
while tragical.] to the people comedies or tragedies at every pause and change
of persons, and hereof Chorus, and in English a quier. Now even as a tragedy
and a comedy did differ, the one being more stately, and the other more light:
so also did tragical and comical quiers, which might notwithstanding be sung
by one and the same persons: the form notwithstanding which gives perfection
unto things, being diverse and different.

CHAP. III. Whether the virtue that belongs to a good man, be the same with
that which belongs to a good Citizen.
AFter the things before mentioned, it follows consequently that we consider,
whether the virtue of a good man and a good Citizen be one, and the same or
no: that is, whether to be a good man is to be a good Citizen: for the
understanding whereof, it is meet first to consider summarily what is the
virtue that belongs to a Citizen. Therefore as a Mariner is one of the
fellowship and society of nauigatours, so a Citizen is one of the fellowship
and society of civil government. Now, albeit that Mariners have unlike offices
and charges, one drawing at the oar, another holding the against us, or it may
be no absurdity will arise hereof, seeing that bondslaues, and enfranchised
persons,

Here a question is propounded whether the virtue of a good citizen and a good
man be one and the same or no: and it is answered that it cannot be the same.
First, because there de Repub. Ve^et. lib. 1. Salust in his second Oration to
Julius Caesar, touching the ruling and reformation of the Roman commonwealth,
Haec igitur multitudo primum malis moribus, etc. that is, Therefore this rude
multitude first infected with corrupt manners and conditions, and after
dispersed into diverse arts and trades of life, and in no respect agreeable and
at unity together, does not seem unto me any thing fit for the rule of the
Commonwealth. Herod. lib. 2. affirms that the Thracians, Scythians, Persians,
de Repub^ and Timeus, writes that Gentlemen and Soldiors abstain from
Husbandry and mechanical trades, and such other gainful occupations. In old
time lands and revenues were designed and set out in Egypt for the
maintenance of soldiers, to the end that they might wholly addict themselves
to the exercise of Arms, without practicing any base Art or Trade. The
Alarbians greatly detest Mechanical arts.

Again, there is another kind of government by the which he that is in
authority commands ] Aristotle in the first and fourth chapters of the first
book of this work says, that Political government is amongst free men and
equals: amongst whom every one that is capable lib. 1. Amongst very many
governments of Co^monweales, the governor and obeier are changed by turns,
because they will be equal according to nature, and differ in nothing. Albeit,
that when the one gouernes and the other obeies, there is a difference sought,
in apparel, words, and honors. In the 1. chap. of the 2. book, Those things
whereof an union is made, must differ in kind, in sort, that the recompense
which is equally made, may preserve the Cities and Co^monweales, as it has
been before declared in the books of manners: the which reco^pensing of
necessity must be kept amongst such as be free and equal, for that they cannot
all govern together, but rather subject still enterchangeably, as if they were
of a diverse nature and quality, the^e being

CHAP. IIII. What is a Commonweal, and how many kinds thereof there be.
THese things being thus declared, it follows that we consider

Policy is the order and disposition of the city in regard of Magistrates, and
specially in regard of him that has the souerain authority over al, in whose
government the whole co^monweale consists. The which government, if it be in
the hands of the people, is called popular, as in the Cantons of the Swissers,
in the Grisian leagues, and in many of the free cities of Almaine, and was in
old time at Athens: If it be in the hands of certain persons, as at this day it
is amongst the gentlemen in Venice, and in certain families in Genes, then is
it called a signorie: if it depend wholly upon one man's authority, it is called
a monarchy, as in France, Spain, Portugal, etc. Now the cause that moves men
to assemble together

CHAP. V. Of the division and definition of Co^monweals, and of their
transgressions.
Upon the determining of these matters, next of all we are to examine how



CHAP. VI. Of the right and law of the Democratie and Oligarchie.
LEt us first see what end and bounds they appoint and limit to the Oligarchie,
right indeed: for if they have begun their society, and assembled themselves
together into one place for 100 pounds, had disbursed and laid down but one
pound, should reap as great a share and portion as he that disbursed and
finished all the rest, as well in the principal stock, as in all supplies,
profits, and increase thereof. But the cause of men's assembling and drawing
together into corporations and cities, is not only to live, but rather to live
well: for if the cause of their assembly and ioining in society, were to live
only, the city should consist of slaves, and of other creatures: but now it is
not so, because they are neither partakers 2000, and yet had community of
nothing but only of traffic and of warlike confederacy, for all that it should
not be a city, and why

It is alleged that there is a certain right in the Oligarchie and
Democratie, being corrupted Commonweales, and in some respects contrary one to
another. Upon which right, they first ground themselves, that favor and
maintain the Oligarchies, who for that they are the superiors, and chief both
in riches and nobility, do account themselves

FVRTHER, whereas both parties acknowledge in some sort a kind of right, they
suppose that ] Right and equity is not well understood in Democraties and
Oligarchies: for in Democraties the populacy being all free alike, think that
they may equally have part in the government, without any regard at al either
of riches or nobility, only in regard of freedom: and contrariwise in
Oligarchies, they regard nothing but riches and nobility, the lords and great
men supposing, that all the commodities, and Grimaldians were Guelphes. The
Athenian people was so disordered and let loose desiring to deliver and
discharge the communaltie of, and yet not to lay the trouble upon

CHAP. VII. Who ought to bear rule in a City.
IT is doubted of some, who it is that ought to bear rule and dominion in a
City, whether the multitude, or the richest sort, or the best men, or him that
is best among the best, or a Tyrant. And every one of in Navigations: For
albeit, that many idiots and unskillful persons do intrude themselves, and

It having been declared, that the difference and variety of gouernements
does accrue from that part which is of greatest sovereignty and power in a
City, and which commands the rest: also how all Cities are necessarily
governed, either by one sole man, or by a few together, or by the multitude,
whence arise six kinds of policies, three good and three bad: Here in this
chapter he discourses after what manner estates are best ordered: for there
are many difficulties, whether the government be in the hands of some few, or
in the power of the communalty: for if it be said, that it ought to be

CHAP. VIII. Of the end of a Policy, which is the public good, and
NOw forasmuch as in all Arts and Sciences, the end whereunto they tend, is a
certain good: therefore the greatest and principallest good, is the end of the
greatest and principallest Art, which is the faculty of Policy: Now, this
political good is right and equity, consisting in the common profit of all.
Now, all men think, that this right is a certain cause to contend in civil
affairs, about equality in honors and Magistracies, as because some

Forasmuch as the end of civil policy is Justice, respecting that which
concerns

CHAP. IX. When a man does greatly excel in virtue, how they ought to behave
themselves: and of Ostracisme.
IF any one, or more then one, and yet not so many as may be able to make a
full complement of a city, do excel others so much, according to the
excellency of virtue, that the virtue of all other, nor their civil power, be
equally comparable with theirs, if they be many; if they be one, with one: yet
these are not to be numbered to the parts of a City: for they

If either one or a few persons do so much excel in virtue in cities, that
none other are to be compared with them, it is just and requisite that they do
always command over the rest; but the like is not to be used amongst them
that excel in riches, nobility, or plurality of friends: for where regard is
had to such goods in the distribution of honors, there the state of
Commonweal is corrupted and depraved. But yet in every Commonweal, be it
good or bad, it is best that there be not amongst the Citizens

THEREFORE it is likely, such a one to be as a god amongst men.] The
Prophetess Pythia

BUT according to such, there is no law.] Xenophon in the eight book of his
Paedia king, showing first in himself the way that he would have others to
walk in, and representing De Legibus, lib. 4. Cicero, lib. 2. Plutarch in his
work entitled, That learning is requisite in a Prince.

the popular Cities do constitute an Ostracisme for such a cause, for they
seem to prosecute equality above all things.] Plutarch in the life of
Themistocles, says thus:

AND that counsel of Periander to Thrasibulus.] Aristotle in this work, lip. 5.
ca. 10. says: Terpsichore, writes that Thrasibulus gave this counsel to
Periander, and not Periander to Thrasibulus, as Aristotle here reports in
these two places. But howsoever it was, the story is still of the same
substance. After (says Herodotus) that Periander trafficked by embassage with
Thrasibulus a potentate of Militum, he beeame more cruel and bloody then ever
was his father Cypselus, he sent to the same Thrasibulus to know by what
means after he had confirmed his estate, he might best govern his City.
Thrasibulus led his Ambassador

Wherefore for this cause nothing does hinder the Monarchs, that they should
not consent ] Aristotle Polit. lib. 7. cap. 3. says: That the changes of
Commonweales do happen by an unproportionable cap. 8. This is a common rule in
a Democratie, Oligarchie, Monarchy, and every kind of policy, not to make any
too great above measure; but rather to distribute small Offices, and of long
continuance, cap. 9. As a nose passing the just proportion, is notwithstanding
fair and well favored, but if it be stretched out excessiuely, then first
the member is deprived of mediocritie, and at last it comes cap. 11.
Moreover, there is a general Caveat for the safety and preservation of every
Monarchy, not to suffer any one to grow too mighty, or if it must be so,
then to make more then one, because they will observe and have an eye to each
other: or if by chance it be necessary lib. 1. lib. 3. and 5. of the
Commonweal.

CHAP. X. Of a kingdom, and the several kinds thereof.
THese thus manifested, it is expedient peradventure to discourse otherwise,
and to consider of a kingdom: for this form of government we say is to be
reckoned in the number of those that be good. But we are to consider whether
it be expedient for a City and Country wherein men are to live well and
happily, that men obey the rule of a king, or follow some other course or
government: or whether it be convenient to some to be subject to the regal
Empire, and to some others, not so conducible. But first we are to divide and
distinguish of gouernements, and to see whether the

De Legibus, lib. 5. And Socrates in his Panegericke bear witness. The third
is elective,

AND this is easy to be known, that there be many kinds of gouernements,
and ] Some kingdoms are Hereditary, and others elective. Hereditary kingdoms
are either by succession from male to male only, as the kingdom of France,
which the French men wisely ordained at the first by the Salicke law, their
kingdom continuing by that providence in the same form of government these
twelve hundred years, the Crown never departing out of their Nation, and the
royal lineage being never changed but thrice in so long continuance: The like
whereof has never happened in any other Monarchy, signory, or popularity,
that is in mind of man, where the issue male failing, females have Munster lib.
3. Iul Pflug. de Repub. German. The Duke of Venice possesses the honor,
dignity, and representation of a king, but yet he can do nothing alone, and
being joined with other Magistrates, has no more power then one of them: who
also are of so small authority, albeit they be so great, that they can decerne
nothing which is of any moment, but by the sentence of the counsel. Contarin.
lib. 2. de Repub. Venet. In some Realms there are nobles and gentlemen not
lawful (as Plato says in his Politic) for a king to rule being not chief
Priest also. cap. 10. Also the first kings of Rome were the high priests, and
afterward the Emperors called themselves by the name of Pontifices Maximi,
chief Priests: and the Emperors of Constantinople were consecrated, as are
the kings of France after their imitation. In like manner the Caliphes of the
Sarasins were both kings and high Priests in their religion, one of them in
Bagadet, another in Caire. Paulus AEmilius De historia Gal. lib. 4. and 5. The
King of Calecuth is chief in his religion, and for that cause excels in
dignity all the other kings of India, and is called SAMORY, that is, a god on
earth. The Pope commands and rules the temporality of the church, called

Rex Helenus, rex idem hominum, Phaebique sacerdos.
THOSE which are called AEsymnetes.] Aristotle uses this word in the Chapter
following, and in the tenth Chapter of the fourth book, which some expound
King. Dionysius Halycarnasseus translateth it, Dictator: it signifies also
(...),

seeing that the former deserved well of the multitude.] Aristotle, Politic,
lib. 5. cap. 10. says: For all those that either have been, or may be
benefactors to Cities or Countries, attained to this regal honor: some by
procuring that the City might not fall into servitude and slavery, as Codrus:
others delivering it out of servitude into liberty, as Cyrus: others for
edifying some City, or enlarging the confines of the Country, as the kings
of Lacedemonia, Macedonia, and Molosse.

CHAP. XI. Of the fifth kind of government, whether it be more expedient for a
City to be governed by a good man, or by good laws.
THese are the kinds of gouernements, four in number, the first which
flourished in the heroicke times, over such as voluntarily subjected themselves
in certain definite matters, for the king himself was both general of the
war, judge, and high Priest: the second, barbarous successiue by lineage,
wherein the subjects were governed according to the laws of servant: the
third, which they call AEsymnetia, that is, tyranny by election of voices: the
fourth Laconicall, that is to say in one word, a perpetual military
intendencie by tribe: these kingdoms differ thus among themselves. The fifth
kind of administration,

The beginning of this question is; Whether it be more expedient for a
Commonweal

But peradventure some may object, that a good man will recompense the having
of affections, by being able to judge in particular cases, which the Law
cannot do, and therefore that it is necessary that he be the Lawe-disposer:
and also that there be Laws written, yet not fully confirmed and unviolable,
in regard that they may men: but when as plenty of these virtuous and good
men began to abound, then they

To the four former kinds of Kingdoms is adjoined a fifth, which is properly
called a Kingdom, where the weal public is administered at the Princes will,
with regard had to the general profit and commodity of the subjects. Which
kind of Kingdom is like unto an Oeconomie: for albeit that a governor of a
family orders his house at his own will and pleasure, yet nevertheless he
has respect to the commodity of the whole family. Now, all these sorts of
kingdoms are reduced to two extremes, to wit, the Lacedemonian, and the
absolute. After, upon the occasion of the Lacedemonian royalty, which was
nothing else but a commission, or military superintendance over the armies, pro
and contra, affirmatively and negatiuely, as well in this Chapter, as in the
next, where it is resolved and discussed. Herodotus in his third book, called
Thalia, handeleth the same controversy: and so also does Dionysius
Halicarnasseus in

THE first which flourished in the Heroicke times over such as voluntarily
subjected themselves ] Such were the kings of Egypt at the beginning, who
lived not disordinately, as others that exercised Lordship and dominion, whose
only will served them instead of a law, but followed the constitutions of the
laws, both in collecting their duties and tributes, and also in the manner and
frame of their living. And they which served and ministered unto them, were not
slaves, or of a servile to the end, that after their example, the king by
imitation might learn to use his Biblioth, lib. 1. cap. 8.

THE beginning of the question is, Whether it be more expedient for a
Commonweal to ] Many are of this mind, that the government of men ought not
to be committed to one alone, but that it is necessary to search out a more
divine thing, to take charge of men, as is easy to conjecture by the example
of many sorts of brute beasts. For amongst sheep, one sheep does not
govern the whole flock; and amongst Horses and Oxen, one Horse or Ox do not
govern the whole Heard: but man is he, that excelling and being more Noble
when any is punished without the disposition of the law, many grievous iarres
and dissentions

CHAP. XII. Of an absolute king, and how people are more disposed
NOw, whereas we have discoursed of such a king as governs all things at his
own beck and pleasure, we are to consider further of this matter. For he
which is called to be a king lawfully, he does not as we say, make a show of
a kingdom. For in all cities it may come to pass, that the Empire of war
may be perpetual as it is in Democratie their own matter: and because they
being troubled, should come to judge. Therefore it is manifest,

All sorts of kingdoms, where the king does not absolutely command, are not
properly kingdoms, neither in very truth is any a kingdom, but that wherein
the king has absolute authority: concerning the which, it is here disputed
whether it be just and lawful

let us speak of that kingdom which is called absolute, where the king does
every thing ] (...), That is, an absolute kingdom, where the kings pleasure
serves in stead of law, his word in stead of judgment, and his life an
exemplar discipline of doing well or evil. After this manner have many of the
Roman Emperors commanded, usurping full authority over the life and death,
goods and honors of their subjects Such is at this day the rule of the great
Knes, or Duke of Muscouie, who surpasses in the severity and rigor of
commanding, all the Monarchs of the world; having obtained such authority over
his subjects ecclesiastical and ^ecular, that he can dispose both of their
lives and goods at his pleasure, no man daring to contradict him. They De
Legibus, lib. 3. Aristotle Politic, lib. 5. For as Socrates in his
Panegericke speaking of the Persians, says: That it cannot be, they being so
brought up, and so governing their affairs, that they should either be endued
with any vert^e, or triumph over their enemies: for how can there be amongst
them of such conditions,

CONSIDERING that Monarchs make unto themselves many eyes, ears, hands, and
feet.]

WHEN therefore it shall happen, that either a whole kindred, or any one person
shall arise ] Aristotle Politic lib. 7. cap. 3. says thus: Peradventure men
esteem it an excellent thing to bear rule over all, forasmuch as by this
means a man may be able to perform many honest and just exploits: and
learning, and to cause the name of God to be feared and reverenced, whose
births

all do judge, that according to the rate of excellency, honors and offices
should be deferred.] The Medes laid the sway of government upon one Deioces,
because of his sufficiency in giving judgment, and of that good justice which
he practiced amongst them, according to the report of Herodotus in his first
book, which I thought good to transcribe into this place, as very fit for this
present matter touching a king and a kingdom. The Medes (says he) inhabiting
towns and villages, amongst them there was found one Deioces, a man highly
reputed of in his territory, and who applying

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED OVT OF GREEK, AND
FRENCH,
THe Philosopher sets down in the beginning, what consideration a Lawgiuer
or a Politician ought to have in the establishing of a Commonvveale: then
continuing

CHAP. I. What a Politician or a Lawgiuer ought to consider in the establishing
of a Commonweal.
IN all Arts and Sciences which are not handled in part, but are in some one
kind perfect and accomplished, it is the same man's part to consider only
Democratie, and one only Oligarchie.

Because Aristotle in the former book divided policies into three goo^ and
three bad: he declares by the example of other Arts and Sciences, as of the
Art of exercise, of Physic, of Building ships, and making apparel, that
it is necessary for the perfection and understanding of a good Politician to
declare, not only which is the best and most to be desired form of
government, but also which is a good one, not simply, but in regard of the
commodities thereof, such as they be: and thirdly, that also which is supposed
to be good, although it be not. And then every form of policy being
propounded, to know how it was first established:

CHAP. II.
SInce we have declared in handling of the forms of Commonweales, that there
are three right forms, to wit, the Kingdom, the Aristocratie,

Having repeated those things which were handled in the former book, the
Philosopher propounds breefly those whereof he intends to speak in this
fourth and fifth books, affirming, that of all naughty forms of Commonweales,
a Tyranny is the worst, being a transgression of a Kingdom: which of good
forms, is the best. Next to a Tyranny, that an Oligarchie is most vicious, as
being contrary to an Aristocratie: and

MOREOVER, a certain one of those which have written before us, has been of the
same opinion, ] This certain one is Plato, who in his Dialogue iutituled the
Politician, or, De Regno, writeh thus of a Democratie, (...), etc.

CHAP. III. Why there are diverse forms of gouernements.
THat therefore there are many kinds of Commonweals, the kind: forasmuch as
the parts of them differ after the same manner. For a Commonweal is the

The cause why there are many forms of Commonweals, and many branches of
every form, is, because in every City there are many parts, by the diversity
whereof,

CHAP. IIII. That a Democratie and an Oligarchie are not simple forms: and
that there are many sorts and kinds of Democraties.
NOw we must not frame our Democratie so simple as some have accustomed to do,
to be only where the multitude commands: forasmuch as in Oligarchies, and
every where, the greatest part bears rule: nor an Oligarchie to be where a
few govern. For if all were a thousand and thr^e hundred, and amongst them
there were a thousand rich men, and these did not communicate the government to
the three hundred poor and free men equal to them in other things, their
estate should never be for oftentimes it falls out, that the same men are
Soldiers and Plowmen. Wherefore if both

A Democratie is a form of Commonweal, where free men and those that are
poor, being more in number, are Lords of the estate: An Oligarchie, where rich
and noble men being few in number, have the government. Now, as diverse kinds
of living creatures are distinguished by the conjunction of diverse parts, as
of mouths, throats, bills, bellies, feet, paws, tallons, wings, hands, eyes,
ears, noses. So by the assembling together of diverse parties in Cities,
arise diverse forms of Commonweals. Now,

THE which is elegantly disputed by Plato in his Commonweal, though not
sufficiently: for Socrates says: That a City is compounded of fo^re necessary
kinds of people, which are the Weauer, the Husbandma^, the Tailor, and the
Builder, afterward as if these were not sufficient, he adds thereunto, etc.
SOCRATES. Go to the^, let us frame a city in our speech, beginning from the
first cradle thereof, and let us grant, that want was the first cause thereof.
ADIM. Be it so. SOC. The first and cheifest want is the prepara^ion of
no^rishment; to the end, we may both be and live. ADIM. Without doubt. SOC. The
second of habitation, the third of apparel, and such like things. ADIM. It is
so. SOC. How shall a City be able part of his no^rishment in the fourth part
of his time, and employ the other three parts,

THEREFORE the first Democratie is that which is said principally to consist i^
equality.] dangers, then the poor are not any whit despised of the rich, for
oftentimes a poor viz. that if any be endued with an excellent natural
conceit, he will never prove a good man, unless even presently from his
infancy, he be accustomed and enured to honest recreations, and continue such
exercises, wholly supplanting all the rest. Now by reason of this former
neglect, it comes to pass, that in such a City none does consider by and
that through the unfit education used by the father. GLAVC. That does also often

CHAP. V. Of the kinds of Oligarchie.
AMong the kinds of Oligarchie, one is, wherein public offices

The right of governing the Commonweal, is limited in Oligarchies, by the
valuation of every particular Citizens wealth. And as in ancient times were
used four kinds of valuations of goods, so are there also four kinds of
Oligarchies, as the wealth does by degrees increase. The first is, where
public offices are given to rich men, enjoying such a proportion of wealth,
that they may exclud^ the poor from government, and because they are many in
number, the Law bears rule amongst them. In the second kind there are fewer
rich men, but such as possess greater wealth, and being in office, may of
themselves choose successors, or place new officers in the rooms Posteris
laxitas mundi and rerum amplitudo d^^no fuit, post qua^ Senator censu legs
coeptus, index fieri censu, Magistratu^ ducemque nil magis ex^^^^re qua^
census. Seneca in the 10 book of the Declamations says, The tax and
proportion of wealth, aduanceth the Senators order: it discernes the knight
from the Plebeian: in armies it gives promotion, Judges are thereby chosen:
The tax of a Roman Gentleman,

CHAP. VI. For what cause there are many sorts of Democratie and Oligarchie.
IT is then manifest by the discourse going before, that there are so many
sorts of Democratie and Oligarchie: for it must needs be that either all (...)
(...) (...) (...)

CHAP. VIII.
IT remains that we speak of the Commonweal, so called generally, and of
the Tyrannical state. Now we have thus ordained it, though it be no
transgressio^, nor yet the Aristocraties lately mentioned. Nevertheless in very
deed, they do all swerve from the right form of a Commonweal: afterward
they are reckoned amongst those which are their corruptions and blemishes,
those that hold more of the Oligarchie, are rather called Aristocraties,
because discipline and nobility

The Commonweal so termed by the general name, is a government compounded
of the Oligarchie and the Democratie: which composition, when it enclineth to
the Democratie, is called a Commonweal: and when it bends more toward the
Oligarchie, it is called an Aristocratie: because virtue and riches do
commonly accompany Nobility, which is defined to be ancient riches and virtue.
There are three things (says he) which contend for equality in Co^monweales;
liberty, riches, and virtue: but the mixture of rich and poor men, is called a
Commonweal, and that mixture of three an Aristocratie, not the true and first
sort, but the second.

CHAP. IX. How the Commonweal so called generally, is made of the Democratie
and Oligarchie.
WE will now declare, how that form of government which is generally called
a

That form of government called by the general name of Commonweal, is made
of the Democratie and Oligarchie in three sorts. First, in taking the Laws and
ordinances of both: then taking the mean of those things that are commanded
in both: thirdly, in following or observing the institutions, partly of the
one, and partly of the other. And then the mixture or temperature shall be
good, when the same Commonweal shall seem both a Democratie and an Oligarchie.

AS may be seen in the Lacedemonian Commonweal, which many hold to be a
Democratie, ] Aristotle in the 2. book of his Politickes, chap. 4. Some hold
opinion, that a good Commonweal should be a mixture of all the forms of
goue^^ement, and therefore they praise the Lacedemonian Commonweal, which
they say, consists of the Oligarchie, the Monarchy, and the Democratie:
their royal estate to be a Monarchy; the Senate, an Oligarchie; and the State
of the Ephori, Popular. Plato in the foureteenth of his Laws, When I consider
the Lacedemonian Commonweal,

CHAP. X. Of the Tyrannical State, and the kinds thereof.
WE will speak now of the Tyranny, not for that it deserves a long
discourse, but that it may have a place in this treatise, since we have set it
in the number of Commonweales. We have in the former book spoken of a
Kingdom, where we discoursed touching that State

Although the Tyrannical State should not be called a Commonweal, as it was
said before, because the Laws have therein no authority, but all things are
ordered at

third kind of Tyranny, which seems to be principally a Tyranny, and is
opposed ] Aristotle in the fifth of his Politickes, chap. 10. Almost the same
accidents do grow in kingdoms and Tirannies, as we said, did chance in
Commonweales: For the kingly state does imitate the Aristocratie, and the
Tyranny is made of the extremest sort of the Oligarchie, and of the
Democratie, and is therefore very hurtful to the subjects, for it is
compounded of two corrupt Commonweales, retayning the transgressions and
blemishes of them both. Moreover, it will easily appear, Item, the oppression
of the people, the driving them out of the Citadell, and forcing them to
disperse themselves, is common to them both, as well to the Oligarchie, as to
the Tyranny. It takes likewise of the Democratie, the making of war against
the Nobles, the destroying of them by covert, or open means, and banishing
them as adversaries and enemies to that state, because they are the Authors of
conspiracies: when some will seek to rule themselves, others refuse to endure
subjection. For which cause, ^eriander counseled Thrasibulus to loppe off the
highest ears of corn; as if it were necessary always to make away the
cheifest Citizens.

A discourse touching the beginning, form, and vices of the Tyranny: taken
SOCRATES. There remains yet to speak of that goodly Government, and goodly
Lord, called a Tyranny, and a Tyran. GLAVCVS. It is true. SOCR. Well then my
friend, what is the form and manner of a Tyranny, since it is almost manifest
that it springs from the Democratie? GLAVC. Very manifest SOCR. Does not the
Democratie spring from the Oligarchie in the same sort, that the Tyranny
springs from the Democratie. GLAVC. As how? SOCR. That good which is cheeflie
proposed kind shall be the people, that is, those which meddle only with their
own affairs, and Certes, the Tragical Poets, as being wise men, shall pardon
us, if us and the rest that become so, but after what manner lives he? GLAVC.
Tell me I pray you, as the common Patria and Matria, as the Cretanes call it.
And this is the end of such a man's desire. ADIM. Altogether. SOCR. Are they not
likewise so addicted in private before their advancement? First they converse
with those that flatter them, and are ready to please them in all things, who if
they have any important business, they fail not to dispatch it ^o the^, abasing
and applying themselves by all means to their humors, but when they have
attained their purpose, they seem strange ADIM. Yea certes. SOCR. Thus spend
they their whole life, not being friends to any, commanding in lordly sort over
some, and obeying others: whereupon we may well conclude, that a Tyrannical
nature does never this, should declare unto us what the state of a Tyran is in
respect of others, should I do

CHAP. XI. That the best Commonweal, and of longest continuance, is that
wherein there are many men of mean substance, neither too rich, nor too poor.
THey do not measure the best Commonweal and best state of life for many
Cities and many men, by excellent virtue, nor by knowledge, both which have
need of Nature and Fortune, nor by that kind of Commonweal which they would
wish, but according to that state of life which is common to the greatest part
of men, and that form of government, whereof many Cities are capable. For the
Aristocraties whereof we spoke ^^e^ now, are either not fit for many cities, or
resemble much the Commonweal, so generally called^ so that we shall speak of
both, as of one. The deciding of these questions, depends or riches, and
their contraries, poverty, or weakness; or ignorance, do with great
difficulty obey

That is the best Commonweal which consists of Citizens possessing mean
substance for neither they which are too rich, nor they that are extremely
poor, be fit for the mainte^ance of civil society, the one being too proud,
the other too base and abiectly minded; the one contumelious and insolent, the
other envious and deceitful; the one commanding as lords, the other obeying as
slaves. But a city should consist of those who are equal and like, as they be
whose estates are mean. Wherefore, that is the best City which consists of
such, and being as it were exempted from seditions, does thereby long uphold it
self, but where many are exceedingly rich and poor, there

CHAP. XII. Of that which does generally concern the preservation of Cities,
and what manner of multitude is fit for a Democratie or an Oligarchie.
WE will consequently show for what sorts of men what kinds of Commonweales are
fit or behoofull, but first we will set down that which generally concerns
all. For that part of the City which desires the safety and preservation
thereof, must have more power then the other which desires it not. Now every
City consists of quality and quantity: by quality I mean liberty,
riches, knowledge, nobility; by quantity, the excessive multitude of the
people. It may so come to pass, that in one of the parts whereof a City
consists, there is quality, and in the other, quantity: As to have more
vn^oble Citizens then noble, more poor then rich, but in such sort, that they
exceed not so much in quantity, as they fail in quality: for which cause
they should be compared together. Then according to the excess of the
Oligarchicall multitude. Therefor he that makes laws in the

IT is necessary for the preservation of every Commonweal, that that part of
the City which desires the safety thereof, be of more power then the other
which does not desire it. And there are two things to be considered in the
parts of a City, to wit, Quality and Quantity: Quality, as Richesse, Liberty,
Learning, Virtue, Nobility: by

that part of the City which desires the safety and preservation thereof ought
to have more power.] Aristotle in the Chapter following^ it is very profitable
to ordain the valuation of Citizens goods after such a rate or proportion,
that they who participate in the Commonweal, be more in number then they who
do not participate: for the poor viz. to see that that part which is content
with the present state, have more power then the other which is not therewith
content. And in the eleventh chapter of the same book: Since Cities do consist
of two parts, to wit, of poor men and rich men, it must be so provided that
both of them think that their safety and preservation depends of the state,
and it must be carefully looked unto, that they wrong not each other in
anything, that he have the stronger on his side, to the end, that when need
requires, he be not enforced

CHAP. XIII. Of the sleights and subtle devises by the rich against the poor,
and by the poor against the rich, to purchase to themselves the government of
THere are five sorts of sleights and subtle devises used and practiced to
circumuent the people: The Assembly, the Magistracies, Judgments, Arms, and
Exercises. The Assembly, that it be lawf^ll for all to be present and
assistant therein, and that there be a fine set on the rich men's heads, if they
be not assistant there, either only, or in greater number. The Magistracies,
that they which have yearly revenue, may not refuse and why there are others
besides those whereof we spoke before, (for there is not one kind of Democratie

Six Democraticall, and as many Oligarchicall laws, subtly and maliciously
devised to uphold, and cause the one estate to prevail against the other in
five things: which are, the public Assembly, Magistracies, Judgments, Arms,
and Exercises, which things may be justly or equally moderated, in being well
entermixed.

CHAP. XIIII. That there are three parts of all Commonweals, the Counsel,
the Magistrates, and Judgments: and first of the authority of the Counsel,
and the manners thereof.
WE will speak again of all Commonweales in general, and of every one
severally in the discourse following, beginning where it is requisite. Then
there are three parts in all Commonweales, wherein an advised Lawgiuer must
diligently consider and regard what is fit or behoofefull for every one. For
where such parts are duly ordained, the Commonweales do of necessity prosper
well, and differ only according to the difference which is in every one of them.
One of these three parts consists in public Counsel: the second in the
Magistrates, what power they have, and

There are three parts in all Commonweales, the Counsel, the Magistrates, and
the certain number do determine of al things, it is Oligarchical: but if the
determinations

belongs to the Counsel to deal in the affairs of peace and of war, to
make leagues, or to break them, to ordain Laws, and to abrogate them, to
condemn, to banish, to confiscate, and to call the Magistrates to account.]
Here Aristotle speaks of the first and sovereign Counsel of a state,
whereon depends all the rest of the government, and by means whereof many
and diverse necessary parts for the establishment of a Commonweal, are tied
together and united, even as in the round world, many unlike mouings are held
together by one heavenly and durable moving, and all causes by the first cause
of al. De ^espargne (as they call him) overseers of the treasures, whose charge
it is to understand how they are levied and employed; and the Secretaries
appointed for the said treasures: or else this Counsel is assembled for the
parties, that is, for matters of justice depending on the sovereignty or royal
prerogative; then there enter the Masters of the requests, waiting by
quarters, who report requests, informations, appeals, and other affairs of
consequence whereof Zazgilars, who do record and register it. Touching the
treasures, the Bassas meddle Sign^ri Cai, and the College of the Ancients, or
of the Sa^ij, represent the Aristocratie, who foresee and consult between
themselves touching the affairs about which the Senate is to be assembled.
They contin^e but six months, and are distinguished into three degrees or
orders. In the first there are six, which surpass the rest in experience and
good reputation, who have the principal charge of governing the Commonweal,
and other affairs of importance; touching which, they give advise to the
Senate, that there may be order taken for the^. In the second degree are five
inferior to the other in account, which have charge of the Soldiers that are
in the pay of the Signorie, following arms under the leading of their Captain
general. In the third degree are five others, who have charge of Syndiquez so
soon as their charge is expired, that is, they may be accused and called to
account. In Switzerland every Canton has a double Counsel, the little and the
great. But upon any weigthy cause that concerns all the Cantons, they hold
their general Counsel called a Journey or Diet, the most times at Baden: as
in like case the Ionians and AEtolians did in ancient times, calling such
assemblies (...) and (...), whereof Herodotus makes mention in the first book
of his History, and Titus Liuius in the first book of the war of Macedon.
There was besides in Greece a public counsel of all the States, called the
Amphictionicall counsel, because it was first ordained and instituted Publicum
Graeciae Concilium. Those people that from the beginning sent thither their
Agents called Pylagorae, and had voices therein, where the Ionians, Dorians,
Perhaebeans, Beotians, Magnesians, Achaians, Pthiotes, Melians, Dolopians,
AEnians, Delphians, and Phocians: afterward there came many others also. Strabo
in his ninth book of Cosmographie writes, That this Counsel was kept at
Delphos in the Temple of Apollo, by reason of the commodious situation of the
place, which is as it were in the midst of Greece, as well of that part
within Isthmus, as that without: and he calls it (...), the nauill of the
earth. This Counsel of the Amphictions was De Bibliotheca Historica, cap. 8.
where he says, that the Thebans not contented with the battle of Leuctra,
wherein they had overthrown the Lacedaemonians, did besides frame a complaint
against them in the assembly of the States of Greece, which is called the
Counsel of the Amphictions, and did prosecute it in such sort, that the
Lacedaemonians were there condemned in a great sum of money, because they had
taken by stealth in time of peace the Castle of Thebes, which was called
Cadmaea. In like manner the Phocians also having profaned and tilled a great
part of the ground consecrated to the gods, called should pull down their walls:
that they might in no sort come to the Temple of Apollo Messire Michel de l'
Hospital Chancellor of France, in the first Oration he made to the Estates
held at Orleance, Anno, 1559. Wherein he does at large confute those which say
that the king does in some sort diminish his sovereign power, by taking advise
and counsel of his subjects, since he is not bound thereunto, and that he
makes himself too familiar with them, which engendereth a contempt and If he
chance to die, then the Archbishop of Magunce assigns the other electours to
Neque vero illorum tantum munus iudicandi esset, sed and reconciliando
discordes, and tumultuantes compescendi, and litium causas praecidendi: ac nisi
res aliter componi possint, tum vero pro tribunals sedendo, causas cognoscendi,
ac vnicuique ius suu^ reddendi. Hac ratione and querelis de iudicioru^
prorogatione obuia^ iretur, and causidicorum artibus munimu^, loci
relinqueretur. Haec ille. The assemblies of the states is held in Polonia every
year, and that chiefly for two causes, the one for administering of justice in
souerainty, for there are appeals made thither

CHAP. XV.
WE will now come to the distinction of Magistracies, for this part also of
the Commonweal has many differences. For it must be considered how many
Magistracies there ought to be, and what authority they are to have, and how
long every one is to continue, because some allow them half a year, others
lesse^ out of certain companies and fellowships until they have passed over all the citizens, or always out

The second part of Commonweales consists in Magistrates, which are properly
those that have power to deliberate, judge, and command, but chiefly to
command. Some Magistracies are necessary in every City, others not necessary,
yet profitable; which great and rich Cities use: for small Cities having few
sufficient men, are constrained to commit many offices to one man. Then all
kinds of Magistracies are not fit or behoofefull for all Commonweales, but some
are profitable for some Commonweales, and other for others: neither are all
created in the same manner, but some by lot, others Plat. De Legibus, lib. 12.
shows the necessity and importance of the suit De repetundis, called in
Greek (...), whereof the Nomophylaces in Greece, and the C^nsors in Rome, had
commonly the charge: but sometimes the people being assembled, was judge
thereof. Budeus in his former Annotations on the Pandects, complains that the
Syndicate (which is an accusing or Vincent de la Lo^pe has gathered the

CHAP. XVI. Of Judgments, and of the kinds and manners thereof.
IT remains that we speak of the third part, which is of Judgments: whereof
we will by

The third part of Commonweales consists in judgments, which part has three
differences in like sort, as the Magistracies have; the first is, of what
Citizens Judges are to be chosen: the second, of what causes they are to judge:
the third, how they are to be created or ordained by voices or by lot. And
there are eight sorts of judgments according to the diuer^ity of causes, which
may be easily understood by the reading of the text. Plato speaks of Judges
in the sixth and twelfth of his Laws. Aristotle also treating

IT remains that we speak of the third part, which is of Judgment.] Plot.
De Leg. lib. 6. are of treasons, sacrileges, extortions, falsehood, thefts,
murders, whether wilful or Pro Praetura vrbana. Vos inquit, quod ad vestram
famam, existimationem, salutemque communem pertinet, At this cay in Switzerland
the taking of any thing for judgment either directly or indirectly, is
forbidden on pain of death. In England likewise the Judges place is little
profitable unto the^, for after that they are chosen to the number of 12.
Tribuni aerarij, yet the same persons did not judge always, but the Pretors
being annual Judges, were therein President, and chose by lot out of the
aforesaid 3. estates, a certain number of Judges, but if they whom they had
chosen, were refused by either of the viz. to Senators and Knights, as
Suetonius and Dion write. Paulus Manutius in his book of Laws, does diligently
treat of the manners which was observed in the election of Judges. Budeus in
his former and latter annotations on the Pandects, has observed many notable
points touching the manner of the Roman judgments, which they that are
desirous to know farther thereof, may read. As also that which Gruchius has
gathered in the first book of the Roman elections, declaring principally what
were the kinds of the Roman judgments in the time of Cicero. And Sigonius in
his second book of the ancient law of the Roman Citizens, chap. 18: who
following the custom of the Romans, puts such difference between the
Magistrates and the judges, that the Magistrates appointed the judges, or
interposed an edict: the Judges having understood

WHICH if they be not well administered, there ensue seditions and changes of
Commonweals.] la Tournelle, wherein criminal causes are judged: and the
Exchequer chamber for such causes as concern the domains of the crown. The
court of requests, where are judged at the first propounding, the causes of
those that are of the kings train, or others who are privileged. The auditory
of the masters of requests of the household, who judge of the titles of
offices. The cha^bers of the generals of the taxes, and the Chancery. On the
other side is the chamber of accou^ts, and another of the viz. the Prelates, of
whom it took the name; and the Barons; who were assisted by certain Lawyers,
or men that were otherwise learned, called clearkes and lay men. That 3.
Prelates and 3. Barons were president there, who did not so much confirm
Judgments by the greater number of opinions, as by the sufficiency of those
which gave their opinions. And that the lay Counselors were chosen out of
Gentlemen and others, who were enioined to be graduats in the law: but it
sufficed if they were meanly seen in other learning, as we see some of the
short Messire Michel de l' Hospital declared in his second Oration which he
made to the Estates at Orleance. Besides, they had in those days few statutes
and edicts, for they thought that the true laws were good and honest manners;
and natural reason assisted by an upright conscience, joined with due
experience, the true r^^le of right judgment: But when men became thus
skillful in points of law, and the offices concerning judgment, having had
before a time limited and small profit, were now become perpetual,
gainefull, Qui dictitabat, iudicem nec de obtinendo iure orari oportere, nec de
iniuria exorari: After

THE FIFTH BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED
ARistotle having spoken of a City and the parts thereof, (wherein the whole
weight of the knowledge of government is comprised)

CHAP. I. Of the changes happening in public Estates.
WE will consider here which and how many, and what are the causes of these
changes which happen in co^monweales: and what are the destructions of every
one, out of what forms into what forms they are changed, and therewithal
what their remedies are, both in general, and in particular, and by what
means they may be chiefly preserved.

The Philosophers purpose is to treat in this book of the changes of Estates,
and to show the

Our beginning herein shall be, that many forms of Commonweales, have been
established,

The most seditions do happen, because that (as all men confess) in the
distributing of honors, equality must be proportionally observed in every
Commonweal; yet some being equal in one thing only, as the poor men in
Democraties are equally do use both lot and election. They use lot in the
creation of the Electors, or chusers

forms of Commonweales have been ordained.] As well principal as subalternal;
third book, chap. 5. and fourth book, chap. 2. 3.

all men confess, that there should be a certain right and equality.] The
end of government is civil justice; and Right is the publlcke good, or common
vtility, 3. of the Politickes, chap. 8. Likewise right or justice is called in
the first book, chap. 2. The order or rule of civil society: because that is
said to be done by right, which is done conveniently according to the order and
institution of civil society, and according to the form of every Commonweal,
as the Democraticall, Oligarchicall, and Aristocraticall

to proportion.] We will afterward show what this proportion and
proportionalitie is^ and how many the kinds thereof be Right (says Aristotle
in the fifth of his Ethickes, chap. 3.) consists in proportion; and proportion
is not only of the number numerant, or that does number, but also of the
number numberable, or that may be numbered. For proportion is the equality of
reason, and consists in four terms

nevertheless they err.] In taking that which is in some sort just, for that
which is properly and simply just: and they judge ill, because they judge of
themselves, and of their own affairs, 3. of the Politickes, chap. 6. agreeing
in the equality of things, and not of persons. They err in speaking of
equality, because they adioine not them to the number of equal persons, nor
account them equal, who are so in very deed. We have already touched this point
in the said sixth chapter of the third book.

in the Democratie, where all the Citizens being in some sort equal, and
because they ] He yields an example of his saying in two corrupt
Commonweals somewhat contrary, viz. in the Democratie and the Oligarchie,
wherein Right is evil understood. First in the Democratie, where the
Democraticall persons, having all like freedom, think that they should all
equally participate in the government, without any respect to be had to
^^^ches or nobility; so that in such an estate the poor are superior in all
things, a^ attribute to themselves the public commodities and honors, which
they distribute

IN the Oligarchie, when they who are unequal in some things, will be
unequal in all ] The other example of right, ill understood, is taken from
the Oligarchie, whose

WHEREBY it happens, that some as being equal, repute themselves worthy ]
Poor men having equal freedom in the Democratie,

OTHERS as being unequal, seek to have more.] In the Oligarchie, the rich and
Noblemen

WHICH is unequal.] As more honor is greater reward: for inequality
consists

Then all these Estates have in themselves a certain right, wherein
nevertheless they do

all these Estates have in themselves a certain right, wherein ^^^erthelesse ]
The Democratie and Oligarchie are grounded on some part of right, or rather
some show of right. Aristotle in the third of his Politickes, chapter eight.
Because they who are equal in some one certain thing, must not attribute to
themselves an equal part of all things; nor they a greater part, who do
exceed in one thing. For they that are superior in richesse, or in Nobility,
are not simply superior, neither they that have like liberty, are absolutely
alike: because

when either of them have not such a part in the government of the Commonweal,
as they think that they ought to have.] As at Rome the Senate and Nobles in
ordaining the popular Estate and government, after the expulsion of the Kings,
assumed

such as excel in virtue, might have iuster cause to mutine, as those which by
reason should be absolutely and only unequal.] The virtuous being less
esteemed, or ill used, might have greater occasion to mutiny: as Cato, being
repulsed when he sued for the Praetorship, or rather (as most Authors write)
the Consulship: Aristides the just when he was banished from Athens: Scipio,
Rutilius, and Cicero, from Rome. Nevertheless, they raise no commotion,
because they have more regard of the public good, then

are some of higher birth, and in regard of this inequality will be preferred
and advanced above the rest.] As the Princes of the blood in France, and the
Lords at Venice, and the Gentlemen of the best houses through all Christian
realms, and in Persia and in India, and wheresoever Nobility is respected.

men do account those noble, who flourish through the virtue and riches of
their ancestors.] Aristotle in the 3. of the Politickes, chap. 8. Every man's
Nobility (says he) is honored in his Country, because it is a probable
thing, that of the better Parents the better children are borne: for Nobility
is virtue by descent. And in the fourth book,

These are, as I may say, the beginnings and fountains of seditions, which
cause the changes

THESE are the beginnings and fountains of seditions.) Civil commotions are
raised viz. when such as are equal, are not equally used among their equals,
and some of them more advanced; or when such as are unequal, are unequally
used among them who are likewise unequal; but the superiors are equal to
their inferiors, or else less set by and despised.

WHICH cause the changes of Estates in two sorts.) He does first set down two
sorts

SOMETIMES from the present form into another diverse.) The first manner of
changing

When the Roman Empire declined, and the title thereof was reduced into
Germany, and others, which prospering from the beginning, did by little and
little grow to such

from a Democratie into an Oligarchie, or from an Oligarchie into a Democra^^e,
and from those forms into an Aristocratie, or from these into those.] The
natural conuersions of Commonweales are very exactly considered and discussed
by Plato in the eight book of his Commonweal, and no less diligently set
forth by Polibius in the sixth of his History, which places the Monarchy as
the first government of all, springing

they seek not to change the present form of government, but maintaining
still the same Estate, they will have it governed by themselves.] The second
manner

the Oligarchie and Monarchy being still continued.] With their Laws, or the
same form of Government remaining. For the Oligarchie, we will cite

MOREOVER, they contend for the respect of more or less, as to augment or
(...) the authority of the Oligarchie, or of the Democratie, and in like sort
of other Common^^^^^ to the end, to enlarge or restrain them.] The third
manner of changing Estates, is (...) the forms are not altered, but do
somewhat vary in regard of more or less, as (...) Oligarchie becoming more
Oligarchicall, and the Democratie more Democrat^^^^

BESIDES, in changing some part of the Commonweal.) The fourth manner is, when

As if they should ordain or put down some Magistracy.) The Dictatorship at
Rome

As it is said that Lysander attempted to have changed the Kingly st^^^ a^
L^ced^^^^.) writes in the fourth of his Laws, and in Alcibiades the first.
But Lysander (as Plutarch

King Pausanias to have abolished the State of the Ephori.] The two principal
degrees at Lacedemon, were the Kingdom and the State of the Ephori, opposed
each against other, as the Tribuneship and Consulship at Rome. Cicero in his 2.
book of Laws. Then as Lysander attempted to change the Kingdom, so did
Pausanias to abolish the State of the Ephori, because their authority was too
Tyrannical, as Plato writes in the 4. of his Laws, and Aristotle in the 2.
of his Politickes, chap. 7: and it was

in Epidamnus the Co^monweale was changed in one part, by the ordaining of a
Senate instead of the Prouosts of the Tribes.] Epidamnus, otherwise called
Dyrrhachiu^, Thucidides makes mention thereof in the first book of his
History. The Romans changed the name of it in process of time. It is
situated in Illyricum, or Sclauonie. At the

in the Court of Athens called Heliaea, when they proceed to the election of
any one to be received thereinto, they must take him even out of those that
have authority or employment in the Commonweal, or that bear other offices.]
The Philosopher speaking of the change which is made in one part of the City,
does beside the former example, allege one out of the Estate of Athens, which
being changed from an Oligarchie into a Democratie, retained still many
Oligarchicall customs: as the election of the Heliastae,

an Archon or President that has supreme authority in this Commonweal, is a
remnant of the old Oligarchie.] The dignity of the Archon in Athens, was
likewise Oligarchicall, and given at the first for term of life, after for
ten years, and at last was yearly. This Archon was called Hegemon, and
Prytanis,

sedition happens in all places, because of inequality, when

THEREFORE sedition happens in all places, because of inequality, when that
is not given to ] As Equality, when it is well kept in all things and persons,
breeds friendship: so inequality causes evil will and dissension, chiefly
when a due proportion is not kept amongst unequal persons, by giving Philip de
Comines reports in the first book of his remembrances.

SO that the kingly state itself being perpetual, is found unequal, if it be
over equal persons.] Kingly estate, the whole soueraign

men by seeking wholly for equality, do enter into sedition.] When some
intrude

equality is double.] Because men are often deceived in the understanding of
equality, He shows that it is double, to the end men should not be deceived
by taking one for another, and by confounding them, and that they should know
the way to

one in number.] Arithmeticke, as 321, when there is equality in multitude, or
greatness in quantity, that stands of severed parts, or of contuued and
joined parts, as might be said amongst so many hundred crowns, or acres of
land.

other in dignity.] By proportion, as 421, wherein double proportion is found.
For as much as the knowledge of this matter is most profitable and necessary,
and not understood by all men, we will stand a little upon it, and rehearse it
more amply for the better interpretation of this place, and the fifth book of
manners. First we will presuppose the same, not respecting some small number of
Tyrants, or one, or the power of the

whereas men confess that to be absolutely right, which is equal according to
dignity, they fall into dissension.] Although all men confess, that the manner
of distributing

one sort, for that they being in some respect equal, account themselves
equal in all respects.] The poor sort in Democraties have equal freedom,
and because they are equal in liberty only, they will be absolutely equal
in all things, thinking it to be against reason, that any one should have
greater privilege, or be preferred for riches or for Nobility, but will that
all do alike participate in their degrees and turns, in public honors, the
4. of the Politickes, chap. 4. and 6. book, chap. 2.

other sort, for that they being unequal in some things, will be vn^quall and
superior in all things.] The richer and nobler sort in Oligarchies, think that
the whole government of the State should belong to them by reason of their
richesse or Nobility, and they divide among themselves all the public
offices, not admitting the poor to any part thereof, though many of them be
both wise and virtuous.

whence proceed two chief forms of Commonweal, namely, the Democratie and
Oligarchie.] Poverty and Riches are the differences whereby the Democratie and
Oligarchie are distinguished. That State wherein public Offices are
distributed to the rich by reason of their wealth, is of necessity an
Oligarchie: and that wherein the poor

that virtue and nobleness are in few men.] He shows a reason why there are
more Democraties and Oligarchies then Aristocraties; wherein all is referred to
the goodness and virtue of them that bear rule, and to the public good

these other qualities are found in many men.] Namely, Poverty, Liberty, and
Riches, which are the differences of the Democratie and Oligarchie.

there are not in any place seen an hundred together that be noble and good.]
At the least, which may be in sufficient number, and sufficiently qualified for
the establishing of an Aristocratie.

there be many poor men every where.] Who if they bear the greatest sway,

to ordain a Commonweal simply in all respects, according to the one or the
other,

AND to ordain a Commonweal simply in all respects, according to the one, or
the other ] The Arithmeticall equality is of it self bad, and the Geometrical
alone cannot be altogether observed without mutinies, but they must be mixed
for the preventing of men's discontents. Socrates in his Areopagiticall Oration,
This (says he) did much help and profit them in the government of the City,
that whereas there are two sorts of equality, of which the one gives alike to
all; the other, that only which viz. in Oligarchies and Aristocraties: For
Riches of it self, or Nobility, can give no absolute right or authority to
govern, in such sort, that none may bear rule save they

SINCE no such Commonweal can be of continuance.] No Democratie which does

THE reason is, because it is impossible that from an error committed at the
first, and from ] The beginning is of such force in all things, that things
well begun, are accounted half done; but things ill begun, have sildome good
event. Wherefore it is no meruell, if these two forms of Commonweales do not
prosper, but soon decay, since that from their beginning they are not grounded
on the true and equal right, but on an outward appearance only.

WHEREFORE it behooves to use partly the equality of number, and partly that
equality) For the well establishing of a Commonweal, and preserving the best
and iustest. So then both these sorts of equality must be used of necessity,
but P^ena talionis was in ancient times ordained for the restoring of that
equality which was before. Touching persons and Offices, they

the Democratie is surer and less subject to mutiny then the Oligarchie.]
Although both be corrupt, yet there is less evil and danger in the
Democratie then in the Oligarchie, and it is less troubled with sedition,
because it approaches nearer to the

in Oligarchies there arise two kinds of seditions, namely between the
Governors, and with the people.] The Oligarchicall persons, who are the richest
or the noblest, do not agree well together, but often times destroy or expulse
each other. And because they afford no part or authority of government to the
poorer sort, which are many in number, or do besides oppress them, it is
necessary that they become enemies unto them, (the 3. book of the Politickes.
chap. 7) and conspire against them, as shall afterward be showed. Plato in the
eight of his Commonweal, the fourth of his Laws, and in the Governor.

in Democraties they are with the Oligarchie only, not of the people with the
people; at the least, whereof any reckoning is to be made.] In the Democratie
sedition is raised by the poor only against the rich. But the poor do never or
very seldom contend amongst themselves, for there is nothing thereby to be
gotten, or if they do at any time, it is some small sedition, and of no
consequence.

the Commonweal which consists of mean men.] That is to say, having mean
substance, who are neither very rich nor very poor.

the surest of all such Commonweales.] The fourth book of the Politickes chap.
11: to wit, of corrupt commonweales, and which have already swarued from the
perfection of a Commonweal.

approach nearer to the Democratie, then to the Oligarchie.] The mean form of
Commonweal has more affinity with the Democratie, then with the Oligarchie:
for which cause the Democratie is surer or safer, and less corrupt. Likewise
in the 8. of his Ethickes, chap. 10. he says, That the Democratie is not bad,
because it does but little transgress or exceed the right form of
Commonweal: and in the 4. of the Politics

CHAP. II. From whence seditions spring, and of their causes.
Since we are come to consider from whence seditions and chaunges in
Commonweales do spring, we will first touch in general the beginnings and
causes as we said before, but because they see others more advanced, some
justly and some unjustly. They

In every sedition there are three points to be considered. The first, how men
are disposed or made prone to the raising of it: The second, to what end they
mutine: The third, what the motive cause thereof is. Equality or inequality in
Democraties or Oligarchies, do dispose and incline men to discord. The ends or
final causes thereof are profit and honor; and their contraries, damage and
dishonor. The motives which provoke them to sedition, are set down to the
number of seven, namely, honor viz. shame, negligence, pusillanimity, and
unlikeness.

will first touch in general the beginnings and causes thereof.] There are
four kinds of causes set down by Philosophers, the efficient, material,
formal, and final cause. The efficient cause of seditions is double, the one
a near, the other, a remote cause. The near cause are the Authors thereof,
by whose counsel, direction, and aid Bellum servile; and one named Eunus a
Syrian, who gathered a power of more then forty thousand slaves in Sicile, and
having put on Kingly attire, ranged through the Island, wasting and spoiling
it. There was also another borne in Cilicia, Magno natu quidam cum omnium
maiorum suorum insignibus se in forum proiecit, obsita erat squalore vestis,
foedior corporus habitus pallore ac macie perempti: adhoc promissa barba and
capilli esfer^^erant speciem oris: noscitabatur tamen in tanta deformitate, and
ordines duxisse aiebant, aliaque mititiae decora vulgo miserantes eum,
iactabant: ipse testes honestarum aliquot locis pugn^rum cicatrices
aduersopectore ^stentabat. Sciscitantibus vnde esset ille habitus, vnde
deformitas,

There is also another description not much unlike to this, made by the same
Repraesentatur mactaturus iam pater filiam abrepto ab lanio cultro: Hoc te vno
quo possum (ait) modofilia inlibertatem vendico. Pectus deinde puellae
transfigit, respectansque ad tribunal: Te (inquit) Appi, tuumque caput sanguine
hoc consecro. Clamore ad tam atrox facinus orto, excitus Appius, comprehendi
Virginium iubet: ille ferro quacunque ibat, viam facere, donec multitudine
etiam prosequentium iuuenum ruente ad portam perrexit. Icilius Numitoriusque
exangue corpus sublatum ostentant populo, scelus Appij, puellae infelicem

Cicero in his Oration pro T.A. Milone compares the people being incensed, to
a tempest: Et quidem, inquit, caeteras tempestates and procellas in illis
duntaxat fluctibus concionum and seditionum. The same Author in his first
book De Oratore: Hoc tempus post consulatum obiecimus his fluctibus, qui per
nos a communi pest^ depulsi, in nosmetipsos redundarunt.

Ac veluti magno in populo cum sepe coorta est
Seditio, saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus:
Iamque face^ and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat.
Tum pietate grauem at meritis si fort^ virum quem
Conspexere, silent: arrectisque auribus astant.

Sic cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor, aequora postquam
Prospiciens Genitor, coeloque inuectus aperto
Flectit equos, curruque volans dat lora secundo.


Unlikeness.] Plato in the eight of his Commonweal says, That wheresoever

BESIDES the causes here alleged which dispose men to sedition, we may add
some other, as the nature of the places wherein men are borne: so Ammianus
Marcellinus in his eleventh book says, That Alexandria in Egypt was
fatallie subject to sedition. And Socrates in his Tripartite History writes:
That the people of Alexandria were much more inclined to sedition then
Sallustius in Bello Iugurthin^: Caeterum mos partium popularium and Senatus
factionum, ac deinde omnium malarum artium, paucis ante annis Romae ortus est,
otio atque abundantia earum rerum quae prima mortales ducunt. Likewise extreme
poverty does much incite men to this evil. Horace in the four and twentieth
Ode of his third book.

Magnum pauperies opprobrium, iubet,
Quid vis and facere, and pati,
Virtutisque viam deserit arduae.
Nam semper in ciuitate quibus opes nullae sunt, bonis inuident, males
extollunt, vetera odere, noua exoptant: odio suarum rerum mutari omnia student,
turba atque seditionibus sine cura aluntur, quoniam egestas facile sine damno
habetur. Many Countries have been much troubled with sedition, because they
could not endure the excessive multitude of inhabitants, and Nulla magna
ciuitas quiescere potest: si foris hostem non habet, domi inuenit: vt
praeualida corpora ab externis causis tuta videntur, sed suis ipsa viribus
onerantur. That is, No great City can remain quiet; if it have no enemy
abroad, it finds one at home: even as great bodies, which seem to be safe
and assured against all outward dangers, yet are surcharged and ouerladen with
their own force. For this cause Scipio Nasica was of opinion, after the
victory which the Romans as it has often happened in France, and late time
yet fresh in memory, in the beginning Omnes rerum mutationes (says Salust in
his preface on the war of Iugurth) caedem, ^ugam aliaque hostilia portendunt.
Presently upon Augustus Caesar's death, the Roman legions which were in
Pannonia and in Germany, raised strange seditions: described by Cornelius
Tacitus in his first book of the History of the Caesar's. Immediately after
the deceasse of Solomon, the Jews rebelling against Roboam by reason of the
taxes which he would not moderate, divided themselves into two Realms,
namely, of Judah and Israel: the first book of the Kings, chapter twelve. Lex
agraria, was the beginning of the seditions among the Romans, and caused the
death of the two Gracchi, brethren, who were the Authors thereof. Besides, the
changing of coins being not used in due time, and upon just cause and urgent
necessity, is wonderfully dangerous, causing great discontent and occasion of
mutiny. So also does the bad administration of justice, and impunity proposed

CHAP. III. A declaration of the causes of seditions.
AMongst which causes we may clearly see what sorce injury and profit

The beginnings and motive causes of seditions, which were simply set down
before,

which causes.] The first cause of sedition is the avarice of the Magistrates
and Governors of a Commonweal, which thing is very pernicious, and greatly to
be shunned. For if Commonweales were therefore ordained at the first, that
under the protection and government of good Magistrates men might quietly
possess their own, then doubtless they which rule Estates ought chiefly to
have care,

is committed sometimes in extorting the goods of particular men, and sometimes
in robbing the public Treasure.] Avarice is the injurious coveting of that
which is another: and it is committed publickely or privately. The public
Treasure is the Peculatus, and the judgment used thereon, De repetundis: when
such goods are either unprofitably, or wastfully spent, Princes and Magistrates
use immoderate and unaccustomed exactions on their subjects. Avarice is
privately committed, when the poorer and weaker sort are spoiled of their goods
by those that have power, which

It is likewise manifest, what force Honor has, and in what sort it is the
cause of sedition. For men which are not honored, seeing others honored, do
mutine; which things are unjustly divided, when any are honored above their
desert and dignity: and justly, when every one is honored, according to his
dignity.



SEDITION arises by reason of Praep^t^nce, when one or many have more power
then the state of the Commonweal can support or endure: whereof does
ordinarily proceed the Monarchy, or Potentacie. Wherefore there is a custom
in some places to banish such persons for a time; which kind of banishment is
called an Ostracism^, as at Argos and Athens. But it were better to take order
at the first, that they grow

Excessive authority and power through riches and friends, is dangerous in
every kind of government: it must therefore be hindered from the beginning,
or abridged and diminished with all possible speed, because that through too
much Praepotence in such things, Commonweales are changed into Monarchies, and
Kingdoms and Empires usurped by new Lords. This matter has been discoursed
at large in the third book, and the ninth Chapter, and the manner of

By reason of Fear mutinies are raised, as well by those that have committed
some offenses, for which they fear to be punished, as by those that desire to
prevent the injuries that are intended against them; ^^ at Rhodes the Noblemen
conspired against the people, for fear of

Fear is a perturbation of the mind for some imminent or future danger. That
also which is done by force or violence, seems to be done by fear. They
raise seditions for fear, who dread imminent and future perils, and seek to
avoid them. So Catiline knowing himself to be culpable and guilty of many
acts, did for fear of judgment conspire against his Country, being assisted
by Lentulus, Antonius, Cethegus, with many sacrilegious persons, murderers,
adulterers, ruffians, men that were far indebted, and others which by reason
of their vile offenses, stood in fear of punishment: He

By reason of contempt likewise seditions are ^aised, and conspiracies made,
namely in Oligarchies, when they who are excluded from authority of
government, are more in number, and do therefore assure themselves that they
are the stronger: and in Democraties, when the rich men do conte^ne the
disorder and negligence of the governors, as at Thebes after the battle fought

Commonly those men are contemned, who have neither virtue, courage, nor power,
being therefore unable to help themselves or others, and who have no industry
nor care. Where contempt is, there can be no obedience, the son disobeyeth
his father, whom he contemns, the wife her husband, the scholar his teacher,
the servant

The changes of Commonweales do happen also by reason of excessive increase.
For as the body consists of parts, and must grow by proportion, to the end,
that the due measure may still remain: whereas otherwise it perishe^h, if the
foot be four ^ubit^s long, and the rest of the body but two spannes: and it
might likewise be changed into the shape of some other living creature,

Every Commonweal is composed of degrees or Estates, as it were parts, which
Estates must be kept and held in concord by a due proportion of each to other,
even as the harmony in Music consists of unequal voices or sounds, which
are equally accorded. For when any of those Estates does rise too much above
the other, there does forwith ensue dissension in the City, like a discord in a
song, when one tune is too low, V^fata fortunasque patrum vitasque principum in
manu haberent, qui and interceptis vectigalibus iure suo rempublicam peculati
sun^. For when both the Romans, Italians, and Senators themselves were of
necessity to appear in judgment before the Knights, touching what it
participate of both, was adioined as a third, for the reverence of religion,
and by reason viz. that the Nobility do not too much oppress the people, and

Commonweales are likewise changed by reason of shame, as it happened at
Heraea, where the Magistrates which before were chosen by election, were
afterward created by lot, because that while the manner of election was
observed, they bestowed the public offices on men of no worth.

Heraea was a City of Arcadia, whose government was popular, wherein men of
no worth were chosen Magistrates by such as were like themselves; for which the
Heraeans being derided, changed their custom of election into the use of lots,
thereby to shun like derision. There was not long since in the counsel of
France an excessive number of masters of requests, extraordinary; and
Secretaries for the Office of the

And by reason of negligence, when they suffer those to attain to sovereign
Offices, who are not friends to the Commonweal, as at Oreum, the Oligarchie
was destroyed by Heracleodorus, who being become a Magistrate, changed the said
Oligarchie into a Commonweal, and a Democratie.

There is herein double negligence, first of those which do call, elect, and
admit into any great Office unworthy persons, and such as take no pleasure in
the executing thereof: or which suffer those men to attain to sovereign
Magistracies, who dislike the present manner of Government. As if the Lords of
Berne should choose an Auoyer, or the Venetians a Duke, whose disposition and
desire were contrary to the form of their Commonweal: or the Cardinals a
Pope, who were not of their religion^ or if the king of France should create a
Constable or Chancellor, who affected not the royal and Monarchical Estate.
The second negligence is of those, who being called to any dignity or office,
show themselves slack and careless in the administration and exercise

the changes of Estates do grow by little and little: I say, by little and
little, because many times there happens a great change both of manners and
laws, without being perceived, through the neglecting of some small thing: as
in Ambracia where they advanced to offices men of small revenues, and in the
end they admitted those that had none at all: as if nothing and little were
near in nature, or not any whit different.

Changes, unless they be very violent, do sildome happen all at once, but are
ordinarily bred by little and little, even as the seasons of the year do by
degrees pass from

Likewise, when the inhabitants of one place are not all native there, this
breeds sedition

It is commonly seen, that the natural inhabitants of a City do seldom
agree with ancient inhabitants who had not descended from any strange people)
writes thus: Hi postquam in vna moenia conuenere, dispari genere, aissimili
lingua, alius alio more viuentes, incredibile memoratu est quam facile
coal^erint. At the first the Gauls and Frenchmen being of a diverse Nation,
Language, and Religion, could not well agree, but after that the Frenchmen were
baptized, and had together with the religion accustomed themselves unto the
manners and language of the Gauls, these two people were forthwith reduced
into one body, and did meruellously prosper. The Lacedaemonians permitted no
strangers to dwell amongst them. At this day in China and Cathay all access
and entrance is denied them, for the Merchants remaining in the Havens, make
show of those wares that they will sell, and have such commodities as they
ask for brought unto Nam cum (inquit Tacitus) de supplendo Senatu ageretur, ac
primores Galliae qui foedera and ciuitatem Romanam pridem assecuti^ ius
adipiscendorum honorum in vrbe expetissent, ac multus super ea revariusque
rumor, and studijs diuersis apud principem certaretur: asseuerantium non ita
aegram Italiam,

In Oligarchies many men do raise sedition, as if they were injured, because
being equal, as we said before, they have not an equal part in government:
and in Democraties the Noblemen

These quarrels springing from inequality in Democraties and Oligarchies
between the Noblemen and the people, have been at large discoursed of in the
third book, and in the beginning of this fifth book. In every Estate, they
that are not esteemed and used

Sometimes Cities are troubled with seditions, by reason of the places wherein
they are situated, when the nature of the Country is not fit for the
constituting of a city: as at Clazomene they that dwelt in Chitrum, bore grudge
and hatred against those of the Island; and the Colophonians against the
Notians. And at Athens they are not all inclined alike: but they of Piceum are
more popular then those of the City. For as in wars the passing of trenches,
although they be small, does break the soldiers array, and disorber the
battles, in like sort, every difference in a

The separations which are in Cities, do often breed quarrels amongst them
that inhabit diverse parts thereof: as at Paris during the factions of
Orleance and Burgoine, they that dwelt in the City, especially toward the
Hals, held stiffely together against those of the University: as Enguerrant of
Monstrellet writes in his first book. At another time they were constrained to
build in the City the Fortress de petit Po^t, that is, of the little bridge,
against the tumults which the scholars made: as Gaguin writes in his ninth
book. Philip de Comines likewise in his fifth book, the fifteenth Chapter,

Peradventure the greatest dissension is between virtue and vice, and next to
that, between richesse and poverty; and so of the rest, one more then another.

Since vice and virtue are contrary, there must needs be dissension between
them, yet they who excel in virtue (as Aristotle says in the beginning of
this book) do never use to raise sedition when they are repulsed, or others
of little or no worth preferred before

CHAP. IIII. The issue of the occasions whereby Commonweales are changed.
SEditions then are not raised for small matters, but from small they grow to

Aristotle having rehearsed and declared the causes of seditions, sets down
the evils and changes that grow thereby. First he says that seditions arising
between the chief men of a country, are dangerous, and must be appeased
with all possible speed,

are not raised for small matters.] Seditions do spring from small beginnings,
but if they be not speedily quenched, they will suddenly grow infinitely, and
not only infect houses, towns, and cities, but also whole provinces and
great estates. They must therefore be looked unto at the beginning, or rather
if it be possible,

AND being small, they take exceeding force, when they arise between the
chief and ] As were those factions and partakings in France in the reign of
Charles the sixth, between the Dukes of Orleance and Burgoine: or

WHEREFORE such evils must be looked unto when they begin.] Wise Princes
Febris hectica, which at the first coming thereof, is easily cured, and
hardly known; but if it be not known nor cured at the beginning, it grows
easy to be known, and impossible to be helped. Even so it happens in
Commonweales and Estates, for the evils and inconveniences which devises
allured and fed the common people. And in another place he says, Cato

this fault is in the beginning.] Aristotle in this same book, chapter eight,
Especial regard and heed must be had to the evil when it begins, how little
soever it be, for

since also men say that the beginning is the half of all.] Hesiodus (...).
Plato in the second of his Commonweal, (...).

that a small oversight chauncing then, does answer by proportion to all the
faults that are afterward committed.] A small fault at the beginning, breeds
a mean evil in the other parts, and a greater fault does by proportion breed
a greater evil; so that the proportion of the evil does always depend on the
occasion and beginning of the fault which breeds it.

the discords of Noblemen (...) the whole City into factions.] Aristotle in
this same book, the eight chapter: Great care and endeavor is to be used for
the ordaining of such Laws, whereby the growing of contentions and
sedseditions between great persons, may be hindered, and the others prevented,
who have not yet taken part with either side, before they enter into any
^action: because every

Moreover, there do happen changes both in the Oligarchie and in the
Democratie, and in the Commonweal, when any Magistrate or part of the city
gets reputation or increases in power: as the counsel of Areopagus, having
won great estimation in the war of the Medes,

Changes do sometimes happen in Commonweales through the discords between the
chief men of a Country: sometimes also when any private men, or Magistrates,
or some tribe and lineage, or some other part of the City, or whatsoever
multitude is the occasion of augmenting the Cities strength; and thereby
increases in reputation: because then either they who envy their honor, do
begin sedition, or else themselves by reason of the power which they have
gotten, will not be content with an estate equal

AS the counsel of Areopagus, having won great estimation in the war of
the Medes.]

AGAIN, the Mariners and those that ^ad fought in the galleys, by whom the
victory was ] The battle was won at Salamis, chiefly by the Me^elotes,
Galio^es, Pilotes, and others who dwelt near the sea coast, was the cause that
increased the peoples power against the Nobleman, and made the inferior
multitude more audatious.

AND at Sirucusa.] The war which the Athenians made against the City of
Siracusa

Furthermore, Commonweales are changed, when the parts of the City which seem
contrary,

Thirdly, changes do happen in Commonweales, when the parts of the City that
seem contrary, are made equal, and the middle or mean part is little or none
at all; as

Besides, they are changed by force, and by subtletie. By force, in
constraining the Citizens to such a change, either presently upon the
beginning, or afterward. The subtlety likewise which may be herein used, is
double: For sometimes they do craftily induce them to a voluntary change of
the Commonweal, and do afterward continue it by violence, as at Athens in the
time of the

Fourthly, Commonweales are changed by force, or subtlety. By force, as the
Roman Commonweal oppressed by Caesar, was changed into a Monarchy: the realm
of Egypt

CHAP. V.
WE will now severally and particulerly consider these things in every kind of
Commonweal. Democraties then are for the most part changed through the
per^idiousnesse Li^wise, Tyrannical States have risen more ofter in times past
then now: because they gave to

The Philosopher having spoken of the public charges in general, does now
particularly consider them in every kind of Commonweal, beginning with the
Democratie,

the bad dealing of those that are the guides and leaders of the people.]
(...). Aristotle treating in these two chapters of Democraties and Oligarchies,
does often make mention of these (...), whom we following the Etimologie of the
Greek word, translate guides and leaders of the people. These men in such
forms of governments did always both do and say to please the people, all
that they

by forging false accusations.] After that Eloquence took place in
Commonwea^es, th^se guides and leaders of the people were commonly Orators, who
took upon them to accu^e others in Judgments and assemblies, where they were
gladly seen and heard, because they spoke things pleasing to the hearers
eares^ Diodorus Siculus in his thirteenth book, the two and thirtieth chapter,
speaking of the five Athenian Captains, who had wo^n the most famous battle
by sea that ever had been fought between

WHEN these persons to please the people, do vex and oppress the rich men.]
So did the Lex agraria, whereat the rich men made great complaints, being
grieved to give unto the poor their houses, woods, and

IN ancient times, when the same person that guided and led the people, was
general of the ] When they who were in credit and favor with the people,
attained to the government and conduct of the army, they did easily usurp on
the Commonweal, and change it into a Tyranny, being skillful and expert in
feats of war, and having in their own hands the forces of the country, as
Pisistratus did at Athens, Gelon, Hieron, Dionisius, and Agathocles at
Syracusa, and infinite others have in other places done the like.

this day that Rhetoric is mounted to the top of perfection.] Rhetoric, as
all other

THE eloquent men govern the people, but because they are not skil^ull in
warfare, they dare ] Demosthenes and Cicero most excellent Orators, were in
great credit in their Commonweales, but neither of them were warriors.
Plutarch writes of Demosthenes, that he fled most cowardly from the battle of
Che^onea^ and performed not so much as any one act of virtue, or that was
answerable to his goodly Orations made before the people, for he forsook his
rank, and cowardly cast away his armor, that he might with the more ease
fly away. The same Author in the life of Cicero says, that he was not only
fearful in fight, but also in pleading.

THE Pritany.] (...) among other things signifies to rule, to govern, to
administer

AS at Athens Pisistratus taking a quarrel against the Pediaci.] That is to
say, against caused to draw him into Athens into the Town hou^e, as though he
had saved himself

by accusing the rich men, obtained the Tyranny, for the grudge and enmity
which he showed to bear against them, and for that he was accounted one that
held on the peoples ] Dionisius being before a private man and of low degree,
obtained the Tyranny of Siracusa by this means: whereas the Siracusians sent
him to Gelle, he finding the mightiest men of the town at controversy with
the common people, began to charge them before the high Court or assembly, and
so wrought by his reasons, that they were straightway condemned to death, and
their lands and goods confiscated; with the benefit of which confiscation he
paid the wages of the ordinary Garrison of Gelle, and promised them that came
with him from Siracusa twice as much wages as the City had appointed for them:
whereby he got the good wills, as well of the keepers of Gelle, as of them that
he brought thither with him, and so was commended by the common there is any
remembrance or record, the Isle of Sicilly has been under the dominion

The changes and troubles which happened in the Athenian Democratie, taken out
of Thucidides eight book of the Peloponesian war.
FOr the lively representing of the changes whereto the Democratie is subject,
it shall suffice to report and set down those which have happened in the
Athenian Democratie, being one of the most famous that ever were. Then the
government of Athens was for the most part Democraticall or Popular, as it has
been said in the end of the second book, and suffered many changes through
the disorder of the Athenian people, whom Polybius in his sixth book compares
to ships wanting Pilots. For when the soldiers fall into an humor of
agreement and obedience to the master of the ship, either for fear of
enemies, or danger of a tempest, they use extreme endeavor, and perform much:
but when through arrogance they begin to disdain those that and friends had
already done many things tending to the accomplishment of stir at all. Then
the said four hundred entering, chose out of their own number certain who were
on the sea in great number, coming to assail, they gave over that bloody
viz. that they should look to the keeping of the city, and to the defending of
themselves against the enemies, and that he hoped to reconcile them to those
that were in the army at Samos; and likewise to vanquish power by placing there
a few men; either to permit the ships that came, to enter, or trouble or
tumult in the City, and also to keep others from it, telling them that they

Seditions and changes in the government of Florence Genoa, and
Therefore whereas in laying of the foundation of the popular authority at
Florence at the beginning, those mixtures and temperatures were not used
therein, that should warrant and settle their liberty; with gentle and
reasonable means, and keep the government from falling into disorder through
the ignorance and licentiousness of the multitude: The Commonweal has
always been full of confusion, and out of order, because on the one side the
citizens of greatest calling, thought themselves Citizens is proportioned to
equality, which is a very necessary foundation of popular our country would
wish for any other government: and he should be a very bad Citizen,

Now, as concerning the house of Medici, The house of Medici.
mentioned in these former Orations, it obtained at Florence (under the name
and show of a Gouenement, well near Cittie-like) very great power and
authority for the space of threescore de Comines says, He took twenty men
for the guard of his person, by the commandment The City of Genoa.
The City of Genoa being builded in a place fit to govern and command upon the
sea, if great opportunity were not hindered by the pestiferous poison of civil
discord, is not like other Cities of Italy, subject to one Sienna.
Sienna for a long time has been the chief and mightiest city of Tuscane,
next after the city of Florence, and was governed by it self, howbeit in such
sort, as it rather knew the name than the effects of liberty: For that it being
drawn and divided into many factions or members of Citizens, that amongst
themselves were called states or orders, obeyed that side which as time fell
out, and through the favor of strange potentates, was stronger then the rest;
as F. Guicchiardine reports in his first book. But the Commonweal of
Venice, Venice and the Commonweal thereof.
which is Aristocraticall, cheefely in respect of the Senate and the college of
the sages, has the parts thereof so well tempered together and proportioned (as
we have touched in many places of The Gentlemen of Venice.
the Gentlemen that there have the whole dominion, having utterly excluded the
people from the government, do divide amongst themselves all charges and
offices, or the most part of them, wherein there is either honor or profit,
whereat the other Citizens, (amongst the which there is a great number of wise,
rich, and courageous men) wonderfully

CHAP. VI. Of the changes happening in Oligarchies.
OLigarchies are changed in two most plain and evident manners: The one is, if
the Governors do unjustly oppress the common people; For then the first that
^hey light on seems sufficient and fit enough to be their patron and
protector, especially if any of those that govern, do undertake this charge,
as did Lygdamus in ^he Isle of Naxus, who afterward usurped Tyranny over the
Naxians. The other manner o^ changing the Oligarchie has not his beginning from
the sedition of the people, but i^ caused by the rich men, and that in many
sorts. For sometimes the Oligarchie is destroyed by the rich men who do not
participate in the government, especially when the number of those that govern
is very small, as it happened at Marsilia, Istrum, and Heraclea, and in other
cities, where Moreover, there are many changes made in Oligarchies, as well in
time of war, as of peace: Of

Oligarchies are troubled with seditions in two manners, the one, when the
multitude of poor men are at variance with the rich; the other, when the rich
men agree not among themselves. And this happens through many occasions,
whereby the said Oligarchies are changed not only into contrary forms of
Commonweales,

Marsil^a.] Strabo in his fourth book of Cosmographie writes thus: The
Massilians being governed by an Aristocratie, do surpass all men in equity of
Laws; Their counsel consists of six hundred, who enjoy this honor for
term of life, and are called Timouchi: Of whom there are fifteen being
chief of the Senate, who dispatch all common occurrence: and of these fifteen
there are three Presidents, who have the sovereign authority of government.
But none is received into the number

at Athens in the time of the thirty Tyrans.] The Athenians being vanquished
by the Lacedaemonians, were for a time constrained to abolish the Popular
Estate, and receive the government of a small number, choosing thirty men, who
should have the

IN the time of the four hundred.] The Oligarchy of these four hundred is
already

WHEN they bring into the Oligarchie another form of Oligarchie.] That is,
when an Paucorum arbitrio belli domique respublica agitabatur, penes eosdem
aerarium, Prouinciae, Magistratus, gloriae triumphique erant. Caesar, Pompey,
and Crassus, allying themselves together, brought in another Oligarchie,
sharing among themselves the Roman Empire, in causing to be given each to
other gouernements of Provinces and charges of great armies. Which Monopoly of
so great mighty Lords, caused the ruin of the Commonweal. For the force
which was before divided in two parts, did as it w^^^ viz. of Caesar, and
Pompey, and Crassus, the grauer and wiser sort held with Pompey, they that were
lighter and more forward to attempt things with desperate rashness, followed
Caesar's hopes.

CHAP. VII. Of the changes happening in Aristocraties.
But seditions are raised in Aristocraties, because few men have any part in
public honors: which we have affirmed to be the cause of troubles in
Oligarchies also, and indeed the Aristocratie is an Oligarchie. For in either
state there are few Governors, howbeit not in one selfsame manner, and
therefore seems the Aristocratie to be all one with the Oligarchie. This
necessarily happens where there is a m^lsitude of high minded men, that

Seditions never arise in right Aristocraties, but in those that are mixed.
First, because a few men have the government there, and specially when there
are others that think themselves nothing inferior to them in virtue. Next of
all, when the virtuous men are either unworthily and spightfully dealt with by
those that are more honored, or not admitted to bear office and honor.
Again, when some are very rich, and others extremely

they at Lacedemon, that were called Parthenians.] When the Lacedaemonians moved
wars against the Messenians, because they had ravished and defiled their
virgins that went to their feast, they bound themselves by great oaths, never
to depart

Lysander was by the Kings.] Lysander was one of the greatest captains of his
time, who having ended the wars which the Lacedaemonians long time had against
the Athenians, won to his Country the principality and superiority of
Greece, as well by sea as by land, wherefore he was much esteemed and honored;
but afterward seeing himself debased and evil entreated by king Agesilaus,
he attempted for spite to take from the two royal houses their privilege of
the kingly estate, to the intent, to deliver it in common to all the families
of the Spartanes: and about this controversy, had raised a great trouble in
the City of Sparta, if he had not died so soon as he did.

when some valiant man is not admitted to bear office and honor, as Cynadon.]
Zenophon writes, that this Cynadon was a mighty and hardy young man, who in
the

AS Pausanias in Lacedemon seems to have been.] The Lacedaemonians for the not

AND Hannon of Carthage.] Iustine in his one and twentieth book, writes, That
avoided, but not regarded, for they feared least in revealing the matter, there
would be

Athenians in all places destroyed the Oligarchies, and the Lacedaemonians the
Democraties.]

CHAP. VIII. Of the particular preservation of states.
NOw will we treat of the preservation of all states in general, and of every
one perticularly. First it is certain, that if we perceive by what means
states are destroyed; we shall also understand those whereby they are
preserved. Forasmuch as of contrary causes spring contrary effects, and for
that perishing or destruction is contrary to preservation. Therefore in well
tempered Commonweales, heed should be taken wealth and substance be augmented
or increased beyond the first stint and value ordained, concerning

Although the means requisite for the conservation of states, may be
understood by the causes of their destructions already declared, yet for the
clearer understanding of the present matter a great mainie of them are set
down. And first, that nothing be committed contrary to the laws and
customs, and that specially by remedying of inconueniencies at the beginning,
how small soever they be; that credit be not given to the guilefulnesse and
craft devised for the deceauing of the Commonweales, whereof

IT is requisite and behoofefull in the Democraties to spare the rich, and in
the Oligarchie ] As Cicero affirms in the second book of his offices.

CHAP. IX. Of the qualities that are to be required in the chief governors of
a state.
THey which are to exercise the chief Magistracies, ought to have three
things: First, a love to the present state: next of all, great

according to the pattern of the same. As, if the laws be popular, that they
be brought

CHAP. X. Of the changing, marring, and ouerturning of Monarchies.
IT rests that we discourse of the Monarchy, and consider what things may
destroy and preserve it. Almost the same accidents do gro^ in Kingdoms and
Tyrannies, as we said, did chance in Commonweales: For the Kingly State does
imitate the Aristocratie, and the Tyranny is made of the extremest sort of the
Oligarchie, and of the Democratie, and is therefore very hurtful to the
subjects, for it is compounded of two corrupt commonweales, retaining the
transgressions and blemishes of the^ both. Moreover, it will easily appear,
that the beginning of Monarchies has proceeded of contraries, for the

The Philosopher, after he has declared the means whereby Commonweales are
altered and destroyed, he reasons likewise touching Monarchies, whereof
there are two sorts, to wit, the Kingdom, and the Tyrannnie; showing the
beginning of either

FOR all they which had deserved well.] Aristotle in the third book of the
Politics, Subijciunt se homines imperio alterius and potestati pluribus de
causis. Ducuntur enim aut beneuolentia, aut beneficiorum magnitudine, aut
dignitatis praestantia, aut spe id sibi vtile

SOME by keeping them from falling into bondage, as Codrus.] There were many
old

OTHERS by setting them at liberty, as Cyrus.] The Persians before his time,
obeyed

THE office of the king is to keep the rich that they be not in any wise
iniuried, nor the common people outragiously or reprochfully dealt withal.]
Cicero in the second book of Mihi quidem on apud Medes solum (vt ait
Herodotus) sed apud etiam maiores nostros fruende iustitia causa, videntur olim
b^ne morati reges constituti. Nam cum premeretur multitud^ ab his qui maiores
opes habebant, ad vnum aliquem consugiebant virtute praestantem: qui cum
prohiberet iniuria tenuiores, aequitate constituenda, summos cum infimis pari
iure retinebat. Ergo hoc quidem perspicuum est, eos ad imperandum deligi
solitos, quorum de iustitia magna esset opinio multitudinis. Adiuncto vero hoc,
vt ijdem etiam prudentes haberentur, nihilerat quod homines his authoribus non
posse consequi se arbitrarentur. Therefore a good king ought to preserve the
Noble and rich men, and not to displease his people; to resist the ambition of
the mighty, and to repress the insolence of the common

the kings guard is of Citizens, and the Tyrans of strangers.] Aristotle in the
third book of the Politickes, the tenth chapter says, The Kings are guarded
by the power of Citizens, the Tyrans by strangers. And the Kings govern
according to

We must therefore deem, that the beginnings of alterations in Monarchies, are
almost all one with those that happen in Commonweales, as has been already
declared: for many subjects are provoked to conspire against the Monarchies by
reason of injustice, and for fear, and for

Three things provoke subjects to conspire against Monarchs, namely, injustice,
fear and contempt: and conspiracy is made either against the person of the
Prince, or against his state. That conspiracy which proceeds of injury,
whereof there are many sorts, is

INIVSTICE is chiefly committed by occasion of reproach and injury, and
sometimes also upon ] Aristotle in the chap. following says, The Monarch ought
to abstain from all kinds of injury, and specially from two sorts; the one,
from

SOME conspiracies are made against the persons of Princes, others against
their state.] Henry Earl of Derby conspired against his own kinsman Richard
King of England,

conspiracy against the children of Pisistratus was caused through the injury
done to Harmodus his sister.] Pisistratus the Tyran of Athens at the time of
his death left three

slew king Philip, because he neglected the injury done unto him by Attalus.]
Plutarch in the life of Alexander the great, declares that murder in this
manner: When Pausanias had been villainously outraged in his body by the
knowledge and commandment

The like happens through fear, which we have reckoned as one of the causes
that work the destructions of Monarchies, as well as of other states. As
Artabanus wrought a trech^rous practice against Xerxes, fearing the accusation
made by his enemies concerning Darius, whom he had caused to be hanged without
the commandment of Xerxes: and supposed that Xerxes would pardon him, and not
remember it for the good cheer which he had made him at supper.

Conspiracy rises upon occasion of fear, when a man is threatened by the
Prince, and will prevent it by practicing to execute that first which he
supposes to be pretended against him. These threatenings are very hurtful to
Princes, and the cause of more and had for his lieutenant Macrinus, a man more
civil then warlike. And as it

wrought a treacherous practice against Xerxes.] Diodorus Siculus in the 15.
chapter of his eleventh book, sets down that conspiracy in this sort:
Artabanus of the country of Hyrcan, a man in great credit with his master king
Xerxes, and Captain of his guard, enterprised to kill him, and to make
himself King: he acquainted another with his enterprise, whose name was
Mythridates, an Eunuch, who lay in the kings chamber, in whom the king put
more confidence then in any other. This man was Artabanus kinsman and old
friend, by reason whereof he easily consented to his treason. Therefore
Artabanus coming secretly by night into the kings chamber

Other conspiracies are caused through contempt; as a certain man seeing
Sardanapalus spin amongst Gentlewomen, if it be true that is reported thereof.
And although it happened not so



As a certain man seeing Sardanapalus spin with gentlewomen.] Sardanapalus king
of the lib. 1. But Diodorus Siculus lib. 2. cap. 107. wrote thus concerning
that matter: Sardanapalus the 30 king of the line of Ninus, and last king of
the Assyrians, went beyond all his predecessors in slothfulness and
idleness: for besides that he was never seen abroad by any man living, he
lead an effeminate life with his concubines, wearing one while a crimosen coat,
another while a coat of fine wool, another while a woman's cloak. He painted
his face, and all his body, according to the manner of a

rose up against Dionisius the last, through contempt.] Dion, son of Hippias,
overthrew the Tyranny of Dionisius, and with less means then ever man had,
that before him took such matters in hand, ouerthrewe the greatest and
mightiest state that then was in all Europe, contrary to the opinion and hope
of all the world. For who would ever have believed that he that arrived in
Sicilia only with two ships of burden, could have overcome a lord that had at
his disposing 400 vessels with oars, an 100000 footme^, 10000 horsemen, with
such provision and munition of armor, corn, and money,

some friends do conspire against the Monarchs through contempt.] Commonly,
they that conspire against Monarchs, are familiar with them, and men of great
credit about them, and there be some that are provoked to conspire sooner, by
reason of too many benefits and good turns which they have received, then by
occasion of too much wrong and outrage: as Perennius did against Commodus,
Plautian against Seuerus, and Seian

Cirus did against Asti^ges, dispising his life and authority.] Cyrus was son
of Maridane, Astiages his daughter, that was married to Cambises a Persian
lord. Zenophon in the first book of the institution brings in Cirus a young
child, flouting at the delights

And Senthis the Thracian, against Amadoceus.] Zenophon makes mention of their

Some conspire for many such things together, as for the contempt which they
have of Monarkes: and for the gain which they seek for, as Mithridates did
against Ariobarzanes: and

The bold and courageous of nature, being advanced by the monarks, and
preferred to the guiding of the armies, conspire against them through contempt
of their persons, and for the hope they have to get their state, or some grear
Province depending on the same. So the last kings of the race of Clouys, being
grown very slothful, and so subject to their pleasure, that no account was
made of them, enioied no more for a certain time

As Mithridates conspired against Ariobarzanes.] Zenophon in the 7 book of the
expedition

But in them that conspire for ambition, there is another manner of cause
besides those that are before recited: for they assault not the tyrans as some
do, to the end to possess the great profits and honors which they see in
them, but determine to hazard themselves in doing some act worthy of
remembrance, thereby to purchase reputation and renown: they (I say) assault
not tyrans to the end to get their state, but glory. Notwithstanding there be
few that attempt to conspire for this cause; for they must be resolved to make
no account of their lives, so they may attain their purpose. And it is needful
for the^ to have the like mind that Dion had, for he assaulted Dionisius the
tyran

In old time great honors were set down in Greece for them that killed the
Tyrans. Therefore many were pushed forwards by this ambition, to conspire
against them, to get glory and reputation: such a one was Dion amongst the
Grecians, who invaded Dionisius the younger: and Brutus amongst the Romans,
who slew Julius Caesar, to Nam (vt ait Cicero libro secundo Officiorum) rerum
omnium nec aptius est quicquam ad opes tuendas, quam diligi, nec alienius, quam
timeri. Praeclare Ennius.

Quem metuunt, oderunt:
Quem quisque odit, periisse expetit.
Multorum autem odijs nullas opes posse obsistere, si antea suit ignotum, nuper
est cognitum. Nec vero huius Tyranni solum, quem armis oppressa pertulit
ciuitas, interitus declarat, quantu^ odium hominum valet ad pestem; sed
reliquorum similes exitus Tyrannorum, quorum haud fere qui^quam interitum
similem effugit. Malus enim custos diuturnitatis metus: contraque beneuolentia
fidelis est vel ad perpetuitatem. Nec vero vlla vis imperij tanta est, quae
premente metu possit esse diut^rna. Testis est Phalaris, cuius est praeter
cateros nobilitata crudelitas, qui non ex insidijs interijt, nec a paucis, sed
in quem vniuersa Agrigentinorum multitudo

The Tyranny is likewise destroyed by an exterior manner, as every other
Commonweal, to wit, if there be any contrary estate of greater power. For
doubtless there wants no readiness thereunto by reason of the diversity of
government; and that which all men desire, if they can, they will execute. The
contrary forms of Commonweales, are as the Democratie to the Tyranny: in
like sort, as one potter is contrary to another, according to Hesiodus: since
the last kind of Democratie is a Tyranny. Likewise, the Kingly state and the
Aristocratie, by reason of the contrariety of government. Wherefore the
Lacedaemonians destroyed many

The Tyranny is destroyed in two manners, the one outward, the other inward.
Outwardly, as every other kind of Commonweal, when there is any contrary
Estate of greater power, as the Roman Commonweal, having attained wonderful
great force and might, destroyed all the Kingdoms that it could, and made them
small Provinces. The Venetian Signorie extending her

As it did long since come to pass in the Tyranny of Gelon.] Herodotus in the
seventh

Now since there are two principal causes for which men conspire against the
Tyrannical states, to wit, hatred, and contempt: it is necessary that this
hatred be against the Tyrans, yet their ruins and destructions do for the most
part proceed from contempt. There is an evident sign of this in that many who
have usurped estates, have likewise held them during their own lives, but
almost

A Prince must above all things preserve his estate, which thing does no less
consist in doing nothing that is unmeet and unseemly for him, then in doing
all that does beseem him. But he that does fashion himself to austerity or
affability, more or less then he ought, is no longer a King or a Prince, but
becomes either a popular flatterer, or a proud Master, and procures to
himself either the contempt or hatred of his subjects: yet it seems that the
one is an error, committed through too great bounty and humanity, the other
through arrogance and fierceness. It is so difficult a thing for a Prince to
carry himself well in the government of a by reason of his great age, he was
slain presently after his advancement to the Empire.

To knit up the matter in few words, all those causes which we have affirmed
to destroy the immoderate and last Oligarchie, and the unreasonable and extreme
kind of Democratie, may be applied to the Tyranny: for these forms of
Commonweales distinct and severed, are kinds of Tyrannies.

The latter kinds of the Oligarchie and Democratie, are a Tyranny, not of one
man,

The Kingdom is least of all destroyed by outward causes, and therefore
lasts longest, but is commonly overthrown of it self in two manner of
ways. The one, when the chief lords of the justly had in contempt, do
succeed in the same, and that they not having Tyrannical power, but

Although of all public states, the kingdom lasts best; and of kingdoms,
that which passes by inheritance is lesser subject to sedition then that which
goes by election, and of those kingdoms that pass by inheritance, that which
goes by succession to the heir male only, not so subject to sedition as that
which may fall to the heir

the principal sorts of the kingdom are divided, and at variance amongst
themselves.] As of late years, the greatest part of the kingdom of Hungary
has been occupied by the Turk, by occasion of the divisions that were
between the chief lords of the country, taking part one while with one side,
and otherwhiles with another side, as it came in their heads, or as present
advantage procured them. In old time the divisions and discords in France
between the houses of Orleance and Burgoigne, intermixed with the Englishmen,
were like to have subverted the kingdom, at such time a^ king Charles the sixth
was fallen into a frenzy.

the kings go about to reign too Tyrannically.] Aristotle in the chapter
following says,

any attempt to reign by deceitor by ^orce, it seems to be Tyranny.] The
Magician in Persia that usurped the kingdom after the decease of Cambises,
faining himself to be Smerdis, Cambises his brother, reigned a while by
deceit; upon the disclosing whereof, he was slain by the conspiracy of the
seven Persian Lords: The Hystory is recited

AS for kingdoms that descend by inheritance, there is another cause of their
ruin.]

CHAP. XI.
TO speak generally, they are preserved by such means as are contrary to
those that destroy them: but to speak particulerly, kingdoms are maintained
by reducing them to a more moderate form. For of how much the fewer things, the
Princes be absolute lords, so much the longer must every Princely state last,
by reason they be less violent, and in manners be surprised or contemned, but
the drunkard may; neither he that is watchful, but the sleepy person.

The causes which destroy Kingdoms and Tyrannies, being declared; according to
the former method those causes also are set down, which do preserve and
maintain them: and first they are generally vpheld by those means that are
contrary to the causes of their ruins: as the Kingdom if it be less
Tyrannical and absolute, and the Tyranny, if it approach nearer to the Kingly
state, which said Tyranny also is preserved and maintained in two manners, the
one very rigorous, the other more moderate. To the side, that through their
help he may be able to resist others that assault him. Si Regum atque
Imperatorum animi virtus, in pace, ita vt in bello, valeret: aequabilius atque
constantius res humanae sese haberent, neque aliud alio ferri, neque mutari ac
misceri omnia cerneres. Nam imperium facile his artibus retinetur, quibus
initio partum Particularly, As touching the preservation and destruction of
the Roman Empire, The Roman E^pire.
which for any thing that is found in writing, and that ever was seen by
experience, has been the mightiest and greatest Kingdom that ever was: I
find, that those ways which the wisest Emperors invented

CHAP. XII. That of all States the Oligarchie and Tyranny do
OF all Commonweales, the Oligarchie and Tyranny continue the least space. For
the Tyranny that has lasted longest, was that of Orthagoras and his children
at Sicione, which lasted (...) hundred years. sometimes bring forth bad
persons, whose malice could not be amended by instruction, it may be



lasted an hundred years.] The longest Tyranny that is spoken of here, has

BECAUSE Pisistratus playing the Tyran, was twice expulsed.] Herodotus in his
first book, also Plato in Hipparcus, declares how the said Hipparcus son of
Pisistratus

NOW Socrates in Platoes Commonweal, treats of the changes of states.]
Plato And though their elders appoint them to be Princes that are found to be
the better,

it is so ordained by Nature, that nothing lasts for ever.] There is nothing
under Heaven that lasts always. But all things that have beginning, must
come to an end, and whatsoever grows, must likewise deminish, being subject
to corruption and change, according to the time appointed unto it by the course
of Nature, as is seen by experience in plants, and in wights, which have their
ages and lastings certain and determined. This instabilitie is also found in
Provinces, Nations, Cities, Manners, Laws, Sects, Empires, Realms,
Commonweales, Potentacies, States, Families, Sciences, and

that all things in a certain circuit of time, or period, are altered.]
Plutarch in the life of Silla. The skillful Southsayers of Tuscane being
demanded, answered, That this so strange sign declared the change of the
world, and the passage from the same into another age: for that they hold
opinion how there must be some ages clearly differing one from another in
manners and fashions of living. To every of the which God has prefixed a
certain time of continuance, howbeit, that all come to the ending of their
Homines populariter annum tantummodo Solis, id est vnius astri reditu
metiuntur. Cum autem ad idem, vnde semel profecta sunt, cuncta astra redierint,
eandemque totius caeli descriptionem longis interuallis retulerint, tum ille
vere vertens annus appellari potest, in quo vix dicere audeo quam multa secula
hominum teneantur. Namque, vt olim deficere sol hominibus, extinguique visus
est, cum Romuli animus haec ipsa in templa penetrauit: quandocumque eadem part
sol, eodeque Plato in Timeus says thus, From thence is proceeded the virietie
of the night, and of the day, and therefore has been brought in the revolution
of the circuit, alone and wise: the month, after that the Moon has gone
about her circle, and overtaken the sun: The year, when the sun has
accomplished his course. As for the reuolutions of others, there be few men
that understand them, know their names, measure and distinguish them by number;
insomuch, that they know not the times, and that their reuolutions are infinite
in multitude, and wonderful in variety. They may notwithstanding have divided
the space of time whereof we spoke, by the great conjunctions P.d'Ally Cardinal
in the concord of Astrology and Theology, and of the history, and in the
book of laws and sects: Roger Bacon in the Epistle to Pope Clement: Sepulueda
of the moving of the sun: Leon an Hebrew in

those things whose root is the sesquitertian, or third number, and an half.]
The Septenary or number of seven, is made of four and three, wherein is found
a sesquitercian proportion, because four contains three, and a third part.
And the septenary joined to a quinary makes twelve. So the quinary is composed
of two and three, in which there is a sesquialteran proportion, for that three
contains two and a half, and therein is found the consonancie, (...). The
third consonancie is (...), in double dia tessaron, and dia pente, and is as
dia pason, for as much as dia pason is a sound composed of dia tessaron and dia
pente. Now Plato has written this according to the opinion of Pythagoras and
his Disciples, who did account numbers, proportions, and mathematical figures
for the first causes of all effects of the world, which Aristotle controlleth
in the thirteenth and fourteenth books of his Metaphisicke.

number.] Solid numbers are those which add depth to length and breadth, as
cubes, piramides, and pillars, etc.

if nature sometimes brought forth evil people, whose naughtiness cannot be
remedied ] The cause wherefore the Commonweal, yea the best Commonweal may be
marred is, that some men in a certain period or revolution of time, are borne
with so naughty a nature and disposition, that it is not possible to reform
them by instruction; and when they meet in such a Commonweal, they mar it:
Certainly, in considering the records of things passed till this age, it
seems that there has been always in the world some good mingled amongst
evil, and that virtue and vice go by turns, passing from country to
country, and reigning more at one time, then at another. For since men's matters
are in perpetual moving, they go up and down incessantly,

For he says the Lacedemonian state changes into the Oligarchie, and the
Oligarchie into ] Such kinds of change^ are laid forth in the eight and ninth
books of Platoes Commonweal, and by us translated in the fourth of these
books of Politiques, or touching Government, as they were found to have
correspondence to Aristotle's discourses.

Here ends the Fifth Book of Aristotle's Government.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED OVT OF GREEK, AND
FRENCH,
CErtain matters already treated of in the fourth and fifth books, are here more
diligently examined: and vvithall are declared the likenesses; properties, and
differences of Co^monvveales,

CHAP. I.
WE have before showed how many Commonweales there be, and what be the
differences between the counsel and the chief part of the Commonweal, and
spoken of the order of Magistrates and judgments, and which do fit each
Commonweal. Again, we have treated of the

The matters treated of in the fourth and fifth books are here briefly
repeated, to renew the remembrance thereof, and to serve as a preparatiue for
the more ample understanding of Democraties and Oligarchies: which being of
many sorts, are varied according to their parts whereof they consist: As the
Counsel, the creating of Magistrates, and form of judging, are compacted
somewhile one way and somewhile another; causing

CHAP. II.
THerefore the end and foundation of the popular state, is Liberty: For it is
an old saying, that in this commonweal only men enjoy liberty, at it seems
that every Popular state aims at the same. Obeying and governing by turns, is
one taken of liberty: for the right or law of the people is to have equality
according unto number; and not according to dignitie^ and where this is right,
the multitude must needs have the chief authority, and that which pleases
many, must be the end and law. For

Liberty being considered as the end in every sort of Democratie, it does
appear in two things, namely, in the course of ruling and governing by turns;
and in the license of living, as pleases every man best, without yielding
obedience to any man otherwise then in his turn. There be ten properties of
Popular states, that the Magistrates be created indifferently out of all the
Citizens, and all govern every man, and every man all men, as their turns
fall; that the Magistrates be created by casting of lots,

CHAP. III. How right is to be observed in the Democratie.
NOw next of all it may be doubted after what manner they shall have this

Since equality and right ought so to be observed in the Democracie, that the
poor may have therein as much power as the rich, to know how this may best
be done, suppose that in a City, whose government is Popular, there are a
thousand poor men, and five hundred rich men; the question is, whether parts

CHAP. IIII. Which is the best kind of Democracie.
Now since there are four kinds of Democracies, that is the best kind which is
the first in order, as we have declared in the former discourses, and it is
the auncientest of all. I mean the first, according to the distinction of
people. For the best sort of people are the Husbandmen, so that a Democracie
may be established, where they live by Husbandry or pasture. For such people
because they have not much wealth, are not idle, and cannot therefore frequent
the public assemblies, and since they want things necessary for the
sustenance of life, they follow their business,

There are four kinds of Democraties, as has been said in the 4. book. cha. 4.
The first is of Husbandmen: the second of sheepeheards, and where the citizens
live upon pasture: the third is of tradesmen, and mercenary people: the fourth,
where every one lives as

CHAP. V. An advertisement for the preserving of Democracies.
IT is the office of a Lawgiuer, and every other person, which undertakes the
ordaining and establishing of an estate, not to make it great or only, but

Whosoever will establish the fourth kind of Democratie, ought to observe
ten

CHAP. VI. How Oligarchies ought to be preserved.
WE shall also hereby perceive how Oligarchies are to be ordered. Now every
Oligarchie must be framed of contraries, in respecting the contrary form of
Democracie, chiefly, that which is well tempered, and the first kind, which
resembles much the Commonweal, so generally called, where the wealth and
revenues are to be divided, and the one made less, the other greater; less,
as

Aristotle having purposed to treat in this sixth book severally of Democraties
and Oligarchies, after he has dispatched and finished his discourse touching
Democraties, enters now into the Oligarchies, wherein he does insist the
less, because the one is understood by the other, since they are contraries:
for there are as many kinds of Oligarchies, as there are of Democraties, which
are opposed correspondantly each to other, viz. the first kind of Oligarchie to
the first kind of Democraty, and so the rest. Touching

CHAP. VII. Of the parts of the people that are meet for war, and how all
kinds of
NOw since there are four chief parts of the people, the Husbandmen,
Artificers, Merchants, and Hirelings: and four parts for war, the Horsemen,
Footmen armed, Footmen unarmed, and seafaring men: where the Country is fit
for Horsemen, there may be well established a mighty Oligarchie, for the
inhabitants may maintain themselves through this power, and it does also
belong to men of great wealth to charges to the chee^e ^ffices, possessed by
those that are o^ other estate, to the end, that the people

Almost all the properties of the Democracie and Oligarchie, being showed, it
is declared,

CHAP. VIII. What Offices are necessary ^or any estate, and what commodious and
honorable.
WE will now entreat of offices, and show how many there are, and what they be,
and of what things they have charge, as we have said before. For the City
cannot women and children. For poor men must of necessity use their wines and
children, as servants,

Some Offices are necessary, and others honorable: those are necessary which
Cities cannot want, and those honorable which serve for the ornament and
beautifying thereof; and some of them belong to civil government, others to
religion. There are seventeen

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED
ARistotle having treated in the former discourses, of states which are not
absolutely good, but by way of supposition,

CHAP. I. Of the perfect Commonweal, and the happy City.
HE that will undertake duly to treat of the best Commonweal, ought first of
all to declare what life is most to be wished and desired: for if he be
ignorant possessions, power, glory, and such like things: whose error is easy
to be refuted by the works themselves,

Whereas after Aristotle's opinion, happiness consists publickely and
particulerly in the enjoying the goods of the mind, of the body, and of
fortune; which are from without us: as well the City, as the private person,
is to be accounted happy, which partaketh and enjoys all the three goods
together. But that he do abundantly enjoy the goods of the mind, as Morrall
and intellectual virtues, and the other goods in mean sort, to wit, the goods
of the body; as beauty, health, and strength; and the outward goods, which be
riches, honors, glories, and such like things.

CHAP. II. Whether the felicity of one particular person, and of the City be
all one, and which life is to be preferred, either that which is employed in
action, or that which is spent in contemplation and study.
IT remains now to examine whether the happiness of each particular man and
of the City, be all one or not. But this is a manifest thing, because all men
do consent that it is all one: for all those which place the good life of each
particular person in richesse, do account the whole city happy which is rich:
and the preferrers and favorers of the tyrannical life, think that city most
happy that commands and rules many. And he which commends each particular
person, chiefly in respect of honesty and virtue, will call that city happy
which is virtuous. But herein two points are to be considered, the one, what
life is to be preferred, whether that which consists in the public
government, and fellowship of the city; or rather that kind of li^e which is
solitary, and is separated be so, it is not behoofefull to strain a man's self
to govern all men, but them only which are fit by

The whole City is happy in the selfsame manner that each particular man is,
because the felicity of particular persons, ensues the welfare of the City,
and is accounted such, as the opinion is that they have thereof: some men
placing it in richesse, others in great power, and large compass of dominions,
referring all their discipline to war,

CHAP. III. Whether felicity does consist in the active or contemplative life.
WE will dispute against those which confess that the life joined with virtue,
is most of all to be desired, and yet disagree about the use thereof, and will
set down the reasons of either party: some despise the offices of the
Commonweal, deeming that the life of a free man differs from the life of a
civil governor, and how that

Aristotle continuing his discourse of the active and contemplative life, does
compare them together, and says that the favorers and affecters of both these
lives, do err,

CHAP. IIII.
But since we have premised these things, and disputed before of other
Co^monweales, we will now speak of that which rem^ines, and first we will show
what grounds it is requisite to have for the co^stituting of such a city as me^
might desire. For it is not possible to establish a Commonweal, without having
in some different measure the things which are thereto expedient

The former discourses touching a happy life and touching action and
contemplation, have been propounded as preparatiues for the better
consideration of a good form of government, the foundation whereof is grounded
on the abundance of things necessary, which abundance consists in two
commodities, the one is the multitude of inhabitants, the other the quantity
and quality of the country or territory. An happy City should be neither too
great, nor too little: but since fairness consists in multitude

CHAP. V. Of the soil or province, which is the most commodious.
WE may say the like of the country, and need not doubt touching the quality
thereof, but that the best and most praiseworthy by the consent of all men, is
that which is furnished with most sufficience, as of necessity that country is
which is fertile and abundant in all things. For to have all things, and to
want nothing, is sufficience. Now it must be so sp^tious both in length and
largeness, that the inhabitants may live together in quiet, both in sufficient
and modest sort. If this which we have propounded be well said or not, we will
hereafter discourse thereof, when we come to that place, where we shall fully
and at large treat of the purchasing, and of the abundance

The soil or region that is fruitful, and abounds in all things, is very
good, being withal so spacious in length and largeness, that the inhabitants
thereof may live without discord in su^^icient sort. The form that is sure and
safe for war, must have the entrance thereof difficult and dangerous for the
enemies, and the issue easy for those of the Country,

CHAP. VI.
TOuching traffic by sea, whether it be profitable or hurtful to well
governed Cities, there are many doubts: for some affirm that it is very
pernicious to the good discipline of a City, that strangers trained up in other
laws, resort thither: and that to people it much by the traffic of the sea,
in sending forth and receiving into the City a multitude of Merchants, it is
against the ordinance and institution of a good government. But if

The nearenesse of the sea is profitable for safety and abundance; not for
men's manners which are corrupted by receiving strangers, or resorting into
other Countries. Plato makes the same discourse in his fourth book of Laws.
There is at this presant


WE will speak of what nature the Citizens ought to be: which thing is easily
known, if we consider the most famous Cities of Greece, and all the habitable

Having treated of the greatness of a City, and the commodiousnesse and
situation of the Country or region, he speaks now of the nature of Citizens,
who for the maintenance of their liberty must be both courageous and
ingenious: and he shows what kinds of people have these two qualities,
namely, the inhabitants of those Countries that are in the midst between the
North and South, being temperate in heat and cold, in the fourth and fifth
climate, wherein stands a good part of Greece, Italy, France, De sensu and
sensibili, and in the foureteenth Section of his problemes. Plato in the
Epinomide does write in like sort of Greece, and of the Grecians; and in
Timeus, of the Country of Attica, and the Athenians. Likewise De re rustica is
of the same opinion, praising his Country Italy, as Aristotle does Greece; and
he alleges Eratosthenes, who divided the whole world into two parts, viz.
the North and South, from which proceeds all that diversity of things which
we see, according to the neerenesse

all the habitable parts of the earth, considering how many sorts of people
there are.] Claudius Ptolomeus in his second book of the judicial part, the
second Chapter, which concerns the universal property of Countries: The
properties of Countries (says he) have been usually distinguished either by
all Paralleles and all Angles, or by their sci^uation toward the Eclipticke,
and the sun: For they that inhabit our country, which is situated in a
Northern quadrant, who are under the Southern Parralleles, that is, who are
described by the Equinoctial, even unto the Summer tropicke, as De rebus
Coelestibus, and in his Urania: by Manilius in the Astronomicke: and by Julius
Firmicus.

FOR whereas some affirm touching those to whom the guard and defense of the
City is ] Aristotle means Plato, whom he reprooueth for bringing in
Socrates in the second book of his Commonweal, discoursing thus of this
matter. SOCR. Shall he not need such a nature as is thereto proper and fit?
ADIM. What else? SOCR. Let us choose then if we can, the natures meet for the
guard

CHAP. VIII. What the true parts of a city be, and the necessary parts
thereof.
But as in other things which consist by nature, those are not parts of the
whole substance, without which the whole cannot be: so also all those things
are not to be set down as parts of a City which are of necessity in Cities,
neither yet

In this Chapter and that which follows, he speaks of the parts of a
City, what they are, and how the exercises thereof may be communicated,
according to the diversity of gouernements and ages. There are then about six
actions, without which no City can be. First it must have victuals, wherewith
the husbandmen and shepherds do furnish it: secondly many trades and
handicrafts: thirdly, armor as well to defend it


THese things being determined, we are yet farther to consider whether they
ought all to be communicated to all: For it may so happen, that the same honor
the gods, certes they are not to make any Husbandman or Artificer a Priest: and
whereas

The necessary actions of every City being declared, it is demanded whether
they

CHAP. X. That the distributing of Cities by the kinds of the inhabitants,
has been aunciently used.
THis seems no new thing nor lately come to the knowledge of those which have

S^th Cities have need of many necessary actions, it is better that they which
use them, be distinguished and separated; as husbandmen from Soldiers, Judges
and Senators from Artificers, which should also be divided by their trades, and
every trade have his quarter, even as we see the Channons and Monks dwell
apart in cloisters. And this manner of distributing the multitude or vulgar
sort of Citizens by kinds and orders of different exercises, is very ancient,
which the Egyptians did long time use, who gloried together by fifteenes,
twenties, or such other number, to the end, that they may know

the City should be divided by orders of exercises.] Plato in Timeus, in that
place where he brings in the Egyptian Priest talking with Solon, touching
the antiquity and government of Athens, and of the City of Says: If you
consider (says he) the laws which they use, and compare them with ours, you
shall find therein great likeness: First the Priests dwell apart from the
common people, next the Artificers use their trades, each sort by himself, and
not indifferently or confusedly one amongst another. The like do their
Sheepheards, Hunters, and Husbandmen. Diodorus Siculus in his first book, the
eight chapter. The policy of the AEgiptians consists in three sorts of people,
namely husbandmen, shepherds, and artificers: The husbandmen taking small
wages of the

AND that they who are employed in the war, should not be Husbandmen.]
Herodotus diligently practiced it? And shall he which takes a buckler or any
other weapons, be

i^ is to be believed that many other things have in length of time ben
invented, or rather infinitely.] The same Aristotle in the twelfth book of his
Metaphisickes, the eight chapter says, That Philosophy has been often found out
(as it is likely) and lost again. Plato in the third and sixth book of his
Laws affirms, that the knowledge of de veritate Christiana, in that chapter
wherein he proves, that the world is not eternal.

CHAP. XI. Of the situation of a City, and of four things.
WE have showed before, that a City should be seated in the most commodious
place that may be, both by land and sea, and in respect of the whole Country.
Touching the means seek to prevail, so are there some means already found
out, and more must be sought and

In choosing a place fit for the building of a City, regard must be had to the
situation thereof, that it may stand commodiously by land and sea, to the
wholesomenesse of the air, to the wind that comes from toward the Sun,
and cheefely to the Easterly next to the Northerly winds: likewise to the
surety of the place, that it may not be easily besieged, but that the approach
thereunto be painful to the enemies, and the salies or issues easy for the
Citizens: whereof he has already spoken in the fifth and sixth chapter de
Architectura. Touching places of strength, they are not in like sort fit for
all Estates: but for Oligarchies and Monarchies, those that are built high: for
Democracies, equality and evenness: and for Aristocracies many places well
fortified. Aristotle writes of the building of private houses, according to
the ancient form of Greece, which is declared by Vitruuius in his sixth book,
the tenth Chapter. The City must likewise be compassed with De rerum
inuentione. Herein is the Lacedaemonians vanity reproved, who remained a long
time without walls, and were in the end constrained to wall their City.

CHAP. XII. Of temples, public or common houses and places to diet together
in.
NOw since the multitude of Citizens must be divided by companies, who are to
diet together, and the walls fortified in sundry places with towers and
bulwarks, whersoeuer they may be fitly erected: it shall be doubtless very
expedient that some of

This Chapter contains the things that belong to the beautifying and profit
of a City: as Churches, Oracles, public places appointed for plays and
exercises, and market places, severed one from another, common places to diet
in together, lodgings of Priests, and of Magistrates.

CHAP. XIII. Of felicity, and the means to attain thereunto, and how men wexe
virtuous by three things.
But let us return to our discourse touching the Commonweal, and declare
whereof, and of what manner of things that City should be founded and
compacted, which is happy and well governed. There be two points wherein every
kind of goodness consists: The one, that the intent and the end wherefore
actions are enterprised, be uprightly grounded and ordained: the other, that
the means of attaining thereunto be found out. For these things may agree and
disagree amongst themselves, seeing that now and then the scope and end is well
laid and proposed, but there is an error and oversight in the means of
attaining thereunto; and contrariwise, it may fall out, that the means are
good, but the proposed end naught. Sometimes, each of men and Cities had never
need of such things. But the actions which concern honor and plenty

Two things there be wherein men proceed well and evil, to wit, in the end,
and in the means tending to the end. They proceed well, when the end and
purpose is good, and they have found out the means that lead thereunto: and
they proceed evil, when there is no mean to attain thereunto: and whereas it
is not good to err in either, and that all men desire to live happily; some
attain to this happiness, and others cannot attain thereunto, by reason they
are hindered by fortune, or by nature. Now the happy life consists in the
perfect use of virtue, being assisted with bodily and outward

CHAP. XIIII. Whether the governors and obeyers, ought always to be all one
and the selfsame persons, or changed by turns, and to what end the
Commonweal ought to be directed, that it is for peace and tranquillity, and not
for wars
NOw forasmuch as every civil society consists of governors and obeyers,
let us examine whether the governors or obeyers ought to be changed, or
continue always all one and the selfsame persons during their lives. For the
discipline and institution ought always to be applied to this end. If the^
some persons were so excellent above others, as we suppose the gods and
heroical personages do excel men, and that straightway they would show
themselves to have great excellency, first in body, and that are natural. Now
that part which is endued with reason, is the better, and is divided likewise

The better to take order for the education and training up of youth, it is
first requisite to know whether they that govern and obey the City, should be
always the selfsame, or else sundry persons, who may command and obey as
their turns fall. But if

CHAP. XV. What virtues ought to be in a Commonweal.
NOw since it seems that men's actions have the same end both in public and
private respects, and that it is necessary to define a good man and a good
City in the same manner, there is no doubt but that those virtues which
concern rest are requisite, for peace is often the end of war, (as has been
said) and rest the end of labor. Now those virtues do further tranquillity,
and the leading of a commendable life, which are used both in time of rest, and
of business, for there are many things very necessary for a quiet life, and
therefore a City must have Temperance, as are said by the Poets to dwell in
the fortunate Islands, for they shall chiefly have need of Philosophy,

Since the chief and sovereign good consists in the same thing, as well in
regard of every peculiar person, as of a whole City, and since that virtue is
the selfsame which makes a man good, and a City good, the City therefore
must be endued with those virtues chiefly which are referred to peace and
rest, as Justice, Temperance, and Philosophy. But because peace is often
obtained by war, and rest by travail or labor, those virtues also are
requisite whereby war and affairs are managed. Nor are the Lacedaemonians to be
imitated, who although they measured virtue in the same sort that other well
ordered Cities did, yet they erred in that they thought to attain thereunto by
the

CHAP. XVI. Of the time wherein men and women should be coupled in marriage,
and of the procreation of children.
THe Lawgiuer in taking order touching this matter, must have regard to the
persons, and to their time of life, to the end they may agree in their ages at
ease, nor too delicately. And this may be remedied by the Lawgiuer if he
appoint them to visit

Aduertisements touching marriage, of which some are drawn from nature, the
rest from the opinion and custom of Aristotle's time^ or from his own opinion.
The first is, that the husband and wife be in the same time disposed and apt,
the one to beget, the other to conceive, and that their forces be not herein
unlike. The second, that the children approach not too near to the age of their
fathers, nor be too far distant from it. The third, that the wife be
eighteen years of age, the husband eight and thirty,

CHAP. XVII. How children should be brought up.
WHen children are borne, there is great regard to be had with what kind of
food they should be nourished for the strength of their bodies. We see by
other living creatures, and by these Nations which are given to warlike
discipline, that much feeding on milk is very good for the body, provided
that there be no wine mingled therewith for the preventing of diseases.
Besides, all the motions which may possibly be used in this age, do greatly
profit. And to the end that the members by reason of their tenderness be not
writhed or made crooked, some Nations do even at this day use artificial
instruments which keep their bodies straight. It is good to enure them so
soon as they are borne, 5 years old, they ought in the 2 years following to
be beholders of the sciences which they must learn afterward. There be 2 ages
whereinto the institution of youth is to be divided, namely from the age of
seven years to the age of fourteen years, and again from the foureteenth,
till the one and twentieth. For they which divide the ages by seuens,

After the Philosopher has declared how children ought to be procreated, he
declares now their food, exercises, and bringing up, setting down likewise
many precepts in that behalf. The first is, that their first nourishment be
milk, which is a very

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF ARISTOTLE'S CIVIL GOVERNMENT, TRANSLATED
THe Philosopher continues this discourse touching the

CHAP. I.
WHen no man doubts that the Lawgiuer ought chee^ely to provide for the
bringing up of children, and that the neglect hereof does greatly hurt the
Commonweal: For the manner of government must be framed according to every
Commonweal, since every one has her peculiar and several customs whereby it
is maintained, and at the first of all. Which ought to be executed publickely
and not privately, nor according to the manner which

Forasmuch as it has been already resolved, that it is behoofefull to prepare
for attaining to the end, by the means that lead thereto; and that the end and
scope of a good Commonweal, is the same that the end of one man alone is; and
that such an end is felicity, and that manners and teaching are the means of
attaining thereunto: Therefore the Citizens of a good Commonweal ought to be
conveniently brought up and taught according to the form of the same, because
every Commonweal has her peculiar customs, whereby it is founded and
maintained. Wherefore Aristotle goes forward with this point, which was begun
in the former book; and maintains, that such care is most necessary for
every civil Governor, because the manners of the Citizens

CHAP. II. Wherein, and how children should be instructed.
WE must therefore know what this institution is, and how children should be
instructed, for at this day it is doubtful, because all think not that the
same things should be learned by youth for the attaining of virtue, or an happy
life. Neither is yet agreed on whether their institution and instruction should
be

The Lawgiuer in taking order for the institution and training up of youth,
must have regard to two things, the one, wherein children must be instructed,
the other, how: for it is not yet agreed on to what end the institution of
children must be directed, whether

CHAP. III. That children must be taught four things, viz. Grammar, the art of
THere are about four things which are usually taught to children, Grammar,
the art of Exercise, and Music. For the fourth, some add Painting: Grammar
and Painting, because they are many ways profitable to man's life: the art of
Exercise, because it makes men strong: As for Music, it might be doubted of,
for at this day many learn it for pleasure, although they of ancient times,
have from the beginning placed it in the rest, it is needful to learn
certain things, and to be instructed and trained in the same, and that

In old time there were in Greece four faculties which Parents did accustom
to cause their children to learn: Grammar, the art of Exercise, Music, and
Painting: for certain profits fit for man's life. Grammar serves to speak
well and to read and write well, for the knowledge of letters is necessary for
merchandise, for the guiding of household affairs, for the getting of skill,
and for the continuance and perpetuating of man's remembrance, and for the
public and private life, in time of peace and war, and of



CHAP. IIII.
IN those Cities which at this day seem to use great diligence in instructing
of children, some men apply themselves to get a championlike actiuitie, marring
their faces, and hindering the growth of the bodies. And though the
Lacedaemonians have not fallen into this error, yet do they with labor make
themselves beastlike and vnmanlike, as though that were a great furtherance to
manhood and fortitude. Howbeit, as we have often continual labors, they
excelled all others, and now are excelled by other people of Greece in such

Two faults are commonly committed in teaching the faculty of exercise to
children: The one is that by assaying to make them strong, their faces are
marred, and the growth of their bodies hindered. The other is, that they make
them beastlike and cruel, by directing their whole training to one martial
virtue alone, as the Lacedaemonians did. Therefore Plato in the third book of
his Commonweal, considering the faults of the art of exercise, will not have
it showed alone, but mingled with Music:

CHAP. V. Of Music by way of disputation, and how children should learn it.
IN the former discourses we have already set down some doubts concerning
Music, which it shall be good to repeat in this place to serve as an occasion
to a more ample disputation which may be here made thereof. For it is not easy
to r^solue what force Music Now that we receive thereby some quality, it
appears by sundry others, and chiefly by the games of

In this place he discourses affirmatively and negatiuely, whether Music be
a science,

wise men do affirm that the soul is an harmony, or that there is harmony in
it.] Plato in his Phedon brings in Symmias talking thus with Socrates: I
believe assuredly Socrates, that you know well enough what we think of the
soul, to wit, that there is in our bodies some intention and complexion of
hot and cold, dry and moist: and that the certain temperature and agreement
of those qualities, are our soul living in the Proxim^ autem Aristoxenus
musicus, idemque philosophus^ censet animam esse ipsius corporis intensionem
quandam, vel^t in cantu and fidibus, quae

CHAP. VI. That Music is to be learned by singing and playing on instruments,
But whether they ought to learn it by singing and playing upon instruments,
or not (as we have cast a doubt before) we will now declare. It is certain that
it stands him greatly upon who will excel and become such a o^e as he wishes
to be, ^o set his hand to the work. For it is imp^ssible or very hard for them
which have not exercised a work or function, to give a good judgment thereof.
And also it is certain that children ought to be occupied abo^^ some thing,
and it is to be supposed, that Architas his rattle was well invented, which he
ga^e to children is pec^liar to men of skill, as the Harp, or if there be any
such like; but upon those instruments

Children ought to learn Music, not only by hearing, but also by singing
and playing upon iustruments themselves. For it is not possible to judge
rightly of the

when they had gotten more leisure through the abundance of wealth.] Whosoever
considers the affairs of people and Nations, shall find, that their
beginnings were small, base, and poor, and that need taught them by little and
little the use of necessary things, and that afterward came up those which
serve for pomp and ornament. The which matter Plato in his Critias or
Atlanticus, has divinely declared, etc. That is to say, When as they wanted
necessaries for this life by the space of many ages, and both they and their
children thought only of those things which were needful for them, and talked
of them, they despised the remembrance of antiquity. For the curiousness of
learning and seeking out of old matters have usually come into Cities through
idleness, when any have already prepared such things as are needful for this
life, and not before. And which is more, Quia prudentissimus quisque maxim^
negociosus erat, ingenium nemo sine corpore exercebat: optimus quisque facere
quam dicere, and si^^ ab alijs benefacta laudari, quam ipse aliorum narrare
malebat. Cicero 1. de Oratore: Nam posteaquam imperio omnium gentium constituto
diuturnitas pacis ocium confirmauit, nemo fere La^dis cupidus adolescens non
sibi ad dicendum studio omni enitendum putauit. Idem auctor in eadem
praefatione libri primi dicit, Graecos homines non solum ingenio and doctrina,
sed ocio studioque abundantes. Stephen Pasquier, in his first book of the
Searches of France, the first chapter, complains of the old inhabitants of
Gaul, and of the French

AND conceived great opinion of themselves before and after the wars of the
Medes, by ] He means the voyage that Xerxes King of Persia and of the Medes,
made into Greece; which is so much spoken of in the Greek Hystories, whereof
Diodorus Siculus in the first Chapter of his twelfth book, writes as
follows, which is very fit for the understanding of the place: The voyage of
Xerxes King of Persia against Greece, by reason of the great power

CHAP. VII. Of harmonies and rimes, or numbers.
WE are yet farther to consider of harmonies and rimes, and how they

Songs be morrall, or active, or rauishing. Those be morrall which imitate
the manners and affections, and appertain to instruction. Those active, which
pertain

The end of the eighth and last book of Aristotle's Politiques, or
A Table of the Chapters contained in these eight books of Aristotle's
Politiques.
The first book.
Chap. Page OF a City or Commonweal, and the parts thereof. I 2 What is a
City: and that it consists by nature: and that man is naturally a sociable
and civil creature. II 3 Of a family and the parts thereof, specially of the
Master and Servant. 21 4 Of a Bondsman, and Bondage, by Nature and by Law. 31 5
Of possession, and of the natural acquisition of goods necessary for life:
vvithall of the variety of livings and trades of men: and of true riches. 36 6
Of artificial getting by way of exchange: and of the invention of money. 44 7
That the skill of acquiring and getting is servant to the skill of
housekeeping, called Oeconomie, and to the skill of political governing: and
how it ought to be used. 48 8 Of the other parts of housegouernment which
belong to the husband and the father: also of such virtues as are respectively
requisite for governors and obeyers. 55
The second book.
1 That all the Commonweales of his time deserved correction: and first of all
Platoes, reproouing that community of things which Socrates devised in it. 61
2 The reproof of the community of vviues and children, brought in by Socrates
in Platoes Commonweal. 71 3 The reproouing of the community of goods and
possessions. 75 4 Of the insufficiency of the second form of Commonvveale,
propounded by Plato in his fifth book De Legibus. 81 5 Of Phaleas his
Commonweal: and of the Chalcedonian Commonweal. 88 6 Of the several
Commonweales of Hippodamus, and of the Milesians. 92 7 Of the Commonweal of
the Lacedaemonians. 104 8 Of the Commonweal of Crete ordained by Minos. 123 9
Of the Commonweal of Carthage. 127 10 Of the Commonweal of Athens, ordained
by Solon. 131
The third book.
1 Of a City, and of a Citizen. 137 2 When any alteration happens in a
City, in what case the City shall be said to remain, the same that it was
before, or otherwise. 14^ 3 Whether the virtue that belongs to a good man, be
the same with that which belongs to a good Citizen. 144 4 What is a
Commonweal, and how many kinds thereof there be. 148 5 Of the division and
definition of Commonweales, and of their transgressions. 149 6 Of the right and
law of the Democratie and Oligarchie: 151 7 Who ought to bear rule in a
City. 156 8 Of the end of Policy, which is the public good and civil
justice, and that it is the noblest end of all other faculties. 159 9 When a
man does greatly excel in virtue, how they ought to behave themselves, and of
Ostracisme. 162 10 Of a Kingdom, and the several kinds thereof. 168 11 Of the
fifth kind of government, whether it be more expedient for a City to be
governed by a good man, or by good laws. 172 12 Of an absolute King, and how
people are more disposed to be governed by one sort of government, then by
another. 179
The fourth book.
1 What a Politician or a Lawgiuer ought to consider in the establishing of a
Commonweal. 168 2 He resumeth the division of Commonweales, propounded in the
former book: and declares how bad ones are opposed unto the good. 188 3 Why
there are diverse forms of government. 189 4 That a Democratie and an
Oligarchie are not simple forms: and that there are many sorts and kinds of
Democraties. 190 5 Of the kinds of Oligarchie. 199 6 For what cause there are
many sorts of Democratie and Oligarchie. 200 7 The division of governments,
according to Platoes opinion: and of the kinds of the Aristocratie. 201 8 Of
the Government generally called a Commonweal. 205 9 How the Commonweal so
called generaly, is made of the Democratie and Oligarchie. 206 10 Of the
Tyrannical State, and the kinds thereof. 208 11 That the best Commonweal, and
of longest continuance, is that wherein there are many men of mean substance,
neither too rich, nor too poor. 219 12 Of that which does generally concern
the preservation of Cities, and what manner of multitude is fit for a
Democratie or an Oligarchy. 221 13 Of the sleights and subtle devises by the
rich against the poor, and by the poor against the rich, to purchase to
themselves the government of the state, and how the Lawgiuer should take order
for it. 223 14 That there are three parts of all Commonweales, the Counsel,
the Magistrates, and Judgments: and first of the aucthority of the Counsel,
and the manners thereof. 224 15 Of the ordinance and authority of Magistracies,
and of their distinctions. 232
The fifth book.
1 Of the changes happening in public Estates. 241 2 From whence seditions
spring, and of their causes. 255 3 A declaration of the causes of seditions.
260 4 The issue of the occasions whereby Go^monweales are changed. 268 5 Of the
changes that happen in Democracies. 273 6 Of the changes happening in
Oligarchies. 290 7 Of the changes happening in Aristocraties. 300 8 Of the
particular preservation of states. 305 9 Of the qualities that are to be
required in the chief governors of a state. 308 10 Of the changing, marring,
and ouerturning of Monarchies. 310 11 Of the maintaining and upholding of
Monarchies. 325 12 That of all States the Oligarchie and Tyranny do least
continue. 331
The sixth book.
1 Of the properties and congruities of every Commonweal, and of their
ioinings and knittings together. 338 2 What the end and ground of the
Democratie is. 339 3 How right is to be observed in the Democratie. 341 4 Which
is the best kind of Democratie. 342 5 An advertisement for the preserving of
Democraties. 344 6 How Oligarchies ought to be preserved. 346 7 Of the parts of
the people that are meet for war, and how all kinds of Oligarchies ought to
use them. 347 8 What offices are necessary for any estate, and what commodious
and honorable. 348
The seventh book.
1 Of the perfect Commonweal, and the happy City. 351 2 Whether the
felicity of one particular person, and of the City be all one, and which
life is to be preferred, either that which is employed in action, or that
which is spent in contemplation and study. 352 3 Whether felicity does consist
in the active or contemplative life. 354 4 Of the commodities requisite for the
establishing of a good kind of government, and of an happy City, and of the
greatness of a City. 355 5 Of the soil or province, which is the most
commodious. 357 6 Whether the nearenesse of the sea be profitable or not. 358 7
Of what quality or nature the Citizens ought to be: and a commendation of the
Grecians. 359 8 What the true parts of a City be, and the necessary parts
thereof. 362 9 Whether all the charges of a City are to be indifferently
communicated to all persons, or whether some are peculiar, others common. 363
10 That the distributing of Cities by the kinds of the inhabitants, has been
anciently used. 364 11 Of the situation of a City, and of four things. 369
12 Of temples, public or common houses and places to diet together in. 370 13
Of felicity, and the means to attain thereunto, and how men wex virtuous by
three things. 371 14 Whether the governors and obeiers ought always to be all
one and the selfsame persons, or changed by turns: and to what end the
Co^monweale ought to be directed, that it is for peace and tranquillity, and not
for wars and lordly dominion. 373 15 What virtues ought to be in a Commonweal.
375 16 Of the time wherein men and women should be coupled in marriage, and of
the procreation of children. 377 17 How children should be brought up. 378
The eighth book.
1 That children should be publickely taught and instructed. 381 2 Wherein and
how children should be instructed. 382 3 That children must be taught four
things, viz. Grammar, the art of Exercise, Music, and Painting. 383 4 Of the
faculty of exercise, and how children should be exercised. 385 5 Of Music by
way of disputation, and how children should learn it. 386 6 That Music is to
be learned by singing and playing on instruments, and what instruments should
be used. 389 7 Of harmonies and rimes, or numbers. 392
FINIS.
Certain extraordinary escapes touching the sense, happening through the often
and thick enterlining of the Copy.
Page 208. line 31. outwardly, read, without. ibidem, line 32. wholly, read,
not at all. page 271. line 1. but only the good that is understood, read, but
only he that is skillful. page 352. line 15. and 16. the possessions and the
body, read, possessions or the body. page 349. line 14. young men and
keepers, read, such as are deputed to the guard and keeping of the City. page
355. line. 34. to be known, read to be accounted such as use action.

The rest are both less material, and not very many.


