THE POORES LAMENTATION FOR THE DEATH OF OUR LATE dread Sovereign the High and
Mighty Princess Elizabeth, late Queen of England, France and Ireland.

With their prayers to God for the High and Mighty Prince JAMES by the grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold (...) shop in
Cornehill, near the Exchange, at the sign of the Cat and the Parrets. 1603.

THE POORES LAMENTATION.
YOu wailing wights that take delight to mourn
vouchsafe to lend your aid unto my Pen:
Assist my muse, my verse for to adorn,
sithes, sobs, and tears, shall sure be pleasing then
For sorrow sadly sits upon my breast,
And does bereave my heart of quiet rest.
Come woe and wander with me all alone,
and guide me to some solitary place:
Where I with floods of tears may since and groan,
and wailing wander by my self a space.
But soft a while me thinks I here some cry,
Stay, stay, and take with thee more company.
We all will bear a part in this lament,
for this thy cares does all of us concern:
Wherefore lets all prepare incontinent,
now we are private none can us discern,
Nay lets not fear, if all the world did see,
For most within it do with us agree.
Then let us all fall down upon our knee,
and then direct our eyes to heaven so hie:
Then with consent let all of us agree,
to wring our hands and sadly sobring cry,
Lord it is thou, it is thou oh Lord I say,
Which for our sin has taken quite away
Our good and Godly gracious royal Queen,
which was our comfort while she did remain:
Whose like on earth before was never seen,
nor did, nor does, the world her like contain,
Elizabeth, Elizabeth I say,
From little England now is taine away.
In the beginning of Queen Mary's reign,
her grace at Ashridge at her house did lie:
Sore sick God wot, and very full of pain,
not like to live, but very like to die.
To her in all the have Queen Mary sent,
To have her brought to her incontinent.
Three of the Counsel to that end did ride,
with twelve score horsemen in their company:
And every one his weapon by his side,
To Ashridge posting they in have do hie.
Yet it was ten a clock within the night,
When they were at the gate for to alight.
Straight to her chamber they in have did go,
and with her grace demanded for to speak:
Answer was made them that the cause was so,
that she in bed that time was very weak,
And did request them stay till the next day,
Who answered that the Queen they must obey.
And she had charged them all upon their life,
alive or dead to bring her thence away:
Wherefore quoth they we soon will end this strife,
going into the chamber where she lay.
Her grace did see them and with grief did say,
Could you not while to morrow morning stay.
No, straight they answered all with one consent,
alive or dead away from hence you must:
Thus with commission to you we are sent,
it is very straight quoth she, yet I do trust,
My gracious Queen will mercy to me show,
Of this my sickness if she did but know^
The Queen has sent her letter for your grace,
against nine a clock therefore I pray prepare:
Alas quoth she th^s is a grievous case,
is this hard hap allotted for my share.
Great God that knows the secrets of my heart,
Vouchsafe, vouchsafe, to take thy handmaids part.
Then on the morrow very sick and weak,
she from her house was carried straight away:
Her servants hearts ready with grief ^o break,
did for their gracious Lady weeping pray.
That God would still defend her with his might,
For this strange dealing did them much affright.
From thence unto the Court she was conuayde,
where fourteen days her grace was closely kept:
And might not see the Queen while there she staid,
this dealing when her grace did see, she wept.
Some charged her with Wyats conspirasie,
The which her grace did utterly deny.
Yet for all that, the Queen commandment sent,
that she next tide should to the Tower go:
And when the time was come she grieved went,
the Queen commanded, and it must be so.
Then to the Tower she was carried straight,
Where for her coming many did awaite.
She landing, passed straight into the Tower,
when she was there, the gates they boulted fast:
Quoth she, I never thought to see this hour,
well now I see my joyful days are past.
Which I have here upon the earth to spend,
Yet ^aue me not O Lord, but comfort send.
Oh Lord thou know the secrets of my heart,
thou know how I am wronged in this place;
I pray vouchsafe great God to take my part,
and let my wrong be turned to their disgrace.
That are the cause of my imprisonment,
Lord let them see their sin incontinent.
Within the Tower long time she did remain,
being too much abused by many a one:
And though her grace did often times complain,
yet there was none that did regard her moan
At last one told her, she from thence should go,
To Woodstock for the Queen would have it so.
Then from the Tower to Woodstocke she was sent,
there to be kept a prisoner as before:
And threescore soldiers for to guard her went,
where at her Princely grace was grieved sore.
Thus traitor like quoth she, why do you use me,
In truth, in truth, you all do much abuse me.
During the time that she in Woodstocke lay,
with life she often escaped very near:
For many ways Stephen Gardener did assay,
as in the story it does plain appear.
To bring that Godly Lady to her end,
But God above, her grace did still defend.
From thence to Hampton Court she was conuey'd,
there to remain as she had done before:
Wherein close prison she a fortnight laid;
and out of doors not suffered for to stir,
From thence at last at ten a clock at night,
She was conuayed to Queen Mary's (...)
Who did demand, and if she would not yield,
unto her grace that mercy she might have:
If I offended have, let me be held
a traitor, for no mercy I will crave.
For God that lives in Eternity,
Does know I never wronged your Majesty.
From prison then the Queen did her release,
and to her house at Lamheye did her send:
From all her troubles there to live in peace,
with two or three upon her to attend.
Thus was our gracious and our loving Queen,
Toste too and fro, as one of no esteem.
Not like a Princess of such great renown,
the like of her fair England never had:
And rightful heir next unto the crown,
which joyed all faith full hearts and made them glad.
For shortly after God did take away
Marie from us which was a joyful day.
Then was Elizabeth proclaimed Queen,
whose love unto us always did abound,
More joy in England there was never seen,
not without cause, as since we all have found.
Specially those which rightly fear the Lord,
And loved the truth, and Papistry abhord.
Thus did the Lord from troubles many a one,
preserve and keep her gracious Majesty.
And with his hand did set her on her throne,
to be admired of all posterity.
That after ages might report and say,
Thus deals the Lord with them that him obey.
Nay of her right when as she was possessed,
and had upon her head that glorious crown:
There he in mercy did not let her rest,
but all her foes with speed that did but frown.
The Lord in Justice ended soon their days,
Therefore alone to him we yield the praise.
All those that please Chronicles to read,
shall see how God did keep her with his power:
And by the hand (as 'twere) her grace did lead,
even from her birth day, to her latest hour:
And many traitorous acts against her grace,
Did bring to light, and utterly deface.
He did not bless our gracious Queen alone,
but all her Counsel, and her realm likewise:
For none of them had cause to make their moan,
for she the meanest sort did not despise.
But did direct such orders for theirstay,
As binds the poor upon their knees to pray.
That God would grant her Nestors years to live,
and Cressus wealth thrice doubled to enjoy:
Salomons wisdom, Lord we pray thee give,
unto her Grace, and keep her from annoy.
These were the prayers that the poor did make,
For virtuous Queen Elizabeth her sake.
Whom from her birth the Lord did keep no doubt,
as he did Moses from proud Pharaohs hand:
To end her days though many went about,
yet like Mount Sina still her grace did stand.
In spite of Pope and Spanish policy,
The Lord did bless and keep her Majesty
For Israel did Moses often pray,
our Queen for England ever did the same,
And Samuel always did the Lord obey,
so did our good and gracious Queen of fame.
As England found, whose welfare did rely,
upon the person of her Majesty.
Abraham is gone, which for us often did pray,
our stay is gone whereon we all did rest:
For Lotte from us is taken quite away,
Joseph is gone, for whom this land was blessed,
Our Abraham, Lot, with Joseph now is dead,
And with our Queen their virtues wrapped in lead.
Gone is our Queen, whose like cannot be found,
gone is our Queen which always loved us dear,
Gone is our Queen whose virtues did abound,
as by her care it often did appear.
Gone is our joy, our stay, our life, our love,
Gone is our Load-starre unto heaven above.
Down is that Sun which often did shine so bright,
down is that Star which many did excel:
Down is that Moon which often did give us light,
down is that light which darkness did excel.
Our Lamp is out, the which did burn so clear,
And gave us light this five and forty year.
But shall we grieve that she is gone to rest,
who all her life to do us good did spend:
No, lets rejoice, sith God does count it best,
from troubles for her Majesty to send,
To give her that for which she labored long,
(...) ^^^^ine her, you should do her wrong.
To heaven, to heaven, our gracious Queen is gone,
to live with Christ in joy for evermore:
Then leave to sith, to sob, to weep and moan;
for she in glory does Gods name adore.
With many thousand Saints and angels she,
Sings Holy, holy, holy, Trinity.
Thus let us leave her with that glorious train,
to praise the Lord in heaven for evermore:
There crowned with glory ever to remain,
with heavenly voices and with Martyrs store.
Who in their conforts all agree in one,
Still giving honor unto God alone.
Yet weeping, weep for her which had your hearts,
who loved you dearly while she did remain:
But let your cries be severed into parts,
your state and welfare still for to maintain.
And praise the Lord, the which in mercy have,
Sent thee a King that is both wise and grave.
The Pope long time has wished for this day,
thinking to bring us underneath his yoke:
But now poor Fools they know not what to say,
hypocrisy they find their fittest cloak.
For though our Queen Elizabeth be dead,
We have a King that rules in her stead.
Who will the truth mainetaine while he does live,
in spite of Pope of Spain or all that route:
Thy holy spirit Lord unto him give,
to be his guide in all he gots about.
And all that seek by means to wrong his grace,
Lord we beseech thee utterly deface.
That little England still may praise thy name,
and live in peace as we before have done:
Preserve O God our royal King of fame,
he may proceed as he has well begun:
Gods glory, and his Gospel to maintain,
while here upon the earth we do remain.
God give us grace which be his subjects true,
with loyal hearts to serve him all our life:
And to prevent those dangers may ensue,
If we among our selves should live at strife.
Come let us join our hearts with hands and say,
The Lord be praisde that ere we saw this day.
For we in England now inioye a King,
which fears the Lord, and holds his subjects dear:
Whose fame for ever through the world shall ring,
for through his Realms the Gospel shines clear.
And we enjoy the peace we long possessed:
That without fear we all may take our rest.
Then let us all confess with one consent,
that God has brought this mighty work to pass:
And of our sin lets earnestly repent,
for through the land more need there never was.
For pride and envy now does bear such sway,
That faithful dealing grows into decay.
Well to conclude, let every one amend,
of his bad life that long he lived in:
Then many blessings God will on us send,
then speedily let every one begin.
To pray, obey, and serve the God of might,
For that is wholly pleasing in his sight.
The God of heaven preserve our noble King,
and grant him three times Nestors years to live:
That we with peace and plenty still may sing,
and always to the Lord true praises give.
Lord bless both him and his, for evermore,
And grant we always may thy name adore.
Lord let those virtues which our Queen possessed.
be trebeled upon his royal head:
Lord guide him in those things which please thee best:
and let her virtues live though she be dead.
Lord bless his grace, and all his royal train.
That peace and plenty he may still mainetaine.
That all thy subjects may rejoice in thee,
which live within the compass of thy Realms:
And joining hearts with hands may all agree,
saying God save, our noble Prince King James,
Whose Godly life, and virtuous deeds do show,
Our state in England shall not ebb but flow.
God grant it may for ever flourish so,
and still be famous all the world throughout,
And let us not the word of God forgo,
though popish Priests to wrong it go about.
Yet let this Island still the same enjoy,
For that is it has kept us from annoy.
Then fear the Lord and honor still thy King,
join all as one, the truth for to defend:
Then peace unto our land will plenty bring,
and all our feeble states shall then amend.
Then let us all with ecchoing voices cry,
The Lord preserve his Royal Majesty.
FINIS.

