A TRVE REPORT Of the most gracious and merciful message of her most excellent
Majesty, sent by the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight,
Vizchamberlaine, and one of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel, to
the place where THOMAS APPELTREE should have suffered for his most Traitorlike
action:

With such other discourse as it pleased him to use upon the matter at the same
time: wherein nothing is added, but his only speech verbatim, as my weak
memory would serve me to do it.

CHARITAS.


Printed at London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. M. D. LXXIX. Iulij. XXIIII.

MAster Carry, Her most excellent majesty is pleased to send me to deliver
her commandment to you touching this man now here presently to die. And
first, I think it not out of purpose, to notify his offense to these good
people, vvherby he is not only vvorthie this punishment: but in judgment of
foreign nations, and by censure offorraine laws, should be delivered to the
tormentors, to endure such torture, as the quality of his offense in so high a
case by good policy should co^dignlie deserve.

And to speak of this fact, such it was, and so fearful, as my heart
quaketh, and my eyes can not refrain tears to repeat it again amongst you.
(God for his mercies sake shield, and defend her most excellent Majesty,
that most mightily has digested the notable danger.) And so I vvil tell you
of this tragedy in course as it fell out.

It liked her highness in respect of the great heat, to take the air of the
water, vvher in grave and weight negotiation she passed the time in
discourse with the French Ambassador by the space of an hour or two. In her
return it pleased her to take diverse pauses, and the rather, by cause she
earnestly read a Book, vvherin it seemed for recreations sake she took some
delighte. By means whereof (even as it pleased God with his holy hand, as
it were, to direct her safety) she commanded the Bargemen to slack their
labor, and slovvly to pass on, where if they had hasted but two strokes
more, they had brought her royal person into the shot it self.

These words were scarcely spoken out by her Majesty, but this caitiue most
unhappily (I must say most diuellishly) discharged his Arquebuse, strongly
charged with bullet, into the Barge where her Majesty was. (God that has
defended her, God that has defended her, thou most mighty God ever vouchsafe
to keep her.) With this blovv the second man to the bayles of the Barge,
within six foot of her royal person, was stricke^ down from his seat,
and vvounded through both his arms, which her majesty beheld, and kingly
handled this cause, as eue^ straight I vvil tell you.

My Lords of her Majesty's counsel dispearsed abroad in their affairs,
hearing of this most perilous accidente, returned to Court, with such speed
as the vvaighte of such a cause might move them to do, and there with
fearful and loving applausure tovvard her Majesty, did most holily thank
our God for his singular help in the preservation of our most dear and
righteous Sovereign.

That done according, with their loves, and duties of service to God, her
majesty and this whole estate: after deliberate, and most grave consulation
of the cause, they al most humbly on their knees besought the Queen that this
slave might suffer, not this death, but ten thousand deaths (if so it were
possible in nature to do) for his so rash and fearful offense. Such, in
deed, might the offense have been, which God for his mercies sake has most
fauourablye forbidden, that it might have roughte up to heaven, and should
most miserably not only plagued this her own land, but all the true
servants of God dispearsed through Christendom, our Religion, and true faith
in Jesus Christ, which we enjoy with unspeakable comfort of free conscience,
might hereby have suffered confusion, and persecution of blood, and vengaunce
amongst us. Our peace, and secure estates increased with exceeding vvelthes,
and nourished with most svveet quietness of life by this her most happy
government, and reign of twenty years, might hereby have been turned to
blouddie vvarres, the fruits whereof is burning and spoiling of houses and
goods, rauishing and destroying of our vviues and children. And what vengeance
soever the world can bring forth, the same should have fallen on us, I say on
us, then the most miserable me^ in the world. And therefore hear me I pray
you. Let us acknovvledge before God with all humble thankfulness these
unspeakable benefits, which we have inioyed, and still shall do, while God
vpholdeth her blessed life, and state amongst us. The loss, and lack of
whom, can not but bring on us all these calamities, and ten thousand more,
which I can not forsee. If then by these, and all other benefits, which you
possess, feel, and taste of, you find how inestimable, and precious a
jewel this our dear Sovereign is for us, and amongst us, what plague,
torment, or punishment, could suffice you for revenge on him, that by any means
should deprive you of such heavenly, and vvorldly felicities, as daily by her
holy hand are ministered amongst you? But I will meddle no further with
these matters. I know you thank god for them, and with true and faithful
obedient hearts vvil ever serve her most excellent Majesty, whom he has made
his minister to distribute all these blessings into your bosoms.

And now, if it please you, you may with marvel hear the message I come of.
I bring mercy to this man, the gracious pardon of our most dear Sovereign,
who with her merciful eye, beholding the clearenesse of this man's heart, free
from evil thought, and consequently from prepension of any malicious fact
against her person, vouchsafes to pull him from the Gallovvs. A notable action
of compassion proceeding from a heavenly mind, and so far different from the
common nature of man, forced into a fearful jealousy of loss of life, as
has never bin read nor heard of.

If casually a man suffer hurt in the fields by an arrovve shot by chance
at rouing marks, how reuengefully the party offended will follow his
process of felony, I have often seen, and the law does well allow it. If in
the Court the meanest serving man strike his fellow with his fist so that he
bleed, he is to loose the same hand. Many other examples may be given you,
both touching the casualtie in this man's fact, and touching the place, and
presence, wherein it chanced to be done.

But our Queen looks neither on her prerogative, on the power of her
laws, nor on the peril of her person, but with the nobility of her heart,
the danger only done to her self, does as you hear, freely pardon it.

And in the sacred word of her kingly estate I protest it unto you, she has
firmly auovved that she had rather have suffered the vvounds the Bargeman now
has, ten fold, than the meanest of us al, or of any subjects, should suffer
the slander of so tyrannous or traiterous a fact, yea, or of the prepension,
or forethoughte of so horrible a treason tovvarde her, though it were in fact
never executed.

Wherein to all our singular comfortes, it pleased her with most princely
affection and earnestness, graciously to affirm, that never Prince had
better, nor more kind true Subjects. God for his mercy direct us, ever to
be so, and with our due gratefulness to sacrifise at her kingly feet our
blood and lives for her service sake, when occasion shall call us thereto.

One other thing I find her Majesty troubled with, that is, the sorrow this
noble young Gentleman, M. Henry Carry has suffered in continual grief of his
heart for the offense of his man, who through the vain ielosie of some evil
dysposed persons, has lykevvise borne some sclaunder of the cause. But it
suffiseth to clear him, that no intent of malice, nor forethought of this
fact, is found in the party himself. His conversation besides with
exceeding faith and diligence in her highness service, vvil ever deliver him,
as a most acceptable Gentleman free from this and all other evil in the sight
of her Majesty and all the world: I shall not need therefore to speak of
him, for his cause needs none excuse.

Here may you behold the rare goodness of our great and gracious Mistress,
full of Religion and piety, Justice and mercy, Temperance and magnanimity
(and that I cannot but tell you) of the most constant and noble courage that
ever lived: the proof whereof (the cause hard, vvherat I was present) I
leave to your judgments.

Her Majesty taking prospecte out of the bales of her Barge, at the very
instant did see the man stricken, and beheld his fall, and heard, as it were,
his deadly scritche, whom she immediately commanded to be taken up, and
then beholding him all embrued with blood, commanded his wounds to be
lapped up with a scarffe of her own, and so with her most constant and
amiable countenance, continued her entertainment of the Ambassador, as though
there had been no such matter. Afterward the man began to fainte, her
highness then commanded a cloak to be put on his body, with other such
necessary reliefes as were there presentely to be had, without alteration of
countenance.

Behold this kingly heart, and courage of rare magnanimity, seeing, as it
were, the present death of the next to her, neither feared her own life, nor
was dismayed with this treasonable chance. An action more than marvelous in
her sex. Hereof how much we may rejoice, I want wit to tell you. But in
one word, her highness, that with her singular vvisdome and policy has
preserved her Empire these twenty years in most joyful peace, with this
courage and magnanimity will (no doubt) as mightily defend us in the most
cruel vvarres. God therefore ever bliss her, and let us with our hands
stretched up to heaven, and our eyes fixed on the seat of God, pray for her
long life, and most prosperous reign over us. THOMAS APPELTREE receive thy
life from her most excellent Majesty, and pray unto God upon thy knees for
her all thy days to come. etc.

And so the people being moved to prayer for her Majesty's most happy escape,
and for the blessing of God to lengthen her days for many and many years, he
fell down on his knees with great devotion amongst them, and so departed
with exceeding joy to the people, and a thousand blessings on himself.


