The true form and shape of a monsterous Child / Which was borne in Stony
Stratforde, in North Hampton shire. The year of our Lord, M. CCCCC. LXV.
This is the fore part. depiction of conjoined twins

This is the back part. depiction of conjoined twins

THis Child was borne on Friday, being the.xxvi. day of January, betwyxt.vi.
and.vii. of the clock in the morninge, and lived two hours, and was
christened by the Mydwyfe, and are both Women Children, having two bodies,
joining together With.iiii. arms, and.iiii. legs perfect, and from the
Navel upward one Face, two Eyes, one Nose, and one Mouth, and three Ears, one
being upon the back side of the Head, a little above the nape of the Neck,
having hear growinge upon the Head. Which Child was borne out of Wedlock.
The Fathers name is Rychard Sotherne, who is now fled And the Mother is yet
living in the same Town. And this Child was brought up to London, wheare it
was seen of diverse worshipful men and women of the City. And also of the
Country. To witness that it is a Troth and no Fable, But a warninge of God, to
move all people to amendment of life.

YOu that do see this Clilde disfigured here,
Two Babes in one, disguised to behold,
Think with yourselues, when such things do appear
All is not well, as wise heads may be bold:
But god that can in secrets show the sign
Can bring much more to pas, by pour divine.
And we that live to see this wonder, how
The gase is given, to make this marvel great,
Let one by one that this beholds now,
Be warned as the wonder gives conceate:
To live to mende the wondrous shape we see,
Contrary much, in all that ought to be.
For as we find, this figure seems strange,
Because it shows, proporsion not in ure,
So bare in mind. how time can choppe and chance,
Disguising works, in wills that be unsure:
From mean to more, from more to much excess,
Where Nature wills, desire should be less.
W. Elderton.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete beneath the Conduit: at the sign of S.
John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.


