A Balad Entitled, the Dekaye of the Duke.
You see by good Trial, what coms of the Duke,
Turn yet to the Dial, of Gods holy Book,
Our people of England that hold with the Pope,
May see the prefermentes that follow the same,
The highest and lowest, he bringes to the Rope,
And strangers and Tyrants do laugh at the game.
You see by good trial, what coms of the Duke
Turn yet to the Dial of Gods holy Book.
Thus are we still spoiled of honor and fame,
By Prelates that practice to poison us all,
The Pope is the Pestilence, and Room has the name,
Where with we come witless to westminster hall.
You see by good trial, what coms of the Duke
Turn yet to the Dial of Gods holy Book.
The Duke had great favor with Justice attained,
But of an ill matter what could be decreed,
For Lords of great Honor where he was arayned,
Had proof to apparent, of many foul deed.
You see by good trial. etc.
Not trifles, but Treasons, so many devised,
As all the world wondered such venom to hear,
In letters, and answers, and writings comprised,
No way to be constred to set the Duke clear.
You se by good trial. etc.
Put of your oppinnion, of all his proceadinge,
Ipocrisie cloked, coms never to good,
I think all the Lawiers were werie of readinge,
And all the hole people in storms as they stood,
You see by good trial. etc.
To tell the hole treatise, the tale were to long,
Against the good Lady, our Queen that now reigns
How many devises to do her grace wrong,
By Pope holy practice, were pact in his brains.
You see by good trial. etc.
And then to his country, what sequel ensued,
Alas to apparent, the perrill drew nie,
In blood to the elboes we had bin embrewed,
Which God has forbidden, that gouernes the sky.
You see by good trial. etc.
The Duke or his doings what more shall I tell ye,
But God of his goodness yet give him some grace,
For in mine oppinnion you papists I smell ye,
You are yet to many that hold with the case,
You see by good trial. etc.
Whose Rumors yet roaring can hardly be still,
A Canckred condition in kaytiffes unkind,
The devil now doubts he is dashed of his will,
Yet Babylon babyes will brag to be blind.
You see by good trial. etc.
When wantons thought worthy, once stand on the top
Their steps are so fickle they cannot stand still,
One leg in good fashion is better to hopp,
Then two legs at Randon to Run where ye will.
You see by good trial. etc.
As pity lamenteth the loss of his grace,
That once being Noble might Nobly have done
So trial tormentith that one in his place,
To Rebels and Riotes so rashlye would run.
You see by good trial. etc.
But such as be seekers, to set all at square,
With strangers, and neighbors, of horrible name,
Do show by their Pitchers what Potters they are,
What Jolie compagnions of Catholic fame.
You see by good trial. etc.
Welwillers are willinge to here and to see,
The good and the Godly regarders of Rule,
Ilwillers unwilling good quiet should be,
As Scollers ware trewantes that love not the scoole.
You see by good trial
But neat with our blissinge, the brackes of our season,
There have bin great warninges as this may be one,
A Duke of high honor, to fall to high Treasen,
Both he, and his honor, how soon they be gone.
You see by good trial etc.
Wherefore it behooves, as God does advance us,
To honor, to favor, to worshipp, or wealth,
We are to consider, it may so bechaunce us,
To lose all together, good hap, and good health.
You see by good trial.
Wherefore to our duties, we are bound to apply,
Our Queen and our countreye to honor and praise,
Content to live lo, but if ye ware hie,
To live within law, and lengthen our days.
You see by good trial. etc.
God prosper the Queen, her Nobles and friends,
Her subjectes assured, of every degree,
And God of his goodness showen the ends,
Of all her offenders, if any more be.
Finis.
quoth. W. Elderton.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate beneath the Conduit, at the sign sign
of saint John Evangelist by Thomas Colwell.




