Weep with Joy.
A Lamentation, for the loss of our late Sovereign Lady Queen ELIZABETH,
with joy and exultation for our High and Mighty Prince, King JAMES, her
lineall and lawful Successor.
THe Thracians ever wept when any were borne; Heraclitus always wept while he
lived; Hezekiah began to weep when he should die: so that it may be said of
all worldly joys, They are mixed with weeping, as it was said of the Jews,
Their wine was mixed with water, Isay. 1. 23.

He that weeps in measure, is like a Christian, he that weeps without
measure, is like an Heathen; he that cannot weep at all, is like a Stone; the
very heavens are said to weep when men cannot: and if the godly weep for the
miseries of this life, the wicked had need to weep for the miseries to come,
Iam. 5. 1.

To weep for com-miseration, as Job did, to behold the miseries of others, Job
30. 25. is fraternall. To weep of contrition, as Peter did for his own sins,
is penitential. To weep for love, as David did for the loss of Jonathan: or
for grief, as Rachel did for the death of her children, Math. 2. 18. or for
joy, as Joseph did at the sight of Jacob, Genesis 46. 29. is natural: but to
weep for ostentation, as many Mourners did, Ier. 9. 18. or for dissimulation,
as Delilah did, Judge. 16. or for desperation, as Judas did, is hypocritical.

Weep.
WHen Nero died, it is reported, the people rejoiced: but when Moses died, it
is said, that all the children of Israel wept, Deuteronomy. 34. 8. and no marvel: for
the one was a cruel and tyrannical Ruler, and the other was a mild and
merciful Governor: and men do commonly weep for those they love, and not for
those they hate: therefore when Christ wept for LaZarus, Lo (says the Jews)
how he loved him, John 11. 36.

Who can call to mind the life of our late sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth,
that cannot lament the loss of so virtuous a Prince; the Vine bleedeth when
the Branch is cut, the Turtle mourns when she is left alone: then what shall
the body do when the head is gone? Such as did love and honor her life, cannot
but weep and deplore her death; her Actions being so glorious when she lived,
her dissolution must needs be grievous when she died.

This most gracious Prince, which lived a Woman, Virgin, and Queen, to the
wonder of all the world, which was a president of piety and humility to all
Princes, which was a pattern of lenity and mercy to all her people, which
was an Example of love and patience to all her enemies: who can not but lament
the loss of so loyal a Lady?

This most royal and godly Prince, which succeeded the Crown after Queen
Mary, as Hezekiah did after Ahaz, 2. Kings 16. did not only suppress all
superstition, but planted true religion in her Land, showing her self more
merciful to malefactors to reclaim them to the word of God, then her
predecessor did to the Martires that suffered for professing the word: and
therefore who cannot weep for the loss of so religious a Lady?

This most loyal and prosperous Prince, which possessed peace in England
longer then Solomon did in Israel: had her Land fenced, not only with walls of
wood, as Gretia was against Zerxes, Herodotus in Polymnia, but with walls of
brass and iron against all outward hostility, that it might be said of
Englishmen as of the Israelites, Every one dwelt without fear under his own
vine, 1. Kings 4. 25. For our Nation, under her Regiment, did flourish in peace
and plenty, as the land of Canaan flowed with milk and honey: and therefore
who cannot weep for the loss of so peaceable a Prince?

When the people wept for Christ, he willed them to weep for themselves, Luke
23. And so, though we mourn for her Majesty, let us weep for our selves,
considering the cause of alteration of Princes is imputed to the sins of the
subjects, according to that saying of Solomon, For the transgression of the
people there are many Princes, Proverbs 28. 2. For what has this precious word
and peace effected in us, seeing for the most part, we are content to be but
Christians in our tongues, though we be Atheists in our hearts, and far worse
then Heathens in our lives?

Joy.
THe Jews at their funerals did use melody, Math. 9. 23. because they took
Death to be an end of misery, and therefore as Martial observes in the
Swanne, Cantatur cygnus funeris ipse sui, he sings alittle before he dies;
even so it is noted in the children of God, they rejoice when they are ready to
die, Acts 5. 41. because indeed, all people, yea all Princes are but pilgrims
upon earth, and their best habitation is in heaven. The departure of our godly
Prince, though it be dolorous, in respect of her subjects, it ought to be
joyful, in regard of her self: for she has left an earthly Kingdom, to
possess an heavenly Kingdom; and insteede of a crown of Gold she has put on
a crown of Glory: then what cause have we to weep, seeing she is partaker of
so unspeakable Joy, but rather, as the scripture teaches us, to rejoice with
those that rejoice, Romans 12. 15. Let this suffice for our comfort, Though death
has seized of her Highness Body, the Angels received her blessed Soul, and
the world possesses her glorious Name.

If we read the scriptures, we shall find, that amongst all the Kings of
Israel, King Solomon reigned longest; and if you read the Chronicles, you
shall find, that amongst all the Kings and Princes of England, Queen Elizabeth
reigned longest, saving one: yet was there never Prince more maliciously beset
with treason then her Majesty, nor any Prince more miraculously protected by
Gods mercy: for he did, not only protect her from untimely dangers and
deaths, but he did protract her days to the natural course of declining, for
she died (as it was said of David, 1. Chro. 29. 28.) in a good age, full of
days, riches, and honor; for which we have great cause to joy.

God for our sins might justly have made the heavens brass over our heads,
and the earth iron under our feet, and so have constrained us, as the people
of Samaria did in extreamitie, not only to eat dung, but their children, 2.
Kings 6. But see how mercifully God has dealt by us; he has taken away our
Prince in a time of plenty, to take away all occasions of murmuring and
mutinies amongst us, whereunto many are subject, if they be but pressed with
alittle scarsitie: and though the Israelites lived disorderly when their
Governors were gone, Judge. 17. 6. yet, contrary to the expectation of many,
our people have lived very orderly and ciuilly since the taking away of our
Queen, for which we have great cause to joy.

To conclude, when God took away Iehoshaphat from the Throne, and Iehoram came
to the Crown, there was great cause of calamity, because he maintained
Idolatry, 2. Chro. 21. but when David died and Solomon was installed, there was
continuance of joy, because he continued true religion as his fathers did
before. And so, though God has taken away Queen Elizabeth our late and loving
Nurce-mother, yet the succeeding of that mighty and godly Prince, King James,
our new and renowned Nurce-father, does give us exceeding cause of joy:
insomuch, as the succession of the latter, is a mittigation of sorrow for the
former. And as the Proclamation was read and received with great applause of
the people, so his Coronation will be as joyful as ever was Salomons, when the
earth rang with the sound of the subjects, in sign of exultation and exceeding
Joy, 1. Kings 1. 40. God make us thankful for so worthy a Prince; and
himself joyful of so unworthy a People.

Printed at London by V. S. for Edmund Mutton, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at
the sign of the Hunts-man. 1603.


