THE CASTLE OF HEALTH, Gathered, and made by sir Thomas Elyot knight, out of
the chief authors of Phisyke, whereby every man may know the state of his own
body, the preservation of health, and how to instruct well his physician in
sickness, that he be not deceived.

M. D. XXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD CRVMwell Lord priuye seal, Thomas Elyot
knight wyssheth long life in honor.
HE GYVETH TVVYSE THAT Bis dat, qui clto dat.
gives quyckely (says Senek). the griete, which I had tor your lordeshypes
disease, with the desire that ye might live long, without syckenesse, caused
such speed in buyldinge the Castle of health, that therein lacked some part of
perfection, but yet the promptness in gyuynge that thing, which I thought
necessary, to declare mine affection, I doubt not, was no less esteemed of
your good lordeshyp, than before is rehearsed. Notwithstanding when I had
eftsoon perused that little fortress, and found here and there some thing
that lacked, I took my pen in the stead of a truell, and amended the faults,
and added somewhat more, where I thought it convenient: And yet perthaunce some
things might happen to escape, which were as needful to be corrected: mine
attendaunce on the parlyament, I being a membre of the lower house,
withdrawinge from me leysur convenient, to find in this warke all the
faults, which might be amended. May it now like your good lordeshype to take
in good part, not e^tsones the castle, which I already have given you, but my
good will and diligence in amen dynge or repayryuge the same, which is also
printed in a much better lettre, considering that I no less do behold you
continuelly with mine eye of remembrance, than they which at dynuar and souper
do daily look on you, the cause I will not repete for suspicion of flaterye.
Frendeshype (as men say) should be requyted, but yet crave I none other
thing, but only equal benevolence, and faith without any suspicion:
whereunto actual demonstracion is so much requysite, that without it they
both, seem to be drowned, sens among us that be mortal, things are most
judged by outward tokens. And yet also in them men be sometime deceived,
Hypocrisy having in this world so great a preemynence: but in amity is one
rule, which seldom fails. He that lives moderately, does love always
faithfully: for over him affections and passions have left authority: and he
that stands just in the myddell, stands most surely. Also in the world
there is no more folly, than to chese friends of them, which do follow fortune,
like as swyne do follow the maiden, which bears on her head a payle full of
milk. And if the payle fall, or happen to be emptye, they will follow no
lengar. The moderate person, where both authority and virtue be in his
friend equal, because that virtue was the only cause of his love, that
remaining, his mind is in such wise thereunto joined, that although
authority happen to flyp, yet that love and virtue may never be severed. I
have spoken of frendshyp perchance more than needs, but who will not wyshe (if
it might happen) to have such a treasor, as neither the mountains of Ethiope,
nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be thereto compared. Callimachus
an ancient port says, Puyssance is dredeful: Richesse is honorable: but love
for surete is most incomparable. Who perceyueth herein more tha^ your good
lordeshyp, which besides the aboundaunt knowledge of histories and natural
wit, also concerning this matter in your own sundry experiences, I dare say
without flattery, are equal to any noble man living. Yet this my long tale is
not superfluous, which is told not to teach you, but only to renew your
lordships remembrance, which is not always present, specially where the brayn is
choked with worldly matters of wayghty importance. In such as I am, having
little and little to do, remembrance stands more at liberty, and therefore we
may more often think on that, which we have both herd and seen, and in
chesinge friends, be the more circumspect. But lest I shall make the name of
frendeshyp tedyouse, by often rehersall, I now conclude, that I leave this little
warke a monument of the long continued affection by me borne toward your
lordeshyp, and a perpetual witness, that I have deserved, so much of your
favor, as in mutual frendeshyppe is of rayson required: which may be as
easyly paid, as it (...) granted, if in place, where it ought to be showed,
ye do not forget it, In the mean time I shall pray to God to add to your
good fortune and health, continuance, with his grace and favor, wherein only
is most perfyt surety.

THE TABLE
IT MVSTE BE REMEMBERED, that the number in the Table, does sygnify the leaf,
and the letter A, does sygnifie the first page or side, the letter B, the
second page or side.

A
ANnexed to things natural. fo. i. b. Ages. fo. xi. a. and. xxxix. b. Air.
fo. xii. a. Appuls. fo. xx. b. Almondes. fo. xxi. b. Anyse sede. xxiiii. b.
Ale. fol. xxxii. b Abstinence. lv. b. Affectes of the mind. lxiiii. a.
B
BLoudde. fol. viii. a. Beetis. xxiii. b. Birds. xxix. a. Brain exceeding in
heat. fol. iii. b. Brain exceeding in cold. ibidem. Brayn moist. ibid. Brayn
dry. iiii. a. Brayn hot and moist. ibi. Brayn hot and dry. ibid. Brain cold and
moist. iiii. b Brain cold and dry. ibi. Beans. xxiiii. b. Breakefast. xliiii.
a. Blood suckers. lxiii. a. Borage. xxvi. a. Breadd^. xxvii. b. Black bird.
xxix. b Bustarde. xxx. a. Byttour. ibidem. Brayn of bestis. xxxi. a. Butter.
xxxii. a. Biere. xxxv. b.
C
COnsyderations of things belo^gyng to health. fol. i. a. Complexion of man.
ii. a. Colerike body. ii. b. Coler. viii. b. Coler natural. ix. a. Coler
unnatural. ibid. Color. xi. a. Color of hear. xi. b Custom. xvi. b
Cucumbers. xix. a Cheries. xx. a. Chestnuttes. xxi. b Capers. xxii. a
Colewortes and cabages. xxii. b Cykorie. xxiii. a Cheruyle. xxiii. b
Consyderations in abstinence. lvi. a Cloves. xxvii. b Conye. xxviii. b Capons,
hens, and chyckens. xxix. a Crane. xxx. a Chese. xxxii. a Cider. xxxv. b
Confortatiues of the heart. lxx. a Cruditie. lxxvi. b
D
DAtes. xix. a Ducke. xxx. a Diversity of meats. ^^uii. a Digestiues of
choler. lix. a Digestiues of fleme. ibi. Domynyon of sondrye complexions. lxx.
b Diete of sanguine persons. lxxii. b Diete of cholerike persons. lxxiii. a
Dyete of fleumatycke persons. lxxiiii. a Diete of melancolycke persons.
lxxiiii. b Diete of them, which be ready to fall into syknesse. lxxx. a Diete
in time of pestilence. lxxxviii. b Drink between meals. xliii. b Drynk at
meles. xlvi. b Digested. lv. a
E
EXementes. fol. i. b Endyue. xxiii. a Eggs. xxxii. a Exercise. xlviii. a.
and. l. a Euacuation. lv. a Excrementes. ibidem.
F
FLematik body. ii. b Fleume. viii. b Fleume natural. viii. a Fleme unnatural.
viii. b Fruits. xviii. a Fygges. xix. a Fenell. xxiiii. a Fylberdes. xxi. b
Flesh. xxviii. a Fesaunt. xxix. b Fete of beastis. xxxi. b Fyshe. ibidem.
Frycasyes or rubbynges. xlix. a
G
GEnitors hot. vii. a Genitors cold. ibi. Genitours moist. ibid. Genitours dry.
ibid. Genytoures hot and moist. vii. b Genytours hot and dry. ibidem.
Genitours cold and moist. ibidem. Genytours cold and dry. ibid. Gourdes.
xix. a. Grapes. xx. a Garlyke. xxv. b Gynger. xxvii. a Goose. xxx. a Gysar of
birds. xxx. b Gestation. li. b
H
Heart hot distempered. iiii. b Heart cold dystempered. v. a Heart moist
dystempered. ibidem. Heart dry dystempered. ibidem. Heart hot and moist. ibid.
Heart hot and dry. v. b Heart cold and moist. ibid. Heart cold and dry. ibi.
Humors. viii. a Herbs used in potage, or to eat. xxii. b. Hare. xxviii. b
Hearon. xxx. a Heart of beastis. xxxi. a Heed of beastis. ibid. Honye. xxxvii. a
Hemorroides or pyles. lxiiii. a Heuines or sorrow. lxvi. b
I
ISope. xxvi. a Joy. lxx. b.
K
Kydde. xxviii. a
L
Liver in heat dystempered. vi. a. Liver cold dystempered. ibidem. Liver
moist dystempered. ibidem. Liver dry distempered. ibidem. Lettyse. xxii. b.
Lekes. xxv. b. Lamb. xxviii. a. Lark. xxix. b. Lyuers of birds and beasts.
xxx. b Lungis of bestis. xxxi. a Letting of blud. lxi. a. Leaches or blood
suckers. lxiii. a Lassitude. lxxviii. b. and lxxix. a
M
MElancolyke body. fol. iii. a. Melancolye. ix. b. Members isntrumental.
ibidem. Meat and drink. xii. b Meats making good juice. ibidem. Meats
making ylle juice. xiii. a Meats making choler. xiii. b. Meats making fleme
ibidem. Meats ingendrynge melancoly. ibidem. Meats making thick juice.
ibidem. Meats hurtynge the tethe. xiiii. a. Meats hurtynge the eyes. ibid.
Meats making oppilations. ibidem. Meats wyndy. xiiii. b. Melons. xviii. b
Medlars. xxi. a Malowes. xxiii. b Mutton. xxviii. a Moderation in diet. xli. b
Meals. xlii. b Maces. xxvii. b Members of birds. xxx. b Melt or spleen. xxxi.
a Marowe. ibidem. Milk. xxxv. a
N
Nutmigges. xxvii. b
O
Official members ix. b. Operations. x. b. Olyues. xxii. a. Orenges. ibid.
Onyons. xxv. b. Order in eating and drynkyng. xlv. b Opylations what they are.
xli. a Old men. ibidem. Ordure. lv. a.
P,
PRyncipalle members. ix. b Parts similares. ibid. Powers natural. x. a
Powers spiritual. ibid. Powers animal. x. b Peaches. xx. a. Pears. xxi. a
Pourselane. xxiii. b Persely. xxiiii. a Purgers of coler. lix. a Purgers of
fleme. lix. b Pourgers of melancolye. ibidem. Precepts of Diocles. lxxxv. b.
Pomegranates. xxi. a Prunes. xxi. b Peason. xxiiii. b Parsnepes. xxv. a
Penyriall. xxvi. b Pepper. xxvii. a. Partryche. xxix. b Plouer. ibidem.
Pygeons. xxx. a Pourgations by siege. lvi. b. and. lvii. b. Precise diete.
xlvii. a
Q
QVantite of meat. xv. b. Qualite of meat. xv. b. and. xviii. a. Quynces. xx. b
Quayle. xxix. b.
R
RAysons. xx. a. Rapes. xxiiii. b Radyshe. xxv. a. Rokat. xxvi. a Replecion.
liii. b.
S.
SAnguyne body. ii. a Stomach hot. vi. b. Stomach cold. ibide^. Stomach
moist. ibide^. Stomach dry. vii. a Spirit natural. x. b Spirit vytall.
ibidem Spirit animal. ibide^. Sorell. xxiiii. a Sauge. xxv. b Stomach in the
which meat is corrupted. lxxxvii. b Sleep and watch. xlvi. b Sauery. xxvi. a.
Saffron. xxvii. a Swynes flesh. xxviii. a Sparowes. xxix. b Shouler. xxx. a
Souper. xliii. b. Sugar. xxxvii. a Scarifyenge. lxii. b Sickenesses appropried
to sundry seasons and ages. lxxx. b Significations of sickenesses. lxxxii. a
T.
Things natural. i. a Things not natural. ibidem. Things against nature.
ibidem. Things good for the heed. xiiii. b Things good for the heart. ibidem
Things good for the liver ibidem Things good for the lunges. xv. a Things
good for the eyes. ibidem. Things good for the stomach. ibidem Temperature of
meats. xvii. a Turnyppes. xxv. a Time. xxvi. b Townecresses. ibidem. Trypes.
xxx. b Tung of beastis. xxxi. b Time. xxxvii. b. and xxxviii. b Times
appropried to every humor. lxxi. b.
V
VVyndes. xii. b Walnuttes. xxi. a Veale xxviii. b Venyson. ibidem. Woodcockes.
xxx. a Vdder. xxxi. a Water. xxxii. b Wine xxxiii. b Whaye. xxxv. b
Vociferation. lii. b Vomyte. lvi. b Vrines. lxxxiii. a Virtue of meats.
lxxxvii. b
Thus ends the Table.
TO THE CONSERVATION of the body of mankind, within the limitation of health
(which as Galene says) is the state of the De ^uenda sanitate lib. 1.
body, wherein we be neither grieved with pain, nor let from doing our
necessary business, does belong the dilygent consyderation of three sorts of
things, that is to say, Things Natural, Things not natural, and Things
against nature.


Things Natural be.vii. in number. Elements. Complexions. Humors. Members.
Powers. Operations and Spirits.


These be necessary to the being of health, according to the order of their
kind: and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be six in number. Air. Meat and drink. Sleep and
watch. Meuyng and rest. Emptynesse and repletion and Affections of the mind.


Things against Nature be three. Syckenesse. Cause of syckenesse. Accident,
which follows syckenes.


Annexed to things natuall. Age. (...). Figure, and. (...) of kinds.


THE Elements be those original things vnmyxt and vncompounde, of whose
tempera^ce and myxture all other things, having corporalle substance, be
compacte: Of them be four, that is to say, Earth. Water. Air and Fire.


EARTH, is the most gross and ponderouse element, and of her proper nature
is cold and dry.

VYATER is more subtle and light thanne earth, but in respect of Air and
Fire, it is gross and heuye; and of her proper Nature is cold and moist.

AIR, is more light and subtylle than the other two, and being^ not altered
with any exterior cause, is properly hot and moist.

FIRE, is absolutely light and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vy^^a^e or out of their natural temperaunce, and is properly hot
and dry.

IT IS to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly se^e or
felt of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they, which by
our senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and b^ rather erthy,
watery, airy, and fyr^; than ^bsolutely earth, air, and fire.

Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2.
COMPLEXION is a combynation of two diverse qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot and dry of the Fire: hot and moist of the Air, cold
and moist of the Water, cold and dry of the Earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities, which abound in him, more thanne in the
other, as hereafter inseweth.

The Body, where heat and moisture have souerayntie, is called Sanguine,
wherein the Air has preeminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow, Sanguine.
Carnos^tie or flesshynesse. The veins and a(...) large, Heat plenty and
read. The visage white and ruddy. Sleep much. Dreams of blouddy things, or
things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestion perfect. Angry shortly.
Siege, vr(...), and sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bledyng. The v^in^
read and gross.


Where cold with moisture preuayleth, that body is called Fle^matike, wherein
water has pre^minence, and is perceived by these signs, Fleumatike,
Fatness, quauyng and soft. Veins narowe. Hear much and plain, Color
white. Sleep superfluous. Dremes of things watery or of fysshe. Slownesse.
Dullness in learning. Cowardyse, Pulse slow and little. Dygestion weak.
Spyttell white, abundant, and thick. Urine gross, white or pale.


Cholerike is hot and dry, in whom the fire has preeminence, and is
discerned by these signs following. Cholerike,
Leanness of body. Costyfenesse. Hear black or dark aburne curlyd. Vysage
and skyn red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him. Little sleep.
Dreams of fire, fighting, or anger. Wit sharp and quycke. Hatdy and
fighting. Pulse swyfte and strong. Urine byg^ colored and clear. Voice
sha(...)e.


Melancolyke is cold and dry, over whom the earth has dominion, and is
perceiuid by these signs. Melancolyke.
Leanness with hardness of skin. Hear plain and thynne. Color duskysh,
or white with leannes. Much watch. Dremes fearful. Styffe in opinions.
Digestion slow and ill. Tymerous and fearful. Anger long and frettynge.
Pulse little. Seldom lawghynge. Urine watery and thynne.


Besides the said complexions of all the hole body, there be in the partycular
members, complexions, wherein if there be any distemperaunce, it brings
syckenesse or grief into the member. Wherefore to know the distemperature,
these signs following would be considered. Forsene, that it be remembered, that
some distemperatures be simple, and some be compounde. They which be simple,
be in simple qualyties, as in heat, cold, moist, or dry. They which be
compounde, are in compounde or myxte qualities: as heat and moisture, heat
and drythe, cold and moist, cold and dry. But now first we will speak of
the simple complexions, of every principal member, beginning at the brain.

The brain exceeding in heat has The heed and vysage very read and hot.
The heat growing fast black and courlyd. The veins in the eyes apparent.
Superfluouse matter in the nosethrylles, eyes, and ears. The heed annoyed with
hot meats, drynkes, and savors. Sleep short and not sound.


The brain exceeding in cold has Much superfluity runnyng out of the nose,
mouth, ears, and eyes. Hear straight and fine, growing flowly, and flaxen.
The heed dysposed by small occasyon to pooses and murres. It is soue annoyed
with cold. It is cold in touching. Veins of the eyes not seen. Sleapy
somewhat.


Moist in excess has Hears plain. Seldom or never balde. Wit dulle.
Much superfluities. Sleep much and deep.


The brain dry has No superfluities runnynge. Wits good and ready.
Watchefull, Hears black hard and fast growing. Balde shortly.


Complexions compouned.
Brain hot and moist distempered has The heed akynge and heuye. Fulle of
superfluities in the nose. The southern wind grievous. The Northern wynd holsom.
Sleep deep, but vnquyete, with often wakynges, and strange dreams. The
senses and wit imperfect.


Brain hot and dry dystempered has None abundance of superfluities, which
may be expellyd. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner balde than other. Much
hear in chyldehoode and black or brown, and courlyd. The heed hot and
ruddye.


Brayn cold and moist diste^pered has The senses and wit dulle. Much
sleep. The heed sone replenyshed with superfluouse moisture. Distillations and
poses or murres Not shortly balde. Soon hurt with cold.


Brayn cold and dry diste^pered has, The heed cold in felyng and without
color. The veins not apperynge. Soon hurt with cold. Often discrased.
Wit perfect in chyldhode, but in age dulle. Aged shortly and balde.


Of the Heart.
The heart hot distem pred has Much blowynge and puffyng. Pulse swyfte and
busye. Hardynesse and manhood much. Promptnes actiuitie and quycknes in doing
of things. Fury and boldness. The breast heary toward the left side. The
breast broad, with the heed little. The body hot, except the Liver do let
it.


The heart cold distempered has The pulse very little. The brethe little and
slow. The breast narowe. The body all cold, except the liver does inflame
it. Fearfulness. Scrupulosite, and much care. Curiosity. Slownesse in acts.
The breaste clean without hears.


The heart moiste distempered has The pulse soft. Sone angry and sone
pacified. The body al moist, except the liver disposes contrary.


The heart dry distempered has The pulse hard. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not sone pacified. The body dry, except the liver does dispose contrary.


The heart hot and moist The breast and stomach heary. Promptnes in acts.
Soon angrye. Fiersnesse but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft,
swifte, and busy. Breath or wynd according. Shortly falls into diseases caused
of putrefaction.


The heart hot and dry. The heart poulse greatte and swyfte. The breath or
wynd according. The breaste and stomach all heatye. Quick in his doings.
Boldness and hardynesse. Swyft and hasty in mouyng. Soon styred to anger, and
tyrannous in manners. The breaste broad, and all the body hot and dry.


The heart cold and moist The pulse soft. Fearful and tymorous. Slow. The
breast clean without hear. Not hastylye angrye, nor retaynynge anger. The
breast natowe. All the body cold and moist.


The heart cold and dry has The pulse hard and little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angrye, but when it happens, it dureth long. The breaste clean
without hear and little. All the body cold and dry.


Of the Liver.
The liver in hete distempered has The veins great. The bloudde more hot
than temperate. The bealy heary. All the body hot exceeding temperance.


The liver cold distempered has The veins small. Abundance of fleume. The
bloudde cold. All the body cold in felyng. The bealy without hear.


The liver moist distempered has The veins soft. Much blood and thynne.
All the body moist in feling except the heart disposes it couttary.


The liver dry distempered has The veins hard, The blood little and thycke.
All the body dry.


THE complexions compounde, may be decerned by the said simple qualyties. And
here Galenus in art par ua. lib. 2,
it is to be noted, that the heat of the heart may vanquyshe the cold in the
liver. For heat is in the heart, as in the fou^tayne or spring, and in the
Liver, as in the River.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered He digesteth well, specially hard meats, and
that will not be shortly altered. Light meats, and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delytethe in Meats and drynkes,
which be hot, for every natural complexio^ delyteth in his semblable.


The stomak cold dystempered He has good appetite, He dygesteth ylle and
slowelye, specially gross meats and hard. Cold meats do ware sour, being
in him undigested. He delytethe in Meats and Drynkes, which be Cold, and yet
of them he is indammaged.


The stomach moist distempred He thyrsteth but seldom, yet he desires to
drink. With superfluouse drink he is hurt. He delyteth in moist meats.


Of humo^rs.
IN THE body of Man be four principal humors, which contynuyng in the
proportion, that nature has lymytted, the body is free from all syckenesse.
Contrary wise, by the increase or diminution of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, inequall temperature comes
into the body, which syckenesse follows more or less, according to the
lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humors, which be these
following. Bloudde, Fleume. Chole^, Melancolye.


Bloudde has preeminence over all other humors in susteynynge of all living
creatures, for it has more conformity with the originalle cause of living,
by reason of tempera^^^es in heat and moisture, alsoo nouryssheth more the
body, and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by
loss whereof, death immediately follows. The dystemperature of blood happens
by one of the other three humors, by the inordiuate or superfluous mixture of
them.

Of fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts, Natural and Unnatural.


Natural fleume is a humor cold and moist, white and sweet, or without
taste, engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the
watrye or raw parts of the matter decocte called C^ilus, by the last
dygestion made apt to be converted into blood. In this humor, water has
dominion most principal.

Fleume unnatural is that, which is myxte with other humors, or is altered
in his qualytie: And thereof is.viii. sundry kinds, Fleume.
Watty, which is found in spettyll of great drynkers, or of them, which
dygeste ill. Slymy or raw. Glasy, like to white glass, thycke, viscouse like
bird lyme and heavy. Plastry, which is very gross, and as it were chalky,
such is found in the joints of them, which have the gowte. Salt, which is
myngled with coler. Sower, myxte with melancoly, which comes of corrupt
dygestion. Harshe, thycke and gross, which is seldom founden, which tastes
like (...)cum
grene crabbes or sloes. Stiptike or binding, is not so gross nor cold, as
harsh, and has the taste like to green red wine, or other like, straynynge
the tunge.


Choler
does participate with natural heat as long as it is in good temperance.
And thereof is also two kinds, Natural and Unnatural.

Natural coler is the foam of blood, the color whereof is read and clear, or
more like to an ore^ge color, and is hot and dry, wherein the fire has
dominion, and is light and sharp, and is engendered of the most subtle part
of matter decocte, or boiled in the stomach, whose beginning is in the liver.

Unnatural choler is that which is myxte or corrupted with other humors,
whereof be four kinds, Citrine or yelowe choler, which is of the myxture of
natural choler, and watery fleume, and therefore has less heat than pure
choler. Yelky, like to yelkes of eggs, which is of the myxture of flewme
congeled, and choler natural, and is yet less hot than the other. Grene like
to lekes, whose beginning is rather of the stomak, tha^ of the liver. Grene
like to grene canker of metal, and bourneth like venym, and is of exceeding
adustyon of choler or flewme, and by these two kinds nature is mortifyed.


Melancoly or black coler is divided into two kinds. Natural, which is the
dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blaknes, wha^ it issues either
downewarde or upward, and is verily cold and dry. Vnnaturalle, which
proceeds of the adustion of colerik mixture, and is hotter and lighter,
having in it violence to kill, with a dangerous disposition.


Of the members.
There be diversities of members, that is to say.

Principal members. The brain, The heart, The liver, The stones of
generation.
Offycialle members. Synewes, which do serve to the brain. Arteries or
pulses, which do serve to the heart. Vayns, which do serve to the liver.
Vessels spermatike, wherein man's seed lies, which do serve to the stones.
Parts called Similares, for being divided, they remain in them self like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Calls betwixt the vttermoste skin and the
flesh. Muskles or fylettes. Fat. Flesh.
Members isntrumental. The stomach. The raynes, The bowelles. All the great
synewes.

These of their virtue do appetite meat and alter it.

Of powers.
Anymall, Spyrituall, Natural.
Natural power, Which does mynister. To whom is mynystred.
Which does mynyster, Appetiteth, Retayneth, Digesteth, Expels.
To whom is mynystred, Ingendreth, Nouryssheth, Feeds.

Power spiritual. Warkynge, which delateth the heart and arteryes, and
eftesoones strayneth them. Wroughte, which is styred by an exterior cause to
work, whereof comes anger, indignation, subtilitie, and care.

Power animal. That which ordeyneth, discerns, and composeth. That moves
by voluntarye mocyon. That which is called sensyble, whereof do proceed the
five wits.
Of that which ordeineth do proceed. Imagination in the forheed. Reason in the
brain. Remembrance in the nodell.

Operations.
Appetite by heat and drythe. Digestion by heat and moisture. Retaynyng by
cold and drithe. Expulsion by cold and moist.
Spirit is an ayry substance subtle styringe the powers of the body to
perform their operations, which is dyuyded into

Natural, which takes his beginning of the liver, and by the veins, which
have no poulse, spreads into all the holle body. Natural, which proceeds
from the heart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent into all the body.
Anymalle, which is engendered in the brain, and is sent by the synewes
throughout the body, and makes sense or feelynge.
Annexed to things natural.
Ages be four. Adolescency to.xxv. years, hot and moist, in the which time
the body grows. Iuuentute unto.xl. years, hot and dry, wherein the body is
in perfyte growthe. Senectute, unto.lx. years cold and dry, wherein the body
begins to decreace. Age decrepite, until the last time of life, accidently
moist, but naturally cold and dry, wherein the powers and strength of the body
be more and more minished.


Color.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Color of inward causes. Of equalytie of humors, as he that is read and
white. Of inequalytie of humors, whereof do proceed, black, salowe, or white
only. Read, Black, do betoken domi Salowe, nion of heat. White, cold of
fleume. Pale cold of melancolye. Read, abundaunce of bloudde. Salowe, choler
citrine. Black, melancoly or coler adust.
Color of outward causes. Of cold or heat, as english men be white, Mories
be blak. Of things accidentalle, as of fear, of anger, of sorrow, or other
like motions.
Color of hear. Black, either of abundance of coler inflamed, or of much
incendynge or adustion of bloudde. Red hear of much heat not adust. Gray
hears of abundance of melancholye. White hears of the lack of natural
heat, and by occasyon of fleume putrifyed.

All the resydue concerning things natural, contained in the Introduction of
Ioannicius, and in the little craft of Galene, I pourposely pass over for
this time, forasmoche as it does requyre^ a red^^, having some knowledge in
philosophye natural, or else it is to hard and tedyouse to be understand.
Moreover this, which I have written in this first tables, shall be sufficient, to
the conservation of health, I mean with that which now follows in the other
Tables.

The second Table.
THINGS not Natural be so called, because they be no portion of a natural
body, as they be, which be called Natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them, the body being in health, so consysteth. By the dystemperaunce of
them, syckenesse is induced, and the body dissolved.

The first of things not naturalle is air, which is properly of it self,
or of some material cause or occasion, good or ill. That which is of it self
good, has pure vapors, and is odoriferous. Also it is of it self, swyfte in
alteration from hot to cold, wherein the body is not much provoked to sweat
for heat, ne to chylle for vehemence of cold. Air among al things not
natural, is chiefly to be observed, forasmoch as it does both enclose us, and
also enter into our bodies, specially the most noble member, which is the
Heart, and we can not be separate one hour from it, for the necessity of
breathynge and fetching of wind.
The causes, whereby the air is corrupted, be specially four. Influences of
sundry sterres. Great standing waters never refreshed. Carayne lyenge long
above ground. Much people in small room living vnklenly and sluttysshely.


Wyndes bryngyng wholesome air, North, which prolongeth life by expoulsynge
ylle vapors. East is temperat and lusty.
Wyndes bryngyng ill air. South corrupts, and makes ill vapors. West, is
very mutable, which nature does hate.

Meat and drink.
In meat and drink we must consider six things. Substance, Quantity,
Quality, Custom, Time, Order.


Substance, sum is good, which makes good juice, and good blood: some is
ylle, and ingendreth ill juice, and ill bloudde,

Meats and drynkes making good juice.
BReed of pure flour somewhat leuened, well baked, not to old nor to stale.
Eggs of fesantes, he^nes or partriches new laid, poched, mean between rere
and hard. Milk new mylked, drunk fasting, wherein is sugar, or the leaves
of myntes. Fesauntes. Partriches or chikens. Capons or hens. Birds of the
fields. Fyshe of stony ryuers. Veale suckynge. Porke young. Biefe not passinge
three years. Pygeons. Venyson of red dear. Pease potage with myntes. Fete of
swine or calves. Fygges type, before Raysons, meals. Borage. Languedebiefe.
Persely. Myntes. Ryce with almo^d milk. Letyse. Cykorie. Grapes ripe. Wynes
good moderatly taken, well fined. Ale and biere syx days old, clean brewed,
and not strong. Mirthe and gladness. The liver and brains of hens and
chykens and young geese.
Meats and drynkes making ill juice.
Old biefe. Old mutton. Geese old. Swanne old. Duckes of the kanell.
Inward of beastis. Black puddynges. The heart liver and kidneys of all
beasts. The brains and inary of the backbone. Wodde culuets. Shell fyshe,
except creuyse deaudoulce. Chese hard. Apples and peers much used. Figs and
grapis not type. All raw herbs, except letyse, borage, and cikory. Onions,
immoderatly Garlik, used, specially Lekes, in colerike stomachs. Wine in must
or sour. Fear, sorrow, pensyfenesse.
Meats ingendrynge choler.
Garlyke. Onyons, Rokat, Kersis. Lekes, Mustarde, Pepper, Honye, Wine much
dronken. Sweet meats.
Meats ingendryng fleume.
All slymye and cleauynge meats. Chese new. All fyshe, specially in a
fleumatike stomach. Inwardes of beasts. Lambs flesh. The synewe parts of
flesh. Skynnes. Brains. Lunges, Rapes, Cucumbers. Replecion. Lack of
exercise,
Meats ingendrynge melancoly.
Biefe, Gotes flesh. Hares flesh. Bores flesh, Salt flesh, Salt fyshe.
Colewortes. All pulse, except white peason. Brown bread course. Thycke wine.
Black wine, Old chese. Old flesh. Great fyshes of the sea.
Meats making thycke juice.
Rye breadde, Must, Bread without leven. Cake breadde, See fyshe great.
Shelle fyshe. Biefe, The kydneys, The liver of a swyne. The stones of beasts.
Milk much sodden. Rapes. All round roots, Cukumbers, Sweet wine, Deep
red wine. Garlyke. Mustarde, Origanum Hysope, Basylle, Fenelle, Cheese, Eggs
fried or hard, Chesten nuttes. Nauews, Fygges grene. Appuls not ripe. Pepper.
Rokat, Lekes, much used. Onyons,
Meats which do hurt the tethe.
Very hot meats. Nuttes, Sweet metes and drikes. Radyshe roots, Hard
meats. Milk. Bitter meats. Much vomyte. Leekes. Fyshe fat. Lymones,
Colewortes.
Meats which do hurt the eyes.
Drunkenness. Lecherye. Must, All poulse. Sweet wynes, and thycke wynes,
Hemp sede. Very salt meats. Garlyke, Onyons. Colewortes, Radyshe, Reedynge
after supper immediately.
Making great oppilations.
Thycke milk. All sweet things. Rye breadde. Sweet wynes.
Meats inflatyng or wyndye.
Beans. Lupynes. Cicer, Mill, Cucumbers. All juice of herbs. Fygges dry.
Rapes, Nauewes raw. Milk. Honey not well clarified. Sweet wine. Must.
Things good for the heed.
Cububes. Galyngale. Lignum aloes. Matoram, Baulme myntes. Gladen. Nutmygges,
Musk, Rosemarye, Roses, Pionye. Hyssope, Spyke, Camomylle, Mellylote, Rewe,
Frankincense.
Things good for the Heart.
Cynamome. Saffron. Coralle. Cloves, Lignum aloes. Perles, Macis. Baulme
myntes. Myrabolanes, Musk. Nutmygges. Rosemarye. The bone of the heart of a red dear. Maioram, Buglosse. Borage. Setuall.
Things good for the Liver.
Wormewode. Wythwynde. Agrymonye. Saffron. Cloves. Endyue. Lyuerworte. Cykorie.
Plantayne. Dragons, Raysons greatte. Saunders. Fenelle. Violettes. Rosewater.
Lettyse.
Things good for the Lunges.
Elycampane. Hysope. Scabiose. Lykorise Raysons. Maydenheare. Penidies.
Almondes, Dates, Pystaces.
Things good for the eyes.
Eyebryght. Fenyll. Veruyn. Roses. Celandyne. Agrymonye. Cloves. Cold water.
Things good for the stomach.
Myrabolanes. Nutmygges. Organum, Pystaces, Quynces, Olybanum, Wormewode,
Saffron, Coralle, Agrymonye, Funytorie, Galyngale. Cloves. Lignum aloes.
Mastix, Mynte. Spodium. The innermost skin of a hens gysar. Coriander
prepared.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Quantity. Cap. 1.
THE Quantity of meat must be proporcioned after the substance and qualite
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats. First, it ought to
be remembered, that meats hot and moiste which are qualities of the bloudde,
are soon, turned into bloudde, and therefore much nourysheth the body. Some
meats do nourishe but little, having lytteil conformity with bloudde in
their qualities. Of them, which do nourishe, some are more gross, some
lyghter in digestyon. The gross meat ingendreth gross blood, but where it
is well concocte in the stomach, and well digested, it makes the flesh more
fyrme, and the official members more strong, thanne fine meats. Wherefore of
men, which use much labor or exercise, also of them, which have very chorike
stomachs here in England, gross meats may be eaten in a great quantite: and
in a cholerike stomach biefe is better dygested than a chykens leg,
forasmoche as in a hot stomach. fine meats be shortly aduste and corrupted.

Contrariwise in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides long
undigested, and makes putrifyed matter: light meats therefore be to such a
stomach more apt and conuenyent. The temperate body is best nourysshed with
a little quantity of gross meats: but of temperate meats in substance and
qualytie, they may safely eat a good quantity. Foreseen always, that they
eat without gourmandyse, or leave with sum appetyte. And here it would be
remembered, that the cholerycke stomach does not desire so much as he may
dygest: the melancholye stomach may not dygeste so much as he desires. for
cold makes appetite, but natural heat concocteth or boyleth. Not
withstanding unnatural or supernatural heat distroyeth appetite, and
corrupts dygestyon, as it appears in fevers. More over, fruytes and herbs,
specially raw, would be eaten in a small quantity, all though the person be
very cholerycke, forasmoche as they do engender thynne watrye bloudde, apt to
receive putryfaction, which all though it be not shortelye perceived of them
that use it, at length they feel it by sondrye dyseases, which are long in
coming, and shortly sleeth, or be hardely escaped. Finally, excess of
meats is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book called
Ecclesiasticus, Eccl. 37.
In much meat shall be syckenesse, and inordynate appetite shall approach
unto coler. Semblablye the quantity of drink would be moderated, that it
excede not, nor be equalle unto the quantity of meat, specially wine, which
moderately taken, aydeth nature, and comfort her, and as the said author
of Ecclestasticus says, Wine is a rejoicing to the soul and body. And
Theognes says in Galenes Eccl. 31.
warke, A large draught of wine is ill. A moderate Calen. de (...)en. sani.
draught is not only not ill, but also commodyouse or profitable.

Of quality of meats. Cap. 2.
QValitie is in the complexion, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as
Hot or cold, moist or dry. Also some meats be in winter cold in act, and in
virtue hot. And it would be considered, that every complexyon temperate and
intemperate, is conserved in his state, by that which is like thereto in form
and degree. But that which excedeth much in dystemperaunce, by that which is
contrary to him in form or quality, but like in degree moderately used. By
form is understand grossness, fynenesse, thickenesse, or thynnesse, by
degree, as the first, the second, the third, the fourth, in heat, cold,
moisture, or drythe.

Of Custom. Capit. 3.
Custom in fedynge is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meats, to the which a man has been of long time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, Hippocra tes aphorismo. 2.
yet do they sometime less harm than better meats, whereunto a man is not
used. Also the meats and drynkes, which do much delight him that eats, are
to be preferred before that, which is better, but more unsavory. But if the
custom Galenus.
be so pernyciouse, that hit needs must be left, thanne would it be
withdrawn by lyttelle and lyttelle in time of health, and not of syckenesse.
For if it should be withdrawn in time of syckenesse, Nature should sustain
treble detriment, first by the grief induced by syknesse, second by
receyuynge of medicines, thirdly by forbearyng the thing, wherein she deliteth.

Of the temperature of meats to be received. Capit. 4.
TO keep the body in good temper, to them, whose natural complexion is moist,
ought to be given meats, that be moist in virtue or power. Contrariwise to
them, whose naturalle complexion is dry, ought to be given meats dry in
virtue or power. The bodies intemperate, such meats or drynkes are to be
given, which be in power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are
always to be considered, as well of the temperaunce of the body, as of the
meats. For where the meats do much excede in degree the temperature of the
body, they annoye the body in causyng distemperance, As hot wynes, pepper,
garlycke, onyons, and salt, be noyfull to them, which be cholerike, because
they be in the highest degree of heat and drithe, above the just temperaunce
of man's body in that complexion. And yet be they oftentimes hol some to them,
which be fleumatike. Contrary wise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold
fruits moderately used, beholsom to cholerike bodies, by putting a way the
heat, exceeding the natural temperature: and to them, which be fleumatike,
they be unwholesome, and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moist.

what distemperaunce happens by the excess of sondrye qualyties in meats and
drynkes. Capitu. 5.
Meats.
Cold, do congele and mortifye. Moist, do pntrifie and hasten age. Dry,
sucketh up natural moisture. Cla^my, stops theissue of vapors and urine,
and ingendrethe toughe fleume and gravel. Fat and oily, swymmeth long in
the stomach, and brings in lothesomnesse. Bitter, does not nouryshe. Salt,
do frette much the stomach. Harryshe, like the taste of wyld fruits, do
constipate and restrain. Sweet chauffeth the bloudde, and causes opilations
or stoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cools nature, and
hasteneth age.
what commodity happens by the moderate use of the said qualities of meats
and drynkes. Cap. 6.
Meats.
Cold asswageth the burning of coler. Moist humecteth that which is dried. Dry,
co^sumeth superfluous moisture. Clammye, thycketh that, which is subtle and
percynge. Bitter, cleanses and wypeth of, also mollifieth and expels fleume.
Salt, relenteth flewme clammy, and dries it. Fat and unctuous, nourysheth,
and makes soluble. Stiptike or rough on the tongue byndeth and comfort
appetite. Sweet, does cleanse, dyssolue, and nouryshe.
Of Fruits. Cap. 7.
FOr as much as before that tyllage of corn was invented, and that deuouryng
of flesh and fyshe was of mankind used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits,
and Nature was therewith contented and satisfied: but by change of the diete
of our progenytours, there is caused to be in our bodies, such alteration
from the nature, which was in men at the beginning, that now all fruits
generally are noyfull to manne, and do engender ill humors, and be often times
the cause of putrified fevers, if they be much and continually eaten. Not
withsta^dyng unto them, which have abundance of coler, they be sometime
convenient, to repress the flame, which proceeds of coler. And some fruits
which be styptike, or bynding in taste, eaten before meals, do bynd the belly,
but eaten after meals, they be rather laxatine. Now shall it not be
inexpedient, to write of some fruits particularly, declaryng their noyful
qualities in appairyng of Nature, and how they may be used with lest detriment.

Of Gourdes.
GOurdes raw be unpleasant in eating, ill for the stomach, and almost never
digested, therefore he that will needs eat them, must boil them, toste them,
or frye them, every way they be without savor or taste, and of their proper
nature, they give to the body cold and moist norishment, and that very little,
but by reason of the slyppernes of their substance, and because al meats
which be moist of their nature, be not byndyng, they lightly pass forth by
the bealye. And being well ordered, they will be metely concoct, if corruption
in the stomach do not prevent them: they be cold and moist in the second
degree.

Of Melones and Pepones.
MElones and Pepones be almooste of oone kind, but that the melone is round
like an apple, and the innermoste part thereof, where the seeds are contained,
is used to be eaten. The Pepon is much greatter, and somewhat long, and the
inner part thereof is not to be eaten: They both are very cold and moist, and
do make ill juice in the body, if they be not well digested, but the pepon much
more than the melon. they do lest hurt, if they be eaten before meals. Albe it,
if they do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned in to fleume, if they
find choler they be turned into choler. Not withstanding there is in them
the virtue to cleanse and to provoke urine, they be cold and moist in the
second degree.

Cucumbers.
CVcumbers do not excede so much in moisture as melons: and therefore they be
not so soon corrupted in the stomach: but in some stomakes, Galen. de alimen.
fa. 2.
being moderatly used, they do digest well: but if they be abundantely eaten, or
much used, they engender a cold and thycke humor in the veins, which never
or seldom is turned into good blood, and sometime brings in fevers. Also
they abate carnal lust. The seeds as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes,
being dried, and made clean from the husks, ar very medicinable against
syckenesses procedyng of heat, also the difficulty or let in pyssynge, they
be cold and moist in the second degree.

Dates,
Be hard to digeste, therefore being much eaten, and not well dygested, they
annoye the heed, and cause gna wynge in the stomach, and make gross juice,
and sometime cause obstructions orstoppynges in the liver and spleen. And where
there is inflammation or hardness in the body, they are unwholesome, but being
well digested and temperately used, they nourysshe and make the flesh firm,
and also byndeth the bealy: old dates be hot and dry in the first degree:
new gathered are hot and moist in the first degree.

Of Fygges.
Figs eaten, do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are soon distributed
into all the Aetius. 1.
parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse, specially grauelle, being
in the raynes of the back, but they make no substancial norishment, but rather
somewhat lowse and wyndye, but by their quick passage, the wind is sone
dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do leest harm of any fruits, or
almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moist than new gathered,
but being much eaten, they make ill bloudde and juice, and as some do
suppose, do engender lyce, and also anoyeth the liver and the spleen, if they
be inflamed, but having the power to attenuate or make humors current, they
make the body soluble, and do cleanse the raynes. Also being eaten before diner
with gynger or pepper, or powder of time, or penny royal, they profyt much to
them, which have oppilations or hard congeled matter in the inner parts of
the body, or have distillations or reumes falling into the breast and stomach.
New figs are hot and moist, old figs are hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second.

Of grapes and raisons.
GRapes do not nouryshe so much as figs, but being ripe, they make not much
ylle Galen. de alimen. 2.
juice in the body: all be it newely gathered, they trouble the bealye, and
fylleth the stomach with wind, therefore if they be hanged up a while, er they
be eaten, they are the less noyfull. Sweet grapes are hottest, and do lowse
somewhat, and Diosco. 5.
make a man thyrsty. Sour grapes are cold, and do also lowse, but they are
hard of digestion, and yet they do not nouryshe. They which ar in taste bitter
or harryshe, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do make the stomach firm
and strong, and do provoke apetite, and do comfort weak bodies, being eaten
before meals, they be hot in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Of Cheries.
CHeries, if they be sweet, they do soon flyp down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharp, they be more wholesome, and do louse, if they be eaten
fresh, and newly gathered, they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Peaches.
PEaches do less harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so sone corrupted being eaten. Of the juice of them may be made a syrope,
very wholesome against the distemperance of coler, whereof proceeds a stynkynge
breathe, they be cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Of Appulles.
AL appulles eaten sone after that they be gathered, are cold, hard to digest,
and do make ill and corrupted bloudde, but being well kept until the next
winter, or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right wholesome, and
do confirm the stomach, and make good digestion, specially if they be roasted
or baken, most properly in a cholerike stomach. They are best preserved in
honey, so y^ one touch not an other. The roughe tasted appuls are wholesome, where
the stomach is weak by distemperance of heat or much moisture. The bitter
appuls, where that grief is increaced. The sour appuls, where the matter is
congeled or made thycke with heat. In distemperature of heat and drythe by
drynkyng much wine, they have been found commodious: being eaten at night, going
to bed, without drinking to them: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Quynces.
QVynces be cold and dry, eaten before meal, they bind and restrain the
stomach, that it may not digest well the mete, except that they be roasted or
sodden, the core taken out, and myxte with honye clarified, or sugar, than they
cause good appetite, and preseruith the head from drunkenness: taken after
meat, it closes and draws the stomach together, and helps it to digeste,
and mollifieth the bealy, if it be abundantly taken. they be cold in the
first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profitable to the stomach, specially they,
which are sweet: but in a hot fever, they that are sour, be more expedient
and wholesome. for than the sweet do incende heat, and puff up the stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears ar much of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after
meat, roasted or baken, they are not unwholesome, and do testrain and knytte the
stomach, being ripe: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Medlars.
Medlars ar cold and dry, and constcictife or strainig y^ stomak, and therefore
they may be eten after meles as a medicine, but not used as meat, for they
inge^ der mela^coly, they be cold and dry in the second degree.

Wallnuttes.
VVallnuttes, if they be blanched, are supposed to be good for the stomak, and
somewhat lousynge the bealy, myxt with sugar, they do noryshe temperately. Of
two dry nuttes, as many fygges, and.xx. leaves of Rewe, with a grayn of salt,
is made a medicine, whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous,
may that day hurt him. and it also preserves against the (...) ^hee, and this
is the very right Mithridate. they be hot and dry in the second degree, after
some opinions hot in the third degree, dry in the second.

Fylberdes and hasyll nuttes.
They are more strong in substance than wall nuttes, wherefore they are not so
easily or sone digested, Also they do inflate the stomak, and cause heed ache,
but they engender fat. And if they be tosted, they are good to restrain
reumes. Also eaten with pepper, they are good against tourmentes of the bealy,
and the stoppyng of vri^e. they be hot and dry in the first deg^ee.

Of Almondes.
They do extenuate and clease without any bindynge, wherefore they pourge the
breast and lunges, specially bitter almondes. Also they do mollyfye the bealye,
provoke sleep, and causes to pysse well. Five or six of them eaten before
meat, keeps a man from being drunk: they be hot and moist in the first
deg^^e.

Chestyns.
They being roasted under the ymbers or hot ashes, do nouryshe the body
strongly, and eaten with honey fasting, do help a man of the cough.

Prunes.
Of the gardeyn, and type, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring
no manner of nouryshement. To this fruit like as to fygges, this property
remains, that being dried they do profit. The damask prune rather binds
than lowseth, and is more commodious unto the stomak. they be cold and moist in
the second degree.

Olyues.
Condite in salt lycour, taken at the beginning of a meal, does corroborate
the stomach, stireth appetite, and louseth the bealy, being eaten with vyneger.
They which be type, are temperately hot: they which be grene, are cold and
dry.

Of Capers.
They nourishe nothing after that they be salted, but yet they make the bealy
louse, and pourgeth fleume, which is therein contained. Also stireth appetite
to meat, and opens the obstructions or stoppynge of the liver and spleen,
being eaten with oximell, before any other meat: they be hot and dry in the
second degree.

Orenges.
The ryndes taken in a little quantity, do comfort the stomach, where it
digesteth, specially con dite with sugar, and taken fasting in a small
quantity. The juice of orenges, having a tossed of breadde put unto it, with a
little powder of myntes, sugar, and a little cynamom, makes a very good
sauce to provoke appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not
to be discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second. The juice of them is cold in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Herbs used in potage, or to eat. Cap. 8.
GEnerally al herbs raw, and not sodden, do engender cold and watery juice, if
they be eaten customably, or in abundance: albeit some herbs are more
comestible, and do less harm unto nature, and moderatly vsid, makith metely
good blud.

Lettyse.
A Monge al herbs, none has so good juice as lettyse: for some men do
suppose, that it makes abundance of blood, all be it not very pure or
perfyte. It does set a hot stomach in a very good temper, and makes good
appetite, and eaten in the evening, it provoke sleep, all be it, it neither
does lowse nor bind the bealye of his own property. It increases milk in
a woman's breasts, but it abat^th carnal appetite, and much using thereof,
hurts the eye sight. It is cold and moist temperately.

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused matchauntes to fetch out of the east and southe
parts of the world, the traffyke of spyce and sundry drouges, to content the
vnsaciablenes of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the virtues supposed to be in
them, were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a sufficient
medicine ageynste all diseases, as it may appear in the voke of wise Cato,
wherein he writes of husbandry. But now I will no more remember, than shall be
required, in that which shall be used as meat, and not pure medicine. The
juice thereof has virtue to purge: the holle leaves being half sodden, and
the water poured out, and they being put eftesones into hot water, and sodden
until they be tender, so eaten, they do bind the bealy. Some do suppose, if
they be eaten raw with vyneger, before meat, it shall preserve the stomach
from surfettynge, and the heed from drunkenness: all be it much using of
them dulleth the sight, except the eyes be very moist. Finally the juice that
it makes in the body is not so commendable, as that which is engendered of
lettyse. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Of Cykorie or suckorie.
IT is like in operation to lettise, and tempereth coler wonderfully, and
therefore in all colerike fevers, the decoction of this herb, or the water
thereof stylled, is right expedient. semblablye the herb and rote boiled with
flesh, that is fresh, being eaten, keeps the stomach and heed in very good
temper. I suppose that Southystel and Dent delyon, be of like qualities, but
not so convenient to be used of them, which are hole, because they are wild
of nature, and more bitter, and there fore causes fastidiousnes or lothsomnesse
of the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Endyue and Scariole.
Be much like in their operation to Cykorie, but they are more conuentent to
medicine than to meat. All be it Scariole called white End^ue, having the
tops of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of
summer, and covered, becomes white and crispe, like to the great stalks of
cabage lettyse, which are in winter taken up and eten. And to them that have
hot stomakes and dry, they be right holsom, but being to much used, or in
very great quantity, they engender the humor, which makes the colike. they
be cold and moist in the first degree.

Malowes.
Are not cold in operation, but rather somewhat warm, and have in them a
slyppernesse: wherefore being boiled and moderatly eaten with oil Galen. 2. de
alim ^tis.
and vyneger, they make metely good concoction in the stomach, and causes the
superfluous matter therein easily to pass, and cleanses the bealye: It is hot
and moist in the first degree.

White betes.
Are also abstersive, and lowseth the bealye, but much eaten, annoyeth the
stomach: but they are right good against obstructions or stoppyng of the liver,
if they be eaten with vyneger or mustarde. likewise it helps the spleen. It
is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Pourslane.
Does mitigate the great heat in all the inward parts of the body, semblably
of the heed and eyes: also it represseth the rage of Venus, but if it be
preserved in salt or brine, it heateth and purges the stomach. It is cold in
the third degree, and moist in the second.

Cheruyle.
Is very profitable unto the stomach, but it may not sustein very much
boiling: eten with vinegar, it provoke appetite, and also urine. The de
coctio^ thereof drunk with wine, cle^seth y^ bladder.

Sorell.
Being sodden, it louseth the bealy. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chewe some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruaylousely preserves from infections, as a new practiser callid Guainerius
does write. And I my self have proved it in my household. The seeds Dioscorides
lib. 2. ca. 106.
thereof braied and drunk with wine and water, is very wholesome against the
colyke, and frettyng of the guts. it stops fluxes, and helps the stomach
annoied with replecion. It is cold in the third degree, and dry in the
second.

Persely.
Is very convenient to the stomak, and comfort appetite, and makes the
breathe sweet, the seeds and root causes urine to pass well, and breaks
the stone, dissolueth wyndes. the roots boiled in water, and thereof oximell
being made, it dissolueth fleume, and makes good digestion. It is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Fenell.
Being eten, the sede or rote makith abundance of milk: likewise drunk with
ptysane or ale. The sede somewhat restrayneth flux, provoke to pysse, and
mytigateth freattynges of the stomach and guts, specially the decoction of
the root, if the matter, causynge frettynge be cold, but if it be of a hot
cause, the use thereof is dangerous, for inflammation or exulceration of Ga^^.
^^m. de medicamen. li. 3. ca. 74.
the taynes of bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the first.

Anyse sede.
Makes sweet breath, provoke urine, and drives down things, cleauynge to
the raynes or bladder, styrreth up courage, and causes abundance of milk. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, how so ever they be ordered: the substance, which they do
make is spungye, and not firm, albeit they be abstersive or clensyng the body,
they tarry long or they be dygested, and make gross juice in the body, but if
onyons be sodde^ with them, they be less noyful.

Peasyn.
Are much of the nature of beans, but they be less wyndy, and passes faster
out of the body: they be also abstersive or clensing, specially white peason,
and they also cause metely good noryshing, the husks taken away. And the
brothe, wherein they be sodden, cleanses right well the raynes and bladder.

Rape rotes and Nauews. Ca. ix.
THe juice made by them, is very gross: And therefore being much eaten, if
they be not perfytely concocte in the stomach, they do make crude or raw
juice in the veins. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause wyndes, and
annoye the stomach, and make sometime frettynges: If they be well boiled first
in clean water, and that being cast away, the second time with fat flesh,
they nouryshe much, and do neither lowse nor bind the bealy. But Nauews do
not nouryshe so much as rapes, but they be even as wyndye.

Turnepes,
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, norysheth much,
augme^teth the sede of man, provoke carnal lust. Eaten raw, they styre up
appetite to eat, being temperarly used, and be convenient unto them, which
have putrified matter in their breasts or lunges, causing them to spytte
easily, but being much and often eaten, they make raw juice and wyndynesse.

Parsnepes and carettes,
They do nourysshe with better juice than the other roots, specially carettes,
which are hot Gal. ^^^p. med. li. 7.
and dry and expels wynd. Not withstanding much used, they engender ill
juice: but carettes less than parsnepes, the one and the other expels urine.

Radyshe roots,
Have the virtue to extenuate, or make thyn, and Paulus Eginera. Dioscorides.
also to warm. Also they cause to break wind, and to pysse: being eaten
before meals, they let the meare, that it may not descend, but being eaten
last, they make good digestion, and louseth the bealy, though Galenus write
contrary. For Lib. 7. de alimentis.
I, among diverse other, by experience have proved it: not withstanding they
be unwholesome for them, that have continually the gout, or peynes in the joints.

Garlyke,
It does extenuate and cut gross humors, and slmy, dissolueth gross
wyndes, and heateth all the body, also opens the places, which are stopped,
generally where it is well digested in the stomach: it is (...)om to diverse
purposes, specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold
enclosed. If it be sodden until it louseth his tartness, it so mewhat
nourishes, and yet loses not his propetie, to extenuate gross humors: being
sodden to (...), it profyceth much against distyllations from the heed into
the stomach.

Onyons,
Do also extenuate, but the long onions more than the round, the red more
than the white, the (...) than they which be green: also raw more tha^
sodden, they styre appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnes, and lowse the
bealy, they quycken fight: and being eaten in great abundance with meat, they
cause one to sleep soundly.

Leekes,
Be of ill (...)ce, and do make troublous dreams, but they do extenuate and
cleuse the body, Galen. 7. cap. 138.
and also make it soluble, and provoke urine. More over it causes one (...)
spytte out easily the fleume, which is in the breaste.

Sauge,
It heateth, and sommewhat byndeth, and therewith provoke urine, the decoccion
of the leaves and branches being drunk* Also it stops bledynge of
wounds, being laid unto them. More over it has been proved, that (...),
which have been long time without chylderne, and have drunk.x. ounces of the
juice of sauge, with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before, that they
have companied with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot
and dry in the third degree, the using thereof is good against palseys.

Isope,
Does heat and extenuate, whereby it digesteth slymy fleume: being prepared
with fygges, it pourgeth fleume downewarde, with honye and water up ward,
boiled in vyneger, it helps the tothe ache, if the teethe be washed therewith,
it is hot and dry in the third degree.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart, and makes on^ (...), eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk: Also mollifieth the bealy, and prepares to the stool.
It is hot and moist in the myddell of the first degree.

Sauerye.
Pourgeth fleume, helps dygestion, makes quyck s^ght, provoke (...), and
styreth carnal appetite: It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rokat,
Heateth much, and increases seed of man, provoke courage, helps
digestion, and some what louseth. It is hot and moist in the second degree.

(...)me.
(...), breaks the stoone, expellyth urine, and ceasseth freattynges. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Penyryall,
Does extenuate, heat, and decocte, it refouemeth the stomach, oppressed with
fleume, it does recomforte the faint spirit, it expels melancoly by sege,
and is medicinable against many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Townecresses.
Paulus discommendeth, saying, that it resiteth concoction, and hurts the
stomach, and makes ill i^yce in the body, taken as medicine, it helps many
diseases. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rosemarye.
(...) to heat, and therefore it dissolueth (...) congeled with cold: It
helps against palseys, falling sickness, old diseases of the breaste, (...)
or frettyng, it provoke urine and sweat: it helps the rough taken with
pepper and honey, it puts away tothe ache, the root being chewed, or the
juice thereof put into the tothe: being bourned, the fume thereof resysteth the
(...): the rynde thereof sodden or burned, and the fume received at the mouth,
stops the ^^ume, which falls out of the heed into the chekes or throote:
which I myself have proved, the grene leaves bruysed, do stop the
hemorroides, if they be laid unto them. this herb is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Spyces growing out of this realm used in meat or drink. Cap. 10.
Pepper.
Black pepper is hottest, and most dry, white pepper is next, long pepper is
most temperate. The general property of al kinds of pepper is to heat the
body: but as Galene says, it perceth downewarde, and does not spread into
the veins, if it be gross beaten. It dissolueth fleume and wind, it helps
digestion, expulseth urine, and it helps ageynste the diseases of the
breaste, procedynge of cold. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second.

Gynger.
Heateth the stomach, and helps digestion, but it heateth not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heat remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moyster: Being grene or well confection(...) in syrope, it comfort much the
stomach and heed, and quyckeneth remembrance, if it be taken in the morrow
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron,
Somewhat byndeth, heateth and comfort the stomach and the heart specially,
and makes good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a small quantity. It is
hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves,
Has virtue to comfort the synewes, also to consume and dissolve superfluous
humors. They be hot and dry in the third degree: sodden with milk, it
comfort the debilitie of nature.

Maces.
Dioscorides commends to be drunk against spitting of blod, and bluddy
fluxes, and excessive laskes. Paulus Egineta adds to it, that it helps the
colyke: they be hot in the second degree and (...) in the third degree. It
is to the stomach very commodious, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmigges,
With their sweet odor comfort and dissolve, and sometime comfort the power
of the sight, and also the brayn in cold discrasies, and is hot and dry in
the second degree.

Of bread. Cap. xi.
BReadde of fine flower of wheat, having no leuyn, is flow of digestion and
makethe flymy humors, but it nourysheth much: if it be leuyned, it digesteth
sooner: bread having much branne, fylleth the bealy with excrementes, and
nourysheth little or nothing, but shortly descends from the stomach: The
mean between both sufficiently leuyned, well molded and moderatly baken is
the most wholesome to every age. the greatest loves do noryshe most fast, for
as much as the fire has not exhausted the moisture of them. Hot breadde,
much eaten, makes fulness and thyrste, and slowely passes. Barley breadde
cleanses the body, and does not nouryshe so much as wheat, and makes colder
juice in the body.

Of Flesh. Cap. xii.
BEfe of England to Englisshemen, which are in health, brings strong
nouryshinge, but it makes gross blood, and ingendreth melancoly: but being
of young oxen, not exceeding the age of four years, to them, which have
colerike stomakes, it is more convenient, than chikens, and other like fine
meats.

Swynes flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nouryshyng the body, Galene most commends
porke, not being of an old swyne, and that it be well digested of him that
eats it. For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for young persons,
and them which have sustained much labor, and therewith ar fatigate, and
become weak. young pigges are not commended before that they be one month old,
for they do bread superfluous humors.

Lamb,
Is very moist and fleumatike, wherefore it is not convenient for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them, which have in their
stomach much fleume.

Mutton,
Galene does not commend it, not withstanding experience proves here in this
realm, that De alime^. lib. 3.
if it be young, it is a right temperate meat, and makes good juice: and
therefore it is used more than any other meat, in all diseases. And yet it is
not like good in all places, nor the sheep, which bears fynest wolle, is not
the swetest in eating, nor the most tender. But I have found in some
countrays mutton, which in whytenes, tenderness, and sweetness of the
flesh, might be well nygh compared to kydde, and in digestion have proved as
wholesome.

Kydde and veale,
Of Galene is commended next unto porke, but some men do suppose, that in health
and siknes they be much better than porke, the juice of them both being more
pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry of their
nature, the youngest be most wholesome: of them that are moist, the eldest are
lest hurtful.

Hate, Conye,
Makes gross bloudde, it dries and stops, but yet it provoke a man to
pysse. Cony makes better and more pure nourishment, and is sooner Hippo. de
ratione ui ctus lib. 2. cap. 19. Plin. 28.
digested than hare. It is well proved, that there is no meat more wholesome,
or that more clean, firmly, and temperatly noryssheth tha^ tabettes.

Dear read and falowe.
Hippocrates affyrmeth the flesh of hearts and hyndes, to be of ill juice,
hard of digestion and dry, but yet it moves urine. Of falowe dear, he nor any
other old writer does speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there be
not in all the world so many as be in England, where they consume a good part
of the best pasture in the realm, and are in nothing profitable, saving
that of the skynnes of them is made better lether, than is of calves: the
hunting of them being not so pleasant, as the hunting of other venery or
vermyne, the flesh much more unwholesome and unpleasant, than of a red dear,
ingendring melancoly, and making many fearful dreams, and disposes the body
to a fever, if it be much eaten: not withstandyng the fat thereof, as some
learned men have supposed) is better to be digested, than the lean.

Of Birds.
THe flesh of al birds, is much lighter than the flesh of bestes in
comparison, most specially of those fowls, which trust most to their wings,
and do bread in high countries.

Capons, Hens, and Chyckens.
The Capon is above all other fowls praised, for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nouryshment. It is
commodious to the breaste and stomach. Hens in winter, are almooste equal
unto the capon, but they do not make so strong nourishement. Auycen says, if
they be roasted in the bealy of a kydde or lamb, they will be the better.
Chickens in summer, specially if they be cockrelles, are very conuement for a
weak stomak, and nourysheth a little. The flesh of a cock is hard of
digestion, but the brothe, wherein it is boiled, louseth the bealy, and having
sodden in it c^l^wortes, Polypodium, or C^^tamus, it purgith ill humors, and is
medicinable ageynste gowtes, joint aches, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesaunt,
Excedeth all fowls in sweetness and holsomnesse, and is equal to a capon in
nourishyng, but he is somewhat drier, and is of some men put in comparison,
mean between a hen and a partriche.

Partryche,
Of all fowls is most sonest digested: and has in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes sede of generation, and reuiueth lust which
is abated.

Quayles,
Although they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increace melancolye, and a^e of a small nourishynge.

Larkes,
Be as well the flesh as the broth, very holsom. eaten roasted, they do much
help against the colyke, as Dioscorides says.

Aplouer,
Is ^lowe of digestion, nourysheth little, and increases mela^colye.

Black birds or ousyls,
Among wild foul has the chief praise, for lyghtnesse of digestion, and
that they make good nouryshement, and little ordure.

Sparowes.
Be hard to digest, and are very hot, and ^tyreth up Venus, and specially
the brayns of them.

Woodcockes,
Are of a good temperaunce, and metely light in dygestion.

Pygeons,
Be easily digested, and at very holsom to them, which are fleumatike, or pure
melancoly.

Goose,
Is hard of digestion, but being young and ^atte, the wings be easy to dygeste
in a hole ^tomake, and nourysheth competently.

Ducke,
Is hoter than goose, and hard to digest, and makes wars juice, saving the
braunes on the breast bone, and the neck is better than the remnaunt.

Crane and bustarde.
Crane is hard of digestion, and makes ylle juice, but being hanged up long
in the air, he is the less unwholesome. Bustarde being fat, and kept without
meat a day or two before that he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and than
drawn, and hanged as the crane is, being roasted or baken, is a good meat,
and nourysheth well, if he be well dygested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shouelar.
Being young and fat, be lyghtlyer digested than crane: and the byttour
sooner than the hearon. And the shoular sooner than any of them: but all these
fowls must be eaten with much gynger or pepper, and have good old wine
drunk after them, and so shall they be more easylye digested, and the juice
coming of them, be the less noyfull.

The parts and members of birds and beasts. Cap. 13.
THe wings brawnes and neck of gese, capons, hens, fesant, partriche and
small birds being fat, are better than the legs in digestion, and
lyghter in nouryshyng. Of wild foul and pygeons being fat, the legs are
better than the wings: the brawnes of ducke, ^eale, and wygeon except, which
is better to dygeste, than the resydue.

The gysar or stomach.
Of a goose or hen being fat with branne and milk, being well sodden or
made in poulder, is good for the stomach, in making it strong to digeste, and
nourysheth competently.

The liver
Of a capon, hen, fesaunte, or goose, being made fat with milk myxte with
their meat, is not only easy to digeste, but also makes good juice, and
nourysheth excellently. But the lyuers of beasts be ill to digest, passes
slowly, and makes gross blood, but it is strong in nouryshyng.

The inward of beasts, as trypes and chytterlynges.
THe flesh of them is more hard to dygest. And therefore although they be well
digested, yet make they not juice naturallye sanguyne or clean, but raw juice
and cold: and requires a long time to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lyghtes,
Are more easy to digest, than the liver, and less nourishes, but the
nourishment, that it makes, is fleumatike: albeit the lunges of a Fox, is
medicinable for them, which have siknes of y^ lu^ges.

The spleen or mylte,
Is of ill juice, for it is the chamber of mela^coly.

The heart,
Is of hard flesh, and therefore is not well digested, nor passes shortly,
but where he is well digested, the juice y^ it makes, is not to be dispraised.

The brain,
Is fleumatike, of gross juice, slow in dygestyng, noyouse to the stomach,
but where it is well digested, it nourysheth much.

Marowe.
Is more dilectable than the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well digested, it norysheth much.

The stones and vdders.
Being well digested, do nourysshe much, but the stones are hotter with their
moystnes, the vdders cold and fleumat^ke, they both do increase sede of
generation but the blood made of the vdder is better than that, which comes
of the stones, except it be of calves and lambs. Also the stones of cocks,
makes commendable norishme^t.

The heed.
The flesh thereof nourysheth much, and augmenteth seed: but it is slow of
digestion, and noyeth the stomach. but to them, which use much exercise, it
is not discommendable.

The tongue,
Is of a spu^gy and sanguine substance, but the kernelles and gristell, which
are in the roots, if they be well dygested, they make good nourishment: if
they be not well digested, they make ^^eme.

The Feet,
Being well boiled and tender, in a holle stomach, dygesteth well, and
makes good juice, and passes forth easily. Galene commends the fete of
swyne. But I have proved, that the feet of a young bullock tenderly sodden,
and laid in sowse two days or three, and eaten cold in the euennyng, have
brought a colerike stomach into a good digestion and sleep, and therewith has
also expulsed salt fleme and coler* and this have I found in my self by often
experience: always forsene, that it be eaten before any other meat, with out
drinking immediately after it.

Of Fysshe generally. Cap. xiiii.
THe best fyshe after the opinion of Galen, is that, which swymmeth in the
pure see, and is tossed and lift up with wyndes and sourges. The more calm
that the water is, the warse is the fyshe, they which are in muddy waters, do
make much fleume and ordure: taken in fennes and dyches be warste, being in
fresshe ryuers, and swyfte, be sometime commendable: all be it generally, al
kinds of fyshe makes more thinner blood, than flesh, so that it does not
much nouryshe, and it does sooner pass out by vapors: to a hot colerike
stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be wholesome, being new, fresh, and not
very hard in substance or ^lymy. hard fyshe is hard of digestion, but the
nourishment thereof is more firm, than that, which is soft: those which have
much gross humors in them, ar best, poudred.

Of Butter. Cap. xv.
BVtter is also nourishynge, and profits to them, which have humors
superfluouse, in the breaste or lunges, and lacks ripynge and clensynge of
them: specially if it be eaten with sugar or honye. If it be well salted, it
heateth and cleanses the more.

Of Chese. Cap. xvi.
CHese by the hole sentence of all writers, lets digestion, and is enemy
unto the stomach. Also it ingendreth ill humors, and bredeth the stone. The
chese which does leest harm, is soft chese, reasonably salted, which some men
do suppose, nourysheth much.

Of Eggs. Cap. xvii.
Eggs of fesauntes, hens, and partriches, be of all other meats most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: If they ^e (...), they
do cleanse the thro^e and breast. If they be hard, they be slow in digestion,
but being ones digested, they do nourysshe much. Mean between ^e^e and
hard, they digest conue^ently and noryshe q^yckely. Eggs well poched, are
better than roasted. If they be fried hard, they be of ill nourishement, and do
make stynkynge fumes in the stomach, and do cortupt other meats with whom
they be myngled. They be most wholesome when they be poched, and most unwholesome
when they be fried. Dioscorides says, If they be souped warm, before any
other meat, they do heal the grefes of the bladder and raynes, made with
gravel: also sorenes of the chekes and throat, and spittyng of blood: and
they be good agei^st cata^^es or ^^illing out of the head into the stomak.

Of drynkes, and first of water. Capi(...) 18.
VVndoubtedly water has preeminence above all other lycoures, not only
because it is an elem^t, that is to say, a pure matter, where of al other
lycours have their original substance: but also forasmoche, as it was the very
natural and first drink to all manner of creatures. Wherefore the saying of
Pindarus the poet, was ever well allowed, which says, water is best. And
one th^nge is well considered, that from the creation of the world, until the
vniue^sall deluge or floudde, during which time, men lived eight or nine
hunderde years, there was none other drink used nor known, but water. Also
the true folowers of Pythagoras doctrine, drank only water, and yet lived
long: as Apollonius and other: and in the serchyng out of secret and
mystical things, their wits excellyd. Moreover, we have seen men and women
of great age, and strong of body, which never or very seldom, drank other
drink, than pure water: As by example in Cornwall, although that the country
be in a very cold quarter, which proves, that if men from their infancye,
were accustomed to none other drink, but to water only, moderatly used, it
should be sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to cause the meat that is
eaten, to perce and descend unto the places of digestion, which are the
pourposes that drink se^ueth fore. But now to the qualities of water, after
the sentence of ancient philosophers and physicians, The rain water, after
the opinion of the most men, if it be received pure and clean, is most subtyl
and penetratiue of any other waters: the next is that, which issues out of a
spring in the east, and passes swiftly among great stones or rocks: The
third is of a clean river, which renneth on great hard stones or pebles.
There be diverse means to try out, which is the best water. For that which
is lightest in poyse or weight is best. also that, whereof comes leest skymme
or frothe, when it does boil. Also that, which will soonest be hot. Moreover
deape linen clothes into sundry waters, and after lay them to dry, and that
which is sonest dry, the water wherein it was deaped, is most subtle. After a
great surfete, cold water drunken, is a general remedy. Hippocrates affirms,
y^ in sharp and fervent diseases, none other De ratio^e ^ictus in mor. acutis
lib. 3.
remedy is to be required, than water. And Galen will not, that children should
be let from drynking of water: but that when they feel them selfs very hot,
after meals, and do desire to drynk water, specially of a clean fountain,
they should be suffered. Also Hippocrates says, In such syknes, where as thou
fear, lest the heed should be vehemently grieved, or the mind perished, there
must thou give either water, or white wine alayd with much water. Not
withsta^dyng there be in water causes of diverse diseases, as of swellyng of the
spleen, and the liver, it also flytteth and swymmeth, and it is long or it
perceth, in as much as it is cold and ^lowe in decoction, it lowseth not the
belly, nor provoke urine. Also in this it is vyciouse, that of his proper
nature, it makes none ordure. Finally, always respect must be had to the
person, that drynketh it. for to young men, and them, that be hot of
complexion, it does less harm, and sometime it profyteth. but to them that at
feeble, old, fleumatike, or melancoly, it is not co^uenyent.

Of wine. Cap. xix.
PLato, the wysest of all philosophers, does affirm, that wine moderately
drunk, nourysheth and comfort, as well all the body, as the spirits of
man. And therefore god did ordeyn it for mankind, as a remedy against the
incommodities of age: that thereby they should seem to return unto youth, and
forgette heaviness. Undoubtedly wine heateth and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly consetueth Nature.

And Galene of all wynes, commends that, which is yelow and clear, saying,
That it is the hottest, and white wine lest hot. And the color mean
between both, of semblable temperature. The yelowe wine, which is the proper
color of very hot wynes, to old men does bring these commodities, First
it heateth all their members: also it purges by urine, the watrye substance of
the blood. Moreover, the wynes, which be pale or yelowe, and full of
substance, they do increase blood, and nourishe the body: but for the more
part old men have need of such wynes, which do provoke urine: forasmoche as
in them do abound watery excrementes or superfluities. And they which do tarry
long in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Black or deep red wines and
thick, do bind and congele that which they do find in the body, and
although some of them do not long abide in the bealy, yet they move not urine,
but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, forasmoche as they
do stop the cundites of the spleen, the liver, and the raynes. Also gross
wines be best for them, which desire to be fat, but it makes opilations: old
wine and clear, is better for them, that be fleumatike.

Galene also prohibiteth chylderne to drink any wine, forasmoche as they be of
a hot and moist Lib. 1. de ^en. (...).
temperature, and so is wine: and therefore it heateth and moysteth to much
their bodies, and fills their heedes with vapoures. More over he would, that
young men should drink lyttel wine, for it shall make them prone to fury and
to lecherye: and that part of the soul, which is called rational, it shall
make troublous and dulle: not withstandyng, yet it is sometime profitable to
mitigate or expel ordure, made of coler or melancoly. Also it profyteth
against drythe, which happens in the substance of the body, either by to much
labor, or by the proper temperature of age: for wine moysteth and nourishes
that, which is to dry, also mitigateth and dissolueth the sharpnes of coler,
and purges it also by urine and sweat: Finally (as Theognes says) Much
drinkyng of wine is ill, but moderate drinking of wine is not only not ill,
but also commodious and profitable. Which sentence is confyrmed by Jesus
Syr^^, in the book named Ecclesiasticus, saying, Eccl^. 31.
wine moderately drunk, reioyseth both the body and soul. Wherefore to
conclude this chapter, There is neither meat nor drink, in the use whereof
ought to be a more discrete moderation, than in wine, consyderinge that deing
good and drunk in due time and measure, it not only conserueth natural and
radical moisture, whereby life indureth, but also it helps the princypall
members, which belong to digestion, to do their office: On the other part,
being ill or corrupt, or taken out of order and measure, it does contrary to
all the premises. besides that it transformeth a man or woman, making them
beastly. More of the qualities of wine, shall be touched hereafter in the order
of diete.

Of Milk. Cap. xx.
Milk is compact of three substances, cream, whey, and cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman. The milk of a cow is thyckest, the milk of a
camel is most subtyl, the milk of a goote is between cow milk, and camel
mylk. Ewes milk is between cow milk and asses milk. Also the mylk of
beasts, fedyng in large pastures, and out of fennes and marshes, is better
than of them, which be fed in little closes, or in watery grounds. In
spring time milk is most subtle, and milk of young beasts, is holsomer,
than of old. To children, old men, and to them, which be oppressed with
melancoly, or have the flesh consumed with a fever ethike, milk is
convenient. And generally to all them, which do not feel the mylk rise in their
stomakes, after that they have eaten it: and in those persons, it does easily
pourge that which is in the bealye superfluous. And afterward it enters into
the veins, and brings good nourishement. Who so ever has an appetite to
eat or drink milk, to the intent that it shall not arise or abraid in the
stomach, let him put into a vessel, out of the which he will receive it, a few
leaves of myntes, sugar, or pure honey. And into that vessel cause the best to
be mylked, and so drink it warm from the vdder: or else let him do as Paulus
Egineta teaches, that is to say, boil first the milk with an easy fire, and
sethe it after with a hotter fire, and skym it clean, and with a sponge deaped
in cold water, take that clean away, which would be burned to the vessel,
than put to the milk, salt and sugar, and stere it often. More over milk
taken to purge melancoly, would be drunk in the morning abundantly Oribasius de
confectione ciboru^ li. 3.
new mylked, as is before written. And he that drynketh, should absteyn from
meat, and exercise, until the milk be digested, and have some what purged the
bealy. For with labor it becomes sour: and therefore it requires rest and
watch or to walk very softly. Finally, where men and women be used from their
childhode, for the more part, to mylk, and do eat none or little other meat,
but milk and butter, they appear to be of good complexion and facion of body,
and not so much vexed with sycknes, as they which drink wine or ale: not
withstandyng much use of milk in men sanguine or colerike, does engender the
stone.

Of ale, biere, cider, and whay.
I Can neither here nor read, that ale is made and used for a common drink in
any other countray than England, Scotland, Ireland, and Poyle. The latin word
Cereuitia, is indifferent as well to ale as to biere, and the only difference
between them is, that biere has hoppes sodden in it, ale ought to have none.
If the corn be good, the water wholesome and clean, and the ale or biere well
and perfytclye brewed and cleansed, and by the space of syx days or more,
settled and defecate, it must needs be a necessary and conuenieut drynk, as
well in syknes as in health: consyderinge that batleye corn, whereof it is made,
is commended, and used in medicine, in all partis of the world, and accounted
to be of a syngular efficacy, in reducynge the body into good temper, specially
which is in a distemperature of heat. For what ancient physician is there,
that in his works commends not ptysane, which is none other than pure
barley, brayed in a mortar, and sodden in water? The same thing is small and
clean ale or b^ere, saving that perchance, the drienge of the malte, is
cause of more dryth to be in the ale, than in ptisane. And the hoppes in biere
makes it colder in operation. But to say as I think, I suppose, y^ neither
ale nor biere is to be compared to wine, consideringe, that in them do lack
the heat and moisture which is in wine. For that being moderately used, is
most like to the natural heat and moisture of man's body. And also the lykour
of ale and bear being more gross, do engender more gross vapors, and
corrupt humors, than wine does, being drunk in like excess of quantity.

And one thing is to be noted, which was lately well marked of a man of
excellent lerning, being vexed witd the sickness of the stone, That in them,
which do always use to drink ale or biere, the stone and gravel engendered in
them is white of color: And in them, which do use to drink wine for the more
part, the stones and grauelle, which be engendered in them, be read of
color. Not withstanding commonly the color of the stone follows the humor,
which does most abound in the pacient. As coler makes the gravel more
read, fleme makes it more white. also some men do suppose, that red gravel
is engendered in the raynes, white gravel in the bladder. Moreover, who so ever
uses ingurgitation of ale or biere, his breath shall be more lothsom, than the
breathes of them, which do take the excess of wine: for the wine by the
reason of his heat, is sooner digested, and does leave behind him fewer
dregs. As for Cider, may not be good in any condition, consyderyng (as I
said) that all fruits do engender ill humors, and do cool to much natural
heat: but to them, which have abundance of red coler, moderatly used, it
somewhat profyteth in mitigation of excessive heat. But who that will
diligently mark in the countries, where syder is used for a common drink, the
men and women have the color of their vysage pallyd, and the skin of their
vysage ryuelled, although that they be young. Whay, if it be left of the
butter, being well ordered, and not drunk, until it have a thycke curde of
milk over it, like to a hatte, is a right temperate drink, for as much as by
the vnctuositie of the butter, whereof the whay retayneth some portion, it is
both moist and nourishyng, and cleanses the breaste: and by the subtylnes of it
self, it descends sone from the stomach, and is shortly digested. Also by
reason of the affinity, which it has with mylk, it is conuertible into
blood and flesh, specially in those persons, which do inhabyte the north
parts, in whom natural heat is conglutinate, and therefore is of more
puissance and virtue in the office of concoction. Also custom from childhode
does eleuate the power of meats and drinks in their disposition, not
withstanding that the four humors, sanguine, coler, fleume, and melancoly,
must also be considered, as it shall appear in diverse places hereafter.

Of honey. Cap. xxii.
HOnye as well in meat as in drink, is of incomparable efficacy, for it not
only cleanses, alters, and norisheth, but also it long time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put in into it. In so much as Pliny says, Such is the
nature of honey, that it suffers not the bodies to putrify. And he affirms,
that he did se an Hippocentaure Plin. li. 22.
(which is a beast half man, half horse) brought in honye to Claudius the
emperor out of Egypt, to Rome. And he tells also of oone Pollio Romulus,
who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus the emperor demanded, by
what means he lived so long, and retained still the vygour or lyuelynes of
body and mind, Pollio answered, y^ he did it inward with meade (which is
drink made with honey and water) outward with oil. Which saying agrees with
the sentence of Democritus, the great philosopher: who being demanded, how a
man might live long in health, he answered, If he wette him within with
honye, without with oil. The same philosopher, when he was a hundred years
old and nine, prolonged his life certain days with the euaporation of honye,
as Aristoxenus writes. Of this excellent matter, most wonderfully wrought and
gathered by the little be, as well of the pure dew of heaven, as of the most
subtyl humor of sweet and virtuous herbs and flowers, be made lykors
commodious to ma^kynd, as mead, metheglyn, and oxymell. Meade, which is made
with one part of honey, and four times so much of pure water, and boiled
until no skym do remain, is much commended of Galene, drunk in Galen. de
tuend. sanita. li. 4.
summer, for preserving of health. The same author always commends the using
of honey, either raw eaten with fine breadde, somewhat leuened, or sodden, and
received as drink. Alsoo meade perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lunges,
causes a man to spytte easily, and to pysse abundantly, and purges the belly
moderatly. Metheglyn, which is most used in wales, by reason of hot herbs
boiled with honey, is hotter than meade, and more comfort a cold stomach, if
it be perfectly made, and not new or very stale. Oximell is, where to one part
of vinegar is put double so much of honey, four times as much of water, and
that being boiled unto the third part, and clean skymmed with a fether, is
used to be taken, where in the stomach is much fleume or matter undigested,
so that it be not read choler. Look the use thereof in Alexandro Tralliano.
Many other good qualities of honye, I omytte to write of, until some other
occasion shall happen, to remember them partycularly, where they shall seem to
be profitable.

Sugar. Cap. xxiii.
OF Sugar, I do find none ancient author of greeks or latynes, to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who says in this wise, after that he has
treated of honey. Moreover sugar, which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, called Felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equal in
virtue, and does not anoy the stomach, nor causes thyrst. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in daily experience, that Sugar is a thing very
temperate and nourysshynge, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that
the stomach abhors honye, it may be used for honye in all things, wherein
honey is required to be.

Of time. Cap. xxiiii.
IN the consyderation of time, for taking of meats and drynkes, it is to be
remembered, that that in winter meats ought to be taken in great abundance, and
of a more gross substance than in summer, forasmoch as the exterior air,
which compasses the body being cold, causes the heat to withdraw into
the inner parts, where being enclosed, and contract together in the stomach
and entrayles, it is of more force to boil and digeste that, which is
received into it. Also meats roasted, ar than better than sodden, and flesh and
fyshe powdered, is than better than in somer. Herbs be not than commendable,
specially raw, neither fruits, except quynces roasted or baked: drink should
be than taken in a little quantity. More over wynes shall need no water or
very little, and that to coleryke persons: red wines, and they, which be
thycke and sweet, may be tha^ most surely taken of them, which have none
opilations, or the stone. Always remember, that in winter fleume increases by
reason of rain and moystnes of that season, also the length of nights and
much rest. And therefore in that time colerike Call. in co^(...)ns. in a pho. 2.
li. 3
persons, ar best at ease, semblably ar young men, but to old men winter is
enemy. It begins the.viii. day of November, and endures until the.viii.
day of February.

The spring time does participate the first part with winter, the later
part with summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, than shall the
Hippocrates de natura humana.
diete be according to winter. If the end be hot, than shall the diete be of
summer. If both partis be temperate, tha^ should there be also a tempera^ce in
diete: always consyderinge, that fleume yet remains, and blood than
increases. And meat would be less in quantity thanne in winter, and drink
somewhat more. Spring time begins the.viii. day of February, and continues
until the.viii. day of May.

In Summer the inward heat is but little, and Gal. com. in aphor. 18. li. 1.
the stomach does not digest so strongly nor quikly, as in winter. Wherefore in
that season, eating often, and a little at ones, is most conueniente. And
Damascenus says, that fasting in summer dries the body, makes the color
salowe, ingendreth Hipocrates de humoribus.
melancolye, and hurts the sight. also boiled meat, bread steped in white
brothe, with sodden lettyse, or cykorie, ar than good to be used. also variety
in meats, but not at one meal, potages made with cold herbs, drink in more
abundance, wine alayde with water, to hot complexions much, to cold natures
less. In this Galen. in commen. in aphor.
season bloudde increases, and toward the end thereof, coler. And therefore
they, which be cold of nature and moist, are than best at ease, hot natures
and dry warste. Moreover childerne, and very young men in the beginning of
summer, ar holest, old folk in the latter end, and in harvest. somer
begins the.viii. day of May, and continues until the.viii. day of August.

Autumn begins the.viii. day of August, and ends the.viii. day of
November, that season of the year is variable, and the air changeable, by
occasion whereof, happen sundry syckenesses, and blood decreaseth, and melancoly
abounds: Wherefore all summer fruits would than be eschewed, forasmoche as
they make ill juice and wyndes in the body. In this time meat would be more
abundant than in summer, but somewhat drier: drink must be less in
quantity, but less myxt with water. This time is dangerous to all ages, al
natures, and in all countries, but the natures hot and moist, be lest
indamaged.

Diete concerning sondrye times of the year, written by the old physician
Diocles to king Antigonus.
FRom the.xii. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest,
until the ninth day of March, which do conteyne.lxxxx. days, reumes and
moystures do increase, than meats and drinks naturally very hot, would be
moderatly used. Also to drink wine abundantly without alaye or with little
water, and to use lybecally the company of a woman, is not unwholesome to the body.

From the nynthe day of March, at which time is aequin^ctium uernum, unto
the.xxv. day of Apryll, sweet fleume and blood do increase, therefore use than
things having much juice and sharp exercise the body dilygently, than may
ye use safely the company of a woman.

From the.xxv. day of Apryll, to the.xiiii. day of June, Choler increases,
than use all things that are sweet, and do make the bealy soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the.xiiii. day of June, at which time the day is at the le^gest, unto
the.xii. day of September, does melancoly reign, forbear lechery, or use it
moderatelye.

From the.xii. day of September, unto the xvii. day of October, do abound
fleume and thynne humors, than would all fluxes and distillations be
prohibited, than all sharp meats and drynkes, and of good juice, are to be
used, and lechery eschewed.

From the.xvii. day of October, to the.xii. day of December, increases gross
fleume, use therefore all bitter meats, sweet wynes, fat meat, and much
exercise.

Of ages. Cap. xxv.
Children would be noryshed with meats and Galen. de tuen. sani. lib. prim.
Children.
drynkes, which are moderately hot and moist, not withstanding Galene
does prohibit the use of wine, because it moysteth and heteth to much the
body, and fylleth the heedes of them, which are hot and moist, with vapors.
also he permytteth them in hot wether to drink clear water of the fountain.

A child growing fast in his members toward a man, so that he seems well
fed in the Oribasius de uirtute simp. li. 1.
body, is than to be feared of fullness of humors, and if it be perceived, that
he is replete, tha^ must be withdrawn and minyshed some part of that
nutriment, and according unto his age, some euacuation would be devised,
otherwhile by exercise, walking up and down fasting, and before that they
eat any meat, let them exercise them selfs with their own labors, and do
their accustomed busynes, and eat the meats, whereunto they be most used, so
that it be such, that may not hurt them. And this need they not to know of
physicians, but by experience and diligent search by their stool, their
nourices shall perceive what digesteth well, and what does not.

But if it appear, that by excessive fedyng, the bealy of the child is fuller
and greatter than it was wont to be, and that which passes by the bealy, is
corrupted, or his sweat stynketh. These things known, if they eat strong
meats, give them not one kind of meat, but diverse, that the novelty of the
meat may help, that they may go more easily to the stool. For if any have
an unreasonable appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be pourged by a boil
or impostume commen forth and broken, before that the meat be corrupted: and
after that let him eat fine meats, and being ones hole, return by little
and little to his old custom.

Young men, exceeding the age of.xiiii. years, Young me^
shall eat meats more gross of substance, colder and moyster: also salades
of cold herbs, and to drink seldom wine, except it be alayd with water.
Albeit all these things must be tempred, according to their complexions, and
exercise and quietness in living, whereof ye shall read in their proper places
hereafter.

Old men, in whom natural heat and strength Old men.
seems to decay, should use always meats, which are of quality hot and
moist, and therewith all easy to be digested, and absteyne utterly from all
meats and drynkes, which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from
wine, which is thycke, sweet, and dark red wines, and rather use them, which
will make thynne humors, and will purge well the blood by urine: therefore white
or yelow wynes, and perchance french claret wines ar for them very
commendable. Also wine prepared Paulus Egineta. li. (...) cap. 23.
with pure honey clarified, wherein roots of persely or fenel be stieped,
specially if they suspect any thing of the stone, or gout. And if they more
desire to cleanse their raynes and bladder: than is it good to use small white
wine, as racked renishe wine, or other like to it, and sometime to stepe over
night therein a persely rote slyt, and somewhat bruised, and a little lykorice.
Finally, let them beware Op^^atio^s what they are.
of all meats, that will stop the pores, and make obstructions or
oppilations, that is to say, with clammy matter stop the places, where the
natural humors are wrought and digested, the which meats I have before set
in a table. But if it charmce them to eat any such meat in abundance, let
them take shortly such things, as do ^e^y^^e opp^lations, or resolve them.
As white pepper bruised and mixed with thetr meats or drink: garlyke also, or
onions, if they abhor them not. Always remember, that aged men should eat
often, and but little at every time, for it fares by them, as it does by a
lamp, which is almost extincte, which by pouring in of oil little and litel
is long kept bournynge: and with much oil poured in at ones, it is clean put
out. Also they must forbear all things, which do engender melancoly, whereof ye
shall read in the table before: and breadde clean without leven is to them
unwholesome.

Moderation in ^iete, having respect to the strength or weakness of the
person. C^p. xxvi.
Now here it must be co^sid^ed, that although I have written a general diet
for every age, yet nethelesse it must be remembered, that sum children and
young men, either by debilitie of nature, or by some accidental cause, as
syckenes, or much study, happen to gather humors fleumatik or melancoly in
the places of digestion, so that concoction or digestion is as weke in them, as
in those, which ate aged. Semblablye, some old men find nature so
beneficial unto them, that their stomakes and lyuers are more strong to
dygeste, than the said young men, sum perchance have much coler remaynyng
in them. In these cases the said young men must use the diete of old men, or
nygh unto it, vn^yll the discrasy be removed, having always respect to their
universal complexions, as they, which a^ naturally colerike, to use hot
things in a more temperance than they, which be fleumatyke, or melancoly by
nature. The same observation shall Hippocra. aphor. Galen. in comment.
be to old men, saving that age, of his own property is cold and dry,
therefore the old man, that is cholerycke, shall have more regard to moisture
in meats, than the young man, being of the same complexyon. Foresene always,
that where nature is offended or grieved, she is curyd by that, which is
contrary to that, which offends or greueth, as cold by heat, heat by
cold, drythe by moisture, moisture by drythe. In that whereby Nature should be
nourysshed, in a hole and temperate body, things must be taken, which are
like to the man's nature in quality and degree. As where one has his body
in a good temper, things of the same temperaunce does nouryshe him. But where
he is out of temper, in heat, cold, moisture, or drythe, temperate meats or
drynkes, nothing do profit him. For being out of the mean and perfytte
temperature, nature requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembrynge
not oonely, that contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in
every contrary, consideration be had of the proporcion in quantity.

Times in the day concerning meals. Cap. xxvii.
Besides the times of the year and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinkyng to be remembered, as the sundry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in number and distance, according to the temperature of the
country and person: As where the country is cold, and the person lusty, and
of a strong nature, there may mo meals be used, or the less distaunce of
time between the^. Contrary wise in contrary contrais and personages, the cause
is before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diete of the times of the year,
not withstandyng here must be also consideration of exercise and rest, which do
augment or appaire the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be more declared
hereafter in the chapter of exercise. But concerning the general usage of
countries, and admitting the bodies to be in perfect state of health, I
suppose, that in England, young men, until they come to the age of.xl. years,
may well eat three meals in one day, as at brekefast, dinner, and supper, so
that between brekefast, and diner, be the space of four hours at the lest,
between diner and supper.vi. hours, and the brekefast less than the dinner,
and the dinner moderate, that is to say, less than sacietie or fullness of
bealy, and the drink there unto mesurable, according to the dryness or
moystnes of the meat. For much abundance of drink at meal, drowneth the
meat eaten, and not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but
also causes it to pass faster than nature requires, and therefore ingendreth
much fleume, and consequently reumes, and crudenes in the veins, debilitie
and slyppernes of the stomach, contynuall flux, and many other inconveniences
to the body and members.

But to return to meals, I think breakefastes (...)
necessary in this realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as also
forasmoch as coler being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities unto
the brain, and causes heed ache, and sometime becomes aduste, and
smouldreth in the stomach, whereby happens peryllous syckenes, and sometime
sudden death, if the heat enclosed in the stomach have not other conueniente
matter to work on: this daily experience proves, and naturalle reason
confirms. Therefore men and women not aged, having their stomachs clean
without put^ified matter* slepyng moderately and soundly in the night, and
felyng them self light in the morning, and sweet brethed, let them on goddis
name break their fast: Cole^ike men with gross meat, men of other
complexio^s with lyghter meat. Foreseen, that they labor some what before:
semblably their diner and supper as I have before written, so that they sleep
not incontinent after their meals. And here I will not recyte the sentences of
authors, which had never experience of English men's natures, or of the just
temperature of this realm of England, only this counsel of Hipoctates
shall be sufficient. We ought to grant some what to Hipoc. ^phor. 18. lib. 1.
Galen. de ^uen. sani.
time, to age, and to custom: not withstanding where great weariness or drith,
greueth the body, there ought the dinner to be the less, and the longer
distance between dinner and supper* also much rest, except a little soft
walking, that by an upright mouynge, the meat being styred, may descend.
This is always to be remembered, that where one feleth him self full, and grieved
with his diner, or the sauoure of his meat by eructation ascends, or that
his stomach is weke by late syknes or much study, tha^ is it most convenient,
to absteyne from supper, and rather provoke him self to sleep much, than to
eat or drink any thing* also to drink between meals, is not laudable,
except very great thirste constrayneth, for it inter^upteth the office of the
stomach in concoction, and causes the meat to pass faster tha^ it should do,
and the drink being cold, it rebukes natural heat that is workyng, and the
meat remainyng raw, it corrupts digestion, and makes crudenes in the
veins. Wherefore he yt is thirsty, let him consider the occasion. If it be of
salt fleme, let him walk fair and softly, and only wash his mouth and his
throat, with barley water, or with small ale, or lie down and sleep a littel,
and so the thirst will pass away, or at the least be well assuaged. If it happen
by extreme heat of the air, or by pure coler, or eating of hot spices, let
him drink a little ^ulep made with clean water and sugar, or a litel small
biere or ale, so that he drink not a great glut, but in a little quantite, let
it still down softly into his stomak, as he sits, and than let him not move
suddenly. If the thirst be in the euenyng, by eatinge to much, and drinking of
wine, than after the opinion of the best learned physicians, and as I my self
have often experienced, the best remedy is, if there be no fever, to drink a
good draught of cold water immediately, orels if it be not p^ynefull for him, to
vomit, to provoke him thereto with a little warm water, and after to wash his
mouth with vi neger and water, and so to sleep long and sou^dly, if he can. And
if he in the morning he feel any fumosit^es risynge, than to drink iulep of
violettes, or for lack thereof, a good draught of very small ^le or biere,
some what warmed, without eating any thing after it.

Of diversity of meats, whereby health is appayred. Cap. xxviii.
Now let this be a general rule, that sundry meats, being diverse in
substance and quality, eaten at one meal, is the greattest enmy to health,
that may be, and that which ingendreth most syknesses* for some meats being
gross, and hard to digest, some fine and easy to digest, do require diverse
operations of Nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heat, and temperate heat, which may uat be together at oone time*
therefore when the fine meat is sufficientelye boiled in the stomach, the
gr^sse meat is raw, so both i^yces, the one good and perfect, the other
gross and crude, at one time digested, and sent into the veins and body,
needs must health decay, and sycknesses be engendered. Like wise in diverse
meats being diverse qualities, as where some are hot and moist, some cold and
moiste, some hot and dry, some cold and dry, according there unto shall the
juice be diverse, which they make in the body. And like as between the said
qualities is contrariety, so the^^y shall be in the body an unequal
temperature, forasmoche as it is not possible for man to esteem so just a
proporcion of the qualites of that which he receives, that the one shall not
excede the other in quantity Wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must
ensue cortuption, and consequently syknes. And therefore to a hole man it were
better, to feed at one meal competentely on very gross meat only, so that it
be sweet, and his nature do not abhor^e it, than on diverse fine meats, of son
dry substance and qualities. I have known and seen old men and old women,
which eating only biefe, bakon, chese, or curdes, have continued in good
health, whom I have proved, that when they have eaten sondrye fine meats at
one meal, have soon after felt them self grieved with frettynges and heed
ache, and after that they have been hole again, there has been given to them
one kind of light meat, they have done as well therewith, as they were wont to
do with gross meats, when they eat it alone which proves to be true that
which I have rehearsed. And it is good reason* for after the general opinion of
philosophers and physicians, the nature of mankind is best content with
things most simple and vnmyxt, all things tendynge to unity, wherein is the
only perfection. Also it is a general rule of phisyke, that where a sycknesse
may be cured with symples, that is to say, with one only thing that is
medycinable, there should the physician give no compounde medicine myxt with
many things. These things considered, it may seem to all men, that have
reason, what abuse is here in this realm in the continual gourmandise, and
daily fedyng on sundry meats, at one meal, the spirit of gluttony,
triumphynge (...).
among us in his glorious chariotte, called welfare, driuynge us a fore him,
as his prisoners, into his dungeon of surfeit, where we are tourmented with
catarres, fevers, goutes, pluresies, frettyng of the guts, and many other
syckenesses, and finally cruelly put to death by them, oftentimes in youth, or
in the most pleasant time of our life, when we would most gladly live. For the
remedy whereof, how many times have there ben devised, ordynaunces and acts of
counsel, al though perchance bodily health was not the chief occasion thereof,
but rather provision against vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people.
For the nobility was exempted and had liberty to abide still in the dongeon,
if they would, and to live less while than other men: But wha^, where, and how
long were the said good devises put in due execution, for all that thereof
should succeed double profit, that is to say, health of body and increase of
substance, by eschewing of superfluous expenses in sundry dishes? Alas how
long will men fantasy laws and good ordinances, and never determine them.
Fantasy proceeds of wit determination of wisdom, wit is in the devising
and spekyng, but wisdom is in the performance, which rests only in
execution. Here I had almost forgotten, y^ my purpose was to write of the order
of diete, and not of laws, but the fervent love that I have to the public
weal of my country, constrained me to digress somewhat from my matter: but
now will I proceed forth to write of order, which in taking of meats and
drinks, is not the least part of diete.

Of Order in receyuynge of meat and drink. Capit. xxix.
Herbs as well sodden as vnsodden, also fruits, which do mollify and louse
the bealye, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that sometime for
the repressynge of fumosities, rysyng in the heed by much drinking of wine,
raw lettyse, or a cold appul, or the juice of oren ges or lymons may be
taken after meals in a little quantity. Moreover all brothes, milk, rere
eggs, and meats, which are purposely taken to make the belly soluble, would be
first eaten. All fruits and other meats, that are stiptike or byndynge, would
be eaten last of all other. Fruits co^fectionate specially with honey at not to
be eaten with other meats. But here it is to be diligently noted, that where
the stomach is colericke and strong, gross meats would be first eaten:
where the stomach is cold or weak, there would fine meats be first eaten.
for in a hot stomak fine meats ar bourned, while the gross meat is
digestyng. Contrary wise in a cold stomach, the litell heat is suffocate with
gross meat, and the fine meat left raw, for lack of concoction, where if
the fine meat be first taken moderately, it styreth up and comfort natural
heat, and makes it more able to concoct gross meats, if they be eaten
afterward: so that it be but in small qua^tite. not withstanding, as I late
affirmed, one ma ner of meat is most sure to every complexion. forsene that it
be always most commonly in conformity of qualites, with the person that eats.
More over take heed, that slypper meats be not first eaten, lest it draw with
it to hastily other meats, or they be digested, nor that stiptik or
restrainyng meats be taken at the beginnynge, as quinces, pears, and medlars,
lest they may let other meats, that they descend not into the bottom of the
stomach, where they should be digested, not withstanding the confection made
with the juice of quinces called Dacytonites, taken.ii. hours before diner or
supper, is commended of Galene, and other, for restoring appetite, and making
good co^coction. Also concerning drink at meals, it would not be before that
somewhat were eaten. And at the begin nyng, the drink would be strongest, and so
toward the end more small, if it be ale or biere and if it be wine, more and
more alayde with water. And after the better opinion of physicians, the drink
would rather be myxte with the meat by sondrye little draughtes, than with
one great draughte at the end of the meal, for the myxture tempreth well the
meat without anoya^ce: a great draught with much drink, drowneth the meat,
rebukes natural heat, that than works in concoction, and with his weight
dryueth down the meat to hastily. Note wines and sweet, or confectioned with
spices, or very strong ale or bear, are not convenient at meals, for the
meat is by them rather corrupted, than digested, and they make hot and
stynkynge vapors ascend up to the brains, all be it if the stomach be very
wyndy, or so cold and feeble, that it can not concocte such a quantity of
meat, as is required to the sufficient nourish me^t of the body of him that
eats, or has eaten raw herbs or fruits, whereby he feleth some annoyance,
than may he drink last incontinent after his meal a little quantity of
secke, or good aqua vite in small ale: but if he have much coler in his
stomach, or a heed full of vapors, it were much better, that he did neither
drink the one, nor the other, but rather eat a little colyander sede
prepared, or a piece of a quynce roasted, or in marmelade, and after rest, to
amend the lack of nature with sleep, moderate exercise, and plasters provided
for comfortynge of the stomach. And here will I leave to write any more of the
diete in eating and drinkyng, saving that I would, that the reders should have
in remembrance these two counsels. First, that to a hole man, to precise a
rule is not convenient in diet: and that the diseases, which do happen by to
much abstinence, ar wars to be cured, than they which come by repletion. And
as Cornelius Celsus says, A man that Cor. Cel. lib. 1. ca. 1.
is hole and well at ease, and is at his liberty, ought not to bind him self
to rules, or need a physician: but yet where the stomach is feeble, as is of
the Ide^ cap. 2.
more part of citesyns, and well nygh all they that be studyous in learning or
weyghtye affairs, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meat may be
such, as that either in quality or quantity, nature being but feeble, be not
rebuked, or to much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. Cap. xxx.
THe commodity of moderate sleep appears by this, that natural heat, which
is occupied about the matter, whereof proceeds norishment, is comforted in the
places of digestion, and so digestio^ is made better, or more perfect by sleep,
the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear, the humors temperate: as by
much watch all things happen contrary. The moderation of sleep must be
measured by health and syckenes, by age, by time, by emptynesse or fullness of
the body, and by natural complexions. First to a hole man having no debilitie
of nature, and digesting perfitly the meat that he eats, a little sleep is
sufficient: but to them, which have weak stomakis, and do digest slowly, it
requires that sleep be much lengar. semblable te^perance is required in youth
and age, winter and summer. The body being full of ill humors, very little
sleep is sufficient, except the humors be crude or raw, for tha^ is sleep
necessary, which digesteth them better than labor. Semblably, where the body
is long empty, by long syknesse or abstinence, sleep comfort nature, as
well in the principal members, as in all the other. Also regard must be had
to the com plexion, for they that are hot, and do eat little, and digest
quickly, a little sleep serves, specially to colerike persons, for in them
much sleep augmenteth heat, more than is necessary, whereby hot fumes and
inflammations ar often engendered, and some time the natural coler is aduste or
putrified, as experience teaches. Fleumatike persons are naturally inclined to
sleep: and because they engender much humors, they require more sleep than
sanguine or colerike. Persons having natural melancoly, not proceeding of
coler aduste, do require very much sleep, which in them comfort the powers
animal, vital, and natural, which ye may find written in the tables
preceding. Sleep would be taken not immediately after meals, and be fore that
the meat is descended from the mouth of the stomach. For thereby is engendered
peines and noise in the belly, and digestio^ corrupted, and the sleep by ill
vapors asccding, made unquiet and troublous. Moreover immoderate sleep makes
the body apt unto palseis, apoplexis, falling siknes, reumes, and impostumes,
also it makes the wits dulle, and the body slow and unapt to honest
exercise. semblably imoderate watch dries to much the body, and does
debilitate the powers animal, lets digestion, and makes the body apt to
consu^ptio^s, where fore in these.ii. thiges, as well as al other, a dilligent
te^perance is to be used. the moderation is best co^iected (for it is hard
perfitly to know it) by the sen sible lightness of all the body, specially of the
brain the brows and the eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach,
the will to make urine, and to go to the stool. Contrariwise, heaviness in the
body and eyes, and savor of the meat before eaten signifies that the sleep
was not sufficient. They that are hole must sleep first on the right side,
because the meat may approach to the liver, which is to the stomach, as fire
under the pot, and by him is digested. To them, which have feeble digestio^, it
is good to sleep prostrate on their bealies, or to have their bare hand on
their stomakes. Lienge upright on the back is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it should be used. Cap. xxxi.
EVery meuynge is not an exercise, but only ye which is vehement, thend whereof
is alteration of the breath or wind of a man. Of exercise do proceed two
commodities, euacuation of excrementes, and also good habit of the body, for
Exercise being a vehement motion, thereof needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labor shall the less grieve, and the body be the more strong
to labor. also thereof comes augmentation of heat, whereby happens the more
attraction of things to be digested, also more quick alteration, and better
nouryshynge. More over, that all and syngular parts of the body, be therewith
somewhat humected, whereby it happens, that things hard be mollified, moist
things are extenuate, and the poores of the body are more opened. And by the
vyolence of the breathe or wind, the poores are cleansed, and the fylthe in the
body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the preservation of
health, that without it, no man may be long without syckenesse, Cor. Cel. lib.
1.
which is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus, saying, that sluggyshenes dulleth the
body, labor does strength it, the first brings the incommodities of age
shortly, the last makes a man long time lusty. Not withstanding in exercise
ought to be four things dilygentely considered, that is to say, the time, the
things precedynge, the qualytie and the quantity of exercise.

First as concerning the time convenient for exercise, that it be not wha^
there is in the stomach or bowels, greatte quantity of meat not sufficiently
digested, or of humors crude or raw, lest thereby peril moughte ensue by
conueyaunce of them into all the members, before those meats or humors be
concoct or boiled sufficiently. Galen Galen. de ruen. sani. lib. 2.
says, that the time most convenient for exercise is, when both the first
and second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins, and
that the time approaches to eat eftsoon. For if ye do exercise sooner or
later, ye shall either fill the body with crude humors, or else augment
yelowe coler. The knowledge of this time is perceived by the color of the
urine, for that which resembles unto clear water, betokenethe, that thiuyce,
which comes from the stomach, is crude in the veins: that which is well
colored, not to high or base, betokens, that the second dygestio^ is now
perfect: where the color is very high or read, it sygnyfyeth, that the
concoction is more than sufficient. Wherefore when the urine appears in a
temperate color, not red nor pale, but as it were gilt, tha^ should exercise
have his beginning.

Of fricasies or rubbynges precedyng exercise. Cap. xxxii.
AS touching things preceding exercise, for as much as it is to be fered, lest
by vehement Galenus. Paulus. Oribasius Aerius.
exercise any of the excreme^tes of the belly or bladder, should hastily be
received into the habit of the body, by the violence of hete, kendlyd by
exercise: also lest some thing, which is hole, be by heaviness of excrementes, or
vyolent mocion, broken or pullyd out of his place, or that the excrementes, by
violence of the breath, should stop the pores or cundites of the body, it shall be
necessary little and little, by chasyng the body, first to mollify the parts
consolidate, and to extenuate or make thin the humors, and to louse and open
the poores, and than shall ensue to him that exercises, no peril of
obstruction or rupture. And to bring that to pass, it shall be expedient,
after that the body is cleansed, to rub the body with a course lynnen cloth,
first softly and easily, and after to increase more and more, to a hard and
swift rubbing, until the flesh do swelle, and be somewhat ruddy, and that not
only down right, but also ouerth wart and round. Some do use fricasyes in this
form. In the morning, after that they have been at the stool, with their
shirte sleue or bare hand, if their flesh be tender, they do first softly,
and afterward faster, rub their breaste, and sides downewarde, and ouerthwarte,
not touching their stomach or bealy, and after cause their servant semblably to
rub overthwart their shulders and back, beginning at the neckebone, and not
touching the raynes of their back, except they do feel there much cold and
wind, and afterward their legs from the knees to the ancle: last their
arms, from the clbowe to the handewreste. And in this form of fricasy, I my
self have founden an excellent commodity. Old men, or they, which be very
dry in their bodies, if they put to some sweet oils, as Yrinum, Nardinum,
Cham^melinum, or other like, myrt with a little sweet oil of roses, I suppose
they do well. I will not here speak of oyntmentes used in old time among the
Romans and Greeks, in fricasies or rubbynges. For I suppose, y^ they were
never here used. and in the said places, they be also left, onles it be in
palseys, or apoplexies, or against the rigor, which happens infeuers, only I
will remember the saying of Hipocrates, Fricasye has power to louse, to bynd,
to increase flesh, and to minyshe it. For hard fricasies do bind or
consolydate, soft rubbing does lowse or mollify, much does minishe flesh,
mean rubbyng does augment or increase it. He that will know more abundantly
hereof, let him read the book of Galen of the preservation of health, callid in
latin De tuenda sanitate, translated most truly and eloquently, out of Greek
into latin, by doctor Linacre, late physician of most worthy memory to our
sovereign lord king Henry the eight. The same mattier is written more brefely
of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius, and some other late writers, but unto
Galene not to be compared.

The diversities of exercises. Cap. xxxiii.
THe quality of exercise is the diversity thereof, forasmoche as therein be
many differences in mouynge, and also some exercise moves more one part of the
body, some an other. In difference of mouynge, some is slow or soft, some is
swifte or fast: some is strong or violent, some be mixed with strength and
swiftness. Strong or violente exercises be these, deluynge (specially in
toughe clay and heavy, bearing or susteynynge of heuye burdeyns, clymmyng or
walkyng against a stipe upright hill: holdyng a rope, and clymmyng up thereby,
hangyng by the hands on any thing, above a man's reach, that his fete touch
not the ground: standing and holdyng up, or spreding the arms, with the
hands fast closed, and abiding so a long time. Also to hold the arms
steadfast, causyng an other man, to assay, to pull them out, and not
withstanding he keeps his arm steadfast, enforcing there unto the sinews and
muscules. Wrastlyng also with the arms and legs, if the persons be equal in
strength, it does exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger, than
is it to the weaker a more violent exercise.

Al these kinds of exercises, and other like them, do augment strength, and
therefore they serve only for young men, which be inclined, or be apt to the
wars. Swifte exercise without violence is, runnyng, playeng with weapons,
tenise, or throwyng of the ball, trotting a space of ground forward and
backward, going on the toes, and holdyng up the hands. Also stirring up and
down his arms, without plummettes. Vehement exercise is compounde of violent
exercise and swifte, when they are joined together at one time, as dansyng of
galyardes, throwyng of the balle, and runnyng after it. footeball play may be
in the number thereof, throwyng of the long dart, and continuing it many times,
runnyng in harneys, and other like. The moderate exercise is long walking or
going a iourneye. The parts of the body have sundry exercises appropried unto
them, as rounning and going is the most proper for the leggis. Mouyng of the
arms up and down, or stretching them out, and playeng with weapons, serves
most for the arms and shulders, stouping and risyng often time, or liftyng
great weightes, taking up plummettes or other like poyses on the ends of
staves, and in like wise, liftyng up in every hand a spear or moryspike by
the ends, specially crossing the hands, and to lay them down ageyn in their
places, these do exercise the back and loins. Of the bulk and lunges the
proper exercise is meuing of the breath in syngyng or crieng. The entrayles,
which be underneath the myddreste, be exercised by blowyng, either by
constraint, or playeng on shaulmes, or sackbottes, or other like instruments,
which do require much wind. The muscules at best exercised with holdyng the
breath in, a long time, so that he, which does exercise, has well digested
his meat, and is not troubled with much wind in his body. Fynallye loud
Celsus. 1.
reading, counterfayte battle, tenyse, or throwyng the ball, runnyng,
walking, add to shotyng, which in mine opinyon excede all the other, do
exercise the body commodiousely. Always remember, that the end of violent
exercise, is difficulty in fetching of the breath. Of moderate exercise,
alteration of breath only, or the beginning of sweat. More over in winter,
runnynge, and wrastlyng is convenient. In summer wrastlynge alytell, but not
running. In very cold wether, much walking, in hot wether, rest is more
expedient. They which seem to have moist bodies, and live in idelnes, they have
need of violent exercise. They which are lean and colerike, must walk softly,
and exercise them selfs very temperatly. The plummettes, callid of Galen
Alteres, which are now much used with great men, being of equal weight, and
according to the strength of him that exercises, are very good to be used
fasting, a litell before breakefast or dinner, holdinge in every hand one
plu^met, and lifting them on high, and bringing them down with much violence,
and so he may make the exercise violent, or moderate, after the poyse of the
plummettes, heuyer or lyghter, and with much or little labouryng with them.

Of Gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
meued, and not of himself. Cap. xxxiiii.
THere is also an another kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
mixed with mo Paulus Egineta. Aerius.
uyng and rest. For as much as the body, syttyng or lyenge, seems to rest,
and not withstandyng it is meued by that, which bears it, as lienge in a
bed, hangyng by cords or chains, or in a cradell, sytting in a chair,
which is carried on men's shulders with slaves, as was the use of the ancient
Romans, or syttinge in a boot or barge, which is rowed, rydyng on a horse,
which ambleth very easily, or gothe a very soft pace. The bed, cradel, and
chair carried, serves for them, y^ ar in long and continual siknes, or be
lately recovered of a fever. Also them, which have the fransy or letharge, or
have a light terciane fever, or a cotidiane. This exercise swetely asswageth
troubles of the mind, and provoke sleep, as it appears in chylderne, which
are rocked. Also it is convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stone,
or the gowte. Gestation in a charyot or wagon has in it a shaking of the body,
but some vehement, and some more soft. the soft serves in diseases of the
head, and where any matter runs down into the stomach and entrayles. But
the vehement shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and stomach.
Also in swelling of the body and legs in dropsies, palseys, mygrimes, and
scotomies, which is an imagination of darkness, being returned, at the end
of his journey, he must sytte up, and be easily moved. I have known, says
Aetius, many persons in such wise cured without any other help. Navigations
or rowyng nigh to the land, in a calm water, is expedient for them that have
dropsies, lepries, palseyes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and
fransies. To be carried on a roughe water, it is a violent exercise, and
induces sondrye affections of the mind, sommtyme fear, sometime hope, now
cowarde heart, now hardynesse, one while pleasure, an other while dyspleasute.
These exercises, if they be well tempred, they may put out of the body, all
long during syckenesses. For that which is myxte with rest and meuyng, if
any thing else may, it most excellently causes the body to be well nourished.
Celsus does prohibit gestation, where the body feels pain, and in the
beginning of fevers, but Celsus. 2.
when they cease, he aloweth it. Riding moderately, and without grefe, it
does corroborate the spirit and body above other exercises, specially the
stomach, it cleanses the senses, and makes them more quycke: albeit to the
breast, it is very noyfull. It ought to be remembered, that as well this, as
all other kinds of exercise, would be used in a hole countraye, and where the
air is pure and uncorrupted. Foresene, that he that woll exercise, do go first
to the stool, for the causes rehearsed in the last chapter.

Of vociferation. Cap. xxxv.
THe chief exercise of the breast and instruments of the voice is vociferation,
which is singing, redyng, or crienge, whereof is the property, that it
purges natural heat, and makes it also subtle and stable, and makes the
members of the body substancial and strong, resisting diseases. This exercise
would be used of persons short winded, and them, which can not fetch their
brethe, but holdyng their neck straight upright. Also of them, whose flesh is
consumed, specially about the breast and shulders. Also which have had
apostumes broken in their breasts: moreover of them that are hoorse by to much
moisture. and to them, which have quarteyn fevers, it is conueniente, it
louseth the humor, that stycketh in the breast, and dries up the moystnes of
the stomach, which properly the course of the quarten is wont to bring with
him, it also profits them, which have feeble stomakes, or do vomit
continually, or do break up sowrenes out of the stomach. it is good also for
griefs of the heed. He that intends to attempt this exercise, after that he
has been at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and washed his
hands. Let him speak with as base a voice as he can, and walking, begin to
sing louder and louder, but still in a base voice, and to take no head of
sweet tunes or armonye. For that nothing does profit unto health of the body.
but to enforce him self to sing great, for thereby much air drawn in by
fetching of breath, thrusts forth the breast and stomach, and opens and
inlargeth the poores. By high crieng and loud redyng are expelled superfluous
humors. Therefore men and women, having their bodies feeble, and their flesh
louse, and not firm, must read oftentimes loud, and in a base voice,
extendyng out the wynd pipe, and other passages of the brethe. But not
withsta^dyng this exercise is not used always, and of all persons. For they, in
whom is abundance of humors corrupted, or be much diseased with cruditie in
the stomach and veins, those do I counsel, to absteyn from the exercise of
the voice, left much corrupted juice or vapors, may thereby be into all the body
distributed. And here I conclude to speak of exercise, which of them, that
desire to ^emayn long in health, is most di^igently, and as I might say, most
scrupulously to be observed.

THE THIRD BOOK
Of Replecion. Cap. i.
REPLECION IS A superfluous abundaunce of humors in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say in quantity, and in quality. In quantity,
as where all the four humors are more in abundance, than be equal in
proporcion to the body that conteyneth them, or where one humor much
excedeth the remena^nt in quantity. In qualytie, as where the blood, or other
humor, is hotter or colder, thycker, or thinner, than is convenient unto the
body. First, where all the humors, being superfluousely increased, fylleth
and extends the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and
bowelles, and is most properly called fullness, in greek Plethor^, in latyne
Ple^it^do. The other is, where the body is infa^ced, either with coler, yelow
or black, or with fleume, or with watery humors, and is properly callid in
greek Cacochymia, in latin Viciosus succus, in english it may be called
corrupt juice. I will not here write, the subtle and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galene in his books de Plenitudine, and in his commentaries
upon the aphorisms of Hipocrates. For it shall here suffice, to show the
operations of replecion good or ill, remytting them, which be curious, and
desire a more ample declaration, to the most excellent warkes of Galene, Aph.
li. 2.
where he may be satisfied, if he be not determined to repugue against reason.
Hipocrates says, Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter natural plusing est* est hic
morb^ facit. Galen. in comment. loco praedicto.
where meat is received much above nature, that makes syckenesse. Galene
declaryng that place says, More meat than accords with natures measure, is
named Replecion. And afterward he expounds that word above nature, to
sygnyfye to much and superfluously, as who says, where the meat is
superfluousely taken, it makes syckenesse. For meat but a little excedyng
temperance, may not forthwith make syckenes, but may yet keep the body within
the latitude or bounds of health, for the meat that shall make syckenesse,
must not a little excede the exquisite measure. The incommmoditie, which
happens thereby is, that moystnesse is to much extended, and natural heat is
debilitate. Also naturalle heat, resolves sommewhat of the superfluouse meat
and drink. And of that, which is re^olued of meat vndygested, proceeds
fumosytie, gross and vndygested, which ascendyng up into the heed, and
touching the ryme, wherein the bray^e is wrapped, causes head ache, trembling
of the members, ^uskyshnes of the sight, and many other sycknesses: also by the
sharpnes thereof, it prycketh and anoyeth the sinews, which make sensibilttie,
the roots of whom, are in the brain, and from thens passes through all the
body. Fynallye, the said fumositie, engendered of replecion, percynge the
innermooste part of the said synewes, called sensible, it greuousely annoyeth
the power animal, there consistyng, by the occasion whereof, understanding and
reason, as to the use of them, are let and troubled. And also the tongue,
which is reasons exposytour, is deprived of his office, as it appears in
them, which are drunk, and them, which have grievous peynes in their heed,
procedynge of replecion. Signs of replecyon be these, loss of appetite,
delight in nothing, slothfulness, dullness of the Oribasius E^poristo^ lib. 1.
wit, and senses, more sleep, than was accustomed to be, crampes in the
body, stertynge or saltion of the members, fullness of the veins, and
thyckenesse of the poulses, horror or shrouelynge of the body myxt with heat.
The remedies are abstinence, and all euacuations* whereof I will make mention in
the next chapter.

Of Euacuation. Cap. ii.
THe meats and drynkes received into the body, if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestio^ in such wise that
the best part thereof goth to the nouryshement of the body: the warst, being
separate by the members official, from the residue, a^ made excrementes in
sondrye fourmes and substances, which are like in quality to the natural
humor, which than reigns most in the body. These excrementes be none other,
but matter superfluouse and unsavory, which by natural powers may not be
converted into flesh, but remaynyng in the body corrupt the members, and
therefore nature abhorryng them, desires to have the^ expelled. These
excrementes be three in number, Exc^eme^tes. Ordure.
ordure, v^ine, humor superfluous. Moreover, there be two sorts of ordure,
that is to say, one digested, which passes by siege, the other undigested,
which is expellyd by vomyte. Where I Dygested.
say digested. I mean, that it is passed the stomach, and turned into an
another figure. Likewise I call that undigested, which still retayneth the
figure of meat. Urine is the watery substance of the bloudde, like as whay is
of milk, Vri^^.
which out of the meat that is altered and co^cocte or boiled in the stomach,
is strayned in the veins called Mesaraice, which proceeds from the holowe
part of the liver, and sent by the raines into the bladder, passes by the
Instrument, the which is ordained as well to that purpose, as for generation.
Humor superfluous is in.iii. sorts, (...) s^perfluous.
either myxt with any of the four humors, called natural, orels it is
gathered into the brain, or it is between the skyn and the flesh, or lies
among the sinews, muscules, or joints. Of humors, some are more gross and
cold, some are subtyl and hot, and are called vapors. Now for to expel the
said excrementes, are. ix. s^ndry kinds of euacuation, that is to say,
abstinence, vomyte, purgation by siege, lettyng of blood, sca^ifieng called
cupping, sweating, provocation of urine, spittyng, bledyng at the nose, or by
hemoroides: And in women, their natural purgatio^s. Of these euacuations I will
brefely declare, with the commodities, which by the discrete use of them do
happen unto the body.

Of Abstinence. Cap. iii.
ABstinence is a forbearynge to receive any meat or drink. For if it be but
in part, it is than called rather temperance than abstine^ce. It ought to be
used only after replecion, as the proper remedy therefore. And than if it be
moderate, it consumes superfluities, and in consuminge them, it clarifieth the
humors, makes the body Cells. li. 2. Hipoc. apho. li. 7.
fair colored, and not only keeps out sickness, but also where sycknes is
entered, nothing more helps, if it be used in season. To them, which have
very moist bodies, hunger is right expedi^t for it makes them more dry, not
withstanding there ought to be consideratio^s, in the meat before
Co^syderations i^ absti(...)
eaten, in the age of the person, in the time of the year, and in custom. First
in the mete before eaten, if it be much in excess or very gross, or not much
exceeding, or light of digestion, and according thereto, would abstinence more
or less be proporcioned. Concerning age, Hipocrates says, old me^ Apho. li. 1.
may susteyn fasting easily: next unto them, men of myddel age, young men may
wars bear it, childern warst of all, specially they that be lusty: not
withstanding here Galen corrects Hipocrates, Galen. in comment.
saying, that he should have exceptid men very old, who, as experience
declares, must eat often and little. As touching time, it must be remembered,
that in winter and spring time, the stomakes be naturally very hot, and sleep
is long, and therefore in that time meats would be more abundant, and all
though much be eaten, it will be son^^ digested. Wherefore abstinence would not
be tha^ so much as in summer, albeit to absteyn much in summer, except it be
after replecion, Damascene says, it dries Damascenus apho.
the body, it makes the color salowe, it inge^dreth melancoly, and hurts
the sight. Moreover custom may not be forgoten. for they, which are used from
childhode, to eat sundry meals in the day, would rather be reduced to fewer
meals, and litell meat, than to be compelled to absteyn utterly, to the
intent, yt nature, which is made by custom, be not rebuked, and the power
digestive thereby debilitate. And note well, that by to much abstinence, the
moisture of the body is withdrawn and consequently the body dries, and waxes
lean: natural heat, by withdrawyng of moisture, is to much incended, and
not finding humor to warke in, tourneth his vyolence to the radycall or
substanciall moisture of the body, and exhaustynge that humor, brings the
body into a co^sumption. Wherefore Hipocrates says, that to scarce and
exquisite an order in meat and drink, Aph. li. 2.
is for the more patte more dangerous than that, which is more abundant.
Contrary wise moderation in abstinence* according to the said consyderations,
is to health a sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. Cap. iiii.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted in the stomak is best expelled
by vomit, if it be not very grievous to him, which is diseased. Also the
moderate use of it, pourgeth fleume, A^^i*. li. 1.
lights the heed, causes that the excess of meats or drinks, shall not
anoy or bring syckenes. Moreover, it amedeth the affectes of the raines, the
bladder, and the fundement. It also helps against lepries, cankers, goutes,
dropsies, and also diverse syckenesses procedyng of the stomach. For if any
grefe happens of the head, vomit is than vncommodious. It is better in
winter, tha^ in summer. Also good for them, which are replete or very colerike*
if they have not well digested. but it is ill for them that be lean, or have
weak stomakes. And therefore where one feels bitter vapors, risyng out of
his stomach, with grief and weighty^es, in the over parts of his body, let
him run forth with to this remedy. It is also good for him that is heart
burned, and has much spittel, or his stomach wambleth, and for him that
remeueth into sundry places. yet I counsa^le says Celsus, him that will be in
health, and would Cells. li. 1.
not be to soon aged, that he use not this daily. And I my self have known
men, which daily vsyng it, have brought thereby their stomakes into such
custom, that what so ever they did eat, they could not long retayn it,
whereby they shortene their lives. Wherefore it would not be vsid, but only where
great surfeit, or abundance of fleume do require it. He that will vomit after
meat, let him drink sundry drinks myxte together, and last of all, warm
water: or if that be to easy, let him myxt therewith salt or honey. If he will
vomit fasting, let him drink water and honey sodden together, or Isope with
it, or eat of a radyshe root, and drink warm water upon it. also water,
wherein radyshe is boiled, and afterward provoke him self to it. Them, that
will have more violent purgations, I remytte to physicians learned. But yet I do
eftsoon warn them, that there in they be circumspect, and do not much use it.
Moreover in vomites, the matter brought forth, would be considered, according to
the rules of Hipocrates, Hipocra. praesag. 2. cap. 7.
in his second book of pronostications, that is to say, if it be myxt with
fleme and coler, it is most profitable if it be not in very great qua^tite, nor
thick, the less mixture it has, the wars is it. If it be grene, like to leke
blades, thyn or blak, it is to be iuged ill. If it have al colors, it is
extreme perilous. If it be ledy colored, and sauorith horribly, it signifies
a short aboli^ion, or dissolution of nature. For as Galene affirms there in
his commente, such manner of vomit declares corruption with extinctinge of
nature. Also every pu^^ified and stynkynge sauoure in vomit is ill. These
things be right necessary, to be looked Galen. de lo^^s aff^ctis. lib. 1.
for, where one does vomit without any difficulty: but to enforce one to
vomit, which can not, is very odious, and to be abhorted.

Of Purgations by siege. Cap. v.
IF the head be heavy, or the eien dim, or if there be pain felt of the
colyke, or in the lower part Cel^. li. 1. A(...). li. 3.
of the belly, or in the hippes, or some colerike matter or fleume in the
stomach. Also if the breath be hardely fetched, if the bealy of him self
sends forth nothing, or if being costiue, one feleth ill savor or bytternes
in his mouth, or that which he makes, has an horrible savor, or if
abstinence do not, at the first put away the fever, or if the strength of
the body may not sustain lettyng of blood, or else the time therefore convenient
is past, or if one have drunk much before his sycknes, or if he which
oftentimes vnconstrayned, has had great sieges, be suddenly stopped: in all
these cases, and where it is peynfull to vomit, and in gnawyng or frettinges
of the stomach, finally in all replecions, where a man can not or will not be
let bloudde or vomit, it is expedient to provoke siege by purgations, which
are received by two ways: upward at the foundement by suppositories or
clysters. Downward at the mouth, by potions, electuaries, or pylles.
Suppositories at used, where the pacient is weak, and may not ^eceyue any
other purgations. sometime for as much as the strayt gutte is stopped with
excrementes, which are dry and hard: sometime where there needs none other
pourgation, specially in bournyng fevers, whereof the matter ascends in to the
heed, than clisters may do harm, and by the benefit of suppositories,
excrementes at brought forth without any annoya^ce. And oftentimes it brings
forth that, which clysters may not.

Suppositories at made sometime with honey only, sodden, rolled on a bourde, and
made round, smaller at the one end than at the other, and of the length and
greatness, according to the quantity of the body that takes it. Sometime there
is myxte with the honey salt dried, or salt peter, or the powder of such
things, as do either purge the humor, which offe^deth, or dissolueth gross
winds, or other matter: they be sometime made with toseyn, pitche, ware, or
gu^mes, sometime of rotes, or the leaves of mercury grene, very small bruised.
also with figgis or reisons, the stones taken out, or of white soap, made i the
figure aforsaid, and being made in the form aforesaid, they must be put up in
at the fundement, to the great end, and the pacient must keep it there the
space of half an hour or more. Clysters are made of lycour, sometime simple,
as water sodden, mylk, oil, or wine. sometime myxt, as water and oil together,
or decoctions, as where herbs, rotes, fruits, seeds, or gu^mes, having
property to make soft, dissolve, draw forth, or expelle matter that
greueth, be boiled, and the lycour thereof, sometime warm, sometime hot, is
received at the fundement into the body by a little pipe of gold or silver,
yuo^ie or wodde, therefore ordained and called a clyster pipe. This is
necessary, where the stomach is weak, and may not susteyn the warkyng of
medicines received at the mouth. also in fevers, colykes, and other diseases in
the bowels, grief in the raynes of the back or huckle bone, ventosyties in
the bealye, inflammation or exulceration in the guts or bladder. It is a
convenient and sure medicine, and lest hurt does ensue of it. The making and
ordryng thereof* I will omytte to write in this place, partly that I would not,
that physicians should to much note in me presumption, partly that an another
place may be more apt to that purpose.

The particular commodities of every pourgation. Cap. vi.
IN potions, electuaties, and pylles ought to be much more observation, than in
clysters or suppositories, for as much as these do enter no further than into
the gutte, where the ordure lies, and by that plac^ only, brings forth the
matter, which causes disease. But the other entryng in that way, that meats
and drinks do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestion, and afterward is myxte with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expellyng the adversary humou^s, somewhat
thereof doutlesse remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to beware, what
medycines they receive, that in them be no venenositie, malice, or corruption,
lest for the expellyng of a superfluous humor, which perchance good diete, or
some brothes made of good herbs, or the said euacuation, with supposytorie or
clyster, might bring forth a^leysure. by desyryng of to hasty remedy, they
receive in medicine that, which shall engender a venomous humor, and
inevitable destruction unto all the body. And therefore happy is he, which in
sycknes fyndeth a discrete and well learned physician, and so true a poticary,
that has always drowges vncortupted, and whom the physician may surely trust,
to dispece his things truly. But now to return to the said form of
purgation, I will now set forth some counsayles, concerning that matter,
which I have collected out of the chief authors of phisike.

Bodies hot and moist: may easily susteyn purgation by the stool. They,
which be lean or thyn, having the members tender, may take harm by
purgations. To men that at colerike, and them, that eat litell, purgations at
grievous. In yo^ge chyldern and old men, it is dangerous to louse much the
^ealy. To them that at not wont to it, purgation is noyful. He that lives in a
good order of diet, needs neither purgation nor vomit. After that the
purgatio^ has wrought, thirstines and sound ^lepe, be signs that the body is
sufficiently purged. By daily taking of medicines, nature is corrupted. When
ye will pourge any thing, make first the matter flowing and soluble. Medicine
to purge ought not to be mingled with meat, but to be taken fou^e hours at
the least before Hipocra. ^phor.
meals, or three hours after meals, except certain easy pylles made to
cleanse and comfort the stomach, which would be taken at the beginning of
supper, or after supper, a litell before that one goth to bed, making a light
supper or none. After purgation taken, the pacient should rest, and not walk,
until the medicine has wrought, nor eat or drink in the mean space. These
things have I rem^bred, because I have known right good physicians, to have
forgotten, to instruct thereof their pacientes. Now will I set forth the
table of such things, which of their property do digest or purge superfluous
humors particulatly, which I have gathered out of the books of Dioscorides,
Galen, Paulus Egineta, Ori basius, and A^tius, and other late writers. not
withstandyng. I have not written all, for as much as there be diverse things,
whereunto we have not (...) founden any names in english.

Digestiues of Choler.
Endyue. Lettyse. Cykorie. Scabiose. Maydenheate. Malowes. Mercurye. The juice
of pomegranades. Pourselane. Popye. Berberyes. Roses. Violettes, the leaf and
flower. Sorell. Lyuerworte. Sorell de boyse. Whay clarified. The great four
cold seeds, that is to say, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and cittuls.
Psillium, Vinegar. Saunders. Barley water. Prunes. Tamarindes.
Pourgers of Choler.
Wild hoppes. Wormewode. Centorie. Fumitorie. Whay of butter. Violettes.
Mercurye. Juice of roses. Prunes. Eupatorie. Tamarindes half anounce in a
decoction: Manna.vi. drammes at the least, and so to xxv. in the brothe of a
hen or capon. Reubarbaru^ by it self from two drammes, unto four, infused
or stiped in lycour, from.iiii. drammes unto.viii.
Digestiues of fleume.
Fenell. Persely, the rotes. Smallage. Capers. Laurel. Synuy^. Puly. Maioram.
Peny^oyall. Wild parsny^ sede. Mynt. Pympernell. Horemynt. Gladen. Ag^ym^nye.
Calamynt. Nep. Betayne. Sauge. Radyshe. Mugworte. Iunyper. Hysope, P^onye.
Baulme. Honye. ^ynger. Squilla. Ari^tolochia. Cynamome. Pepper. Cumyne.
Purgers of fle^^e.
Centorie. ^ettyll. Agtimonye. Alder. Polypod^u^ of the oak. Myrobalani kebuli,
in fused from half an ounce to an ounce, and.ii. dra^mes. In substance, from
two drammes to half an ounce. Aga^icus from a dra^me to two dra^mes infused,
from.ii. dra^mes to five. Y^eos. Maydenheare. Sticados.
Purgers of mel^^colye.
The brothe of colewortes light boiled. Baulme mynte. Sticados. ^yme. Scene
boiled in white wine or in the brothe of a hen. Lased sauery. Exithimus.
Unwrought sylke. ^rganum. Calamynt. Bourage. Hartis tongue. Quyckbeme.
Maydenheare. With wind. Pulyall mountain. Honye. Sugar.
Melancolye for the thynnesse and subtylnesse of the humor, needs no
digestive.

They which will take sharper purgations, or compound with diverse things, let
them take the counsel of an honest and perfect physician, and not adventure
to myxte things together, with out knowing the temperance of them in degrees,
and that he can proporcion them to the body, that shall receive them in
symples, as they be written. And so he may use them without peril, ageynste the
humors, whereunto they serve.

Lettynge of bloudde. Cap. vi.
THe part of Euacuation by lettyng of blud, is incision or cuttyng of the
vain, whereby the blood, which is cause of syckenes or grefe to the hole body,
or any particular part thereof, does most aptly pass. The commodities whereof,
being A(...)oldus de uilla noua.
in a moderate quantity, and in a due time taken, be these that follow, it
clarifieth the wit, and makes good memory, it cl^s^th the bladder, it dries
the brain, it warmeth the ma^owe, being in the bones, it opens the herynge,
it stops tears or droppynges of the eyes, it takes away lothsomnes, and
confirms the stomak, it norisheth that, which is propre to nature, and the
contrary expels. It is thought, that thereby life is prolonged, and the
matter making syckenesse shortly consumed. Wherefore lettynge of blood
Oribasius su medici nae compendio.
is not only expedient for them, which are full^of blood, or have abundance of
strength, but also for them, in whom, without plenitude, called fulness,
inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some outward stroke, the
blood being gathered within, by collection thereof, do feel grief or disease.
Also where there is much pain felt, or debilitie of some member, whereof is
supposed to be engendered some grievous disease. Moreover they which use excess
of meats and drynkes, may be cured by lettynge of bloudde. But those, which
be temperate, keeping good diete, be helped without lettynge of blood: as by
fricasies, using of bathes, exercise, walking, and tydyng moderately. Also
unctions with oils and oyntementes, called Diaphoreticae, which by
euaporation, do shortly euacuate the fullness. All be it, if the fullness be
of melancolye blood, than always needs must be lettynge of bloudde.
Abundance of melancolye bloudde is known by these signs. There is felt in
the entrayles, or within the bulk of a man or woman, a weyghtynesse with
tension or thrustyng outward. and all that part, which is above the nauel, is
more heavy, than it was wont to be. Also much vain and fatty, the residc^ce or
bottom thycke, troublous, and fat. sometime black poushes or boyles, with
inflammation and much pain. These must be shortly let blood, and the melancoly
humor also purged by siege. They which have crude or raw humors, must be
warely let bloudde, before that syknesse engender, but having the fever, in no
wise. Concerning lettyng Acti. ll. 3
of blood, these things following, would be had in continual remembrance,
and be before thought on. In abundance of the blood, the quality and quantity,
the greatness of the sycknes, and if it be present, or looked for. also the
diete precedynge, the age and strength of the person, the natural form of
his body, the time of the year, the region or country, the present state of
the air the disvse of accustomed exercise, the cessyng of euacuations used
before. In quality consider, of what humor the fullness proceeds. In
quantititie the abundance of that, which is to be purged. In siknes, if it be
dangerous or tolerable: if the siknes be present, it requires the more
diligence: if it be looked for, it may be the better proporcioned. In diet, the
custom in eating and drinking, must be specially noted. In young men and women,
lettyng of blood would be more liberal. In old men and young children, it would
be scarser: strong men may sustain bledyng, they which are feeble, may not
endure it: Large bodies have greater vessels, than they, which be litell.
lean men have more blod, corporate men have more flesh. The time of the Cor.
Celsus li. 3.
year must be specially marked. For in the beginning of spring time is the
best letting of blood, as Dribasius says, and so does continue, after the
opinion of Arnolde, unto the eighte calendes Oriba. su. Arnoldus de uilla noua
de flobothomia. lo. Dama scenus in art med.
of June. Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in a cold country, or where
the person is of a very cold nature, the veins should not be opened. And
Damascene says, They which in youth have used to be much let blood, after
they be three score years old, their nature waxes cold, and natural heat is
in them suffocate, specially if they were of a cold complexion. but that is
to be understand, where they that are in health, are often let blood. For in
the lapse from health, and in diverse diseases, wherein the blood is corrupted,
or where it ingedreth impostumes, or resorteth to any place, where it ought not
to be, or passes by any other cundyte, than nature has ordained, or where it
is furious or inflamed, or by any other means bredeth grievous diseases, in all
these cases, it ought to be practiced, ye sometime in aged persons, women with
child, and young infantes. For in extreme necessity it were better experience
some remedy, than to do nothing. Al other things concerning this matter,
pertayn to the part curatiue, which treats of healyng of sycknes, whereof I
will not now speak, but remytte the reders to the counsel of discrete
physicians.

Of scarifyeng called boxyng or cuppyng. Cap. vii.
FOr as much as it is not convenient, to be let Galenus.
blood oftentimes in the year, because much of the vytall spirit, passes
forth with the bloudde, Acti^ li. 3.
which being exhaust, the body waxes cold, and natural operations become the
more feeble, I there fore do counsel (says Galen) that the base parts of the
body, as the legs, be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as well in
conseruynge health, as in repayrynge thereof, being decayed. For it cures the
eyes being annoyed with long dystillations. It profits also to the heed, and
over part of the body against sundry diseases. In what member the blood is
gathered, the body being first purged by scarification, the grefe may be
cured. Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds thereto, that it
helps squynances, or Oribasius in medici ne compendio.
quinces in the throat, and dissolueth the constipa tions or stoppinges made of
al places, if the places be scarified: not withstanding application of boxes
about the stomach, in hot fevers, where reason is troubled, ar to be eschewed,
for fear of suffocation. Likewise put to the heed indiscreetly, it hurts
both the heed and the cies. The late authors Actius.
do affirm, that scarifieng is in the stead of lettyng bloudde, where for age,
debilitie, or time of the year, or other like consyderation, a man may not
susteyn blood lettynge, and it bryngethe forth the thyn blod, which is next to
the skin.

Of blood suckers or leaches. Cap viii.
THere is also an other form of euacuation by worms, found in waters called
blood suckers, or leaches, which being put unto the body or member, do draw
out bloudde. And their drawyng is more convenient for fullness of blod thanne
scarifienge is, for as much as they fetch blood more deper, and is more of
the substance of blood. yet the opinion of sum men is, that they do draw no
bloudde but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable unto our body. And
therefore in griefs, which happen between the skin and the flusshe of
bloudde corrupted, these are more convenient than scarifienge. But before that
they be put unto any part of the body Oribasius in medici ne compendio.
they must be first kept all one day before, giving unto them a little blood
in fresshe flesh. And than put them in a clean water, somewhat warm, and with
a spounge wype away the flyme, which is about them, and than lay a little
blood on the place grieved, and put them than to it, and lay on them a spounge,
that when they be fulle, they may fall away, or if ye will sooner have them
of, put a horse hear bytweene their mouths, and the place, and draw them
away, or put to their mouths salt or ashes, or vyneger, and forthewith
they shall fall, and than wasshe the place with a spounge, and if there do
issue much bloudde, lay on the place the poulder of a spounge, and pytche
bourned, or lynnen clothe bourned, or galls bourned, or the herb called Bursa
pastoris bruysed. And this suffyseth concerning blood suckers.

Of hemoroides or pyles. Cap. ix.
HEmorroides be veins in the foundement, of whom do happen sundry passions.
sometime swellyng, without bledynge, sometime superfluous blood by the
puissance of nature, is by them expelled, and than be they very convenient. for
by them a man shall escape many great sycknesses, which be engendered of
corrupted blood, or of melancoly. Semblably, if they be hastylye stopped from
the course, which they have been used to, thereby do increase the said
syknesses, which by them were expelled, as dropsies, co^sumptions, madness,
fransies, and diverse diseases of the heed, and other syknesses, palenes of the
vysage, grief in the raines of the back, and thies. And if they flow to much,
there insueth feebleness, leannes of the body, alteration of color, great peines
in the lower parts of the body. And if the flux be vnmoderate, it ingendreth
myscheuous diseases. Wherefore it would be diligentely taken head, that they
run in mesure, or else to use some things moderately, which may restrayn
them.

Concerning other euacuatio^s, I do purposely omytte to write of them in this
place, for as much as in this realm, it has been accounted not honest, to
declare them in the vulgar tongue, but only secretly.

Of affectes of the mind. Cap. x.
THe last of things callid not natural, is not the least part to be
considered, the which is of affectes and passions of the mind. For if they be
immoderate, they do not only anoye the body, and shorten the life, but also
they do appaire, and sometime lose utterly a man's estimation. And that much
more is, they bring a man from the use of reason, and sometime in the
displeasure of almighty god. wherefore they do not only require the help of
phisyke corporal, but also the counsel of a man wise and well learned in
moral philosophye. Wherefore after that I have recyted, what they be, I will
briefly declare such counsayles, as I have gathered. And as concerning
remedies of phisike saving a few symples, which do comfort the heart and
spirits, the residue I will remytte to the counsel of physicians, like as I
have done in euacuation. Affectes of the mind, whereby the body is annoyed, and
do bring in siknes, be these, ire or wrath, heaviness or sorrow, glad nes, or
reioycyng.

Of Ire. Cap. xi.
IRe is kendlyd in the heart, inordinately chaufyng the spirits there, and
than is sent forth into the members, and does superfluously heat them, and
disturbeth reason, where the bodies be hot before. Where natural heat is
feeble, the heat may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts, and than does
the extreme members, that is to say, which are far from the heart, remain
cold, and trembling. Of this affection comes sometime fevers, sometime
apoplexies, or privation of sencis, tremblyng, palseys, madness, fran sies,
deformity of visage, and that warse is, outrageous swearynge, blasphemy,
desire of vengeance, loss of charity, amity, credence, also forgetfulness of
benefit precedynge, and of obedience, duty, and reverence. There also do
succeed contencion, chargeable suite, unquietness of mind, lack of appetite,
lack of flepe, feeble digestion, scorn, disdain, and hatrede of other, with
peril of losyng of all good reputation. These incommodities of Ire, perfitely
had in remembrance, and at the first motion thereof one of them thought on, may
happen to bring in his fellows, and thereby the flame may be quenched. or let
him that is angry, even at the first consider one of these thin ges, that like
as he is a man, so is also the other, with whom he is angrye, and therefore it
is as lefull for the other to be angry, as unto him, and if he so be, than
shall that anger be to him displeasant, and stere him more to be angry. Whereby
it appears, that Ire is to him loathsome. If the other be pacient, than let him
abhorte that thing in him self, the lack whereof, in the other contenteth
him, and asswageth his malice. More over, let him before, that occasion of Ire
does happen, accustom him self to behold, and mark well them that be angry,
with the success of that anger. and ruminate it in his mind, a good space
after. And in that time, let him remember, how Christ, the son of God and
God, who (as he him self said) might have had of God his father, if he
woldehaue asked them, legions of angels to have defended him, ye with less
than a wynke, might have slain all his adversaries, yet he not withstandyng
rebuked, scorned, falsely accused, plucked hither and thither, stryped, bounden
with halters, whypped, spytte on, buffetted, crowned with sharp thorn, laded
with a heuye piece of timber, his own proper torment, halyd, and driven forth
like a calfe to the slaughter house, eftsoon beaten and overthrown, retched
forth with ropes, arms and legs laid on the cross, and thereunto with long
iron nails through the hands and fete nailed, with many strokes of ha^mers,
with many prickynges, or ever the nails might perce by his tender and most
blessed flesh, and synewes, quyte through the hard timber, up to the heedes
of the nails, and all this being done for the offense of mankind, and not his,
yet with the men, which did it, his most unkind country men, his most
unnatural kynnesinen, whom he first made of nothing, preserved by miracles,
delivered from perils, and cured of dyseases, in all his vexation and
trouble, he was never seen or perceived angry. If one will say, that Anger is
natural, let him also consider, that in Christis manhood were all natural
powers. If he will say, that Ire is token of courage, and in Christ it lacked
not, whom both angels and deuyls trembled and feared. The premysses often
reuolued, and borne in the mind, I will not say, shall utterly extincte all
motions of wrath, which is not possible, but it shall, when it kyndleth lightly
repress it, and let that it shall not grow into flame. And in speaking
here of wrath, I do not mean that, which good men have against vices: or
wise and discrete governors, and masters, ageinste the defautes or
negligences of their subjects or servants, used in rebukynge them, or
moderately punysshynge them. For that is not properly ire, but rather to be
called displesure, and is that whereof god speaks, by his prophet David,
saying, Be you angry, and do not sin. And that manner of anger, Psalm. 4.
Genes. 31. Exodus 32. Leuit. 10. Marc. 11.
has been in diverse holy men, prophets, and other. And it appeared in Christ,
when he drove out them, which made their markette, in the holy temple of
god, where there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in like wise when he
rebuked the hypocrites. But if none of these things may come so shortly to
his remembrance, that is meued with anger, at the least, let him think on
the lesson, that Apollodorus the philosopher, taught to the emperor Octauian,
that before he speak or do any thing in anger, he do recite in order, all the
letters of the A, B, C, and remove somewhat out of the place, that he is in, and
seek occasion to be otherwise occupied. This shall for this time suffice, for
the remedies of Ire. And he that will know more of this matter, let him read
in my warke, called the Governor, where I thereof do write more abundantly.

Of dolor or heaviness of mind. Capitulo. xii.
THere is nothing more enemy to life, tha^ sorrow, called also heaviness, for
it exhausteth both natural heat and moisture of the body, and does
extenuate or make the body lean, dulleth the wit, and darkeneth the
spirits, lets the use and judgment of reason, and oppresses memory. And
Solomon says, that sorrow dries up the bones. And also, like as the mothe in
(...). 17.
the garment, and the wourme in the tree, so does heaviness annoye the heart
of a man. Also in the book called Ecclesiasticus, Sorrow has killed
Ecclesiasti. 25. 28.
many, and in it self is found no commodity. Also by heaviness death is
hastened, it hydeth virtue or strength, and heaviness of heart boweth down
the neck. This is so puissant an enemy to nature and bodily health, that to
resyste the malice and violence thereof, are required remedies, as well of the
wholesome counsayles found in holy cripture, and in the books of moral
doctrine, as also of certain herbs, fruits, and spyces, having the
propretie to expelle melancolyke humors, and to comfor(...) keep lively the
spirits, which have their proper habitation in the heart of man, and moderate
nourishynge of the natural heat and humor callid radical, which is the base
or foundation, whereupon the life of man stands, and that failing, life
falls in ruin, and the body is dissolved. Now first I will declare some
remedies against sorowfulnesse of heart, concerning necessary counsel.

Sometime this affecte happens of Ingratitude, either where for benefit, or
special love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in his necessity,
or is deceived of him, whom he trusted, or fyndeth him, of whom he has great
expectation, forgetful or neglygent in his commodity, or perceyueth the
person, whom of long time he has loved, to be estraunged from him, or to
have one of later acquayntaunce in more estymation. This affection nyppeth the
heart, ye of most wysemen, for they love most heartily, not provoked by carnal
affection, but rather by good opinion, inge^dred by similitude of honest
studies and virtuous manners of long time mutuallye experie^ced. And it is not
only unto man grievous, but also unto god most displeasant and odious, as it is
abundantly declared in scripture. Wherefore the person, which feleth him self
touched with this affecte, before that it grow into a passion, and waxes a
sycknesse, let him call to remembrance these articles following, or at the
lest ways some of them, for eueryche of them may ease him, though perchance
they can not forth with perfitly cute him.

Consider, that the corruption of man's nature is not so much declared in any
thing, as in ingratitude, Lou^iasles against ingratitude.
whereby a man is made warse, tha^ diverse brute beasts. The little ant or emote
helps up his fellow, whom he sees overthrown with burdeyn, or, by other
occasion. Also when olyphantes do pass over any great water, the grettest and
most Appianns in varia historia.
puissant of them divide them selfs, and settinge the weakest in the myddell,
part go before, trieng the depenes and peryls, part come after, succouryng the
weakest or least, with their long noses, when they se them in danger. The same
beasts have been seen not only bring men out of deserces, which have lost
their ways, but also revenge the displeasures done to them, the which gave
them meat, as one that slew him, which had committed aduoutrie with his
masters wife. The terrible Lions and Panthers, have been seen in their manner,
to render thanks to their benefactours, ye and to obiecte their own bodies
and lives for their defense. The same we may daily behold in our own dogs.
Tha^ in whom thou fyndest the detestable vice of Ingratitude, reputing him
among the warst sort of creatures, think not that thou haste lost a friend,
but think that thou art delivered from a monster of nature, that devoured thy
love, and that thou art now at liberty, and have won experience to chese the a
better. But if this may not suffice, than eftsoon consider, that if thou look
well on thy self perchance Seneca, de benefi. 7.
thou may find the fault, whereof thou complaynest, within thyn own bosom.
Call to thy remembrance, if thou have always rendered unto every man condign
thanks or benefytte, of whom thou have kyndnes received, or if thou have always
remeinbred, every one of them, that have done to the any commodity or
pleasure. Thou shalt well perceive, that what thing thou rereceyuedst in
childhode, thou forgattest or did litel esteem, when thou camist to the
state of a man. And what thou dyddeste remember in youth, in age thou dyddest
littell think on: thy nouryces pappe, her rockynges, her watchynges, thou have
not always remembered, or equally recompensed.

Thy schole masters study, his labor, his dilyge^ce, in a like degree, thou
have not required. What greter fre^des have thou had, of whom thou could
receive any gretter benefits, than thy norishyng and preseruyng of thy life,
in thy most feebleness, or thyn erudicion, whereby thy nature was made more
excellent. Remembrynge this, leave to be angry or sorrowful for so common a
vice, yet if it cesse not to grieve the, co^ferre the ingratitude that does vex
the, with that ingratitude, which was showed by the Israelites, whom god
chase for his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them wonders,
preserved them forty years in desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to them
the country, which flowed milk and honey, defended them against all outward
hostility, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Jerusalem, as stones in the street, had his tabernacle, and afterward his
most holy temple among them, which he did daily vysit with his divine
majesty, made their kings to reign gloryousely, and spoke with their
prophets famylyarlye, and corrected their errors most gentilly: and yet for
all this, they imbracyng the paynyms idolatry, they left so gracious and
loving a lord, and living god, and to his greatte despite, gave divine
honors, to calves of brass, and other monstrous images, and at the last,
put to most cruel death, the only son of god, that had done so much for
them.

And if we christen men, do look well on our selves, reuoluynge the
incomparable benefit, which we have received by Christis passion, and
consider the circumstance of his most excellent patience, and most fervent
love toward us, with our forgetfulness, and the daily breach of our
promise, which we made at our baptysme, conferryng our mutual unkindness
thereunto, there shall appear none ingratitude that should offend us. Finally
for a conclusion, behold well about the, and thou shall al day find the
chylderne ingrate to their parents, and wives to their husbands. And will
thou look that thy benefit or vain expectation, should make the more fre from
ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance has sent the, than nature may the
parents to ward their children, or the coniu^ction of bodies by lefull
marriage, take unkindness from the wives toward their husbands. This vice
therefore of Ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly frendshyp
so precious, that life or health therefore should be spent or consumed. I have been the lengar in this place, because I have had in this grief sufficient
experience.

If death of chylderne be cause of thy heaviness, Death of chylderne.
call to thy remembrance some chylderne (of whom there is no little number)
whose lives either for vncortigible vices, or unfortunate chances, have been
more grievous unto their parents, than the death of thy children, ought to be
unto the: consydering that death is the discharger of al griefs and myseries,
and to them that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority do grieve Loss of goods.
none but fools, which do not mark diligently, that like as neither the one
nor the other does always happen to them that are worthy, so we have in daily
experience, that they fall from him suddenly, who in increasynge or keeping
them seems most busye.

Oftentimes the repulse from promotion is Lache of promtio^.
cause of discomforte. but than consider, whether in the opinion of good men,
thou art demed worthy to have such advancement, or in thyn own expectation
and fantasy. If good men so judge the, thank thou god of that felicity, and
laughe at the blyndnesse of them, that so have refused the. If it proceed of
thine own folly, abhorte al arrogance, and enforce thy self to be advanced in
men's estimation, before thou can find thy self worthy in thy proper opinion.

All other chances of fortune, esteem as no Chances of fortune
thing, and that long before they do happen. The often recordynge of myserie,
prepares the mind to feel less aduersite. And the contempt of fortune is
sure quietness and most perfect felicity.

This now shall suffice concerning remedies of moral philosophy. Now will I
write somewhat touching the counsel of phisycke, as in relieuynge the body,
which either by the said occasions, or by the humor of melancolye is brought
out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angry, studyous, or solytarie, and rejoice the with melody, or else be al way in
such company, as best may content the.

Avoid all things that be noyous in syghte, smellyng and heryng, and embrace
al thing that is dilectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and business of mind, much companieng with
women, the use of things very hot and dry: often purgatio^s, immoderate
exercise, thirst, much abstinence, dry wyndes and cold.

Absteyne from daily eating of much old bief or old mutton, hard chese,
hare flesh, boores flesh, venyson, saltfyshe, colewortes, beans, and
peason, very course breadde, greatte fyshes of the sea, as thurlepole, porpyse,
and sturgeon, and other of like natures, wine read and thycke, meats being
very salt or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlyke, onyons, and lekes.

Use meats, which are temperately hot, and therewith somewhat moist,
boiled rather than roasted, light of digestion, and ingendryng blood clear and
fine. As milk hot from the vdder, or at the lest new mylked, ruen chese,
sweet almondes, the yelkes of rere eggs, little birds of the busshes,
chyckens, and hens. Wine white or clarette, clear or fragraunte. Sweet
savors in winter hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Confortatiues of the Heart hot.
BOurage, the flower or leaf. Buglosse. Baulme mynte. Elycampane. Cloves.
Cardamomum. Rosemarye. Lignum aloes. Musk. Ambergrise. Saffron. The bone of
the heart of a red dear. Myntes. The rynde of Cytron. Been. Cububes. Basyle.
Confortatiues of the Heart cold.
VIolettes. Perles. Coralle. The unicorns horn. Old appulles which be good.
Roses. Saunders. The olyphantes tothe. Waterlyllies. Coriander prepared.
Confortatiues temperate.
Iacincte. Sapphire. Emerauldes. Myrabolanes, called kebuli. Buglosse. Gold,
silver.
Of Joy.
Joy or gladness of heart does prolonge the life, it fatteth the body that
is lean with troubles, bringing the humors to an equal temperance, and
drawyng natural heat outward. But if it be sudden and feruente, it
oftentimes flees, for as much as it draws to suddenly and excessiuely
natural heat outward. And therefore diverse men and women have been seen to
fall in a sound, when they have suddenly beholden the persons, whom they
fervently loved.

As a woman in Rome, herynge first, that her son was slain in battle.
After when he came Ti. L(...)s
to her, she saying him alive, imbracynge each other, she dyed in his arms.
This well consydred against such inordinate gladness, the best preservative is
to remember, that the extreme parts of mundayne joy is sorrow and heaviness:
And that nothing of this world, may so much rejoice us: but occasion may
cause it to be displeasant unto us.

The domynion of sundry complexions. Capitulo. xiii.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsayles of
ancient and approved authors, as also mine own opynion gathered by diligent
marking in daily experience, concerning as well the necessary diete of every
complexion, age and declination of health, as also the mean to resyste
discrasies of the body, before syckenes be therein confirmed, leaving the
residue unto the substa^ciall lerning and circumspect practice of good
physicians, which shall the more easily cure the pacientes, if their pacientes
do not disdain to bear away and follow my counsel.

And first it ought to be considred, that none of the four complexions, have
sooly such dominion in one man or woman's body, that no part of any other
complexion is therewith myxt. For wha^ we call a man sanguine, colerike,
fleumatike, or melancolye, we do not mean, that he has blood only without any
of the other humors, or coler without blood, or fleume without blood or
melancoly, or melancoly without blod or coler. And therefore the man, which is
sanguyne, the more that he draws into age, whereby natural moisture decays,
the more is he colerike, by reasone that heat, surmountynge moisture, needs
must remain heat and drithe. semblably the colerike man, the more that he
waxes into aege, the more natural heat in him is abated, and drythe
surmountyng natural moisture, he becomes melancolyke: but some sanguyne man
has in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with coler, than an
other has. Likewise the colerike or fleumatike man with the humor of sanguine
or melancoly. And therefore late practisers of phisike are wont to call men,
according to the mixture of their complexions, which man receives in his
generation, the humors, whereof the same complexions do consist, being
augmented superfluously in the body or members by any of the said things
callid not natural, every of them do semblably augment the complexion, which is
proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto the body. And for
these causes, the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman, feeling any discrasy by
choler happened to them by the said things called not Naturalle, they shall use
the dyete described hereafter to him, which is naturally colerike. Semblably
the coleryke or melancolyke man or woman, having any discrasye by fleume, to
use the diete of him, which is naturally fleumatike, always remembrynge, that
sanguyne and fleumatycke men have more respect unto drithe, colerike and
melancolyke unto moisture, and that always as the accide^tall complexio^
decays, to resort by little and little to the diete, pertaynyng to his
natural complexion.

The times appropryed to every natural humor. Capitu. xiiii.
But first it must be considered, that where the four humors, be always in
manne, and in sum man commonly one humor is more abundant than an another
naturally, that is to say, from his generation. The said humors have also
peculyar times assygned to every oone of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after ensues, after the description of Soranus.
Soranus Ephesius.


Fleume has most puissance in winter, from the.viii. Idus of November, unto
the.viii. Idus of Februarye, whereby are engendered Catarres or reumes, the
vuula, the cough, and the stytche. This humor is part in the heed, part in the
stomach. It has dominyon from the third hour of night, until the nynthe
hour of the same night.

Bloudde increases in Spring time, from the.viii. Idus of February, unto
the.viii. Idus of May, whereof ar engendered fevers, and sweet humors, which
do shortly putrifye, the power of this humor is about the heart, and has
dominion from the.ix. hour of night, until the third hour of the morning.

Read choler has power in summer from the viii. Idus of May, until the.viii.
Idus of August, whereby are engendered hot and sharp fevers, this humor is
specially in the liver, and has dominion from the third hour of day, until
the.ix. hour of the same day.

Yelowe choler, whereof is engendered the fleme of the stomach, is nourysh ed in
Autumn, which begins the.viii. Idus of August, and dureth unto the.viii.
Idus of November, and makes shaking fevers and sharp, the black coler than
increases, and than follows thycknesse of the blood in the veins. Black
coler or melancoly most reigns in the spleen, and it reigns from the
nynthe hour of day, until the third hour of night.

Peculyar remedies against the distemperance of every humor.
IF the distemperance be of blood, help it with things cold, sharp, and
dry: for bloudde is Soranus in art me (...).
moist, hot, and sweet. If it be of read coler, give things cold, moist,
and sweet, for read coler is bitter and fyry. If it be of black coler, give
things hot moist and sweet, for black coler is sharp and cold. If the
disease be of salt fleume, give things sweet hot and dry, thus says Soranus.
Not withstanding where there is abundance of cold fleume not myxte with
coler, there things very sharp and hot be most convenient, as tarte
vyneger with hot rotes and seeds, or wynes strong and rough, honey being
sodden in the one and the other, or where choler is myxte with fleume, syrope
acetose made with vyneger and sugar boiled, sometime with herbs, roots, or
seeds, which may dissolve fleume and digest it.

Dicte of them, which are of sanguyne complexion. Cap. xv.
FOrasmothe as in sanguyne men blood most reigns, which is soon corrupted,
it shall be necessary for them, which are of that complexio^, to be
circumspecte in earynge meat, that shortly will receive putrefaction, as the
more part of fruits, specially not being perfitly ripe, also mea tes that be
of ill juice, as flesh of beasts to old, or to young, vdders of beasts,
brains except of capons and chykens, marowe of the backebone, much use of
onyons, lekes, garlyke, much use of old fygges, much use of raw herbs, and
al thing, wherein is excess of hete, cold, or moisture, meats that be stale,
fyshes of the fennes or muddye waters, and to much sleep, as experyence
shows.

Dyete of cholerike persons. Cap. xvi.
TO them, which be choleryke, being in their natural temperature and having
not from their youth used the contrary, gross meats moderately taken, be more
convenient, than the meats that be fine, and better shall they dygeste a piece
of good bief, than a chykens leg. Choler of his property rather burning than
well digestynge meats of light substance, not withstanding some gentylmen,
which be nycely brought up in their infancy, may not so well sustain that diet
as poor men, being the more part used to gross meats. wherefore their diete
must be in a temperance, as young biefe, old veale, mutton, and venyson
powdered, young geese, and such like, conseruinge their complexion with meats
like thereunto in quality and degree, accrodyng to the counsayl of Hipocrates.
And as he perceyueth choler to abou^de, so to interlace meats, which be cold
in a moderate quantite, and to alay their wine more or less with water,
eschewynge hot spices, hot wines, and excessive labor, whereby (...) body
may be much chaufed. Also he may^ eat oftenet in the day, than any other:
foresene, that there be such distance between his meals, as the meat before
eaten be fully dygested. which in some person is more, in some less,
according to the heat and strength of his stomach, no tinge always, that the
colerike person digesteth more meat than his appetite desires, the
melancolyke person desires by false appetite more tha^ his stomach may
digest. And to a cholerike person, it is right dangerous, to use long
abstin^^e: for choler, finding nothing in the stomach to concocte, it fares
than, as where a little potage or milk, being in a vessel over a great
fire, it is burned to the vessel, and unsavory fumes and vapors do issue out
thereof. Likewise in a cholerike stomach, by abstinence, these inconveniences do
happen, humors adust, consumynge of natural moisture, fumosities and stynkynge
vapors, ascendynge up to the heed, whereof is engendered, duskynge of the eyes,
heed aches, hot and thyn ^eumes, after every littel surfete, and many other
inconue^iences. wherefore beside the opynion of best learned men, mine own peynful
experience also moves me, to exhort them, which be of this complexion, to
eschew much abstynence. And although they be studyous, and use lyttel
exercise, yet in the morning, to eat somewhat in littell quantity, and not
to study immediately, but first to sytte a while, and after to stand or walk
softely, which vsyng these two years, I and also other, that have long known
me, have perceived in my body a great alteration, that is to say, from ylle
astate to better. Always remember, that if any other humor do abound in the
choleryke person, as fleume, or melancoly, than until that humor be expelled,
the diete must be cortectiue of that humor, and therefore more hot and fine,
than the natural diete before ^ehersed: but yet there would be always respect
had to the natural complexion, some time sufferyng the person to eat ordrynke
that, which nature working, seruently desires.

Dyete of fleumatike persons. Cap. xvii.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moist, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is my^^e with choler, and therefore has not in him
so much cold nor humiditie, as pure fleume has: and therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot and dry, whereby fleume is dygested or expulsed. To
fleumatike persons al meats at noyful, which are very cold, viscous or slymy,
fat or sone putrified, eating much and often, specially meats ingendringe
fleume, which be remem bred in the table precedynge. Al things be good,
which are hot and dry, also meats and drinks which be sour: onyons
also, and ga^lyke, moderatelye used, be very commendable, in pure fleume not
myxte with choler, much using of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten
and ea ten with meat, ought to be with all fleumaticke persons famylyar, also
gynger is right convenient, but not to be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the
body, heatyng and comfortynge the stomach, not entering into the veins, or
annoyenge the liver, which virtue is not in gynger. Gynger condyte, the which
we do call grene Gynger, specially candyd with Sugar, if it may be gotten, and
also Myrobalaues, called kebuli, condite in India* be most excel lent remedies
against fleume. also the herbs, which are remembered before in the table of
digestiues of fleme, and the roots of persely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and
ca^ettes be very commendable. Exercise twice in the day, the stomach being
almost empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensing of
the body from al filthynesse, with rubbyng and wypynge, oftentimes with
washing, specially the heed and partis therabout, moderate sweating in hot
bathes or stufes be to this complexion necessary, specially when they have
eaten or drunken excessiuely. The heed and fete to be kept from cold, and to
dwell high and fat from mores and marshes, is a rule right necessary, also to
absteyne from eating herbs and rotes not boiled, and generally from all
meats* which will not be easyly dygested.

The division of melancoly, and the diete of persons melancolike. Cap. xviii.
MElancolye is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only
cold and dry, the other is called aduste or bourned. Natural melancolye is
as Galene says) the resydence or dregs of the blood: and therefore is colder
and thycker than the blood. Melancoly aduste is in four kinds, either it is
of natural melancoly adust, or of the more pure part of the bloudde aduste,
or of choler adust, or of salt fleume adust. But of all other that melancoly is
wa^st, which is engendered of choler: finally all aduste melancoly annoyeth the
wit and judgment of man. for when that humor is hette, it makes men
mad, and when it is extincte, it makes men fools, forgetful, and dulle.
The natural melancoly Ex Marel lio ficino. de uita sana.
kept in his temperance, profyteth much to true judgment of the wit, but yet
if ^t be to thick, it darkeneth the spirits, makes one timorous, and the
wit dulle. If it be myxt with fleume, it mortifieth the blood with to much
cold. Wherefore it may not be so litell, that the blood and spirits in their
feruentnes, be as it were vnbridlyd, whereof do happen unstableness of wit
and slipper remembrance: nor yet so much, that by the weight thereof (for it
is heavy, approchynge nyghe to the ^^the) that we seem to be always in sleep,
and need a spur to prycke us forward. Wherefore it is right expediente, to
keep that humor as thyn as nature will suffer it, and not to have to much of
it. But now to the diete pertaining to them, whom this humor anoyeth. The
knowledge, that melancoly reigns, is oftentimes heaviness of mind, or fear
without cause, slepynesse in the members, many crampes without ^eplecion or
emptynesse, sodayn fury, sodayn incontinencie of the tongue, much solicitude
of light things, with palenesse of the vysage, and fear full dreams of
terrible visyons, dreamynge of darkness, deep pyttes, or death of friends or
acqueyntance, and of all thing that is black. The meats convenient are they,
which be temperate in heat, but specially they that be moist: meats soon
digested, and they rather boiled tha^ roasted, temperately myxte with spices,
milk hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is very conuement for that
complexion, sweet almondes blaunched, and almonde milk, the yelkes of rere
eggs, and finally all things, which engender pure blood, and all that is
written in the chapter of age. All these be ill for them, wine thycke or
troublouse, specially red wine, meats hard, dry, very salt, or sour,
bourned meat, fried meat, much bief, hares flesh, beans, toket,
colewortes, mustard, radyshe, ga^lyke, except there be much wind in the
body, for than is it very wholesome, onyons, lekes, finally all things, which
heateth to much, keleth to much, or dries to much, also wrath, fear,
compassion, sorrow, much study or care, much ydelnesse or rest: all thing
that is greuouse to see, to smell, or to here, but most specially darkness.
Moreover much drienge of the body, ^^ther with long watch, or with much
care and ^o^^ynge of the mind, or with much lecherye, or much eating and
drinking of things that be hot and dry, or with immoderate euacuation,
labor, abstinence, thyrst, going in the air vntemperately hot, cold, or
dry, all these things do anoye them that be grieved with any melancolye. It is
to be diligentely considered, that where melancolye happens of choler aduste,
there meats, which be hot in warkynge, would be wyselye tempered, and
drinking of ho^^e wynes would be eschewed: semblable cautele would be in
sauoures. Not withstanding moderate use of small wynes, clear, and well
verdured, is herein very commendable, the humor thereby being clarified, and
the spirits cleansed, but the abuse or excess thereof does as much damage.
Alsoo it is right expedient, to put into wine or ale, a gadde of silver or
gold, glowyng hot out of the fire, to temper hot meats with ^oses,
Vyolettes, Saunders, Rose water, bourage, Buglosse, baulme called in latyne
Melyssa, or the water of all three drunken with good wine, white, or clarette,
or made in a Iuley with sugar, is wonderful wholesome, chewyng of lykorise, or
raisons of coraunce is right expedyente: but most of all other things,
myrthe, good company, gladness, moderate exercise, with moderate feeding.
And thus I leave to speak of dyetes aptely belonging to the four complexyons.

THE FOVRTHE BOOK
What cruditie is, and remedies therefore. Capitulo primo.
CONCERNING syknes, and things accident thereunto, I will not treat of in this
warke, saving only that I will somewhat write of two discrasies of the body,
which do happen by the excess or lack of things callid not natural, whereof
I have spoken before. The one is called cruditie, the other lassitude, which
although they be words made of latin, having none apt english word
therefore, yet by the definitions and more ample declaration of them, they shall
be understand sufficiently, and from hensforthe used for english. But fyrs^e
it shall be necessary, to consider, that concoction is an alteration in the
stomach of meats and drynkes, according to their qualities, whereby they are
made like to the substance of the body. Cruditie is a vycious concoction of
things received, they not being holly or perfitely altered. The cause thereof
is, sometime the distemperature of the stomak, sometime inflammations, sometime
matter congeled, or impostumes in the stomach, otherwhile ingurgitation of
meat and drink: or for the vicious quality of the same meats or drinks, or
the ^eceyuyng thereof out of order, or lack of exercise, or of convenient
euacuation. The mean to escape cruditie, is to be diligente in observation of
the councels before written, concerning the things called not natural, not
much vsyng meats that be very hard to concoct, also fat meat and meats
long kept, also corrupted or stynkyng, sweet fruits, and bankettynge dyshes,
hasty fedynge without good chewynge, also much or very often drinking at
meals, very much heat, or very much cold after meat. This affecte of
cruditie, perceived by sum ill sauoure, rysynge out of the stomach, the
most spedy remedy is vomyte, if that it may be done without great
difficulty: but if it be greuouse unto the pacient, tha^ let him rest and
absteyn all that day or more, if that need be: Afterward, with suppositories or
other light remedies, provoke him self to the stool. A^tius would, that he
should drink a draughte of cold A^ti' sermon. 9
water, affyrmynge, that thereby the stomach being corroborate, dryueth out of
him down into the belie, that which cleaves fast to it. I my self using
to drink fasting, very small biere or ale, when I have been in that case, have
found ease by it. Paulus Aeg^eta wylleth, that at the beginning, the legs
and arms should be Paul. Egi. lib. 2.
rubbed with a course lynnen clothe, the legs downewarde to the fete, the
arms to the tops of the fingers, and when they be well chaufed, tha^ to rub
them again with some oil, that does open the poores, and dyscusse the
vapou^s, as oil of cam^myll, oil of anete, and other like. he prayseth much
Mulse, or the water of honey, specially if some I soap be boiled in it. Galene,
and all other, do agree, that in this case, Pepper bruysed and eaten with meat,
is very expedient: And where there is much wind in the stomach, tha^ to eat
all times of the day of the medycine made of the three kinds of pepper, time,
anyse sede, and honey clarified, which is called Diatrion pipereon, or that
which is called Diaspoliticon, or Diapiganon, which is made of cummyne, stieped
Galen' de menda sa ni. lib. 5.
one day and a night, or longer in tarte vyneger, and after feyed or laid on
a burning hot stone, and made in powlder, also pepper, and rewe dried
somewhat, and made into powlder, all in equal porcions, and myxt with
clarified honey. Galene adds thereto salt peter, called in latin Nitrum. The
confection made with the juice of quynces, and is called Diacytoniten, is very
excellent, but it is to be diligently noted, that where eruditie is in a
cholerike person, there would the said medicines be temperatly used, and the
said Diacytoniten, to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being
the space of four years continually in this cruditie, I never found any
thing to be compared to fine Reubarbe, chewed with raysons of corens, which I
took by the counsel of the worshypfull and well learned physician, master
Doctor Augustine, who in his manners declares the ancient gentylnesse of his
blood, which medicine I do not leave to use daily fasting, when I feel such
cruditie to begin. Also syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure
vyneger, and little water, until it be thick as a syrope, is sometime
convenient, and that as well to colerike persons, as unto fleumatike: and if
fleume be abundant, than with roots and seeds of fenelle and persely sodden
with it. Also in that case Oxymel, that is to say, honey and water sodden
together, with the said roots and seeds, and a quantity of vyneger put
thereto in the boylynge, is very commendable, if the pacient be very costiue,
than the medicine of Galene, called Hierapicra, from half an ounce to an
ounce, taken in water of honey or ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a grote
and a h(...) two grotes, if the stuff be good, will pourge the body
sufficiently, without making the body weaker. Also that medicine by clensynge
the stomach and body, delyuereth a man and woman, from many peryllous
syckenesses. If the humors in the stomach be not putrified, but that it is
grieved with abundance of salt fleume, I have found that milk new mylked,
wherein is put a quantity of good honye or sugar, and three leaves of good
spear myntes, and a little boiled, so being drunk warm fasting, the
quantity of a pynte, and restinge on it, without eating or drinking any other
thing the space of three hours after, have abundauntly pourged and comforted
the stomach, but where there is no fleume, but only choler, it is not so
wholesome, but rather hurts, making fumosities in the heed, whereof comes
heed ache.

Of Lassuude. Capitulo. ii.
LAssicude is a disposition toward sycknesse, wherein a man feleth a
soorenesse, a swellynge or an inflammation. Soreness happens of humors sharp
and gnawing, as after great exercise and labors, which lassitude happens to
them, whose bodies are full of ill juice and excrementes. Also after cruditie in
them, which are not exercised, or do abide long in the heat of the Acti^ li.
3.
son. It may also be in the body, wherein is good juice, if he be fatigate
with immoderate exercise. In them, which do feel this lassitude, the skin
Galen' de menda sa ni. lib. 5.
appears thick and rough, and there is felt a grefe sometime in the skin
only, sometime also in the flesh, as it were of a soore. The cure thereof, is
by much and pleasant rubbyng, with sweet oils, which have not the virtue to
restrain or close, and that with many hands, and afterward to exercise
moderately, and to be bayned in water sweet and temperate in heat. also than
must be given meats of good juice, potage but selde, wine is not to be
forboden. for unto wine, uneath any thing may be compared, that so well
dygesteth crude humors. it also provoke sweatte and urine, and makes one to
sleep sou^dly. but if this lassitude do abide the night and day following, or
waxes more and more, than if the paciente be of good strength and young, and
has abundance of blood, let him be let blood, or provoke the hemoroides or
piles to blede, if they do appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any
humor, without abundance of blood, than resort to purgatio^s apt for the
humor that greeueth. The tokens whereof, shall appear as well by the color of
the skin and die^e precedyng, as by urine, ordure, sweat, thirste, and
appetite, as it is rehearsed before in the complexions. If the ill bloudde be
little in quantity, and the crude humors abundant, than shall he not be let
blood, nor vehemently pourged, neither shall exercise or move him self, nor be
bayned, for all exercise carries humors throughout all the body, and stoppith
the powers. Wherefore these manner of persons, should be kept in rest, and such
meats drynkes and medicines should be given to them, which should attenuate or
dissolve the grossenes of the humors, without notable heat, as oxymell, barley
water, and muise, if the pacient abhor not honey. And for as much as in the
said persons, commonly there is abundance of wind about their stomachs,
therefore pepper, specially long pepper, or white, is very convenient to be
used, and the medicine before written, callid Diaspoliticum. When the humors are
dissolved, tha^ is it good to drink white wine, or small clarette wine
moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. Capit. iii.
When one thinks that he does feel a swellyng or bollyng of the body, where
in deed there does not appear in sight or touching any swellyng, that is
called Lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise or vehement mouynge.
This does happen of excessive multitude of humors, which do extend the
muscules or fyllettes. In this no sorenes is felt, but only an heaviness with
extension or thrustyng out of the body. And because that there is abundance of
blood in the body, best remedy is to be letten blood about the the elbow or
ancle, after to be purged, than to use soft fricasyes with oils before
rehearsed, afterward much rest and temperate bathes, and meats lackyng
sharpnes, and being abstersive.

Lassitude with the feelynge of inflammation. Capitulo. iiii.
IF without any mouynge, the muscules and flesh rise up in the body, as it
swelled with great peynes and excedyng heat, than sone after follows most
hottest fevers, except it be prevented by letting of blud, and that in
abundance, and almost to sowning, but it were more sure to be let Aetius.
blood twyse in one day, the first time without sownyng, at the next time
sownynge is not to be fered. If the grefe be in the neck or head, the blood must
be let of the vain called Cephalea, or the shulder vain. If it be in the
bulk or uppermost part of the body, than must the vain be cut, which is
called Basilica, or the innermost vain. If all the body be grieved, tha^ cut
the veyn, which is named Mediana. or the myddel vayn. If a fever remain after
blood letting, than order him with the diete of them that have fevers, which ye
shall find written hereafter. If no fever remain, than use moderate
fricasies, and little eating, and that of meats having good juice,
increacynge by little and little to the natural diete.

Diete of them that are ready to fall into syckenesse. Capitulo v.
Now return eftesones to speak of diete, it is to be remembered, that they,
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto, either by
replecion of superfluous humors, orels by cruditie or malice of humors, which are in them. As touching the first, the general diete must be such, as thereby
the humors may be attenuate, and by convenient euacuation, brought to a
moderate quantity. As for the second must be corrected with meats and
drinks of contrary qualities, having always respect to the age of the person,
time of the year, place of habitation, and most specially the universal
complexion, for choler offendynge in an old manne, in winter time, in a cold
countreye, or the person being of his natural complexion fleumatike or
melancoly, would not be so habu^dantly expulsed or subdewed, as if it be in one
young and lusty, in the hot summer, in the countries, where the son fervently
burns, or the person of his proper nature is very colerike. And in likewise
contrary. Wherefore every manne, knowing his own natural complexion, with
the quality of the humor that offends, let him make temperance his chief
coke, and remembrynge that which I have before declared, ordeyne to him self
such diete, as may refourme the offense with none or lyttel annoyaunce, to his
universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily escape, not only
diverse syckenesses, but also the most pernicious danger, proceeding of
corrupted drowges or spices, whereof some covetous poticaries do make medycynes,
maugre the hedes of good and well learned phisytions.

Sickness most commune to particular times of the year and ages. Cap. vi.
Although I do not intend to write of the cure of egritudes or syckenesses
confyrmed, as well because it moughte be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also forasmoche as it were very peryllous, to dyuulgate that noble science, to
commune people, not learned in lyberall sciences and philosophy, which be
required to be suffi ciently in a physician. And moreover, many books of
Hipocrates and Galene ought to be radde, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men's bodies: yet not withstandyng, I trust I may without
any note of arrogaunce write, what diseases do most commonly happen in sundry
times of the year and ages of men and women, with some significations, whereby
the dyscrasy or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
physician being far of, may be truly informed, consyderyng that vrines far
carried, do often deceive them, and likewise lack of the sight of the pacie^t,
and inquisition of things, which do precede or follow the sycknes. And with
this I trust none honest and charitable physician will be offended, but rather
give to me thanks for my dilygence, in the aduauncyng of their estimation,
which by lack of perfytte instruction has been appaired.

Syckenesses of Spring time.
Diseases procedynge of melancolye, as madness, falling syckenesse,
bleedynges, quynses, poses, hoorsenes, coughes, lepries, scabbes, ache in the
joints.

Syckenesses of Summer.
Many of the said diseases also fevers continual, hot fevers, fevers terciane,
quartayns, do mytes, flyxes, watryng of eyes, peynes of the ears, blysters and
sores of the mouth and sweattynges.

Syckenesses of Autumn.
Diverse of somer sycknesses, also oppilations of the spleen, dropsies,
consumptions, strangulyons, costyuenesse, ache in the huckle bones, shortness
of wind, frettyng of the bowelles, falling sycknes, and melancolyke dyseases.

Sycknesses of winter.
Stytches and grefes in the sides, inflammation of the lunges, reumes, coughes,
pains in the breast, sides, and loins, heed ache, and palseyes.

Spekenesses happenynge to children.
When they be new borne, there do happen to them sores of the mouth called
Aphte, vomiting, coughes, watchinge, fearfulness, inflamatio^s of the navel,
moisture of the ears.

When they bread tethe, ytchinge of the gummes, fevers, crampes, and laskes.

When they wax elder, than be they grieved with kernelles, opennesse of the
mould of y^ heed, shortness of wind, the stone of the bladder, worcester mes of the
bealy, wartes, swellynges under the chynne, and in England commonly purpyls,
mea sels, and small pockes.

Syckenesse happening to young men from.xiiii. years of age.
Fevers cotidiane, tercyane, quarteyne, hot fevers, spittinge or vomytinge of
blood, pleuresies, diseases of the sides, inflammation of the lunges,
lethargies, fransy, hot syckenesses, cholerik passions, costiuenes or vehement
laskes.

Syckenesses of age.
Difficulty of breath, reumes with coughes, strangulyon, and difficulty in
pissinge, ache in the joints, diseases of the raynes, swymmynges in the heed,
palseyes, ytchinge of all the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes and
ears, dullness of sight, hardness of hearing, tisiknesse or shortness of
breath.

Although many of the said sycknesses do happen in every time and age: yet
because they be most frequent in the said times and ages, I have written the^,
to thinte^t, y^ in the ages and ^ymes most inclyned unto the^, such things
might be tha^ eschewed, which are apt to inge^dre y^ said dyseases.

The general significations and tokens of syckenes. Cap. vii.
IF the body be hoter, colder, moyster, dryer, leaner, fuller, the color more
pale, or swart, the eyes more holowe, than is accustomed to be, it signifies
that the body is disposed to sickness, or already sick.

The brain sick. Rauynge. Forgetfulness. Fantasye. Humors coming from y^
roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breathe. Trembling of the heart. Beatynge of
the pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diversity of colors. Grief about the heart.

The liver sick. Lack or abundance of humors. The form of y^ body
altered. Palenesse. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrementes
accustomed. Pain in the place of y^ liver. Swellinge. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction, slow or quick. Appetite of moist or dry, dull
or quycke. Separacion of excrementes moist or herd with their colors.
Yexynge. Belkynge. Vometynge with pain and difficulty of breath. Urine much or
little with the color and substance, to red or to pale, to thick or to thyn.

The breast. Difficulty of breath. Cowghe. Spyttinge. Pain in the breast.

This have I written, not to give judgment thereby, but only for the pacient
to have in a redynesse, to the intent that what so ever he feleth or perceyueth
in every of the said things, thereof to instruct his physician, whereunto he
may adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of urynes. Cap. viii.
FOrasmoch as now a days the most common judgment in syckenesse is by vrynes,
which being far carried or much meued, or standing long after that it is
made, the form thereof is so altered, that the physician shall not perfytly
perceive the natural color, nor contents, although it be never so well
chaufed at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men do affirm. I will
therefore somewhat speak of vrines not so much as a physician knows, but as
much as is necessary to every man, for to perceive the place and cause of his
grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine, four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the color, the regions or parts of the vryne, and the conte^tes or
things therein contained.

Also forasmoch as in the body of man be four qualities, heat, cold,
moisture, and dryth, two of them, heat and cold, are causes of the color,
dryth and moisture are causes of the substance.

Moreover in urine, being in a vessel apt there unto to be seen, are three
regio^s. The lowest regio^ in the bottom of the vrynall, containing the space
of two fyngers or little more. The myddel region, from whens the lowest ended
unto the cerkle. The highest region is the cerkle.

The highness of the color sygnifyeth heat, the pale, black, or grene,
sygnifieth cold.

Also the grossenes or thyckenesse of the vryne sygnyfyeth moisture, the
clerenes or thynnes, signyfieth drithe.

The colors of Vrynes.
Color of bright gold. Color of gylte.
Perfyte digestyon. Red as a red apple or che^y. Base read, like to bole
armenake, or saffron dry Read glowynge like fire.
Ercesse of dygestion. Color of a beasts liver. Color of dark red wine.
Grene like to colewortes.
Adustion of humors. Leaddy color. Black as ynke. Black as horn.
Feebleness or mortification of nature, except it be in purging of melancoly.
White clear as water. Gray as a horn. White as whay. Color of a camels hear.
Lack of digestion. Pale like to brothe of flesh sodden. The beginning of
digestion. Citrine color or yelowe, Subcitrine or paler.
The myddell of dygestion. White and thynne betokens melancolye to have
dominyon. White and thycke, sygnifieth fleume. Read and thycke betokens
sanguine. Read and thynne betokenethe choler to have the souerayntie.
The substance of the urine. Cap. ix.
AT the first pissyng, all vrines well nigh do appear thyn, as long as they
abide warm. for natural heat, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the lycour, which is the substance of the urine, to congele or be
thycke for any occasion: but after that heat is gone, some vrines shortly,
some a longer time after, wax thick, like wise sometime, some at pissed
thicker, and after wax clear, some remain stylle as they were made, some be
metely thycke, as they were troubled, some very thick and gross. They that
wax clear, sone do gather that, which is thick into the bottom of the
vrinal, some remayn troubled, the grossenes not withstandyng gathered in the
bottom. Semblably the diversity of thyn or subtyl vrines, must be perceived,
that is to say, that some are very subtle as water. some less subtyl, some in
a mean between thycke and thynne.

Of things contained in the urine, some do discende down to the bottom, and
be called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the grounds,
some the resydence, which if it be white, light, risynge up from the bottom
of the vrinall, like a pear, it sygnifieth health, if it be of any other figure
or color, it betokens some anoyance. If like things be seen in the myddell
of the vrynall, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the vryne, they be named clouds, in latin Nebulae. The grou^des or
residences not perfect, some is like lyttelle read vetches, and is called in
latin Orobea, some is like to branne of wheat ground, and severed from the
meal, and is callid branny residence, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto
plates, having breadth and length without thicknes, and may be named platy
residence, in latyne Laminea. some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may
be named mealy residence, in latin Similacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hears, some lengar, some
shorter. sometime like to rags somewhat red. there is also seen in the
vppermoste part of the urine, sometime a foam or froth, sometime belles or
bobles. sometime there swymmeth in the urine a thing like a copwebbe,
otherwhile there is about the cerkle, as it were the rentynge of clothe, sometime
there is in the urine like motes of the son, sometime like the matter of a
sore, otherwhyle like the sede of a man. also grauelle or sand. And in these
things may be diverse colors, some white, some red, some between both, some
yelow, some graye, and some black. All this must be diligently marked, and
thereof separatly to advertise the Physician, unto whom I refer the judgment
of the syckenes, for the cause before rehearsed, and for as much as the
judgment of them is very subtle.

Semblably of ordure, whyther it be very thyn or very thick: what other matter
yssueth out with it, what color it is of, the savor very great, little or
none, if it were easyly expulsed, or peynefully, how often or how seldom.

Moreover of sweat, what color it is of, and of what savor, if in tastinge it
be salt, sour, bitter, or unsavory.

Also the vomyte, if it be of one color or many, if it do smell horribly, of
what humor it had most habundaunce, if it were fasting, or after meals, if
it were peynefull or easy.

Likewise spettyl, whether it be thick or thin, or mixed with blood or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humor issuynge out at the nose, and if that be
blood, than whyther it be red, watrye or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to aduertyse the Physician of the diet
used by the pacient, as well before the syckenesse, as in the time of the
syckenesse, his age, the strength of his body, his exercise, and place, where
he lengest abod^ in his youth, whether it were hye or low, watery or dry, hot
or cold.

This I trust shall be sufficient, to instruct a physician, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him read the books of Hipocrates Galene,
Cornelius Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and diverse other late writers, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The precepts of the ancient physician Diocles unto king Antigonus. Cap. x.
We will now divide the body of man into four parts, the heed, the boulke,
called in latin thorax, which conteyneth the breast, the sides, the stomach, and
entrayles. The belly, called in latin venture, conteyneth the panche and the
bowels. Also the bladder, called in latin vesica, in the which name is also
contained the cundytes, by the which brine passes. When any disease approaches
to the heed, these tokens do commonly precede, swymmynge in the heed, heed
ache, heaviness of the brows, soundynge in the ears, pryckynges in the temples,
the eyes in the morning do water, or wax dynime, the smelling is dulle, y^
gummes do swelle. When thou felest such tokens, forthwith pourge the heed with
somewhat, not with vehement medecines, but taking Isope or Organum, and the
croppes of them boil with white or claret wine half a pynte, and therewith
gargarise your mouth fasting, until the fleume be purged out of pour heed,
this is the easyest medicine in discrasies of the heed. It is also very wholesome
to gargarise the mouth and breast with honey water, wherinto mustarde is put and
myngled, but first the heed must be rubbed with a warm clothe, that the
fleume may easyly come out of the heed. And if these tokens be neglected,
these manner of syckenesses do follow sone after, bleared eyes, and humor
lettinge y^ sight, cleftes in the ears, swellynges in the neck full of
matter, called the kings evil, corruption of the brain, poses, or reumes,
heaviness of the head, and tooth ache.

Wha^ the boulke is like to suffer any sickness it is perceived by these
tokens, all the body is in a sweatte, the bulk most specially, the tunge
waxes thick, the spettyll is either salt or bitter, or cholerike, the sides
and shoulders do ache without any occasion, the pacient gapeth often, also there
does happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heaviness, also the breast and arms are very cold, and
the hands do tremble. Against these things this remedy may be prouy ded.
After a moderate soupper, assaye to vomit without any medycine, vomyte is
also profitable, which meat does follow: He that in such wise will vomit,
let him eat hastyly small radysshe roots, townketsis, rokat, synuy, or
purslane, and drink after it a great quantity of warm water, and provoke
him self to vomyte. He that sets little by the said tokens, let him fear
these sycknesses following, the pleuresie, the sickness of the lunges,
melancolye or madness, sharp fevers, the fransye, the letargie, inflammation
with yexinge.

If any syckenesse be toward the bealye, they may be espied by these tokens,
the bealy is first wrapped together, and in it self is troubled, all meats
and drinks do seem bitter in taste, he feleth heaviness in his knees, a
styffenes in his loins, a weariness in all his body without any occasion, a
slepynesse in his legs, with a lyttel fever, when thou feleste these tokens,
mollyfie the bealy, not with medicyne, but with good order of diete, for it is
best and most sure, to use those things, whereof lightly may ensue none
annoyance, in the number of them are betes boiled in water of honey, garlike
sodden, malowes, sorel, mercury, and al things condite in honey. All these do
expel the ordute of the belly: but if any of the said signs does more and
more increase, the lyquour, wherein the sede of Carthamus, called also Cnicus,
is boiled, is a pleasant and sure medicine. small colewortes boiled in a good
quantity of water, the licour thereof in measure.ii. pintes, saving the third
part of a pint, with honey and salt being drunken, shall profit much. Cicer,
and the pulse callid in latin eruum, in english I suppose chittes) in water
drunk fasting, has the same effect. To them, which set little by the said
tokens, these diseases do suddenly happen, Flux of the bealy, bluddy flux,
slyppernes of the bowels, peines in the guts, ach in huckle bones the fever
tercyane, the gowte, the apoplexy or pal sey in the lymmes, hemoroides, aching
of joints.

When the bladder is toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens,
fullness felt after ly tell meat, brekyng wind downewarde and upward,
palenesse of color in all the body, heavy or troublous sleapes, the urine pale,
and passinge forth peynefully, swellynges about the coddes and privy members.
When these tokens appear, tha^ is it expedient to have remedy of odoriferous
things, which do expel urine, which shall be done without any peril with
the rotes of fenell and persely stieped one or two days in good white wine and
to drink thereof fasting every morning three ounces and two dra^mes, with the
water of wild carettes, or elycampane, which of these is next at hand, every
of them have like effect. Also water, wherein the peasyn called in latyne
Ciceres, are stieped, being drunk with wine, is like commodiouse: he that
neglects the said tokens, let him look for these syckenesses following, the
dropsy, the greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, the stone, ache of the
back, or peynes in the raynes, the difficulty of urine, fullness of the belly.
In all these things that we have spoken of, we shall give to children most easy
medicines, to men those, which be stronger in workynge.

This diete of Diocles, although at this time it seems not most pleasant,
nor according to the practice now used, yet being tempred with that, which I
have before remembered, some thing may be found in it, which being
experienced, may be as commodious for the health of ma^s body, as that diete,
which is morecuryous or pleasant.

Of them in whose stomakes meat is corrupted. Cap. xi.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat, assay to vomyte, drynkyng sweet wine, absteyne from meat, that engender
botches, inflammations, fumous ructuations or vapors, and take such as
nourysh good juice, and chose them out, which do mollify the belly, and at
sundry times take them. It is also good to take temperatly y^ which lowseth the
belly, as the medicine called picra, and to absteyne from such things, whereby
ill juice is gathered, and do engender syckenesses, hard to be cured or never,
as goutes, boneache, peynes of the raynes etc.

Of the virtue of meats. Cap. xii.
HE that is studyous about the conservation of health, he needs to know the
virtue of meats. The meat which has virtue to Oribasius de medici na simpli.
extenuate, or make humors subtylle, it opens the poores, and brings
forth that which is fast in the flesh, it makes that which is clammye,
subtylle, and does extenuate, or relent that which is fat, it brings
forth that which abides long in the bealy, but that which is eaten, is a
superfluity watery and colerike, and at length makes melancolyke blood.
Wherefore much vsyng of them is prohibited, specially to them; that are
colerike, and only serves for them that are replete with fleume, crude or
undigested humors, clammy or fat. The diete of fattinge things, does
nourishe abundantly, so that the stomach and liver do digest well: meat of
good juice, makes good blood, but yet it stops the liver and spleen. These
do they, which make fat humors only, as the poulse called Lenticula, and
they that are slymy like malowes, some do make fat humors, and be also slymy,
as fishes with hard shelles. Finally the diete, which does extenuate and make
lean, is more sure for keeping of health, than that, which fatteth much.
Norishyng meats would be therefore moderately used, when a man perceyueth him
self to have need thereof, it may be most surely used of them that be exercised
temperately, and can sleep when they list. They that can not sleep by reason of
exercise, let them eschew fattynge meats, let none ydelle person
attempt to use them. In the preservation of health, sluggardy is the greattest
mischief. Like as the temperate moving is good, so is the meat which between
thycke and thynne, is to man's health most convenient, which ingendreth blood,
according to the competent constitution of man's body, and therefore is it to be
chiefly used. Meat of ill juice is always noyfull, wherefore it ought to be
eschewed. Likewise the variety of meats is to be observed diligently, for it
is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary virtues. for if
they be not well digested, that which is received, may bring displeasure.

A diete preservative in the time of pestilence. Capitulo. xiii.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next colerike,
than fleumatike last melancolyke, for in them the humor being cold and dry,
is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strayte passages, by the
which venim must pass. The diete convenient for y^ time is to abstein from
metes, inflamig and openig y^ pores Marfilius ^^inus.
also from the heat of the son, from to much heat of fire, or garmentis,
from very hot herbs, and much use of tart things, except onions and cikory,
or radishe with vinegar. for they do resist against venim, from wine very
fumishe, exercise incontinent after meals, from swetting, from al thingis that
will cause oppilations and putrefaction, from things hot and moist, where
moisture has the dominion in degree, specially being not sufficiently boiled:
also from milk, except it be in a littel qua^tite, and that with a litel
sugar. Frutis and herbs cold and dry, and therewith sour or somewhat bitter,
are not prohibited. If ye eat figs, grapes, or sweet cheries, eat after
them of an orange with salt. If ye eat things cold and moist, as cucu^bers,
melones, fyshe soft and fresshe, or damsyns, eat by and by after some fenell,
and orange with salt, drinkinge therewith a draughte of good wine. Beware of
musherons, much purslane, gourdis, and al other things, which will sone
putrify: not withstanding, I will not forbid eating of lettyse, with a few
myntes, or myxt with cynamom. Al things sour ar commended, as well in diete
conseruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or heals, except where there is
straytnesse of the breast, or weakness of the stomak, than ought they to be
tempred with sugar, salt, almond milk, cinamom, pepper, fenell, saffron,
eggs, and some thing that is fat or unctuous. Capers ar good to be used with
vinegar. Chese very fat and salt, is not commended, no more is colewortes, or
any kind of pulse, except chittes: great peason, rapes, nor spynache is good.
Also there be forboden rokat and mustard, much wine and eggs, except they be
eaten with sorell sauce, vyneger, or juice of orenges: persely and also
parsnepes be good. new wynes be noyfull, let the meat be somewhat more than
drink. but yet susteyn not to much hunger nor ^hyrst. beware of lechery, of a
clowdy wether and close, eschew much resort or thronge of people, wyndes
coming from fennes or mores, from sleep at none: use with your meat this
poulder, sanders read, half an ounce, cynamom three drammes and a half,
saffron half a dram. After your meat, eat a little of coriander sede,
well prepared. In the morning, at a temperate fire kembe your heed backward,
cleanse your body and heed of all superfluities: use also moderate fricasies,
with sweet perfumes, and odouts, wash oftentimes your face and hands with
pure vyneger myxt with rosewater. In cold wether mixed it with myntes, baulme,
rue, or myrtes, and some time cloves. In hot summer with roses or violettes.
Above all things use to take white wine good, white vyneger rosette, water of
roses, in equal porcions, put there unto a littell setuale, or of the rynde of
a citton, and drink thereof a little, and oftentimes wash there with your
handis and vysage. Medicines preservative against the pestilence, which be
always most ready, at these, a fig with rue, and a wall nutte eaten fasting,
also triakle, or mithridate, to old men a dram weight, to young men half a
dram, or a scruple dissolved in vinegar and rose water, or in water of
tormentill, scabiose, or balm, if the plage be in summer: if it be in winter,
put to the waters some white wine. Also the pills called commonly Pillul^
Rasis, but in deed they were invented by Rufus) are very excellent, specially
if the aloe, which is it, be washed, and there unto added a little Bolus
armenus, and terra sigillata, And if the person be of hot complexion, a
quantity of sorell sede, and red cotall, this confectioned with syrope of
cittons, in cold complexions or to old men with white wine, use them every
third day one pille at a time, three hours or four before dinet or supper. If
ye take triakle or Mithridate, absteyne from meat at the least syx hours
after. A piece of the rote of setual, borne in the mouth, preseruith from
infectio^. In likewise does sorell chewed fasting, and the juice sucked down.
To poor men, Marsilius was wont to give a toste of bread steped in vinegar,
with a piece of an onyon or rewe. Al things which be cordial, that is to
say, which do in any wis^ comfort the heart, do resist pestilence, vehement
anger, or heaviness, be very pernicious. other more exquisite and costly
preservatives, I pourposely pass over, which Marsilius, and other physicians,
do write of abundantly, forasmoch as I desire to be in this warke compendious.
One thing I had almost forgotten, that there is no better preservative, than to
fle from the place corrupted, betyme and far of, and to let none approach
you, that has made their abode, where the plage is fervent. More over receive
not into your house any stuff, that comes out of a house, wherein any person
has been infected. For it has been seen, that such stuff lyeng in a cofer
fast shut by the space of two years, after that the coffer has be^ opened,
they which have stand nigh to it, have been infected, and sone after have died.
But here I always except the power of god, which is wonderful, and also
mercyful, above ma^s reason or counsel, p^seruing or strikig whom, wha^, and
where it shall like his majesty, to whom be glory and praise everlasting. Amen.

THVS make I an end of this treatise, desyryng them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against enuyouse dysdayne, on whom I have set the
adventure, for the love that I bear to my country: requiringe all honest
physicians to remember, that the intent of my labor was, ye men and women
redinge this warke, and obseruinge the counsayles therein, should adapte thereby
their bodies, to receive more sure remedy by the medicines prepared by good
physicians in dangerous syckenesses, they kepinge good diet, and infourminge
diligently the same physicians, of ye manner of their affectes, passions, and
sensible tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessary science of phisike,
with the ministers thereof, escape the sclaunder, which they have of long time
sustained, and according to the precepte of the wise man, be worthily
honored, for asmoche as the highest god did create the physician, for ma^s
necessity. And of the earth created medicine, and y^ wise man shall not abhor
it. Thus fare ye well gentle reders, and forget me not with your good report,
and pray to God that I be never wars occupied.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO M. D. XXXIX.

