A ballat entitled Northomberland news /
VVherin you may see what Rebels do use.

Come tomblinge down come tomblinge down.
That will not yet be true to the Crown.
YOU Northcountrie nodies why be ye so brag
To rise and raise honor to Romish renown
You know ye at Tiborne there stands a Nagge
For such as will never be true to the crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
What mean ye to follow the man in the Moon,
With battz bows and arrows and bills very brown.
His shyninge with shame will be shadowed so soon,
It will grieve him that ever he troubled the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
Thowghe Popery wrought a great while a go,
That Percie provoked King Harry to frown.
Yet who would have thought there were any more,
That would not yet be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
Our Queen is the daughter of Henry theight,
Who brought every Alter and Imagerie down.
He left her and tawght her a remedy straight,
For any that would not be true to the Crown.
Come tombling. etc.
And though you do greet her like Traitors with treason
To whom you owe honor with cappe and knee down.
I am suer that saint Peter will say it is reason,
To rule ye that will not be true to the Crown.
Come tombling. etc.
And though you do say that is matter amiss,
Which you would redress by noble Renown.
What any way wurse then Rebellion is,
Of any that will not be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
What Strangers can be, more stranger then ye,
That gather together both carter and clown.
And study to stir to seek and to see,
Which way to devise to trouble the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
Sir Ihon Sborne your morrow Mass Priest,
Says to Lobbe look about will ye knele down?
We will have a Mass before Jesus Christ,
And that is the way to trouble the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
The Knights to their knaves say stick and be stowt,
Our banners and staves shall bring us Renown.
We have Nobles and others that be as deuowt,
To help us at this time to trouble the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
The Rebels come flinginge but what comes after,
A song worth the singinge hey down a down down.
A Tyborne Typpett a roope or a halter,
For any that will not be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
For though ye spoil Churches and burn up the Bible,
And worship gaie Crosses in every town.
Your Idolles you asses are never possible,
To save ye that will not be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
And though ye do carry the banner of force,
And Iolie round Robyn under your gown.
You know that saint George has a praunsinge horse,
Can make enie Rebel to stoop to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
The Westmerland Bull must come to the stake,
The Lion will rore still till he be down.
Northumberland then will tremble and quake,
For woe that he was so false to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
And Catholics old that hold with the Pope,
And carry dead Images up and down.
To take better hold they shall have a Roope,
To teach them once to be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
Let every Priest that sayethe any Mass,
Either choose to take the Crucifixe down.
Or hang as high as the Crucifixe was,
Except he will be true to the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
For God is a God of Ielosie such,
He lokes to have his holy Renown.
Or else he will mislyke very much,
To give any one his excellent Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
God prosper the Queen as I trust that he shall,
And grant of his mercy with blessed Renown.
The North, and West, country, the sowth, east, and all,
The people of England may cleave to the Crown.
Come tomblinge.
And I wish that Good Preachers and other true teachers,
Would visit the vynearde whose branches be down.
That all the North Country yet nosseld in Popeerie,
Might know their duty to God and the Crown.
Come tomblinge. etc.
Finis
quothe. W. E.

Imprinted at London in Paul's Churcheyarde, at the sign of the Lucrece by
Thomas Purfoote.


