A SHORT AND TRVE DISCOVRSE FOR SATISFYING ALL THOSE WHO NOT KNOVVING THE
truth, speak indiscreetly of her most excellent Majesty, of the Lord
Willughby Governor of her Majesty's succors in the united Provinces of the
Low countries, and of all the English nation: by occasion of a strange placcat
of the 17. of April 1589. the new style, put forth by certain particular
persons (as is said) under the name of the General States of those united
Provinces. By which discourse, every one is prayed and required to speak well
and Honorably of th'actions of those Estates general lawfully assembled.
Together with An Extraict of the authentic evidences and proofs for the
chief poincts of this discourse, whereunto they are directed by respective
quotation of page and Line. 1589.

A SHORT DISCOVRSE TOUCHING the siege before Gertrudenbergh, and the town lost
by reason thereof.
IT is holden a point of some perilous consequence, to breed grudging in a
servant toward his master. This is principally prevented by that Scripture,
forbidding us to detain the wage of him whom we set on work. But as the rules
of holy Scriptures are not precisely kept in private matters, through man's
corruption and otherwise: even so falls it out in more public affairs, as
for example, in the case of Brakeley fortress, and of the towns of Heusden
and Gertrudenbergh, where the men of war in garrison for the general Estates
of the united Provinces in the Low countries, by want of pay and other
misseintreaties, sent to them from the Lord Willughby Governor general etc.
And for so much as some malicious and envious at her Majesty's greatness, and at
the weal and repose of her subjects and good neighbors, are not ashamed to
publish this: that, So as men use the name of her Majesty and of her
ministers, it is tolerated without pain and chastiseme^t to do evil in those
provinces, as if her Majesty and ministers made way to wickedness: we must call
those evil tounged men to some better consideration of the royal affection
and zeal wherewith her Majesty proceeds, in favoring and assisting at al
needs and seasons, by all means that God puts in her princely hands, those
provinces and Estates representing soueraingty there. To begin with the
wars in time of the late prince of Orange of honorable memory, you shall find
in the contract made by master Edward Dier for her Majesty, what assistance
was accorded to that prince and country: besides that every port of her
kingdom, gave free passage out and in to all such as assisted or favored him.
It is well known how the Marquess of Haurech being sent 1578. by the States
general, obtained of the Queen great sums of money in pressed, which are not
yet satisfied. And if we shall but only name the latter wars, since Braba^t and
Flanders lost, and since the death of the duke of Aniou, and of the Prince of
Ore^ge, I say since Antwerpe lost, and the succourlesse negotiation with the
French king broken of, when all things so desperately wauered in those
provinces: it will most clearly appear with what cheerfulness her Majesty
not sparing her Nobility, employed all means to conserve those countries and
States. All this with a most sincere and heroical mind, not so much as
accepting the offers to her made of those countries. So far is her Majesty
from suffering or wittingly and willingly winking at such evils in those
co^tries, whose gracious endeavor has bin with no less care of her neighbors
in all their extremities then of her own kingdoms. But going thus slyly about
to obscure her most high and honorable actio^, you bark at the full Moon or
rather seek to shadow the sun, whose brightness breaks forth through all
clouds and is glorious in heaven and earth. Smaller stars perhaps, such as
Barons and Lords, though their honor shines by her sovereign light, yet may
they seem to suffer some darkness by these cloudie oppositions or mists
rather smoking out of diches, except they labor somewhat in declaration of their
own cleerenesse.

This makes the Lord Willughby Governor general of her Majesty's succors in
those provinces, to say in defense of his honor: First, that this placcard, as
in many things else, so affirming him to have sought by letters and messengers,
to maintain them of Gertrudenbergh in mutine, does notably forge and
counterfeit. For howsoever it were free and lawful for him to send thither,
her Majesty and those provinces being by virtue of precedent contract friends
to friends, and enemies to enemies: upon what reason or ground could he send
thither. Since at the general States instance to her Majesty, he had already
charge and commandment from his sovereign Mistress to accomplish their
desires, for Narden, Medenblicke, La Vere, and Armude, according as he
performed the same one after an other to their full and whole contentment, and
to the stopping of these wicked mouths in this behalf, that speak thus
slanderously of the Lord Willughby. For like as his obedience and faithful
service is apparent in handling the affairs of these four places: so certain
and manifest it is, that for the town of Gertrudenbergh, he never conceived
nor intended to do ought that might displease her Majesty and the States, with
extreme hazard to his wife, children, and all such honors and means as by Gods
mercy under her blessed gouuernment he enjoys in England. What if that
garrison would treat with none save with the Lord Willughby on her Majesty's
behalf? Should that redownd to his dishonor, and not much rather to the
increase of her Majesty's greatness, who by Gods grace wins such reputation
among these stranger soldiers, that albeit they never reaped other benefit or
reward from her, then by virtue of the consederacie of treaty with those
provinces: yet they chused rather to hold that town in her Majesty's name unto
the generality then to render to the enemy, though they alleged many occasions
of such render given them, which they did afterward more particularly discourse
in writing, and which shall be more largely spoken of hereafter. If then there be
any spice of dishonor in this action, it must light on them, who by disorder,
carelesnes, and fault of due pay to that garrison, suffered things there to
run to that uttermost that to save the place, these disorders and confusions
suffered and wrought by them could not be redressed but by th'autoritie charge,
expense, and great travel of her Majesty's servants. Had the Lord Willughby
carried this actio^ by his own proper authority, in deed, he should hardly
have answered it to his sovereign Mistress and the States, as having exceeded
his commission and therefore to be condemned for ambitious, and not content
with his own charge. But it is far otherwise as the very placcard shows.
For being many times required and prayed as well by the general States, the
council of Estate, Conte Maurice of Nassau and the States of Holland, as also
by the Magistrate of Dordrecht, to suffer himself to be employed about
appeasing Gertrudenbergh, the Lord Willughby nevertheless to prevent al
tongues that might insinuat any pretense in her Majesty, for other towns then
comprised in the contract (a thing broadly and lewdly spoken among them the
last year) did still put over this business to themselves, as they that had
good means to work this by the going between of the Magistrate of Dort, next
neighbor to Gertrudenbergh, not the Magistrate of Dort utterly given over the
matter, without effecting any thing according to the act of authorisatio^ to
them given 7. Aprilis aforesaid, and thereupon the Lord Willughby again most
earnestly solicited even by Count Hohenlo, as appears by his letters the
last of the same April and other letters afterward, requiring that he would do
his best for some appointment with Gertrudenbergh: for so much as (said he) we
perceive no other means left, the garrison there having signified by their
letters of the 20. and the Magistrate of Dort by theirs of the 28 of the same
April, that the soldiers of Gertrudenbergh would treat with none, but with
the Lord Willughby in her Majesty's name. This was the occasion that at last his
Lordship having achieved the States desire at Medenblick and Narden, being as
loath to fail in any part of his endeavor for preservation also of
Gertrude^bergh, a town so greatly importing the province of Holland and the
generality, as they had remonstrated many times to him, not farther endaunger
those affairs, being yet so smally come on, sent thither Sir John Wingfield
knight, M. Thomas Wilford Sergeant mayor of the English, and George Gilpin
secretary of Estate there, accompanied with M. Ioos Menin counsailor pensioner
of Dort, and Dirick Geerbrantsen Stoop, who wrought in such sort with them of
Gertrudenbergh, as they sent deputies to Dort the 9. of May, who presently upon
their arrival exhibited to the Lord Willughby, a certain discourse signed and
sealed, containing the reasons of their miscontentment, and therewithal,
certain articles demanding security to themselves for any thing done in this
alteration. Upon which articles of assurance after good deliberation and
communication first had with the Magistrate of Dort, certain points were
apostilled, but yet without agreeing any thing definitiuely to that garrison,
which might be interpreted prejudicial, either to the general of the country,
or the particular of Holland: yea, quite to the contrary, his Lordship sharply
by word and writing blamed their unreasonable demand to be paid from her
Majesty, to whom hitherto they had done no particular service. Their deputies
stood hereupon, that for so much as these matters could not determine at Dort, it
would please the Lord Willughby to come personally to Gertrudenbergh, that so
upon the place all things might take better end, whereunto his Lordship having
partly consented with the Magistrates advise of Dort, departed the 13. of May,
with intention yet not to enter the town of Gertrudenbergh, but lying in his
boat before the town to negociat from out of his boat with the garrison. But
by occasion of a treason the next night before discovered, which had been
practiced by Captain Fournet and Mark Albanois, both which suffered therefore
afterward, the Lord Willugh by was driven to enter the town that very day, and
that without hostages or any other assurance, save the signed writing of the
Deputies of Dort and Gertrudenbergh, or else the town was to fall in more
danger then ever before.

If two months and more before this time, the soldiers of this garrison for
want of pay, had changed their Colors tearing and renting their Cornets,
Ensigns and Banderols from their lances and standarts, as this placcard
rehearses, we leave it to the consideration of all men, yea of these evil
speakers, and even of these which did impertinently reproach a certain promise
never thought of, together with th'apostilles of the ninth of May, we leave it
I say to all good consideration, whether the Lord Willughby might not justly
doubt of his own safety, being now in the hands of a sort of warlike
malcontents, without one farthing to content them. But being taught by
experience in such cases to make virtue of necessity, his Lordship carried
himself so with them, as by Gods grace and the assistance of the Deputies of
Dordrecht he calmed their choler, and brought them so far on, as to yield
their demand in writing the foureteenth of May, which was one and thirty
months pay, releasing all surplus.

They insisted upon ready money, but were brought by the Lord Willughby, yet so
far further on as to give one months day: notwithstanding their alteration
had already continued two months. About which matter his Lordship not having
other commission save to hear and understand, after he had required them to
hold all good and soldiour like discipline, while the States and Count Maurice
of Nassau being advertised might resolve upon this their demand, he left with
them at their request Sir John Wingfeld for entertainment of some better
order: and so departed from Gertrudenbergh the 15. of May, without promise of
one half penie to them. What a strange thing is this then, that together with
these occurrents should come to be alleged the apostilles of the 9. of May, as
if by them had grown some prejudice to the country, since all that passed at
Dort was but to make way to these affairs, and to the Lord Willughbies journey
toward Gertrudenbergh, and since that by the apostilles nothing was to that
garrison agreed definitiuely, but the final accord concerning that alteration
differred more the^ two months, that is to say, till the 26. and 27. of Iulie
following, whereof the States and Count Maurice of Nassau having signed that
contract are not ignorant. What shall we say to these calumnies? No nouelty, a
thing well known to the whole world, that is that the Lord Willughby being
entreated to mediat in this extreme necessity, and at his own charge to
prepare an appointment of that alteration, which happened through want of pay and
other evil usage, is now requited with this ingratitude and disacknowledgement
together with a practice of persuading lies against him to the people,
specially in that point of th'apostilles by which I say, it is notorious that
no damage could come to the country nor to any person in particular. For Count
Maurice of Nassau being advertised of all this by the Secretary of Estate
George Gilpin, thanked the Lord Willughby therefore by express letters of the
11. of that month.

The rest is in substance, that the Lord Willughby after his departure from
Gertrudenbergh the 15. of this month, aduertising the States and Count Maurice
of Nassau, of the soldiors foresaid demand and of the time which by his means
they gave for satisfaction, he went to Walckerland at their instance also,
specially of the States of Zeland, for to appoint the affairs of Vere and
Armude, which towns but specially Vere, the States of the country and Count
Maurice of Nassau did hold as good as besieged. This Zeland business at the
first seemed to promise speedy dispatch. But at this very time Oste^d finding
it self threatened with siege by the enemy, called the L. Willughby thither:
without also giving ear or any reverence at all to Count Maurices letters of
the 29. of May in his Lordships absence, written to put them in mind how the
town of Gertrudenbergh apperteined to his late Lord and father, after whose
death he was coheire with his brethren and sisters who had no way offended the
garrison there: and that therefore he desired to send commissioners to treat
with them upon their pretenses.

Hereupon the States general and they of Holland particularly, renewed their
earnest request for his Lordships emploiment in this appointment of
Gertrudenbergh: because, they said, they knew no other remedy. To which end
also Count Maurice of Nassau gave him autentike copies of two co^missions, the
one dispatched by the States general the 2. of June, the other by the States
of Holland the 3. of the same, pourporting that Count Maurice as Governor of
Holland and proprietary of Gertrude^bergh, should treat with them of that town
jointly with the Lord Willughby or by means of his Lordship only: with
restrainct nevertheless that by whatsoever appointment to be made, the town
must not be separated fro the province of Holland, according as the commission
contains. The Lord Willughby seeing him self this pressed on every side,
overcome with the desire which he knows to be in her Majesty his Mistress,
who takes nothing more to heart then to defend al those provinces with every of
their towns and places, and greatly carried in his own affection to do all
good office and pleasures to the States and Count Maurice of Nassau, according
as already he manifested the same by appointing and bringing home into their
duotio^ to their co^tentme^t the towns of Medenblick and Narden in Holland, and
of Vere and Armude in Zeland, he yielded to assist the compassing of this
appointment according to those co^missions. And this did he the rather moved by
letters of the 10. of June to Count Maurice of Nassau from S. John Wingfield
knight, containing that the soldiers there had threatened that they would
quickly find a sovereign Prince, since the Queen of England would neither take
them into protection nor procure assurance of their persons and pay: besides
other aduertisements by letters of the 19. of this month, to his Lordship from
the Magistrate of Dort, how the soldiers of that garrison began to speak of
hearkening to the enemy, and of a purpose to receive the enemies letters
whenever they should be sent, notwithstanding that hard before they had
hanged up Captein Fournet and the Albanois with others for a particular
treason. So then to prevent these apparent dangers and upon these their earnest
instances the Lord Willughby accompanied Count Maurice of Nassau and the
Deputies of the States, having commission of the seven and twentieth of June,
from the States of Holland, to promise to that garrison 20. months pay or two
hundred thousand florins. Coming thus before Gertrudenbergh to appease this
alteration they proceeded so far remaining still in their boats, as diverse
times offer of the said sum was made to the deputies of the garrison the 28.
of this month. But the day following, the Lord Willughby seeing them refuse
this offer and to stand obstinatly upon four and twenty months pay as
appeeres by their writing: he could not but marvel with some disdain,
whereupon he sent a sharp letter into the garrison, and yet not so content, he
declared by word to Count Maurice of Nassau, and the States deputies there, and
to them of Dort, that for his particular he held it best since the soldiers
stood so obstinate, rather to assail the town by force then to burden the
provinces with such a sum. Or else that if in further treaty with them they
would articulate, that his Lordship with his guard might enter the town for
conduct of the money to be paid them, that he would upon that event do his best
to bring the town into the Countes hands as owner thereof.

This proposition thoroughly deliberated in counsel, it was answered by the
Count and all the deputies, that (notwithstanding the enemy had then no army at
hand that might induce the garrison to change party) yet to attend the event of
the forcible attempt were too too hazardous, and to promise any more they
wanted commission. Whereupon the said Lords, Count, Lord Willughby and
deputies of the States, departed from the flote before Gertrudenbergh, and went
to the Haghe without any final composition of this alteration. Lo here that
promise for which some slanderers do find fault with her Majesty's Lord
Lieutenant General, as if neither remembering the ten thousand dangers which he
hardly escaped within that town in May last, nor perceiving th'extreme perils
now also immine^t there, he would most unadvisedly presume to promise by him
self alone to render that town, and thereupon make sir John Wingfield to give
his hand to Count Maurice of Nassau, which self same town all the united
Provinces thought not good to set upon by force, but rather by their departure
seemed to abandon, notwithstanding his Lordship then promised his best offices
to bring it about to their desire, if they had liked to follow his advise. In
which emploiment he offered him self with the very same affection to do
pleasure and service to Count Maurice of Nassau and the States, as he had done
in the other four towns which they presently held in possession to their
whole contentement. Medenblicke. Narden. La Vere. Armude.


To speak truly and certainly of these occurrents, we must stay upon the
manage of every affair as it passed from day to day, in which behalf he that
couched and signed the placcard either erreth of misinformation, or else
misreporteth of malice. An abuse offered to none so much as to his own
Masters, blindfolding their eyes as if they saw not that which all the world
sees: and therefore, forsooth, men must upon great pain be forbidden to say
that which is apparently true, that is, That certain particular persons who
were the very cause of that town lost, seeing their own fault irreparable,
will needs color their excuse by the Lord Willughby. And this is not their
first wrong done him in his honor. For heretofore when he was Governor of
Berghes op Zoom, they shamed not to calumniat his actions as if he had had some
sinistre drift against that town, which his Lordship held always very dear.
Berghes op Zoom defended.
But that this their imagination was a false lie, fell out evident, when with
the peril of his life (all glory be to God) the town was maintained against a
royal army of the enemy.

To proceed with the town of Gertrudenbergh, it makes well for our purpose to
show how the same town was yet further preserved, though as good as given over
by the retraict of Count Maurice and the States as aforesaid, as appeeres by
the daily handling of those matters. You must understand that after the States
general, the counsel of Estate, Count Maurice of Nassau, and the States of
Holland had better waighed this matter in counsel at the Haghe, of that
garrison, with certain points and articles concerning a final accord and
their own assurance. Which being considered in counsel were finally set down
for agreed the 26. following, and signed by Count Maurice of Nassau as
proprietary of that town and Governor of Holland, and by the Lord Willughby
for her Majesty. For, as for the States you understand already that the
garrison would not once treat with them. Now whereas in the second apostille
upon there foresaid article was comprised, that the horsemen in the garrison
should be made into one Cornet of 100. lances, and 50. carrabines only, and
their footmen into one Ensign of 150. and no more, so as the residue might
range themselves under the companies at her Majesty's charge in Berghen or
otherwhere, the whole garrison being advertised thereof by their deputies,
found themselves greatly interessed, and setting forth the 27. of July
following their griefs and difficulties, declared that they never meant to be
separated one from an other, for which purpose they had condicioned in their
second article that they might retain their garrison, adding thereto that the
half of their soldiors could not be ordered under one Cornet and one Ensign,
and that also the same should be to them great charge and expense to go seek
service in an other garrison. Which point Count Maurice and the States finding
hard to be resolved, without being upon the place among the soldiers,
especially their number being yet unknown, they left all to the Lord
Willughbies discretion, giving thereof to the soldiers an act signed by the
Count and jointly by the Lord Willughby at th'instance of the States. Here is
the conclusion of final treaty with them of Gertrudenbergh until the very
day, made in the boats before the town.

Now for the execution of this treaty you must understand, that the soldiers
being somewhat better contented with this last apostill, the Lord Willughby
went his way from the flote toward Gertrudenbergh, at th'instance of Count
Maurice of Nassau and the States, and according to the second article of the
treaty: where after hostages delivered as well on the part of the Magistrate as
of the garrison there, his Lordship entered but very reasonably attended, taking
immediately such order with that forlorn state, that upon the 28 of this
month, commissaries Orsemall, Parasis and Matrut, deputed thereto by the Count
and the States, began to make payment. And albeit the Lord Willughby might well
have sought the government of that town for him self, or in his absence for
sir John Wingfield according to the content of the treaty, articul. 3. yet to
clear him of all ambition as well for his own part (being highly contented
with the Honor her Majesty vouchsaueth him) as also for sir John Wingfield his
near allie: his Lordship did by letters of the 28. of that month to the
counsel of State, which had commission to govern the provinces, beseech them
and that unfeignedly that they would bestow that government on Colonel Sche^k,
who had sued for it. This done, the Lord Willughby forthwith even the self
same day advertised Count Maurice of Nassau, who was then gone from the flote
to Dort, that to reduce and redress those men of war into convenient order
(which thing yet the very next day before was resolutely left to the Lord
Willughbies discretion in regard of those difficulties before moved by the
garrison) there were no other way but to content them by making one Cornet of
200 lances, and one of 100 Carrabines: one company of foot of 200. one other
of 150. which thing though his Lordship had already, as is before said,
authority by discretion to do, yet did he write that he would not do it without
first knowing the Countes advise, according as also he never attempted any
thing in the world about reducing and reformation of these men of war till
first and foremost having received two of his letters, containing his advise
before imparted with the deputies of the States first at Dort then at Haghe.
But so soon as his Lordship had received those letters he set on hand to
reform and reduce those companies, as the necessity, the country service, his
own Honor and the holding of that treaty required: yet still according to the
Counts advise, as before said, containing a general clause that his Lordship
might dispose of things as appeeres by th'originalles of 28 and 30 of this
month. Things being so far on, to finish likewise the rest, his Lordship,
according to the second article of the treaty, propounded to the garrison the
draught of an oath to be taken by them, in such manner and form as they of her
Majesty's succors had done, that is to say, to the States general etc. even
as the commissaries themselves had set it down. The soldiers hearing but the
name of the States general, cried hand over head tumultuously that they had
not contracted with the States, neither would they in any sort swear to the^.
The Lord Willughby perceiving that to avoid one difficulty was to fall into an
other, finding himself in some perplexity as being their alone, not assisted
by any of that country, was forced to alter the draught of the oath by omitting
the name of States general: because otherwise the money already paid and to pay
being within the town had been utterly lost, besides all this negotiation
overthrown and his Lordships person to come in exceeding danger. Yet would not
he pass further herein, finding the soldiers reasonably well satisfied by
putting out the names of the States general, till he sent immediately both the
oaths drawn as they were to Count Maurice of Nassau, declaring to him that as
by the first it was impossible to quiet those men of war, so by the second
their was good likelihood they might be contented. Count Maurice wrote back by
express letters of the last of July that he allowed well of this alteration:
signifying also ioinctly with the States of Holland to his Lordship, that they
found it not good to give the government of Gertrudenbergh to Colonel Schenk.
Hereupon the Lord Willughby went on, giving order for that which remained, that
so the whole payment being once made as equally and as much for the countries
profit as was possible, the foresaid co^missaries being daily therein occupied,
his Lordship then might grow to finish that business as well for reforming the
companies as for giving their oath according to those ample commissions which
already his Lordship had. The rest seemed of ready dispatch. But the money not
being ready, and if it had been ready, yet not being sufficient to pay the
soldiers (as the commissaries appointed for the payment can well witness at
this day) the Lord Willughby was feign to advertise Count Maurice of Nassau,
the counsel of Estate, the States of Holland and the Magistrate of Dort
respectively, to the end that they might presently make provision for it, as by
his Lordships letters of the 2.3.5. and 6. of August following appears. Count
Maurice first communicating this with the States, answered that the money was
not yet all levied, earnestly desiring the L. Willughby to deal with the
Magistrate of Gertrudenbergh and Dort to take up that which wanted, and the
States of Holland would assume and undertake to repay it. This request
according to letters to him thereof, his Lordship performed with such
diligence, as the whole paime^t being quickly made, he proceeded according to
his former commission to redress the companies, causing them to take that very
oath which (once again I say it) Count Maurice of Nassau had not only
approved, but therewithal had sent the garrison a general pardon, which was to
them upon the instant delivered according to the first article of the treaty,

This is the plain course and very true carriage of these affairs, so to be
proved by all and every th'instructions, commissions, letters and warrants
before mentioned, as they are yet exta^t to be seen, and for more plain
evidence are extracted in the end. What a foul placcat then is this, publishing
to the world against al truth, that forsooth the Lord Willughby had redressed
those companies as him self listed, giving them an oath to their liking upon
his own head. But his commissions and sincere actions are so evident to the
contrary, as by allegation of them the people themselves may easily judge the
truth, and we need speak thereof no more. Yet thus much more then need, that
over and besides all the particular ordonances and warrants already spoken of,
according to which his Lordship governed him self, he has more over to show an
act of thankesgeuings for all his sincere actions, which Count Maurice of
Nassau and the States of Holland jointly gave him before his coming from that
town: a thing alone that may maintain his Honor and reputation with all the
world. And that yet so much the more, because in the conclusion of the same
act, the Count and States do confess and say, as by other the like they had
done, that the Lord Willughby was employed in appeasing this altered town of
Gertrudenbergh at their great instance and earnest suit, hoping that her
Majesty of England (so are the words of the act) will take it in very good
part, because say they, by this his imploiment the province of Holland and
consequently all the countries had received a very principal benefit. The Lord
Willughby finding him self this kindly thanked by this act, and considering
how Count Maurice of Nassau and the States of Holland had preferred S. John
Wingfield (though yet it were no more the^ contained in the treaty) before
Colonel Schenck, in the government of Gertrude^bergh: he grew desirous to
requite courtesy with courtesy. Whereupon, voluntarily, franckly, and to show
that he never affected that government neither for him self nor any other (for
as for sir John Wingfield he was there established by Count Maurice) he then
and not before, made promise under his hand, in substance, this, that for so much
as he had been forced to intermedle in this affair, and to enter the town
for appeasing th'alteratio^ there, and that God of his goodness had so blessed
his actions as to bring the^ to pass, that for all this he would pretend
nothing for himself in the town, but ever would be ready, as far as were in
his power, to restore it to Count Maurice of Nassau: so as again the Count
would perform and hold what was promised to the soldiers there, for
conseruatio^ of their lives, wives and children, according to that which was
also her Majesty's desire. Here appeeres sufficiently that Count Maurice of
Nassau had passed to the garrison a former promise, by the precede^t contract,
the promise of the Lord Willughby having relation to a promise formerly made to
the garrison, as the very letter of his promise plainly shows. Let the world
judge how honestly these men deal in giving the people to understand against
all truth, that the promise made by the Lord Willughby should go before the
treaty with Gertrude^bergh, the words, I say, of this promise being so clear
to the contrary, so confirmed also by these circumstances, as the meanest
handicrafts man on earth ignorant of all policy may easily judge that this
promise of the Lord Willughby was rather the close and period of all this
business, referring it self to the precedent treaty. Before that treaty a man
may well judge by these occurrents, that things could not have been so
reduced, and how it might have been afterward compassed, let men judge by that
which follows. The Lord Willughby then, upon his entry into the town having
by Gods good grace, conducted the affairs to this point, and being no less
desirous to pursue this course of his sincere actions, caused the soldiers to
restore to the Magistrate and burgers of the town their arms, a poinct yet not
mentioned in the treaty, and so being called away for her Majesty's service,
the better part of the Spanish fleet, and that the rest were chased Northward,
the garrison esteeming the great danger to be well over, began to excuse by
letters of the 17. of August, alleging certain difficulties yet to be
discussed between them and the townsmen, namely an oath of fidelity from the
burgers for assurance of the town and themselves, which once done they would
be commanded any where either for service of her Majesty or of the united
Provinces of the Low countries. While these things passed, the Lord Willughby
seeing Ostend quit from an imminent siege by overthrow of the Spaniards, induce
them to co^serue a town so much importing religion and all the country. What
could the Lord Willughby do more for bringing a good government into the town
then before his departure to cause the soldiers (though no such matter were in
the treaty) to restore to the Magistrate and Burghers their arms again? what
could he do more then call forth 200 horses as upon so good occasion he did?
Verily these three things thus falling out, who would doubt of his duty and
not hold it assured?

The placcat makes mention of certain powlder, whereunto we answer shortly
that it was never used in her Majesty's service, but withdrawn to the profit
of the States and the country, one part during Berghen op Zoom besieged, and
the other part in Zeland. The substance of that which remains may be said in
few words.

The Duke of Parma, being disappointed of his attempt in Flanders upon the
coming of the Spanish fleet well beaten, he the^ besieged Berghen op Zoom with
so puissant an army as for many years before he had not the like, where the
Lord Willughby was engaged, from the 24 of this September until the 13 of
November, inclusiuely following. AT the beginning of this siege his Lordship
thought good to send for 100. of foot men from Gertrudenbergh to the succor
of Berghen op Zoom. But they made difficulty to come as well for that the enemy
lay near them, as also for the just fear they had, least they should not be
permitted to return after the siege levied (which yet should have been a
breach of the contract with them) by reason whereof his Lordship was feign to
promise them free return. By these soldiers which were the best trained in
all the troops, and other soldiers sent for from Ostend, Vlissing and Briel,
the deputies of the counsel of Estate, and of the States of Holland and Zeland
to pass over from Terthole to Berghen op Zoom, (for by th'enimies artillery
withdrawn the river of Volsemer was freed) among whom the chief were, M.
James Valcke counsailor of Estate, M. Iaspar Vosberghe counsailor of Holland,
and M. John Barneuelt aduocat of the States of Holland, who were right welcome
to the Lord Willughby, not only for their special degrees and places which
they held but also for coming as good signs of some more liberty like to be
now, that th'enimies artillery was carried away, in which respect they passed
their dinner at the Court of the Lord Willughby in ioility and hearty cheer. In
this doubtful time, the circumstances of our business then in hand requiring
no new matter to be set abroach which might call us from thinking how to take
order by all means still to resist that siege continued, the camp not rising
from Berghen op Zoom till ten days after, yet needs must Berneuelt at any
hand that afternoon make great complaints against Gertrudenbergh, alleging
that during this siege they had taken certain marchandises going for the
country of the enemy, by name for Breda, Rosendale and other places
thereabouts, and which had paid all rights due for license, which taking of
theirs because it was an offense against a resolution and ordinance of the
States general, the garrison must therefore be well punished according to
their fault. And for so much as they could not be easily punished (as he said)
except the town might come to the States hands, he therefore desired the Lord
Willughby to remember his promise, and his Lordship not having leisure to
breath from continual resisting, th'enimies army still being before Berghen,
he must forthwith bethink how to bring Gertrudenbergh into the Counts hands,
or else (quod Barneuelt) I know how otherwise to bring it under the States,
protesting that he rather wished Gertrudenbergh to fall into th'enimies hands
then to remain in that case. These indiscreet words uttered with loud speech
in great chaufe of choler and bitterness, coming to the soldiers ears of
the garrison of Gertrudenbergh, whereof there were, as you have heard, one
hundred in the town of Berghen op Zoom, it was no need to bid them to make
have home to their garrison so soon as ever the enemy had raised his camp,
neither could all the offices and inducements of the Lord Willughby stay them,
his Lordship having in truth, lost all his former interest, credit, and wonted
power of persuasion with them, by means of this kind of broad speech from
Barneuelt, and having now no other way but fair means to use toward them,
because before their coming out from Gertrudenbergh thither, they were
promised a free return.

Th'enimy raising camp from Berghen the 13 of November, as is said, the Lord
Willughby took order for that which was to be done after the siege, and
transported him self to Dort, where sir John Wingfield who also had been
somewhile at Berghen in the siege, came to see his Lordship the 19 of this
month, and told him that the soldiers of Gertrudenbergh for more part were
upon point of an other mutine, by reason of Barneuelts loud and open speech at
Berghen, being such (said they) as they perceived they were not sincerely and
plainly treated withal in July last, and therefore since, by Barneuelts speech,
it seemed that the States pretended to recover into their hands the town of
Gertrude^bergh, belike, to thrust in another garrison, they would on the other
side advise for their own surety. The Lord Willughby hearing this, sent back
S. John Wingfield to Gertrude^bergh presently, as well for prevention of all
inconveniences likely to fall by his absence, as also to declare to that
garrison that they should do well to give no heed to such speeches, but to
continue their good and faithful service, and, as for his Lordship, he would
endeavor no thing more heartily with the States then to set forward by all
means whatsoever might serve to the accomplishment of the treaty. Thus much
being delivered by sir John Wingfield, though it were very acceptable to the
soldiers, yet ceased they not by fair words to win away the Burgers arms,
for their assurance and safety, as they said. For, the offender still casts
all back reckonings. Some taking pleasure to speak evil, go no further then
these terms of the placcat, and seeing this conference at Dort, are not
ashamed to say against a direct truth, that all this was by former consent of
the Lord Willughby. But all the world may see the vanity of this abuse, by his
Lordships letter of the 25 of this November, sharply blaming there former
attempt, with express commandment on her Majesty's behalf to render the
arms before taken from the burghers. Whereunto if they obeyed not, the fault
must be laid upon Barneuelts brauing speeches at Berghes, which renewed such
doubtful fears in those soldiors brains as caused all this mischief
following.

And if we had not thus evidently where to lay this fault, yet all men of good
and sound judgment know you may not pike these quarrels at other men by such
extrauagant presumptions and circumstances, who by better proofs setting forth
the truth can clear themselves. For to proceed by circumstances and
presumptions, a man might even so judge that Barneuelt (whose signature was
th'aute^tike warrant to pass this placcat) were the greatest traitor in the
land, because some will not let to say that he wrote to Richardot president of
the Duke of Parmas counsel of Estate, that he the same Barneuelt would so
carry the affairs of the States of the united Provinces in the Low countries,
that they should fall into the hands of the King of Spain. And could any man
wish a better co^currence of circumstances or more evident proof, then the
self same way that he takes? to wit, to draw dry the thresors of those
Provinces already so far in arrerages, and all to leuy secretly an army
wherewith to assail by water and land a town confederated with the
generality, bringing to the bouchery all the best soldiers of that country. A
man may easily judge by what faithful and martial advise the men of war of
that country, left their trenches to th'enimy before Gertrudenbergh, neither
rased nor thrown down, as also upon what reason Count Maurice of Nassau might
not be suffered to accord with the garrison of Gertrude^bergh, when the
minister of the Church there and the Schoute beseeching mercy, offered to Count
Maurice reasonable conditions on the part of the town and garrison. Wherefore
would not Barneuelt accept those offers, except it were thereby to do th'enimy
good service, and therewithal also to be aduenged of Dort where he has borne
and does bear a particular hatred, because that town did ever greatly respect
the Queen and could never approve all th'actions of some calling themselves
deputies to the States of Holland, and least of all did Dort allow this rash
siege most unadvisedly enterprised and performed. On the other side, experience
now shows, what a special piece of service Barneuelt did to the Spanish
king, when he maintained by open speech in public assemblies sundry times to
certain ministers of the Gospel, deputies for the Church of Holland in summer
1587. that it was a great abuse and most pernicious error to think that the
united Provinces were not sufficiently able, in richesse, and puissance, to
maintain, conserve and defend themselves against the common enemy, without any
need of succors from the Queen, or any other Princes aid in the world. This
vain counsel brought all that country into a terrible confusion and mutinery
of soldiers, bereuing it of all authority, counsel, leaders, soldiers and
money, making it a contempt to all neighbors. Every politic man then may
judge Barneuelts deeds to agree well with his letters. Likewise Greffier
Cornelius Aerssens, who signed this placcat, being heretofore examined and
atteinted of treason, and thereupon suspended from his office and restrained to
his house in Vtrecht, for writing and holding corresponde^cy with th'enimy,
namely with the Magistrate of Bruxels promising him service and friendship, we
shall not need more particularly to discourse after what sort he had before
that time sent his wife secretly to Antwerpe carrying an other woman's name for
laying of the better fundation to all his correspondence, with such a pasport
as to that end he him self had dispatched and signed.

Now to go to the offer made by Sir John Norris, and the coming of M. Bodley
counsailor of Estate in the Low countries, which the placcat me^tioneth; first
you must understand that those two persons for the places which they held, if
they could advance the matter of Gertrudenbergh, it was either by force or
fair means, by deeds or by words. As for any inducement by fair means, it
is already showed to how little purpose that had been, by reason that though the
garrison was content to give some ear, yet through Barneuelts brauing former
speeches they refused to give trust or credit unto any thing propounded, making
full account that we went about to entrap them, as the said Lord Ambassador
found by experience, when he thought to have drawn from them some soldiers
for Portugal service, according to such counsel and advise as the Lord
Willughby had before given to that effect. To bring any thing there to pass by
force, was not thought good during the alteration, which yet had it seemed
good, could not have bin done during the siege before Berghe^ op zoo^ for the
reasons already spoken of. After the enemy gone from Berghen op Zoom, to go
against Gertrudenbergh with the soldiors having endured the siege together with
those others which had lien abroad in Tertholen beaten with rain and wether,
was a thing never propounded, the said Ambassador never declaring any charge
from her Majesty for besieging any town confederated with the generality, but
for gathering a certain proportion of soldiors according to his enstructions
for the service of Portugal. Wachte^donck.
And had he had other charge, as he had not,

Lordship forthwith sent thither one of his folk able to redress the abuse if
any there were, and therein was so much done, as not only all complaints
ceased, but the Princess had, to her desire and contentment, restitution of
all goods remaining at Gertrudenbergh since Count Hohenlos government. What
could the Lord Willughby do more for all parts? well, the placcat says on,
that the garrison of Gertrudenbergh seeing the contributions, which they dealt
with, suffised not for their pay, and that (according to their treaty) the time
of their count and reckoning for satisfaction of that which wanted, drew near,
to wit, February following: they gat certain Magistrates of the town to go to
the Haghe, to signify from them all this matter to the States general and
counsel of Estate, for some convenient order therein. The Magistrates so
endeavored as the 25 of January they obtained for the garrison a good and
profitable resolution. That is to say, in effect, that the States and counsel
of Estate of the united Provinces of the Low countries intended to give
reasonable satisfaction to the^ of Gertrudenbergh, within ten days after the
first six months which should expire the 15 of February following. Likewise
Count Maurice of Nassau by the 27 of the same month, sent them word that they
should have all manner reasonable contentment. The Lord Willughby in this mean
while making a iourny to Vlissing, and after his return falling into some
infirmity, gave nevertheless continually the best order that could be (for
performing her Majesty's commandments and the countties service) to transport
for England one after an other the soldiers appointed to the Portugal voyage,
and specially the horsemen remaining. This business almost all dispatched, it
pleased her Majesty to honor him with her letters of permission to come home
into England for some short while, according to his long suit for the same. In
which letters her Majesty signifying a care that the matter of Gertrudenbergh
should be discretely handled, answered by way of apostille (quite contrary to
the resolution of the 25 of January past) that the deputies of the general
States had none authority from there superiors to deal with the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh, and that so much the less as the Lord Willughby had not (said
they) performed his promise of bringing the town to Count Maurices hands,
without which the country was not to pay this sum sufficient to do greater
service to her Majesty and the country: not leaving out in this resolution
such abuses as had passed in that town. To this apostille the Lord Willughby
answered summarily, how the treaty of Gertrudenbergh had passed from the
beginning to the end, making good proof also that therein he had been not the
alone actor but a third person, warranted by diverse commissio^s to accord them,
who without his coming between would never have agreed, because things were
come to such extremity for want of payment which the States ought to have made
in time and place. In which emploiment no more then in any other, his Lordship
proved that he never received any thing from them to induce this promise, but
was so far from making any such promise before the contract with
Gertrudenbergh, that quite contrary, it was long after, as appeeres by the very
words thereof making express relation to that former promise of Count Maurice
of Nassau to the^ of Gertrudenbergh at the treaty making for preservation of
their lives, wives and children. His Lordship farther set forth in this
answer, the offices he had done in reforming th'abuses befallen in that town
so often as ever they came to his ear.

This resolution of the States cutting of all hope of there further treaty with
Gertrudenbergh, yet to prevent the apparent breach and utter disunion, if that
garrison should come to any inckling of that which had thus passed, and to
leave nothing undone for accomplishing all the good pleasures and commandments
of her Majesty his Mistrisse, his Lordship made his journey for England by the
way of Gertrudenbergh. Where finding them in reasonable disposition, expecting
co^tentment according to the resolution of the 25 of January, he by nourishing
this their hope, brought them so far on (notwitstanding the jealousy they had
conceived of him) that by his persuasion they promised under their hands, to
give over all meddling with contributions and public revenues, as well within
their town as in the country adioining, thereby preventing all farther
complaints and making manifest to her Majesty and all others, that they sought
not to be masters of the general contributions and other revenues, but rather
desired one or two thresurers to be appointed for recept thereof, allowing them
but there count and reckoning from six months to six months according to the
treaty, as appears by their original declaration given to the L. Willughby
to be signified to her Majesty that she might be pleased to give notice thereof
to Dort their next neighbor, because they coueted nothing but good
neighborhood and amity with all. These things thus well brought about, the L.
Willughby being well apaid to have holden the matters in so moderate terms,
took ship from Gertrudenbergh to Midleburgh in Zela^d about the 3 of March,
from whence after order given for some things concerning only the English
nation, his Lordship went to Vlissing to embarke for England. But while he
staid there for a good wind,

By this iournall manage of matters and by these allegations and probations, we
trust that as in the conscience of all men it may be most truly said, and
without boast on the part of the Lord Willughby that next after God, under the
name of her Majesty and the princely respect wherein she is holden, the town
of Gertrudenbergh had been so many months kept through his Lordships travail
and good offices: eue^ so we may hope that these worst speakers of him, now
seeing the truth disclosed, will let the blame of this great loss rest upon
them that were causers of it. And so much the rather because such as were then
in Gertrudenbergh do say that during the siege, the so much urged promise of
the Lord Willughby, was sent in to the besieged from th'assailants, with a
false date later then the original, as if one would have done a thing for the
nonce to provoke them to yield the town to th'enimy. And least this our often
mention of the general States of the united provinces in the Low countries,
should be misenterpreted to any derogation of their reputation, honor and
authority: all Princes, States, Lords, Gentlemen, Counsailors, Magistrates,
and all persons in particular of whatsoever quality, estate or condition, are
most humbly prayed and desired with all reverence and instance, not to
conceive, by occasion of this discourse, any other opinion then right good of
the general States of those provinces lawfully assembled, nor yet, by occasion
hereof, once to speak otherwise then well and right honorably either of
themselves in general or particular, or yet of their actions or comportements.
For, the purpose of this discourse is chiefly to touch the slanders and
slanderous insinuations of the placcat against the Lord Willughby. As for the
case between the States and the garrison of Gertrude^bergh, as we mean
nothing less the^ to determine or to debate it, but leave the^ to be judged
according as they deserve, even so do we not pursue the placcat for the
disproportionable and vile valuatio^ of English Gentlemen, Capteins, and
Soldiers there with the rest, by a few more or less gildres or Florins:
neither for the iniquity thereof in proclaiming and banning them to death
vniudged and unheard, not so much as summoning them who in an equal court are
ready to come in to answer, and therefore can not be said contumaces or refusing
to be justified: nor yet for the inhumanity thereof, in exposing them to the
violence of every bloody hand: nor yet for the barbarism thereof, in provoking
and rewarding such perilous co^fusions and private violences; besides other
untruths, impertinencies, and disorders more like to come out of some Spanish
vessel of the same humor with him that penned the Turkish Bann against the
late right worthy Prince of Orange, then to pass with the consent of
th'onorable States general in a just assembly, or to be decreed in any other
Christian court. This were a labor apart. We will leave these wrongs to the
righteous and almighty judge of the world, whom we beseech on behalf of the
States to show the^ such grace and favor as by their own proper forces with
the assistance of their good neighbors, they may be hable to maintain their
state, to th'aduancement of Christ's Gospel and th'enlargement of his Church
Sobeit.

AN EXTRACT OF COMMISSIONS, ordonnances, letters, instructions, aduertisements,
intelligences and other such warrants, extant to be given in evidence for
proof of the principal points of this discourse, whereto they bin
respectively quoted, page and line.
Page 6. Line 3.
1 A Commission dispatched the 7 of April 1588. still. nou. authorizing the
Magistrates of Dort, to appoint th'alteration at Gertrudenbergh, because the
garrison there would not in any sort treat with the States. Line 11.
2 Letters from the garrison of Gertrudenbergh the 20 of April 1588, declaring
they would no have communication with any save with the Lord Willughby in
behalf of her most excellent Majesty* Line 12.
3 A letter from the Magistrate of Dort the 2^ of April 1588, that the same
garrison would common with none, save with the Lord Willughby her M^iesties
Lieutenant in th'vnited provinces of the L^w countries. Line 13.
4 A letter fro the Magistrate of Gertrudenbergh, of the same date and tenor.
Line 6.
5 Letters from Count Hohenlo of the last of April, requiring the Lord
Willughby to deal in appointing the same alteration, for preventing th'en^mies
driftes and practices. Line 26.
6 A letter of the Lord Willughby the 7 of May 1588, requiring the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh to send deputies to Dort according to a siufconduct for that
purpose dispatched, for further declaration to his Lordship of their demand and
meaning. Line 31.
7 A letter from the garrison of Gertrudenbergh the 8. of May, for excuse of
deputies to be sent praying his Lordship to come personally thither for the
better appointment of things upon the place. Page 7. Line 2.
8 Letters of crede^ce from the L. Willughby the 9 of May, for Sir John
Wingfield, M. Thomas Wilford, M. George Gilpin and the deputies of Dort, sent
to Gertrude^bergh to persuade them to send deputies to Dort notwithstanding
their former refuse. Line 12.
9 Articles exhibited to the L. Willugbby by the dep^tes of the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh after their ^riuall at Dort, concerning their assurance. Line 11.
10 A discourse of the reasons of the alteration of the soldiers in garrison
at Gertrudenbergh. Line 15.
11 Th'apostilles given upon the former articles by the L. Willughby with
advise of the Magistrate of D^rt, where among other things, that garrison is
s^arply blamed for demanding pay from her Majesty (...) whom they never yet
had done any service in part^cular. Page 10. Line 7.
12 Letters of very loving thanks from Count Maurice of Nassau to the Lord
Willughby the 11 of May upon particular aduertiseme^t to the same Count by M.
George Gilpin, of every thing passed. Whereby appears that the reproach of the
placcat concerning the apostilles of the 9 of May is far fro the purpose. Page
8. Line 30.
13 The demand of the soldiors of Gertrude^bergh by writing of the 14 of May
for 31 months pay, releasing the rest. Page 11. Line 2.
14 Letters from Count Maurice of Nassau the 29 of May to the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh, declaring that the same town after death of his Lord and
Father of Honorable memory, apperteineth to him and his brothers and sisters
who had never offended that garrison, and therefore desired commissioners from
thence for better understanding of their meaning. Line 16.
15 A commission from the general States the 2 of June 1588, to treat with the
garrison of Gertrude^b. Line 17.
16 A commission from the States of Holand the 3. of June 1588, to appoint
th'alteration of the same garrison. Page 12. Line 8.
17 A letter from S. John Wingfield the 10 of June to Count Maurice of Nassau,
aduertising very particularly the state of Gertrudenbergh. Line 22.
18 A letter from Count Maurice of Nassau the 11 of June, requiring the L.
Willughby to hasten ^is return from Ostend for appointing th'alterat^on at
Gertrude^bergh, for so much as it would not be without him. Line 14.
19 A letter from the Magistrate of Dort the 19 of June, aduertising the Lord
Willughby the^ in Walckerland about the affairs of Vere, etc. that the
soldiors of Gertrudenbergh would give over to the enemy, except his Lordship
stayed it. Line 22.
20 A letter from the States of Holland the 20 of June, praying the Lord
Willughby, that leaving all business he would approach as near Gertrude^bergh
as he could, for appointing th'alteration of that garrison to her Majesty's
contentment. Line 24.
21 A commission from the States of Holland the 27 of June, to promise 200000.
florins or 20 months wages to the garrison of Gertrudenbergh. Page 13. Line 5.
22 A letter from the L. Willughby the 29 of June, sharply reproving that
garrison for refusing the former sum. Page 15. Line 17.
23 Instruction for M. Richard Allen an English gentleman and for commissary
Matrut the 9 of July 1588, being sent by the Lord Willughby, at request of the
States to let the garrison at Gertrudenbergh understand, that they should be
satisfied with in few days. Page 16. Line 4.
24 The contract made with them of Gertrudenbergh the 26 and 27 of July by the
L. Willughby in the name of her Majesty and of Count Maurice of Nassau in
presence of the deputies of the States. Page 17. Line 25.
25 A letter from the Lord Willughby the 28 of July, d^siring the counsel of
Estate to bestow the government of Gertrudenbergh upon Colonel Sche^k. Page 18.
Line 7.
26 A letter from the Lord Willughby the 28 of July, aduertising Count Maurice
that the soldiors of Gertrudenbergh would not be satisfied without making one
cornet of 200 lances, and one of 100 carrabins, one company of 200 foot, and
an other of 150. Line 15 and 24.
27 Letters from Count Maurice of Nassau the 28 and 29 of July, referring the
reformation of th'aforesaid companies to the Lord Willughbies discretion. Page
19. Line. 15.
28 Two draughts of an oath sent to Count Maurice of Nassau, by reason the
garrison of Gertrudenbergh made difficulty at the name of the States. Line 20.
29 A letter from Count Maurice of Nassau the last of July, allowing the name
of the States to be left out in the foresaid oath, according to the change
which was made thereof, and therewithal aduertising that the States thought
not good to bestow the government of Gertrudenbergh upon Colonel Schenk. Page
20. Line 11.
30 Letters fro the Lord Willughby of the 2.3.5. and 6. of August to the
counsel of Estat, to Count Maurice of Nassau, to the States of Holland, and to
the Magistrate of Dort, to supply the money wanting for pay. Line 24.
31 A general pardon fro Count Maurice of Nassau the 28 of July, for all things
committed in Gertrudenbergh during the alteration. Page 21. Line 10.
32 An act of the last of July, wherein Count Maurice of Nassau and the States
of Holland, do give great thanks to the Lord Willughby for his travails in
appeasing the same alteration. Page 22. Line 1.
33 The Lord Willughbies promise to deliver Gertrudenbergh to Count Maurice
when it should lie in his power, so as the Count would likewise perform that
which he had promised to the garrison there, for saving their lives, wives and
children according to her Majesty's desire. Page 23. Line 25.
34 A letter from the Lord Willughby the 15 of August, sending for 200 horse
from Gertrudenbergh to be employed upon all occasions while the Spanish fleet
was looked for. Page 24. Line 15.
35 A letter from the Lord Willughby the 4 of September aduertising Count
Maurice that the town was not assured, and that therefore it was convenient to
stablish there a counsel of war, for reducing the soldiers by little and
little to some more reasonable order. Page 29. Line 29.
36 A letter from the Lord Willughby the 25 of November, reproving the garrison
of Gertrudenbergh for taking away the Burghers arms there, the tenor whereof is
set in the end hereof translated word for word. Page 34. Line 17.
37 The resolution of the general States the five and twentieth of January
1589, promising to content the garrison within ten days after the ten months
which should expire in February following, as it is also translated in the end
hereof. Line 25.
38 A letter from Count Maurice of Nassau the 27 of January 1589, promising
contentment to the same garrison according to the former resolution. Page 35.
Line 11.
39 Memorialls presented by the Lord Willughby the 18 of February 1589, to the
States general praying them to depute some of their assembly with other of the
counsel of Estate, to advise how the garrison of Gertrudenbergh might be
contented for six months, together with which memorialls his Lordship sent
th'extraict of her Majesty's letter commanding him to deal discretely with
that garrison. Line 31.
40 Second memorialls to the same effect from the Lord Willughby to the States
general the 21 of February, together with the States resolution declaring
flatly that they would not treat with that garrison for want of authority
from their superiors, directly against their other resolution of the 25 of the
month next before. Page 36. Line 11.
41 The Lord Willughbies answer to that resolution of the 21 of February
exhibited by M. Bodley counsailor of Estate, wherein among other things, his
Lordship offered to withdraw Sir John Wingfield out of Gertrudenbergh. Page 37.
Line 15.
42 A discourse of the third of March 1589, wherein the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh offers to the Lord Willughby as in her Majesty's name, to quit
all dealing with such contributions as hitherto they have taken, resting
content to be paid according to the treaty, desirous also to hold all good
correspondency and neighborhood with Dort, beseeching his Lordship thereof to
advertise her Majesty as on their behalf.
A LETTER FROM THE LORD WILlughby to Sir John Wingfield Knight, Governor of
Gertrude^bergh, to the Captain, Sergeant Mayor, Lieutenants, Ensigns, and
other soldiors there holding garrison, and to every of them.
Page 29. Line 29.
I Understand, to my great grief, that not manydaies past, using her Majesty's
name and authority, you caused the Burghers of the town of Gertrude^bergh to
yield up their arms, without telling them any reasons leading you thereto.
Whereat as her Majesty's Lieutenant in these parts I can not merueile enough.
For if that had been her Royal pleasure, no doubt, holding the place I do in
these countries, she would have signified so much to me. But so far were you of
from having any right or reason to use her name or authority, that I am sure
her Majesty knows it not. And had you had commission from her to attempt
such a matter, yet nevertheless ought you not to have enterprised it of your
selves without making me first and foremost privy, both for that I am her
Majesty's Lieutenant here, and also your Governor chosen and established
according to your oath to me in that quality taken. Now for my part I do not nor
ever will allow this deed of yours committed utterly without my priuity, and
for the which you can not but incur her Majesty's high displeasure, so much
the rather for that heretofore I openly signified by Secretary Gilpin that her
Majesty's will was to have you hold your selves in good accord, straight
correspondencie and sound friendship with your townsmen, as well for
advancement of the common weal as for the weal of that town. What if some
Burghers had committed some offense, your part had been to advertise me, that
knowing the cause I might have set down punishment, according to right and by
lawful means. And therein as you should have found me most ready to do reason
to every party, so would I not in any wise have suffered the good and loiall
men lovers of their country, inhabiting there and bearing arms these many
years for love to religion, to their country and for preservation of that
town, to receive such a shame as to have their arms taken away for the abuse
(if any such were) of some particular person. I therefore do earnestly require
you and in regard of my place do give order expressly that upon sight hereof,
you satisfy the Burghers there, restoring to every town dweller his arms,
least her Majesty may have just cause against you for not enough respecting
these my commandments. But trusting verily that you will not let things run
so far out, but rather take some way by gentle means to seek her Majesty's
favor, and so meet with all inconveniences that might befall, I beseech God
to give all and every of you wisdom and discretion to perform well the
services of her Majesty, and of these countries.

From Dordrecht the five and twentieth of November. 1588.
A Resolution of the States General, promising contentment to the garrison of
Gertrudenbergh.
Page 34. Line 17.
Upon declaration to the States general, and counsel of Estate of the united
provinces of the Low countries, by the deputies of the town of Gertrudenbergh,
in the name of the men of war on foot and horse there holding garrison; for
obteining count and reckoning for six months which they have served by virtue
of their new commission: It is resolved that within ten days after those six
months expiring at the 15 of February next, the counsel of Estate shall call
before them the Tresurers of the companies and others, that have received and
taken the money appointed for enterteinment of that garrison; to the end that
they giving up th'accompts and other credible informations of the money which in
these six months they have received and had as well by contributions and all
other means of the same town of Gertrudenbergh and other places adioining
under the province of Holla^d, as also of some villages in Brabant for better
understanding how far that pay during these six months is advanced by way of
impressed: that so after the reckonings made up, that may be done which shall
stand with reason.

So set down and resolved in the assembly of the aforesaid States at Haghe 25
of January. 1589. still. nou. Egmont vidit.
By order of the foresaid States. C. Aerssens.

AN EXTRAICT OF A SECOND resolution of the same States general upon second
Memorialls sent by the Lord Willughby touching the garrison of Gertrudenbergh:
This resolution quite contrary to the former.
Page 36. Line 1.
But to enter into any communication etc. The deputies of the provinces think
not themselves authorized by their superiors.

So set down at Haghe, 21. February 1589. VVermelo vidit.
By order of the aforesaid States. C. Aerssens.


