THE Queens Majesty's Entertainment AT WOODSTOCK

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cadman. 1585.

(...) follows brought no less like to the Queens majesty: and all the rest
that were present: for at his coming he caused them to dismount themselves
and said: You must fight no more, most valiant Knights: vyolenee must give
place to virtue, and the Doubtful hazard you be in, by a most noble help
must be ended. Therefore cease your fight and follow me, so shall you hear
that you would least believe, and shall have with me that shall most behooue
you. And you fair Lady, fall into this fellowship, where it shall appear
Sibilla said true, and your infortunes shall have end.

This said, he brings them al to ye place where the Queen's Majesty stood (in
a fine Bower made of purpose covered with green Iuie, and seats made of
earth with sweet smelling herbs, (even such a place as you shall
conjecture) and after some reverence beginning his tale, he showed a great
proof of his audacity, in which tale if you mark the words with this present
world, or were acquainted with the state of the devises, you should find no
less hidden then uttered, and no less uttered then should deserve a double
reading over, even of those (with whom I find you a companion) that have
disposed their hours to the study of great matters.

Here follows Hemetes tale.
Most excellent Princes, forepoynted from above with your presence and your
virtue to profit more then you are aware of, how much you are bound to the
immortal Gods, and mortal men are bound to you, our present case will
partly prove: But before you understand the worth of your virtue, may it
please you to hear the variableness of our adventures. Not long since in the
Country of Cambia which is situate near the mouth of the rich River Indus, a
mighty Duke bare dominion called Occanon: who had heir to his estate but one
only Daughter named Caudina: this Lady then more fayrer then fortunate, lived
most dear to her father and best beloved of his people: But to prove that
Beauty is not always a benifit, nor highest states be ever the happiest, it
cha^ced within a while that Caudina being sought unto by sundry that were
great, and served by many that were worthy, had more competitors of her
beauty then did either well content her, or proved commodious unto them: for
love, which is not led by order nor chosen by appoyntemente, had limed her
affections unreasonably with the liking of a knight, of estate but mean, but
of value very great called Contarenus who as he exceedingly loved her, so the
desires of diverse others was somewhat for his glory, but nothing for his gain.
In small process of time the seecret fires of their fa^cies discovered by the
smoke of their desires, bewrayed this matter unto her father long time before
they would. The Duke dissembling what he saw, but determined to disapoynt
that he most missliked, neither made challenge to the Knighte, nor charged his
Daughter for any love was betwixt them, but devised a way as he thought more
sure, (but as it proved most sorrowful) to set these lovers asunder by the
work of an inchantresse most cunning in her kind: he caused Contarenus, to be
conveyed up and carried in the air from the cost of Cambia to the very bounds
of the Occean sea: which cost Occanon twentye thousand Crowns (a dear price
for repentance:) but it is no nouelty for Princes to make their wills very
costly, and sometime to pay dear for their own displeasures. Contarenus thus
strangely divided from his joy and perplexed above measure was charged by the
inchantresse to wear this punishment with patience, which necessity did put
on, and destiny would put off: and ere seven years came about, she truly
assured him, he should have for his reward the height of his desire: but first
he should fight with the hardiest knight, and see the worthiest Lady of the
world. The whilst she told him, he must there take the guard of a blind
Hermit, who should recover his sight, and he his satisfaction, both at one
time, so she left him on the earth, and took her way again into the air.
Caudina now lacking log that she looked for, the sight and service of her
knight, fell soon in those diseases that accompany such desires as to be
acombred with mistrust, curiositye, and exceeding unrest. At last as Princes
do few things privily, but they have partakers of their Council: and heirs
to crowns lack never servants of hope, which be curious to please the^: The
devise and dealing of Occanon came to the ears of his daughter, which being
told her: And is it even so, quoth Candina? care kings for no right? then right
cares for no kingdoms. It is neither the court of Occanon, nor the country of
Camb. that I can account of, if Contarenus be gone: Farewell most unhappy
country, and most cruel Father, that turns me to this fortune, to follow my
fates, which neither greatness of estate nor hazard of mine adventure shall make
me forsake: but if I lose not my life, I will find Contarenus, if he be in the
world. This said, she pursues her most hard determinations, and taking only
two Damsels with her in simple habit, with such things as were necessary, she
straightwaies conveyed her self most closely from the borders of Camb. and
with toil too long to tell, passed perils past belief, til at last she
arri^ed at the grate of Sibilla, where, by chance she met with a most noble
knight eclipped Loricus, by love likewise drawn thither, to learn what should
betyde him. This Loricus loved a Lady that was matchless, in such manner as is
strange, for after much devise to attain but the favor that she would be
pleased, he might but love her without looking froward: and seeing no glaunce
of her lyking (his uttermost devotion) to find surely out her fancy (which
she carried most closely,) he made a strange assay with all the semblance that
might be. He showed to set by her but lightly, that was so sought for of all,
and the better to color the passion, he was not able to conquer, he made
show of choice of a new mistress, that lived every day in her eye: A piece sure
of pri^^ but far from such a pearl, as his heart only esteemed. And to this
Idol he seemed to offer all his love and service, leaving no manner of
obseruaunce undone, that to love appertayned: As wearing her colors on his
back, her pictures in his bosom, keeping her company above all others, and
continuing most at her commandment: which espied by this Lady (that indeed was
liked no more) for whatsoever man may think might become or content though she
cared not for his choice, yet he showed scorn of his change: and by jealousy
disclosed that which love could not discover. Which Loricus perceiving, he fell
by and by to consider, that the want of his worth made his service vnaccepted,
and no impossibility in her will to receive one too serve her, that merited the
honor of such favor. Therefore he left his own country, and betook
himself altogether to travel, and to arms, desiring with most endeavor but to
deserve that reputation as this great and noble mistress would but think him
worthy to be hers, though she would never be none of his; so thinking no toil
too tough, nor no attempt too hard to attain to renown, he wandered through the
world till he came by painful ways to Sibillas grate, where he met with
Caudina. Where these two lovers having occasion to unfold al their fortunes:
the Lady seeking to know the end of her travel, and the knight advise for the
ease of his hope, they both received this answer of Sibilla: That as they
were now coupled by this fortune, so they should never depart fellowship, till
they had found out a place, where men were most strong, women most fair, the
country most fertile, the people most wealthy, the government most just, and
the Princes most worthy: so should the Lady see that would content her, so
should the knight hear that might comfort him. Now most dear and best
deserving Lady, it falls to my purpose, and your praise, to say somewhat of my
self. Old though you see me here, and wrinckled and cast into a corner, yet
once have I been otherwise: A knight known and accounted of, with the best of
the world: and living in court of most fame amongst a swarm of knights and
Ladies of great worth and virtue, where beauty bade the basse and desire
sought the gole. It chanced me to love a Lady, to be beloved of Love himself,
if he could but have seen her: but as she was such as did excel, so was she
of wonderful condition, without disdain to be desired, but most dainty to
be dealt with: for touch her, and she will turn to 20. diverse shapes, yet to
none but to content, as me thought, that thought still to touch her, was a
heaven: and so it seemed by my hold that was so loath to let her go. Till (alas)
it liked her at last to put on the shape of a Tigris so terrible to behold, as
I durst hold her no longer, and being so escaped, I could never more set eye
on her. Madam, thus began my pain, but you hear not yet my punishment: being
shifted from the sight of that I sought above the world, and then little
delighting to look on any thing else, I took by and by a Pilgrimage to Paphos
in Cyprus, trusting to hear of my mistress there, where Venus was most
honored. Whither when I came, as I began to step in at the door of her
temple, I was suddenly stricken blind^^^^stonied at my mischaunce, and
understanding not the cause thereo^^^fell down on my knees and said: O fairest
of the Goddesses and farthest from cruelty, what has been my fault, that thou
art thus offended? Thy folly and presumption (quoth Venus Chaplen as I guess)
from my youth up quoth I, have I ever been an honourer of virtue, a delighter
in learning, and a servant of Love. But it is no parted affection quoth he,
that Venus will be honored with. Books and beauty make no match, and it is an
whole man or no man, that this Goddess will have to serve her, and therwithal
taking me by the shoulders, he thrust me out of the Temple. So with sighs and
sorrow I sat down in the porch, making intercession to Apollo (the peculiar
God I honored) to have compassion on my estate: Now faithful prayers being
hard ere they be ended: Mercury comes unto me, and bid me be of good comfort,
the goddesses be alfound to have this fault: Diana with Acteo^: Pallas with
Arachne: Juno with Tirecias, were angry above measure: so is Venus now with
thee, the cause with the remedy shall be told thee at Delphos, whither straight
I must carry thee. Which he had no sooner spoken, but by and by I was set in
the temple of Apollo. Where first demanding my fault, the Oracle made answer:
Thy fear and not thy faith: and what quoth I, may be my remedy? The best
besides the beautifullest, the Oracle straight answered. And with this Apollo
his priest took me by the hand, recounting unto me the whole course of my
life, whom I loved, and how I lost her. And when I told him of the faithfulness
of my service. and the faithfulness of my meaning, of the variablenes of her
condition, and at the last of the fearefulnes of her appera^ce: Ah, good
Hemetes quoth he, it is not the kind of women to be cruel, it is but their
countenance, and touching their variablenes, who will not apply himself
thereto, shall not much please them, nor long hold them, neither is it to be
found fault with. Nature her self loves variety, so it be done without deceit.
Now for thy faithfulness it suffices not, the servants of Venus must not only
have faith, but also lack fear, fear lost thee thy mistress, and thy boldness
to enter into Venus Temple, being unacceptable, made her strike thee blind. But
Apollo bid me tell thee, the Gods will receive, whom women for sake, thy eyes
shut up from delight, shall give thy mind more open understanding: this
punishment shall be thy profit, Venus can bar thee but from her felicity of
love: but for the devotion thou bear to Apollo, he gives thee this gift, to
be able to discipher the destiny of every one in love, and better to advise
them, then the best of her Darlings. And furthermore, does promise thee, that
in revolution of years thou shall recover thy sight: but this shall not betide
thee till at one time, and in one place, in a country of most peace, two of
the most valiant knights shall fight, two of the most constant lovers shall meet,
and the most virtuous Lady of the world shall be there to look on. And when
thy eyes shall behold what thy heart delights in, even a Lady in whom
inhabiteth the most virtue, Learning, and beauty, that ever yet was in
creature, then shall they be opened, and that shall be thy warrant.

Al Apollo says is sooth: the while, it is determined that thou shalt dwell
in an Hermitage, where nothing that longes unto Natures use, shall be
lackinge unto thee: so sodainelye I was shifted unto this hill hard by, where
I have wintered many a year far from the woes and wrongs, the world
besides is full of. And now best Lady and most beautiful, so termed of
the Oracle, and so thought of in the world: what the Inchantresse told
Contarenus: Sibilla showed Caudina, and Loricus: and Apollo said to me, by your
most happy coming is veryfied, The most hardy knights Cont. and Lori. have
here fought, the most constant Lovers Cont and Caudina here be met, and I poor
Hemetes (as the knight knows full long blind) have received my sight. Al which
happened by virtue of your grace, which the best so much honor, and we most
bound unto you: and so I present these noble persos to please you with their
service, and my self to serve you ever with my prayers, and leaving these
Lovers to their delights, must leave Loric. to this advise. Knight, prosecute
thy purpose, it is noble, learning by me not to fear of thy self to take
pain: remembering, nothing notable is won without difficulty, Hercules had by
his labors his renown, and his end by his Love: Loricus, thy end will be
reward, at least most reputation, with noblest women most esteemed. But I fear
I have too long tired your most noble ears, and therefore only now I beseech
your Ma. with your happy presence to honor my poor home, whither straight I
mean to guide you.

This Learned or long tale being brought to his end: the poor Hermit laden as
it were with beads and other such ornaments of his profession, begins to tread
the way before the Queen, which her Majesty espying, refused her steed, and
betook her self in like sort to the use of her feet, and accompanying the
Hermit (her self waited on of the rest) fell into some discourse and praise of
his good tale, which not ended, or rather scarce fully begun, the Q. Ma. had in
sight the house, which indeed was a place by art so reared from the ground, as
never before, nor hereafter, shall I see ye like. First it was inco^passed the
number of 200. paces round with lattise, the place of the princes entrance
bedect with Iuy and spanges of gold plate, the glimering whereof was such, that
men of great judgment might have held themselves at stay. The ground from
thence reared little and little to the altitude of forty foot or more, the path
in mounting covered with fresh turues, with such art, that a great many made
question of his skill, which was ye Layer. The way was railed with lattice,
beset with sweet flowers and Iuy, as before: above in the house was a Table
made in order of a half moon or more, covered with green turues (and so
replenished with sorts of dainty, and those diverse dishes belonging to banquet,
that the beholders might well have though, Iupit. had hoped the connuing, and
trusted the pleasing by banquet of his fair Europa.) At one end thereof
somewhat dista^t, from ye other, was placed another table (but round) with a
chair costly made of Crymson velvet, imbrodred with branches and pictures of
wild beasts and trees, as it had been a piece of work made in the desartes.
But least I hold you too long, this mount made, as I have said, about an
Oak, the top whereof was enforced by strength too bend down her branches
to cover the house, which was done with such art, that ye praise of the
beholders coming would have sufficed the woorker for his travel: although he
was not so satisfied for his skill, by more then 40. pounds. A number of fine
Pictures with posies of the Noble or men of great credit, was in like sort
hanging there, where with many were in love, and above the rest the French
Ambassador, which was present at these sightes, made great suite to have some
of them. The which posies, with some perfect note of their pictures, I would
have presented unto you: but because the Allegories are hard to be understood,
without some knowledge of the inuentors, I have chosen my time rather when my
self shall be present, and more the sooner, because I would leave nothing
unfulfilled of my first determination. Now Hemetes having brought her Majesty
to the entrance of this place said: Here most Noble Lady, having now brought
you to this most simple Hermitage, where you shall see small cunning, but of
nature, and no cost, but of good will, my hour approaching for my orrisones
(which according to my vow I must never break) I must here leave your
majesty, promising to pray, as for my self, that whosoever wish you best, may
never wish in vain.

Thus the Hermit departes, and the Queens Majesty addresseth her self with
merry cheer to banqueting, which to increase a divine sound of unacquainted
instruments in the hollow room under the house, made such strokes of
pleasure, and moved such delights, that if Apollo himself had been there, I
think he would have entreated the learning of their skill, or at the least
forgotten the pleasant remembrance of his sweet Daphnes. Her Majesty thus in
the midst of this mirth might espy the Queen of the Fayry drawn with 6.
children in a wagon of state: the Boys bravely attired, and her self very
costly apparrelled, whose present show might well argue her immortality, and
presenting her self to the Queens Majesty, she spoke as follows. As I did
roame abroad in woody range,
In shade to shun the heat of Sunny day:
I met a sorrowing knight in passion strange.
by whom I learned, that coasting on this way
I should ere long your highness here epsy,
to whom who bears a greatar love then I?
Which then took root still mounting up on height,
when I beheld you last nigh to this place,
with gracious speech appeasing cruel fight.
This love has caused me transform my face,
and in your hue to come before your eyne,
now white, then black, your friend the fayery Queen.
Which marking all, as all to me is known,
your face, your grace, your government of state,
your passing sprite whereby your same is blown:
do know by certain skill you have no mate:
and that no man throughout the world has seen
a prince that may compare with the English Queen.
This knowledge kends in me so hot desire
to see your highness here in this my walk
as since your parting hence I flam'de in fire
till your return that I might hear you talk,
that none to you a better heart does bear
my self in speech to you might make it clear.
In sign whereof accept most sacred Queen,
this simple token wrought within this wood,
which as but base so better should have been
If I had not at sudden understood
of your arrival here, which made me take
what came to hand, and no great choice to make.


Her speech thus ended she delivered her gift, which was a goune for her
Majesty of great price, whereon the imbroderer had bestowed the sum of his
conning, which she received with yelding thanks: to whom the fayry Dueene
replied: The thing is far beneth both your desert,
and my desire, yet am I glad to hear
your highness take it thus in so good part,
which for my self, if it like you to wear:
then shall I reap the fruit of happy mind,
as honored by you the honor of your kind.


To gratify the rest of the Ladies present, there was devised many excellent
and fine smelling Nosegayes made of all cullers to every one whereof was
annexed a posy of two verses, given by a handmayde of the fayry Queen, and one
above the rest of greatest price for the Queens Majesty with her posie in
Italian, which because I neither understoode it, nor scarce can write it to
be understood: I leave also till my next co^mig to visit you: for the rest as
they wear given, I have set down: every several posie was fair written
and bordered about conningly with several branches excellent to behold.

L. Darby.
The virtues four went wandering once and harbarlesse astray,
Till Darby gave them room to rest whereas they now may stay.
L. Warwick.
If your deserts surpassed not my silly pen and speech,
Some other me^ should view them then, which now do pass my reach.
L. Hunsdon.
For husband, children, and your self, or ornaments of fame,
You are above comparison, a right thrice happy dame,
L. Haward.
The means that make a mother bleste, you have a fruitful race,
A noble dame, a patient wife, what is this but blessed case.
L. Susan.
Take heed least in a mood, dame Venus work your woo,
For spite of right must work in her, you pass her beauty so.
L. Mary Uere.
Where virtue, birth, and beauty to, are thus in one mould cast,
This place to simple' is for her seat with gods let her be plast.
Mistress Skidmore.
Trusty and true, secret and sage in place where you do serve.
With wise foresight these praises lo your worthiness deserve.
M. Parry.
For long and faithful service sake which has abidden tuche,
good Parry is a paragon, show me a another such.
M. Abbington.
Good liking upon choice made way, to bring you first in place,
Which you maintain by modest mean still in your Princes grace.
M. Sidney
Tho young in years yet old in wit, a gest dew to your race,
If you hold on as you begine who is it you will not deface?
M. Hopto^
When Phoebus saw fair Hopton come to Court and leave the tower,
He spread his beams with merry looks that erst before did lower.
M. Kath^rin Howarde.
For noble race, and virtues gifts, compare you with the best,
Who list to seek, in you shall find, no less then in the rest.
M. Garret.
Why do men set their sights to feed on Pictures set in goulde?
since Garret gives the very vewe of natures modest moulde.
M. Bridges.
In guess is guile, conjectures fail, your graces be well known:
Which who denies, fame says he lies, by whom the brute is blown.
M. Borough.
Apollo seeing his Burroughes brows his Daphne did forgette,
so stald in stay, so rapped in love as he stands musing yet.
Mistress Knowles.
You gallants give the room a Dame of price does come,
Conjecture what your bragges may be when she has cast the sum
M. Frances Howarde:
Sum say dame nature took in care, to keep Cornelias moulde,
But Howardes it is about her neecke eframed in finest goulde.
I think (good sir) I have within little repeated the names of those that were
Ladies and maids of Honor, at these sightes, wherein you shall see the vain,
that runs to the liking of such kinds. Now her Majesty being risen: with
good cheer, accompanied with the Queen of the fay r ye and the Lady Caudina;
she comes from her banquite, and at her departure the Lady Caudina says: Let
thanks suffice in word where strength in pow're does faynte.
let pith in prayer from Heaven to crave requite,
stand for reward to such a sacred Saint.
in whom on earth the gods in Heaven delighte,
whose moulde when nature made she began to stand,
in wonder of the work she had in hand.
The gods for all their good bestowed on man,
accept our speech, as fruit of thankful heart:
which since it is the utmost that we can,
let humble thanks be price for your deserte.
Content your self with that contents the gods,
twixt whom and you I see such little odds.


The day thus spente, her Majesty took her coach with joy in remembering what
had passed, recounting with her self and others how well she had spente the
after noone, and as it fell of necessity in her way homewarde, closely in an
Oak she heard ye sound both of voice and instrument of ye excelentest now
living whose pleasantness therein bred a great liking with a willing ear to ye
purport which I have hardly gotton to present you withal: assuredly I see
great invention therein, and yet no more then the just fame of the deviser
does both deserve and carry. The song in the Oak
The man whose thoughts against him do conspire,
in whom mishap her story did depante:
The man of woo, the matter of desire,
free of the dead that lives in endless plainte:
His sprite am I within this desert won,
to rewe his case whose cause I cannot shune.
Despair my name who never seek releife,
frended of none, unto my self my foe,
An idle care mayntayned by firm belief,
that praise of faith shall through my torments grow.
And count the hopes that other hearts do ease,
but base conceates the common sort to please.
I am most sure that I shall not attain,
the only good wherein the joy does lie.
I have no power my passions to refrain,
but wayle the want which naught else may supply.
Whereby my life the shape of death, must bear
that death, which feels the worst that life does fear.
But what auailes with Tragical complaint,
not hoping help, the furies to awake?
Or why should I the happy minds acquaint
with doleful tunes, their settled peace to shake?
O ye that here behold infortunes fare,
there is no grief that may with mine compare.


Now was it dark night, and her Majesty filled with conceits, returns
home, leaving earnest command that the whole in order as it fell, should be
brought her in writing, which being done, as I hear, she used, besides her
own skill, the help of the deuisors, and how things were made I know not,
but sure I am her Majesty has often in speech some part hereof with mirth at
the remembrance.

But to keep my promise for the rest, I will begin in order to make you privy
of the sequel: which indeed follows, as an apt consequent to what is past.
Therefore shall you understand, that upon the 20. day of the same month, the
Queen being disposed to spend her time with some delights, this Comedy was
presented, acted before her Majesty.

And the more to egg you forward with desire of the end, assure your self, it
was as well thought of, as any thing ever done before her Majesty, not only
of her, but of the rest: in such sort, that her Graces passions, and other the
Ladies could not but show it self in open place more then ever has been
seen.

The Actors names.
1 Roxane Caudinas maid. 2 Occanon the Duke. 3 Achates his Counselor. 4 Queen
of the fairy. 5 Caudina the Dukes daughter. 6 Contarenus Caudinas Lover. 7
Niphe Caudinas other maid. 8 Alexandro and 9 Guilfrido, Pages.
Roxane. I Think as yet all here has fresh in mind,
a strange adventure past in act of late,
How that a Lady borne nigh to the Inde,
arrived here in quest of loving mate:
Whom she did find by such aduentrous sort,
as erst the Hermit showed by large report.
Which Hermit then if you remember well,
requirde the Prince and Lady of this land,
That she with her would let the Lady dwell:
and waiting still on her, attend at hand:
And that the Knight in Court there might remain,
till that they both returned home again.
Which thing consented too by Princes voice,
they have pursude and waited on the train,
Tillate desire has made them alter choice:
the Ladies heart still longing home again,
And glad to win the Duke her Fathers will:
for moving whom she knows she has done ill.
For though at first in heat she set him light,
and forced by fathers wrong, went wandering so,
Yet does she still suspect strong Natures might,
who checking chafe sure works the chafer woe:
Which to appear, is now her chief desire,
and therefore home she means to retire.
Which thing to compass well, and leave no part
of duty vnfulfulfilde both here and there,
She with the fairy Queen is gone apart,
of whom she hopes the rediest way to hear:
How to return with love from whence she came,
as she for love departed from the same.
Now wil'd she me (as loath to move offense)
if she were called for ere she could come back,
To be in place, and not to part from hence,
that for excuse in me might be no lack:
Til whose return fair Ladies if I may,
among you with your leave I mean to stay.

Achates. Occanon. Now good my Lord let mourning moan have end,
the harm is yours, your self this still to wrack,
The Heavens I trust some better news will send,
the Gods which suffered you these pains to take,
Intend you to behold with cheerful eye:
your help is near, it must of force so be.

Occan. In seeking hope, hap flies still away,
my weary corpse is ready for to faint,
Then death, that debt which I at length must pay,
by yielding life receive, and end my plaint.
Now is the time most for to pleasure me,
when I in grief, do crave it thus of thee.
Who has not heretofore beheld on stage.
the hard conflict which breach of duty breeds,
With natures might in way to vanquish rage,
let him behold me and my daughters deeds:
Twixt whom, as strange contempt has caused flame,
so nature seeks again to quench the same.
She set her love where she her self likt best,
I much mislikt because her choice did light,
Beneath her birth, though I might like the rest:
to stay this stream I did all that I might.
First with persuasions sweet I did begin,
to try if so my daughter I could win.
The more I chargde, the sorer she repeld,
wherefore my labor lost, I changde my way,
And from my Court her Lover I expeld,
thereby in hope to work my daughters stay.
But while I sought to wring her from her love,
love wrought her clean from me, as then de did prove.
No sooner did she find her self alone,
bereft of him whom she a love did choose.
But secretly her self must needs be gone:
her state, her train, her wealth, she did refuse:
And held that hap to be her only bliss,
him to enjoy whom she in Court did miss.
Her parting first, because it did proceed,
from vilde contempt of duty to her Sire,
Did stir my choler much, for that her deed,
till nature did arrest, and wrought desire
To have my child restorde to me again,
whose absence then had wrought my woe and pain.
Then I began such parents to accuse,
as be too sour to those they have begot,
And found of al, them farthest from excuse,
whose noble state does make them more of note,
On them and theirs Love has the greatest power,
therefore on Love they ought the least to lower,
A quiet life where need no labor wills,
A seemly face whereon all eyes be cast,
A diet where desire the heart fulfils,
A world of sport while day, while night does last,
How can these things but make Love open a way,
and fancy force with her delights to play?
Here did I fail in seeking to withstand,
where I confess the power of love is most,
Hence did proceed the leaving of my land
to find her out which I so lewdly lost.
This is the cause why in such simple case,
I wander seeking her from place to place.
So as I feel my weery bones to shrink,
not able long my fainting corpse to bear,
Sleep does oppress my limbs which gin to sink,
while slumbring ease relieues my toylesome cheer.
I pray you Sir, depart not hence from me.
your faithful help mainteynes my hope I see.

Acha. I will my Lord not once part from your side,
take you your rest, your travels do it crave,
Here fast by you I am resolved to bide,
to guard you so, as naught your rest deprave.
The grief of mind I see works wondrous things,
commanding al estates both Lords and kings.

Roxa. O Gods what have I heard, O cruel fates,
must that needs fall which you will needs fulfill:
My Lord the Duke to leave his Princely states,
and wandering thus to yield to Fortunes will?
Then do I see that even as you please,
men reap their rest and feel their most disease.
This haughty Duke which set so light by love,
as though he could command him to obey,
Does now himself by strange adventures prove:
that against Loves force no power bears sway:
For where Love lives at will, he soonest dies,
and where he flaunts at full thence soonest flies.
But yet to learn more certainly what is past,
ere that to him my self I do bewray,
At this good man I mean to have a cast,
of whom I will learn out if that I may:
By way of glaunce who it is that lies here,
and what might cause this his so ruthful cheer.
If It be not he, then is my labor lost,
and being but few words the cost is small,
If it be he, then hence straight will I post,
and to my Ladies ears report it all:
That she thereby may presently advise,
what good therein may to her state arise.
Good Sir I see you sad which greeueth me,
whom curchy makes partaker of your woe,
To ryp your grief unpleasant it will be,
as to all pained souls it is I know:
Yet if I may find such grace in your eye,
tell me what man this is that here does lie.

Ach. Fair Lady this your courteous speech does crave,
disclose of all that careful breast does hide,
In him that lies here the world may have,
wherein with maze to let their minds abide.
A Prince he is, whom fortune does constrain,
with fruitless toil to travel still in vain.

Rox. A Prince? I pray you where, and of what land?

Ach. An Asian Lord the great Cambaian Duke.

Rox. What fate might force him take this toil in hand?

Acha. To find his daughter out these pains he took.

Rox. Why where is she, how hapt he her to leese?

Ach. Because in love her mind he did displease.

Rox. Perhaps he did not like where she had loved,

Ach. Even so it was: for he from court removed
her friend, for whom her country she forsook,
As not of force her Lovers lack to bear:
which known, the Duke to travel him betook:
To find her out whom Nature made so dear,
With mind resolved if he her met again,
to think such hap sweet pay for all his pain.

Rox. And has he not as yet heard where she is?

Ach. Not yet, but that Sibilla bade him go,
to such a soil as I suppose is this,
and there to have his hope and end his woe,

Rox. These things be strange, yet stranger things have been
accomplished here, as I my self have seen.
Well Sir, I am to think my self much bound,
for this your curchy showed at my request,
And if your ease may grow within this ground,
by means of me, sure I will do my best.
But Sir, may I desire your Princes daughters name?

Ach. Gaudina she is called of worthy fame.

Rox. I thank you Sir, I can no longer stay,
but for requite command me any way.

Ach. I thank you for your courtesy.

Rox. Now to my L. I Will go with speed,
that hearing this she may accordingly proceed.
Exit. Occanon from sleep. Ah, ah, it is but vain to hope in sleep,
to purchase ease, where waking fills with care:
In sleep I felt my slumbering eyes did weep,
my heart did pant for grief in mind I bare.
Now let us pass unto our iourneyes end,
til we find out what chance the Gods will send.

Ach. My Lord, if words that pass from faithful heart
may stay your mind, my hope here bids me stay,
For marking all that is here in every part,
and minding that which Sibil once did say:
Me think this place should be the happy land,
where we should rest, as she bare us in hand.
Besides while you took rest, a Lady came
with show of grief, that your mishaps were such,
And learning both yours and your daughters name,
did pass away: all which persuade me much:
That if you stay til she again return,
your heavy heart with joyful news shall burn.

Occa. The nearer hope to have that I desire,
to see my child whom I so far have sought,
The more I burn, the greater is my fire,
for fear to fail of that to win I thought,
The wished end requites the toil that is past,
and joy for grief is recompense at last.
What is the force of fathers care I see,
though I my self am father to my care,
To this effect the same has wrought in me,
that though it be among examples rare:
My self I have disrobed of my state,
to find my child which I did lose of late.

Acha. For great offense my Lord the payment great,
the meanest man feels not the greatest fall,
You rue with time that you did work in heat,
and yet you find to comfort you withal:
This cost to Sibilles words so does agree.
But sir behold what Ladies do I see?
The Fairy Queen and Roxane enters. A royal blood her virtue will bew ray,
though Fortune seek her near so to oppress,
And noble race will not run far astray.
but of her self will work her own redress:
As I my self even now have found most true,
in this your Ladies case whom I so rue.
She fearing fathers wrath for her offense,
though by constraint unkindly causd to stray,
As she intends with speed departure hence,
so will she not but wisely part away,
And for advise resorted unto me,
to learn what way her best return might be.
My Council was, since fates had found the mean,
the English Queen to make for her defense,
To whose assured stay she might welleane
to swage her fathers wrath, so wrought for her offense:
For none could help her more nor so as she,
if with such suit her grace content might be.
Her credit is so good her fame so flies,
her Honor such, her wisdom so in note,
Her name so known to all men's ears and eyes,
as better mean could no where else be got,
Then if he might at her hands understand,
what she has heard and seen within her land.
Whereon when we resolved by joint assent,
and I at her request was drawing near,
To move the suit according as we meant,
I met you by the way which had been here:
By whom I learned a very speedy mean,
to work her weal and void al terror clean.
But maid where is the Duke of whom you spoke,
which took this toil for your good Ladies sake?

Rox. Yon same is he whose strange attire,
descries his grief and points at his desire.

Queen. Well: I Will feel his pulse. Sir knight I hear,
you are inquest your daughter here to find.
In weed disguisd because behaps you fear,
least being known contrary to your mind.
Your seerch might grow too long, yet may it be,
your state descride you may find help of me.

Occa. Alas Madam, and must it needs be so?
must grief burst out? and must my careful thought,
Make you by speech partaker of my woe?
wherein the wrong that I have justly wrought
unto my self, shall lead me on along,
til her I find whose wandering is my wrong.
My native Country is, where Indies stream,
does enter Sea, nigh to the Cambaian cost,
From whence I rome into this famous realm,
to seek my child which by mischance I lost,
There Duke I am, a Lord of fruitful soil,
though Fortunes force now tax me with this toil.

Queen. How hap your child did leave you so alone?
was there no help but she must needs be gone?

Occa. She would needs love where I misliked much,
a man of mean estate of base degree,
She is my only care and his case such,
as, though well borne, a subject yet to me.
Whom I in heat removed from her: but she
in greater heat removed her self from me.

Queen. Me thinks these words in such high state bewray
more egar mind then gift of great conceate,
A Princess peer a Duke should seek to stay,
and not against fume with wit to work debate.
Are you so far misledde for want of skill,
as you know not that love will have his will?
He knows no peer: al states stoop to his check,
he spares no prince no more then mean estate,
But makes each one obey him at a beck:
He takes great scorn to hear tell of a mate,
But where he finds such match as he does like,
without gainsay he bends his bow to strike.
Because you are a Prince of high degree,
in Country where you dwell, you hold it light
That Love should should wound your only heir I see,
but were you of far more puissant might,
And she of price as peerless as may be,
love has subdu'de far brauer Dames then she.

Occa. Madam I must confess the force of love,
to be a thing in vain against to bend,
Which blind reason first did after prove,
to set us so as we can not defend,
And so triumphing when we cannot see,
we must confess, who is the God but he?

Queen. As who should say, Love never hits aright,
but beetle like bereaved of sight does run,
Not waying worth, nor marking where to light,
But love often times by due desert is won,
And most pressed on in Dames of highest prise,
wherefore judge right, for love often times is wise.
Perhaps your daughters Love sprang from desert,
perhaps the persons worth procur'de her choice,
Perhaps he was so tied he could not start
from her, commanding him by virtues voice:
And would you seem at such link to repine,
which virtue did with her own fingers twyne?
Therefore make your account this grief you feel,
proceeds from offense against such a power,
And never hope to win your better weal,
till that his wrath appeared, he leave to lower.
Love is a Lord, who lothes, him him he shames,
not sparing Lords, not sparing princely Dames.
And chiefly where with virtue he does link,
for virtues sake, where love does like to light.
There can no force enforce his force to shrink,
he trusts so much to his confederates might.
Wherefore your daughters love for virtues sake,
work what you could, no overthrow would take.

Occan. I never did repine where virtues love did link,
but where there seemed Disperagement to rise,
As in her match I did and do still think,
his birth to hers in no point did suffice,
A Princes child inheritour to state,
too good I thought so far to vndermate.

Queen. Alas good Sir, know you not at these years,
that Love does always fight on equal ground,
And where he minds match, he makes them peers:
if mynds agree the ground of states is found.
A Princely heart in meaner man may dwell,
where, if a Princess like, she does but well.
For when the ear is fed with worthes report,
when eye beholds what rauisheth the sight,
The heart straight to desire yields up the fort:
where if again like liking hap to light,
When virtues join and like with like is knit,
what match is made more excellent then it?
This match should you maintain where love crept in.
not of himself but gesse-waies led by hand,
For virtue was the first that did begin,
against whose force whilst you thought to withstand,
In single terms as not allowing love,
the compound strength of virtue you do prove.
You blame not him for mounting up so hie,
she bears the blame for bending down so low,
Whom fortune bids look up, too blame were he,
if he should quail, and worthy overthrow.
And she too blame, of near so high degree,
not casting Love where virtues does agree.
Alas what is birth though borne so much in eye,
the only mean to blind who so is borne,
Who looking big with countenance on hye,
with vain conceits holds virtues gifts in scorn,
Unhappy he that bragges in that behalf,
where virtue lacks he proves himself a calfe.

Occa. You force me sore, yet this you will not deny,
that though Loves power be not to be withstood,
And that the match of minds be beyond cry.
and they best linkt where liking thinks it good,
Yet should my child of me make so small store,
as match her self and not move me before?

Queen. If match were made by only mean of man,
you had been first, as whom the cause concernd,
But what the Gods first move do what you can,
they will pass on though parents be not warnd,
It is but vain to say love shall not win,
unless at your consent he first begin.

Occa. But was not that unkindly done of her,
unknown to me to stray from Countries soil?
Thereby her Fathers blood so sore to stir,
which for her sake do take this yrksome toil?
In kind a child, unkind to such a Sire,
deserving just revenge of fathers ire.

Queen. Nay was not that unkindly done of you,
unknown to her, to send her love away,
To work you both such woe as you feel now,
you for her sake, she for her Love to stray:
In kind a Sire, unkind to such a child,
whose only fault has child and Sire exilde.

Occa. But nature should have borne with parents heat,
since what was meant was meant but for her good,
The Love of kind, such fancy love should beat,
and though she found me for a time in mood.
Time would have turned and causd me to relent,
in that for which from me she slily went.

Queen. Where nature does but warm love sets on fire,
and greater force of lesser is obayde,
For love by choice does draw more deep desire,
the love of kind, by kind love's over wayde,
Which master like gives not time to relent,
but on he will or make the man repent.
How could your Tigrish heart by sundring them,
which lived in heaven before you sought their hell,
Defeat the hold where Cupid held his claim?
but in these terms no longer for to dwell:
What if your child were offered to your face,
should she, or should she not obtain your grace?
And if her Love for whom her toil has been,
should come with her resolved to be her own,
Should not this angry mood of yours void clean?
answer me that, for that thing being known,
Perhaps I would in part procure your ease,
so that their match your mind might not displease.

Occa. This compound case does cause a fight in mind:
to gain my child my grief would soon relent,
Though in her flight she followed not her kind,
but with her match I cannot be content.
But who are you Madam if I may crave,
to know your name which seeks them thus to save.

Queen. I am the Fairy Queen.

Occan. O noble Dame,
whose skill is such, as naught is hid from you,
Nothing so dark but you do know the same,
I know you know where both they be, and how
I may obtain the thing I have so sought,
whose want I wrought and dearly have it bought.

Queen. Well Sir, I do perceive you are content,
to take your child into your grace again,
In hope whereof she shall straight be present,
to please her fathers sight, to stay his pain:
For other things discourse you when you meet,
all will be well since you are won from heat.
Go maid, go, call your Lady here. Rox. exit.
Occa. I thank you noble Dame for pitying me,
and tendering this my silly daughters state,
Whom if it be my hap again to see,
no such like heat shall set us at debate,
And yet I hope by reason so to deal,
as that her match shall stand to Countries weal.

Acha. It will be hard her settled love to shake,
which grounded once is not light to remove,
Yet for your love and for her Countries sake,
it may fall out she will forget her love:
Which being new and young did ravish so,
now being old has better leave to go,
But yonder comes the maiden which was sent,
Gaudina and Roxa. enters. and lo my Lady there for whom she went.

Qu. It Is true my L. your daughter is in place.
perform your speech and let her find some grace.
Gaudi. espying her father, falls on her knees, saying:
Gaudi. I must dear father crave here at your feet,
for mine offense your pardon to obtain,
From whom to fly, I yield it was not meet,
yet Love (my Lord) in me so sore did rain:
As victor once repulse he would not bear,
but bade me seek my love in place each where.
You understand my Lord the course I kept,
you see the gods have brought this gear to end,
These fatal liftes could not be over lept,
but needs my will to their great might must bend:
For fault to you their force I must oppose,
I am your child of me you may dispose.

Occa. Small pardon needs where grace is ready found,
upon some better hope you have discharge,
Affection heales where folly made the wound,
but these things are to be discourst at large.
But now the mean to mend your present case,
is that you yield and gain your fathers grace.
This Lady here the Fairy Queen has laid,
for your defense in so forsaking me,
As much as may in your behalf be said,
to whom we both are bound exceedingly:
One point remains, wherein if you relent,
to take you home to grace I am content.

Queen. I dare my self for her part undertake,
that on her side resistance will be small,
To what request her father here shall make,
the cause once known, and circumstance withal;
To compass your good will is her desire,
wherefore demand the thing that you require.

Occa. Gaudina this long time you have given rain,
to serve your choice and feed your fancy still,
Wherein as you have suffered part of pain,
so I became partaker of your ill,
Now is the time to come to reasons school,
which can alone these hot affections cool.
For love to leave the land where you were borne,
to tread your Fathers tears quite under feet.
To stray you wot not where as one forlorn,
to wander stranger like in such a heat:
Does ill beseem a person of your port,
which being done, to reason now resort.
You are mine only child, heir to my state,
the wealth whereof does rest upon your choice,
Which will be well if you in taking mate,
do use advise of Fathers careful voice,
Mark well, hereon does hang your Fathers love,
besides the good by you my state may prove.
I will (considering both birth and your degree,
whereto at first I cast my chief respect)
To Countries good you chiefly have an eye,
which calls you home, and wills you to neglect,
The Love of him which led you so astray,
and for her sake to take a better way.

Gaudin. A dainty choice my Lord you offer me,
old rooted love still wedded to conceit,
With rufull look appearing in mine eye,
and to your suit presenting still debate,
Whom Countries good and nature bids obey,
whereby my tongue knows not what is best to say.
But good my Lord since you which may command,
do give me leave for my defense to plead,
May it please you in short to understand,
how things have past twixt him and me indeed,
Which being heard, if you be not content,
my will to yours shall presently be bent:
How worth in him did work love first in me,
in Princely state while I did live at home,
Your self therewith displeasd did right well see,
which banishing him enforced me to rome,
Because the bait which love for us had laid,
held us so fast as it could not be stayde.
By land and Sea I wandered far and near,
not finding rest til Sibil told me plain,
het hap of that I hoped remained here,
where I should rest and finish al my pain:
Success confirmed her speech, and here I found,
to whom by chained link love has me bound.
For farther link in marriage to proceed,
because therein I had not your consent,
I followed still Apollos holy reed,
whose priest in that restrained mine intent,
And wild me not to marriage to give place,
til he should like of whom I took my race.
Our state is thus, our love which thus did grow,
stands in these terms, in other terms yet free,
I loved where I likt which reft me froe,
I hasted on the thing I likt to see:
I sought, I found, our love remains still,
so to pass forth, if it be your good will.

Occa. If you stand free save only that it pleased
the mighty Cupid this to cause you rome,
Therein I find my heart well easd,
and trust to match you well when I come home:
With love more fit for you then this can be,
where both estate and wealth shall well agree.

Gaud. Alas my Lord, it is but fortunes gift,
to have descent brought down from Princes train,
The persons worth is virtues worthy drift,
which by desert the highest place should gain.
Care not for birth though it be never so base,
but virtue reke which craves the highest place.

Occa. As it is a chance to be a Princes child,
so if you think that virtue is restraind,
To one alone, therein you are beguild,
she does refuse of none to be obtaind:
And where that royal blood with virtues meet,
does not such one best seem a Princely seat.
Such one I know in place where you were borne,
more fit for you then this to whom you cleave,
Whefore give your consent, and think no scorn,
at Fathers suit your former love to leave:
For duty so despisde for all my pain,
to find you out, I crave this only gain.

Gaudi. But yet my Lord consider all the toil,
which I have past to compass this my love?
Shall old conceit at length receive the foil,
whose force I feel not minding to remove?
When Love forsaken shall revive again,
alas my Lord how sore will be my pain:
To be constraind not once to cast a look,
where I tofore did pitch my whole delight?
To leave him thus, for whom I all forsook,
how can true love abide such poisoned spite?
What Is to be said in this unequal fight,
where love denies what nature claims of right?
O Cupid be content with that is past,
thus long to thee I have my service vowed,
Let nature now prevail at last,
what she demands hold it not disalowd:
And shall I then forsake my former joy?
nay my Gaudina death were less annoy.
Plaint has found mean, and love has won his right,
from whom but death no force shall sever me,
Dame Nature be content, here in thy sight
my Love I do release and yield to thee,
Yet neither love nor nature may possess,
but only death the mother to redress.

Occa. See how this heat does burst to extreme flame,
see what devise extreme desire has found,
She loves and cannot leave yet to void blame,
she has found out another helples ground,
By death to disappoint both our desires:
see reasons check when senseless love aspires.
Yet this I may not leave that is begone,
Madam of you I must crave farther aid,
By whom I trust this fort shall yet be won:
you have perceived by both what has been said,
You see the ground whereon my reasons lean,
to work my daughters weal be you the mean.

Queen. I see affection armed and loath to yield,
whom length of time and strength of love support,
I see whereon persuasions right does build,
which has me thinks possessed the stronger fort:
If love had sight and reason could be hold,
or fiery flame could be subdu'de with cold.
But Lady, give me leave whose friendship tried,
does bid you bend your ear to that I say,
The truth whereof cannot be well denide,
though flaming love in heat seem to say nay:
Immortal states as you know mine to be,
from passions blind affects are quite and free.
If you may so consent to Parents mind,
(wherewith is joined the wealth of countries soil)
As love cannot accuse you for unkind,
ne yet complain himself to have the foil:
Considering he whereon your Love is bent,
may have your love though you herein relent.
If you forsake, not forced by greater cause,
love then of some unkindness might you blame.
But weight of greater worth forbidding pause
if you withstand, you blemish much your name.
It were no love that stood so in your sight:
but might be termed mere madness out of right.
Return again with parent whence you came,
regard the state which birth has brought you to,
Relent to love that will augment your fame,
and yet this knight cannot, if you so do,
Condemn you much although you him forsake,
since of two gods the greater you do take.
Your Fathers reason springs from such a ground,
as cannot well by reason be deny'de:
If he for you so fit a match have found,
as for your birth no fitter may be spi'de,
What have you then against him to withstand,
since naught but good can come from parents hand.
Set al aside, and only this observe,
to seek you out, your knight he took no pain,
Yours was the toil, you did from country swerue,
you trauail'de still, in rest he did remain:
So that of you if love crave further aid,
you answer may, he has his wages paid.
But though you may thus check his love you will say,
how shall I choke the love which flames in me,
That, do my best, so keeps me at the bay,
as ties me fast when loose I feign would be:
So that I find, the goal must there be won,
where fancy fights, and love the broyle begun?
Your countenance seems to yield, debar al dout,
let meaner love to greater quickly yield,
Your good it is these reasons go about,
let common care give private will the field,
Why stand you still as one in sudden trance,
give place to that your honor may advance.

Gaudina. The Assault is great, yet love bids keep the field,
what all this time has my long travel won?
If now by light attempt I hap to yield:
these reasons helte before my flight begone:
What is now said but then the same was true?
the ground is old though flowers be fresh and new.
When he by slight was so withdrawn from me,
then did my love condemn these reasons all,
And shall I now since nothing else I see,
by yielding thus procure both present thral?
I rather choose to wander with him still,
then so to change and countermaund my will.
I feel a false alarm as though there were,
a fitter match to be found out for me;
No Contarenus no, I smell this gear,
to try if so I would relent from thee:
No our consents have joined this faithful link,
til thou say nay I will not from thee shrink.
And yet in thee if slender shows take place,
I Will never yield for honor of my kind,
Let men remove and slightly turn their face,
in woman's breast more stay they still shall find:
My parents pardon me my country stay,
for what is said from Love I will not stray.

Occan. You see how sore my headstrong daughter's bent,
she will not yield for ought that can be said,
Were it not good that to the knight we went,
to see if his desire might be delaide:
I see by him the mean must first begin,
to quench the flame my daughter frieth in.

Queen. If it seem good to you as't does to me,
to him where as he is, we will repair,
For at his hand this must be wrought I see,
if he himself will yield to countries care:
Com Sir, and you Madam, let us retire,
we have to deal with him whom you desire.

Gaudi. You may so with persuasions deal I think,
as he to your demand may seem to yield,
But inwardly that he from me will shrink,
no reason can such ground bring for her shield:
Yet to do that which both you do desire,
apart with you my self I will retire.
Exeunt. Here the Pages abiding, use a pretty act of sport, but because the
matter will be full without it, I have thought good not to trouble you with such
Parenthesis, but making their speeches ended I will only recite the introduction
to their coming in.
Alexandro. But yonder comes the Fairy Queen,
and brings with her in train,
My Lord the Duke with merry look,
I hope weis home again.
Occa. the Duke, Eambia the Fairy Queen, Contarenus, Gaudina, Roxa. Niphe.
Queen. You hear Sir Knight the parents just request,
you see the force whereon his reasons stand,
Affections stays what wisdom thinks for best,
the matter rests al only in your hand.
By nature you are farther to forsee,
you are therefore to strike the stroke, not she.

Occa. You know of old what led me so to let
the great desire wherewith you both so brent,
Against your worth my will was never set,
to further Countries good was mine intent:
Which since in me so constantly does dwell,
to yield thereto me thinks you might do well.

Gaudi Yet Contarenus think what is in you,
if virtues worth and weight in you be great,
And such as none but blind can disallow,
why should persuasions then us two defeat,
As who say, any else might better seem.
then you and I to rule so great a realm,
Birth bears me out, and virtue bears up you,
and why should any then thereof mislike?
As certain proof shall still prevail I trow,
before that is uncertain how to like.
You are to choose my friend, make answer so
as you do not procure us endless woe.

Conta. The choice is hard in midst of such extremes,
my Lord and Prince pretending Countries good,
On the other side affections dazeling beams,
which still will shine though clypsed with a cloud,
Lays in mine eye my Ladies due desert,
which naught but death can sever from my heart.
What flashing flames did she at first abide,
when as on me her love she did bestow?
What constance still in her wrought on my side,
to keep that love whereto my life I owe?
What grief did then consume her careful heart,
when as my Lord wil'd me from Court depart?
What was the zeal that made her so forsake,
the bliss which princely Court to her could bring,
And for my Love such passing pains to take,
to find me out where brute of me should ring.
Now should I swerue whom she so long has sought?
death were too small did I but fault in thought.
How can I leave her thus and not deserve,
to be enrould with those infamous men,
Whom Love, because they did from him so swerue,
has painted out by Poets public pen:
In hell to have their well deserving hire,
for so defrauding love of just desire?
Yet pardon me Madam for waighing both,
if any harm do rise, the grief is mine,
You to displease the god, know I am loath,
for whom my heart disdaines not any pine.
Set love aside til reason has found out,
what is the best in that we go about.
Against our Love our Countries good is laid,
for whose avail we ought not death refuse,
Then death for love in Countries cause bewraid,
ought to rejoice and seek no other scuce:
Yet leaving Love for countries cause I die,
who will not weep such hap on me to lie.
Because my Lord your father may well know
that virtue is the link of this our Love,
And not affection blind which leads us so,
as being bent we cannot once remove:
Mark Madam what I say, and yield consent,
it is your love that causes me relent.
Without my Lord your parents free good will,
at home with him what can his child enjoy?
And thus to live in state a wanderer still,
as you do now, what more may breed annoy?
Good Madam though I love as no man more,
yield yet to him, withstand him not so sore.
You shall obtain such one by his foresight,
as he shall like, and countries weal shall crave,
You mustregard the commonweals good plight,
and seek the whole not only one to save.
If you do well, I cannot do amiss,
though loosing you I lose mine only bliss.
I do foresee the grief that will ensue,
when I shall find my self of you bereft,
When careful mind my late mishap shall rue,
that void of you and of your sight am left.
A double death my doleful days shall feel,
yet I resign my right to countries weal.

Qu. A noble speech confirming what was said,
that virtues worth was causer of your love,
For sure my Lord it cannot be denaide,
but that this mind a stony heart might move,
Which to his praise does yield to Countries good,
the thing which to possess so near he stood.

Occa. Well Conta. I must needs esteem,
you of such worth as your estate does bear,
And if it might so to all others seem,
you best deserve the garland for to wear.
But since the fates against your virtues bend,
your virtue wills you this to condescend.
Whereto this far I yield if that you please
with me again to Country to resort,
You shall in noble state there live at ease,
and spend your days in most delightful sport.
And as for love I banished you my land,
even so for love in grace still shall you stand.

Cont. My Lord, what you have done, your state maintains,
exiling me that did offend your eye,
My life must be in course of restless pains,
for her whom care of country does deny.
Good hap light on the land where I was borne,
though I do live in wretched state forlorn.

Gaudin. Alas that such a spirit cannot persuade,
Alas that state and virtue sunder so,
Alas of worth no more account is made,
but thus from thee my love must I needs go.
Well since he yields which has most right in me,
Ah Countries good I yield my self to thee.

Occa. Now have I that which though I bought with pain,
I think it light, the gain thereof so great,
Now I receive you to my grace again,
whereof before Love sought you to defeat.
The second mends the former fault does heal,
since you give place to care of Countries weal.

Queen. Well now the force whereto your fate made way
is well expired, you have the heavens to friend,
Who though they saw you run so long astray,
yet have they given your care a joyful end.
Think on and thank, it is a special grace,
first so to stray, then so to end your race.
Your peace is wrought Madam, retire with me,
to place where I do dwell from whence you may
To Country make repair when time shall be.
til when my Lord if you with me will stay,
What things shall need for that your home retire,
I will supply your want to your desire.

Occa. Your goodness has so bound both her and me,
as while we live we be yours to command,
By you is wrought this wished work I see,
by power divine, and by no mortal hand.
Pass on Madam let us be of your train,
the causer of our joy the healer of our pain.

Queen. And you sir knight whose honest yielding made
the good consent which past to help this ill.
You may remain as I before have said,
where I do dwell with hearty great good will.
And ever have the Fairy Queen to friend,
for virtues sake which I in you do find.

Conta. Madam I am your own still to command,
as one you see of hap bereaved quite,
Resolved not to return to countries land,
since I have lost what was my whole delight:
When resting pawse has stayed my troubled heart,
I will retire and draw my self apart.
And now since cause of such importance moves,
my woeful heart thus to forgo his love,
Most worthy Dame since chance so parts our loves,
that from my sight your presence must remove,
Grant me herein, since now the last I see,
let not your love all whole depart from me.
Weigh well the cause that moved me to relent,
which may perhaps imprint more deep conceit,
What man as I, his love so firmly bent,
would yield the hold once master of the bait?
The gods preserve your honor still in health,
my private good, my common countries wealth.
And if your mind were set that home you will,
it were but labor lost, if I gainsaide,
And absent if your love continue still,
my gain is great who still this ground have laid,
That honest love might think it no disgrace,
though they that love do hap to sunder place.

Gaudi. Well, Contarenus well, what shall ensue?
you are the cause whose yielding makes me yield,
Yet of my word for ever hold this true,
whereon you may assured comfort build:
Til death my soul and body shall depart,
your love shall lodge in some part of my heart.
Grief calls me hence. Exit.
Conta. Such is my recompense.
Now do I feel the pangs the Sea men bide,
which having harbor nigh in hope to land
By turning wind are driven to try the tide,
and trust the Seas thereby to void the sand.
Now do I feel the depth of mothers pain,
for death of child she hoped to see again.
Was ever man more near his haven of bliss?
his ship driven forth with wind that filled the sail,
Had ever man such cause of hopeless miss,
as I which at the fall so soon did fail?
Did Fortune ere so sudden show her power
as in her mirth so soon again to lower?
When I had lived so long in strange exile,
in desert wastes commanded still to dwell,
Disfauored of my prince (alas the while)
and bard my Ladies sight my heauiest hell:
Again at last though to her pain we met,
so Love in her surmounted lucklesse let,
Which love as it did work in her to ease,
so Fathers search which sought to salve his loss,
Has bred us both more cause of great displease,
and tied us thus to try more bitter cross:
By duty she is forced to relent,
and leaves to love a leisure to repent.
Yet can I not Gaudina blame therefore,
her hearty love, her toyling tractes bewayles,
She is the lodge where virtue makes her store,
it was her sire that bred my doleful days:
Most happy he that on her jove can hit,
most hapless I for so forgoing it.
And so far went I yet as one that spied,
her whole estate depend upon my grant,
Though my mishap herein be not denied,
yet of her spide my self may justly vaunt.
To work her good my life I would forgo,
as I have done though to my endless woe.
Niphe and Roxane enters.
Rox. Friend Niphe could we two have ever once surmised,
that such event would fall to this exceeding love,
Or that blind Cupid could so quickly be suppressed,
which to all reason first so strongly gave the glove?

Ni. I never thought but that there might fall out some turn,
the stream did run so strong, it threatened still to stay,
The flame so flashing hot could not so always burn,
but being closely kept would burst some other way.

Contar. What Niphe, art thou here, and heard'st my plaint?
with silent voice could thou such grief abide?
Which heretofore when fortune gave the taint,
from sounding shril could not thine anguish hide?
Oh help in sound to show my sorrowing state,
which seemed to thee most happy but of late.

Niphe. I will good sir do all that lies in me,
to ease your care whose case does touch me near,
To find you out by land, and eke by Sea,
my self did toil twixt hope and trembling fear,
Whose shaking off in sort as now we see,
is sour to you, and nothing sweet to me.
But since you may with license of my Lord,
return again from whence you were exilde,
Why will you not with him therein accord?
me thinks refusing that, you are beguilde,
There whom you love, you may have still in sight,
which step in love was never holden light.

Conta. Can I behold another to embrace,
where I my self my Love have always cast,
Would not my grief bewray it self in place,
to see my Love so clearly from me past.
Good Niphe help, this is my last request,
to show my grief good Niphe do thy best.

Niphes song.
O silly Bird what feels thy heavy breast,
which seeking food to feed thy young withal,
At thy return do find thy empty nest,
and none therein to answer at thy call?
How can thy heart but melt away for grief,
forgoing them to thee of late so liefe?
How could thou Thisby stay, by trembling hand,
from reauing thee thy then so loathsome life,
When dead on ground thy Pyrramus began stand,
who hoped forthwith to have thee to his wife?
The nearer hope the fuller fraught with gall,
when trust in hope to rest has sudden fall.
Poor Contarenus how has Fortune fickle dame,
procured thy grief in offering thee her hand?
Which in thy cause does now deserve most blame,
when she would seem thy special friend to stand,
O ye that trust the whirling of her wheel,
beware the wrench at turning of her heel.
And you that look aloft beyond degree,
when fairest wind does fill your flying sail,
Hold fast for fear your footing ficklest be,
when hope will seem to help you to prevail.
So did she here with Contarenus play,
from whom she fled when she made show of stay.
Conta. I thank thee Niphe for thy mournful song,
the tune whereof delights the doleful ears
Of such as justly may complain the wrong,
whose grief dammes up the flood of trickling tears.
Farewell to both, since I must needs depart,
bear witness of my woe and careful heart.
And tell my Lady dear that I intend,
henceforth to seek if I may meet her friend,
Loricus whom the Hermit did commend,
I Will bid him think and hope one day to find
Reward for that his faithful service long,
til when we both may plain of fortunes wrong.
Yet say, I will abide hers to command,
where so adventures hard shall carry me,
Not leaving love by Sea nor yet by land,
though that I love, I never hap to see.
Oh careful heart oppressed with such desires,
as lacks the joys that lyking aye requires.
Yet this I am assur'de her Princely heart,
where she has loved will never quite forget,
I know in her I shall have still apart,
in honest sort I know she loves me yet.
These thoughts in me maintain the hope of life,
which other ways by death should end the strife.
Exit Contar.
Rox. Well then I see our fortune must divide,
we must again to Countries land retire,
This knight delights in sorrowing to abide,
For missing her which was his whole desire.
My self have felt such travel on their train,
as I am glad home to return again.
The Gods send al good speed that tarry here,
and chiefly her which gouernes all the rest,
As for my self I will spread far and near,
for princely praise that she deserves best:
And that God loved us which made us stay,
where virtuous Queen does stately scepter sway.

Finis.
Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1585.


