A new Ballade, declaryng the dangerous* shootyng of the Gunne at the Court.
To the tune of Sick and sick.
Weep, weep, still I weep, and shall do till I dye:
To think upon the Gunne was shot, at Court so dangerously.
THe seue^tene day of Iulie last, at euenyng toward night,
Our noble queen Elizabeth, took barge for her delight:
And bad the waterme^ to row, her pleasure she might take
About the River to and fro, as much as they could make.
Weep, weep, still I weep, and shall do till I dye:
To think upon the Gun was shot, at court so dangerously*
And of her Counsel with her grace, were nobles two or three,
As fittest were to be in place, regardyng their degree:
The French Ambassador likewise* to common with her grace,
Of weighty causes satte with her, each one in comely place.
Weep, weep. etc.
But when her grace an hour or two, had past to take the air,
Returnyng readyng on a book, she said row soft and fair:
Whereby as God the matter wrought, the slacknesse and the stay,
Softely she paste and nothing thought, of gunshotte any way.
Weep, weep, etc.
But all this while upon the Themes, in a schullers Boat unknown
A wretched felloe got a gun, that was none of his own
And shot a bullet two or three, at randon all about,
And gave no great regard to see, what time the queen went out.
Weep, weep. etc.
But as her grace came passing by, had given his piece a charge,
And there out let a bullet fly, that hitte one in the Barge:
A water man through both his arms, as he began to row,
That he cried out upon his harms, whereat the queen was woe.
Weep, weep etc.
Her self in sight and presence by, when that the bullet came,
She saw him hurt, she saw him fall, yet shru^ck not at the same:
Neither made she any fearful show, to seem to be dismayed,
Nor seemed to the Ambassador, of any thing afraied.
Weep, weep etc.
But having such a mighty mind, as passes tongue to tell,
She stepped unto the wounded man, and bad him take it well:
His gusshyng blood could not abashe, her noble courage then,
But she was readier to give help, then all the noble men.
Weep, weep etc.
But what her highness said and did, in that so sudden fear,
Hereafter in my sorry tale, the substance you shall hear:
Let boats go out and fetch him in she said, that this has done,
And quickly was the person brought, that so discharged ye gunne
Weep, weep, etc.
The noble counselors most abroad, to who^ these tidyngs came
Made have to court with trembling hearts, to think upon the same
Applaudyng God upon their knees* most humbly in their place,
With tears of joy that bitter bale, had so escaped her grace.
Weep, weep etc.
His name was Thomas Appletree, of Court a seruyng man,
Which was no little greef to see, to his good master than:
He was committed to the gaile, at Counselors grave regard,
That they might judge what vilest death, were fit for his reward
Weep, weep etc.
With blubryng tears it is no bote, to tell the weepyng eyes,
That were full woe of such a shot, where all our saftie lies:
The bullet came so nere her grace, within six foot at least,
Was never such a cursed case, by such a wilful beast.
Weep, weep etc.
Wherefore it was decreed and judged, by all the counsel grave,
That hangyng was to good a death, for such a wretch to have:
A gibbet was set up in haste, against the Court full nigh,
Where this unhappy Appletree, was pointed for to dye.
Weep, weep etc.
And on the Tuesdaie following, then this wicked prisoner came,
Well guarded with the Marshalls men, to hang upon the same:
His master standing on the bank, to hear what he could say,
He humbly fell upon his knees, and mercy did him pray.
Weep, weep etc.
Would God thou had never served me, quod he with woeful look,
But God he said forgive it thee, that cursed mark thou took:
And after prayer said and done, on the ladder as he stood,
He took his death before them all, he was a subject good.
Weep, weep, etc.
And never meant to hurt her grace, nor any in the Barge,
Nor meant to shoot in any place, to hurt with any charge:
But wished he never had been borne, for his good masters sake,
Whom he had made a woeful man, and no amends could make.
Weep, weep etc.
For troth it was and truth it is, the Queen and Council know
Not willyngly, though wittyngly, he let the bullet go:
Which matter has been sifted so, it moves more her grace,
To let the passion of it go, the meekelier in his case.
Weep, weep etc.
The Queen that saw this Sacrifice, a ready wretch to dye,
Whose pity pleads pardon still, put for the her princely eye:
And sent the Captain of her Guard, a Counseler grave and wise,
To make the fact and favor known, as he could best devise.
Weep, weep, etc.
Who gave a thu^dring peale of grace, the prisoners fault to show
And all the people in the place, what prince th^i had to know:
What courage in her noble grace, in peril did appear,
Before the French Ambassadors face, in such a sudden fear.
Weep, weep, etc.
And told again if that mishap, had happened on her grace,
The stay of true Religion, how perlous were the case:
Which might have turnde to bloody wars, of strange and foreign foes,
Alas how had we been a curste, our comfort so to lose.
Weep, weep etc.
Then of the mercy of her grace, her subjects (...) save,
By whom these xx. years in peace, such quiet ^^^s we have:
The tears fell down on every side, and aloude the people cry,
The almighty long preserve her grace, to govern prosperously.
Weep, weep, etc.
And last of all he said again, mark yet this piteous queen,
For all this vile unhappy fact, so leudely done and seen:
Retournes to her inured course, of mercy to forgive,
That this accursed shall not dye, but pardons him to live.
Weep, weep etc.
And then to hear the people shoute, and see the^ clapped their hands
Who would have torn his flesh before, being in hangma^s hands
To see the goodness of her grace, to such great pity bent,
It made the stoniest heart of all, astonished to lament.
Weep, weep etc.
The counseler that the pardon brought, then knelyng on his kne
And every subject as they ought, kneeled as well as he:
And said a prayer for her grace, upon the doleful ground,
Whereof the peoples sighyng sherles, above the skies rebounde.
Weep, weep, etc.
All loving subjects learn to know, your duties to our queen,
By land and water where ye go, that no such deed be seen:
But pray to God that rules the skies, her highness to defend,
To reign with him perpetually, when her highness life shall end.
Weep, weep, still I weep, and shall do till I dye:
To think upon the gun was shot, at court so dangerously.
W. E.

Finis.
Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North-doore of
Saint Paul's church, at the sign of the Gunne.


