The Knight of the Swanne.

Here begins the History of ye noble Helyas knight of the Swanne, newly
translated out of Frensshe in to English at thinstygacion of the Puyssaunt
and Illustryous Prince Lord Edward Duke of Buckyngham.



Prologue of the Translatour.
VErytably it is that all virtues and noble intencions ben nourysshed and
engendered in the hertes and courages of gentyl persons, the which causes them
to enclyne to all perfeccyon of bounte. Endeueryng the^ to hear, ^^and auaunce
the glorious renown of their foregoer, predecessors replenisshed with ye
grace and love of god Among all other endewed with bounty and noblesse i^
high dygne and Illustryous prince my lord Edward by the grace of god Duke of
Buckyngham Earl of Herforde, Stafforde, and of Northampton desyringe cotydyally
to increase and augment the name and fame of such as were relucent in virtuous
feats and triumphaunte acts of chyualry. And to encourage and styre every
lusty and gentell heart by the exemplyficacyon of the same having a goodli
book of the high and miraculous histori of a famous and puyssaunt king named
Oryant sometime reynynge in the parties of beyond the sea having to his wife a
noble Lady of whom she conceived six sons and a Daughter and chylded of
them at one only tym at whose birth echone of them had a chain of Silver at
their necks the which were all turned by the prouydence of god into white
Swannes (save one) of ye which this present Hystory compyled, named Helyas the
knight of the swanne of whom linially is dyscended my said Lord. The which
ententifly to have ye said history more amply and universally known in this
his natif country as it is in other, has of his hie bounty by some of his
faithful and trusti servants cohorted mi master wynkin de word to put the
said virtuous hystori in printe. And he as willing and glad to content
accomplish and obey the gracious mind and pleasure, has sough and found a
true approved copy, enprinted and corrected in ye frenssh language, at whose
instigacio^ and stirri^g (I Robert Copland) have me applied moieni^g the help
of god to reduce and translate it into our maternal and vulgar english tongue,
after the capacite and rudeness of my weke entendemet. Beseceing my said lord
and consequently al them yt redeth or hereth it red to take no regard to ye
la^guag misorned and rude, for without high style and enerue industry I have al
only verbated and followed mine auctour as nyghe as I could with ye profou^dite
of good heart, and where as oni fault by me or wrong Impressio^ be found
intelligibly after their science to correct and amend in pardoni^g al
ygnoraunce. In the which doing I shall be oblygate and bound to pray for the^
to almighti God that he give unto them his realm celestial unto ye which we
al may come Amen.

Explicit prologus.
Here begins the table of this present book.
How the king Pyeron of Lylefort had to wife and spouse Matabru^e for that
she was rich and endowed of great erthely goods. yt which between them had a
son named Oryant. Ca. primo How king Orant chased a heart so swyftely yt he
lost his folk, and came to a fou^tayne where as he spoke with fair Beatryce
whom he chose to be his wife. Ca ii. How ye king Orya^t at his returning fro
the chase brought with him the fair Beatryce for to espouse and take her to his
wife. Ca, iii. How the might king Oriant espoused ye noble queen Beatryce, the
which conceived of him.vi. sons and a daughter at one burden. Ca iiii. How
king Oriant took leave of the noble Queen Beatrice his spouse. And how ye false
and peruerce Matabrun composed and machined with another matrone to commite
crime and treason toward the said noble Queen Beatryce. Ca. v How the Queen
Beatryce childed naturally.vi. fair sons and a daughter, ye which in their
birthe brought echone of the^ a chain of Silver miraculously wrought at their
necks. Ca. vi. How Marks bare ye.vii. children into forest, and left them on
his mantell. Ca. vii. How the.vii. children were found in the forest by a
devout heremite named Helias. Ca. viii. How ye good and devout hermit prayed
to our Lord for the aid and succor of the.vii. poor children, whose prayers
were exalted, Ca. ix. How the.vii. children were myraculouslie nourisshed of a
white got sent by gods grace. And how matabrune accused falsely the good
Queen Beatrice to king Oriant her spouse. Ca. x. How king Oryant assembled his
counceyle to know by what ma^er he ought to entreat ye Queen his wife ye
wrongfully and without cause was iniuryed of the peruerce. Matabrune mother of
king Oryant. Ca. xi. How the devout hermyte Helyas baptized the.vii. lite
children in his hermytage. Ca. xiil How one of the yomen of ye hunt of the
peruerce Matabrune found the.vii. children in the said forest, the which told
of them to Matabrune. Ca. xiii. How at the commandment of Matabrune an
hounds man named Sauary came for to slay ye.vii. ltile children of king
Oryant unknown in the Forest, where as they were transmued into swannes. Ca.
xiiii. How ye good hermyte Helyas returned into his hermitage with his godson one
of king Oryant sons, and found not the other children, transmued into
swanes. Ca. xv. How ye false and peruerce Matabrune made wickedli to afferme by
an untrue knight named Makayre that ye noble queen Beatrice had forfayted with a
dog. Ca. xvi. How the Angel of god annou^ced to the devout hermyte Helias
that the.vii. children that he had found in the Forest were king Oryantes
children, and that he should se^d young Helias to prove the truth. Ca. xvii.
How King Oriant sent for the good queen Beatrice his wife for to make expose
to her yt whereof she was accused, and co^dempne her to death. And how Helyas
his son aryued at ye palace of his father for to defend and succor his
mother from death, Ca. xviii. How king Oryant commanded to make armoures for
his son Helyas to fight against Makayre, and after went to the good hermit
in the Forest. Ca. xix. How the noble king Oryant delivered out of prison the
good queen Beatrice his wife. and after ordained to his son Helyas all
thing to fight with Makayre. Ca. xx. How Helyas the noble knight of ye swanne
vainquisshed and overcame the false knight Makirae in camp of battle. Ca. xxi.
How the wicked knight Makaire confessed openli before the king and the queen
and al ye people ye treason done to the said queen and her seven children. And
how he was shamefully hanged as a falls reproved traitor on the galowes. Ca.
xxii. How the noble king Oryant did send for the gold smyth yt which brought
ye other five chayns and the cupe that he had deteyned and recyted all the
miracle done with them. Ca. xxiii How the false Matabrune made all the kepers of
ye prison so dronken that they did sleep whiles she fled away And how.v. of
the swannes returned into their form humayne. Ca. xxiiii. How King Oria^t
gave his realm to his noble sone Helyas wherefore he made to crown him king
honorably and than gave him leave to go take his mother Matabrune in the castle
of Maubruyant, and there he made to brenne her in a great fire. Ca. xxv. How
Helyas took leave of king Oryant his father and of queen Beatryce his mother
for to follow the adue^tur of his brother the swa^ne that appeared on the river
before a ship. Ca. xxvi. How the swanne brother of king Helyas co^duited ye
said ship wherein Helyas was till they came to the city of Nymaie. Ca. xxvii How
ye earl of Fra^kebourke made wrongfully to come and appear by Justice Clarysse
Duchess of Boulyon at Nymaye willing to usurp her of her duchy in gyuynge
falls understanding to Otton Emperor of Almayne the which held the court of
his parliment at the said city of Nymaie. Ca. xxviii. How Helyas the noble
knight of the swa^ne arrived at the city of Nymaie for to defend the right of
ye noble duchess of Boulyon whom the Emperor received with great honor.
Ca. xxix. How Helyas the virtuous knight of the swanne did fight against the
earl of Frankebourke the which he conquered and slew in the field. Ca. xxx.
How the noble knight Helyas wedded ye daughter of of duchess of Boulyon. Ca.
xxxi. How the noble duke of boulyon left his land because his wife disobeyed
his commandment, and after his brother the swanne brought him to Nymaye to
the emperor Octon. Ca. xxxii. How the noble duchess of Boulyon complained
pyteously to the emperor for the departinge of her good husband Helyas. Ca.
xxxiii. How Helyas aryued at Nymaie where he was goodly received of the
emperor. Ca. xxxiiii. How Helyas the noble knight of the swanne did return
into the city of Lylefort within the ship of his brother the swanne. The
which myraculously and by the dyuyne will of our lord returned before his
parents and friends into his first form and natural estate of humanyte. Ca.
xxxv. How queen Beatryce made great Joy of her son yt was returned to his
right form. Ca. xxxvi. How ye noble Helyas took leave of his parente and
friends, and made himself Relygyous there as he was nourys^hed with the good
hermyte, where he made to buyld a Castle like to that of Boulyon. Ca. xxxvii
How the puyssant and virtuous emperor Octon espoused the earl of Boleyn to the
fair ydain daughter of ye noble knight of the swanne Helyas. And how after ye
drem that she had ye aungel of god annou^ced to her yt she should conceive and
bear three noble knights. Ca. xxxviii How the duchess of Boulion sent mani
squiers and messagers over all countries and regyons for to find her noble
husband Helias knight of the swanne, Ca. xxxix. How the abbot of Saincteron
and ye squire Ponce departed fro Rome at their returning fro the holy sepu^cre
And sith by the will of god they aryued at the new castle of Boulyon. Ca. xl.
How the squyre Ponce arrived at Boulion for to bear tidinges to the duchess of
Helias knight of the swanne the which at that time was become religious. Ca
xli. How ydain the noble duchess of Boulion endoctrined her three sons
Godfrey, Baudwyn, and Eustace i^ all manner of good operacyons, virtues, and
manners. Ca. xlii. How the three noble brethern Godfrey, Baudwyn, and Eustace
appropryed and used the^ i^ all manner of noble games, and assayes of
worthynesse Ca. xliii
Explicit tabula.
How ye king Pieron of Lilefort hade to wife and spouse Matabrune for that she
was rich, and endowed of great erthly goods. The which between them had a
son named Oriant. Ca..i.


WE read in the ancient and autentike cro^^cles yt sometime there was a noble
king in lilefort, otherwise named ^he strong isle a much rich land, yt which
king had to name Pieron. And he took to wife and spouse Matabrunne ye
daughter of an other king puissau^t and rich meruailously. By ye reason of
which marriage was made and accorded peace between two mighty kings, the which
long time before had been adversaries and ennemes one another by mortal war.
But as than and by ye treaty of marriage was pacified the said discord. How be
it nevertheless that the said king Pieron him accorded to take to wife the
said Macabru^e for that she had great possession of lands and other infinite
richesses whereby as the story says the marriage was made be coueitise and not
by love whereof many harms grew, and all by ye said macabru^e yt wrongefully
sew discord between king Oriant, his wife and his children. The which
possible came by gods will for yt the said marriage was not cordialli made as is
said, or for a more meritorious wealth, as since happened to the high praise of
god and his holy faith, for finably al turned to honor by the grace of ye hye
god that often approves them yt he loves sending them some aduercites first.
For he has no merit toward god to have any swetnes if first he taste no
bitterness of heart, as saint Paul says. By many triblations we must enter into
ye realm of god. But finally our lord resists ye peruers, in giving his
glory to ye meke as in this story appears. For all the punicion fell on
macabrune finabli yt had caused al ye ill. And they that had been iniusly
vilipe^ded were miraculousli exalted. and it is often seen yt marriage made by
couetise co^eth to no perfeccion of goodness. For if the co^iuntio^s be not
made by love as god ordained often of comes grievous desolacio^ as did of her,
like as thistory shows here after

AFter the marriage of king Pieron and Matabru^e as ye manner is, they had
between the^ a son noble and wise named Oriant, the which after ye dyscease
of his father abode with his mother as heir of ye realm, which he succeeded and
governed peastabli without to be married

How king Oriant chased a heart so swiftely yt he lost his folk and came to a
fountain where as he spoke with fair Beatrice whom he chose to be his wife.
Ca. ii.


AFter that the noble king Oriant was gro^en in age, in force, and prudence,
on a day he ^^^ibered him for to go to hunt. And when al things were ready and
he comen in ye Foreste he at the play and pursuit of his Greyhoundes reised a
great heart, whereate he took so great pleasure yt he chased him so swifely yt
his folk might not follow till returned in plain feeld where as was hedge ne
bushe And thus he left of his folk he pursued meruailously til he aproched a
river wherein they said heart lepte for saufte, and so escaped the king and his
hounds. Wherefore the king left him and returned alone till unto a fountain
that he found, ye which was so clear and pleasant to his light that he a
light from his horse for to refresshe him a little in the same place. And there
he sat down under a tree, to ye which he had reined his horse the better to
solace and sport him at his own pleasure. And thus as he was in consolacio^
there came to him a young damoysel much grievous and of noble mai^tene named
Beatrice accompa^ied of a noble knight, and two squires, with.iiii damoyselles
the which she held in her service and famyliarite. And there as she that in
title of signorie posseded the said ground began to speak to ye king Oria^t
in repreuing him for that he was comen to hunte with in the bounds and limits
of her signourye and possession And as unto him yt which she knew not she
began to say prudently. Fair lord who has moeued you to come hu^te or take
any beasts wtin yt forestes of my regio^, know ye not that I am lady and
possess resse of this lord, Damoysel said the king nay. And woe has than said
she given you leave or license so to do. I have well apperceiued the heart yt
ye have chaced and put to flight, and has saved him in the river, but how be
it that ye had taken him yet should he not have abiden as yours. And yet is
mine intencion if it please god that ye shall recompense me or ye depart. For
ye have none accio^ of right for to chase or take any beast wild or tame in mi
forestes, nor on mi ground. And when king Oriant had heard ye fair Beatrici
speak thus bi^ reason so right notably, he took her in so great pleasure yt he
was suddenly surprysed of her love in such wise that fro than he purposed in
him self to take her to wife and spouse. And ye better to manifest and wake
her have knowledge of him he began to lift up his visage in beholding her with a
Ioifull chere and said Know ye fair damoysel that I would not think to do you
any displeasure, but me think yt I may well come and sport me s^il unto this
region and loud as sovereign lord thereof, by reason wherofre owe me homage.
And to the end that ye pretend no cause of ygnorau^te wit ye (without yt I will
hide it) yt I am Oriant king of Lylefort. Whereby there is neither lord ne
damoysell in all this country but they ben holden to yield me tribute and
homage as my vassayll and fee al subject. But yt not wtstanding if I thought to
have ende^aged you of one seile ferdinge I would recompense it at your desire,
for yt noble prudence, curteysy, and graciosite yt I perceive being in you, by
your maintene and moderate speech. How be it that it is well in my power to
make your self amend and repair the injury that ye have done in repreni^ge
and chiding me for yt which is mine own. But your noble, faconde, and
pleasant behauour causes me somewhat to refrain mi courage, and receive your
offense to marci. And when a noble knight named Sauary yt long time had served
the said damoysel had heard ye right mighty king Oriant speak thus benignely
he descended incontinent from his horse, and with his knees flexed he prostened
him and did him honor and reverence in saluinge him and said. Sir king if it
please you ye shall pardon my Lady if she have any thing offended you, for she
had no cognycion of your riall mageste when she reasoned with you. And she
knowledgeth also yt she has nothing but yt it is at your pleasure and
commandment, and otherwise would she not do, wherefore ye shall pardon her if
it please you For she has said nothing but by ignorance, and as she that
right willi and with good courage will keep yours and hers. Than answered the
king to him and said. Know ye noble knight that I accept enough the excuse
yt ye have made for your noble lady. But she shall make me amends in such
manner as she shall be agreeable, for ye beauty and for mosite of her noble person
moeueth me to be her husband, and to take her to wife and spouse, as she the
which is my whole desire. Than the king began for to speak in this manner and
said. Gentill damoysell pleasant, virtuous, garnished of al beauty in whom I
have totali set the love of my heart, is it not well your will that I be your
husband. Pleases it you not to be mi wife and spouse to the end that I make you
to be crowned as queen and ladi of Lilefort. May ye find in your heart by such
manner to accomplish my will, that you and I might be assembled and conionct by
marriage. Answer ye now and say your advise. Ha sir said she right humblye. I
am not dinge ne suffisaunt yt ye do to me such honor, for ye handmaiden or
subgecte ought not ne may not in any thing compare to her prence and lord.
But since that it pleases you to command me so to do, in disparsinge to me of
your grace I were right simple and evil instruct if I refused your pleasure, and
the excellent honor that ye so benignely and of your goodness unto me
present. For if it should please you to marye me to ye least knight of your
noble company yet ought I to consent of right. wherefore to you that is my
lord, and to other in comparable: I am all ready to abey and accept your good
and noble will in the honor whereto ye require me, the which with good heart I ot
troy and grant you. And than king Oriant took her by the hand and said
Certes lady I pr^mise you on ye faith of knighthod yt as long as ye be on live
never to espouse other woman than you, and I assure you eue^ here yt I shall be
your husband. And thus by a comin accord and by the consentement of them
both was promised ye said marriage with one cordial love.

How king Orient at his returninge fro the chase brought with him the fair
Beatrice for to espouse and took her to wife. Ca. iii.


When the promise was thus made the king incontinent made her to be led to
Lylefort for to marye her. And in May when the trees spryngeth and bring
forth their odiferaunte flowers, and that the Birds being their armonical
tunes on the small grene twiges was made the enter of ye noble queen Beatriece
into the realm of Lilefort. At the which enter all the people afflued from all
parts leding great Joy and mirth euerech in his possibilite That is to wit,
some to make fyrs and games of mirthe. Other made diverse fair mysteries and
tourneimentes of feats of arms. And before the same came ye old qeuene
Matrabrune mother of ye prue king Oriant. The which wha^ he saw her come began
for to smile and have great Joy of ye pleasure that he had to see ye noble
beatrice his love, which he loved merueilousli and with all his heart. wherefore
he said to his said mother which he perceived murmr a litel, I require you my
right dear lady and mother yt ye will make joyous chere and behold here how I
have found ye most fair ladi of ye world, replenisshed of wit and virtues
as much as any woman living. And I am advised that never as long as she
lives to have other wedded wife, for in her is all mi pleasure. Than as heavy
and angry answered his said mother by a manner of envy. Ah my son litel
rejoice I for presently I apperceiue your ygnouraunce yt ye now will so abate
your estate, as to take a simple damoysel and you being a right puissaunt and
noble king might demand and have to wife ye daughter of the most rich and
noble prince that might be found upon the earth, and finabli you and yours
possede his realm by succession. Madame said the king, ye, if it please me
so. Know ye that I never ^ou^de none that so much pleased me, and that was
to me so agreeable as she is. And ye know yt there is nothing as to have his
pleasure in this world. And also marriage ought not to be made but if ye
parties were co^tente and of good accord. Wherefore I beseech you to take it in
gree as well as I. For to morrow in the morni^g if it please god I will that the
feast and solempnite of ye marriage be celebred as it behooves. And eke I hope
sithit is by the will of god, and of good love and assent of us both yt there
may be but al wealth come thereto. Certainly son said she since that it please
the yt it be so it cannot displease me in any manner. But I accord totallie to
thi^ good will. All these words said she with mouth, but not with heart, as
many done yt be faint symulacyon make semblaunt to consent to some good work,
but they have an other thought and cursed will at heart. And so had the said
Matabru^e, for she ceased not to murmr in her self against ye said marriage,
and malignousli thought alwai to put therein some diversity, and seperacion. But
not withstanding this the feast was not deferred. For the night before the day
of weddinge for ye honor and magnifice^ce of the good king Oriant and of his
noble love Beatrice were made moriskes, comedies, daunces, interludes, and al
manner of Joyous sportes in ye kings palais, whereas were many great princes and
knights of renown Pipes, taborins, dourimers, fidles, organs, psaltries,
clauicordes, and mani other instru^entes there was in great nombre sowning al
songs of armony. On ye morrow the king was had to the church accompanied of
many great princes and lords, in so great triumph and honor yt it may not
be recited. And in likewise was apparailed ye noble lady Beatrice and co^duited
of many noble ladies and damoysels pages with diverse liueraies, as well of ye
kings as the queen's. In such wise yt at the conioyninge of this noble marriage
was made al singular and inestimable solimpnite in the church. The mass done
eueri man returned to the palais royal, where they were received in open court
for to take their reiectio^. And there were all the assestent is served of
diverse dilicates and veni^o^^ of wines and of al noueltees as plenteously as
they could wisshe. And there presentlye for the honor of the noble king Oriant
eueriche of the company efforced them to do honor and service to the noble
queen Beatrice, the which was so pleasant and acceptable to all the people yt
echone praised her. And in likewise were made the sam^daye many other new
games, and service to all honors. Than after with all mirthe and sown of
trumpetes and other armonious instruments, ye mighti king Oriant and ye noble
queen Beatrice his wife lay together. And on ye morrow was yet made great joy
and exultacion of al other new pastimes, In this estate lasted ye feast and
sole^nite of the marriage long space in great haboundau^ce o gifts, largess of
goods, and sumptuousness of services in such manner that of long time had not
be seen semblable feast, to the pleasure of eueri man. But the said Matabrune
murmured always i^ her self by wicked detraccion, which she put since in effect.
And if she made any chere at the said feast it was by false semblant and manner
of doing, for unjustly and wrongfully she conspired always some evil upon the
noble queen Beatrice.

How the mighty king Oriant espoused the notable Beatrice, the which conceived
of him.vi. sons and a daughter at one burden. Ca. iiii.


(...) chamber royal she saw a woman in the street that bare to christning
two children that an other woman had conceived and borne at one time. And than
familiarily she called ye king of whom she was right well beloved and said.
Sir I greatly meruai^e me of a thing that I see yonder. And whereof sweet love
said the king. Of ^i. children said she that a woman has contained at one
time, which I see yonder borne to christning, me seems that it is difficile
for a woman to conceive two children without having the company of two men.
Sweet love said the king, yes right well, put away the opinion to your mind.
For by the will of god and after nature a woman may conceive of one man to the
nombre of.xii. children at ones, naturally fourmed, and parfite. The which
words precedent is compared full derely the forenamed queen, by the false and
malignus Matabrune. And it is so often seen fortune, yt it is better to be still
than to speak evil, whereof ye sage says. That a great speaki^g is seldon
seen pronounced, without to have any fault, whereby he says after yt he never
repented him of to little speech. But al things promised ye king Orient and
queen Beatrice loved well together. Than it happened with in a while after that
tidinges came unto ye king yt some of his enemies had destroyed and slain of
his folk, and all redi had conquered of his lands by war. And that soon
enough and easily they had moeued to enter many princes. But what tidinges so
ever he had, he made no ^emblaunt to resist against his contraries. For he was
in such wife enprised and taken in ye love of his wife that after the tidinges
he was about.vi. month yt he could in no wise leave her, n^ puruey any
thing for the said affairs, wherbi fina^l^ his enemies came so ferforth in
his lands that by constraint he was driven to prepaire men of war and to
live his spouse. And conseque^tely he made to dissemble his chiualry to the end
yt without delaie they might be ready to accompany him in his wars against his
enemies the which was done at his commandment. Tha^ saw he ye time that his
wife approached to be delivered, wherefore beningneli he called Matabru^ his
mother for to be to her as to commau^de and said, My lady mother ye see that I
am constreyned to depart for to go war upon mi enemies. Ye know also that in
likewise of the grace of god my wife has conceived and is great with child,
wherefore I pray you if it please you of your benign grace to have her for
recommaunded in all her singular affairs, prayinge you also yt in mine abse^ce
ye take and keep her as your daughter in showing you to be her mother, And I
believe in ye pleasure of god that she will have you in honor and reverence as
mother and obey you as your daughter. Ye se that she is mecke as adoue, soft
and amiable as a lamb, prudent and virtuous as is possible, wherefore I
reco^maunde her to you as she that knows the great love that is conjoined
between us two, and as to mi part I wene that never man loved woman more than I
love her. Ye know also ye danger yt might come to a woman big with child as
she is wherefore if by your defaut any inco^uenie^t came to her I should not be
glad ne content with you. Ye have folk of all estates at your pleasure for to
command the^ to do all the service and help yt to her shall be requisite.
Therefore madame I put and leave her all in your keeping and solicitude Mi fair
son said Matabrune thou know yt what pleases thee, to me is agreeable, and
all thy will is mine wherefore thou may well know that I shall keep thy wife
the queen as my singular daughter, and better than mi self. Thou may in
likewise wit that I am she that would be most heavy and soroful if any harm
came to her. And therefore doubt not but that I shall dilige^tli do thy pleasure,
for I love her with all mi heart for gracious and noble maintene that I se in her
dayli encreace, therefore take no thought. well madame said he, I thank you and
totally put her in your grace, wherefore in saying adewe I take my leave humbly
at you. Now go said she god be thy guide. And thus the king departed from the
said Matabrun his mother, whose words were not accordau^t to her deeds, for
they were al but abuse and false simulacio^, like as untruly she showed by her
curssednes Tha^ after ye king came to take leave of his noble spouse and in
weeping tenderly spoke long with her, and than took an amerous leave of her,
in kissing her beni^gnely so that she fell down in a swonne. And he took her
up amiably m^king a great lamentacion and sorrow. And at her awaking in weeping
by her were made many co^plaintes, the which were so prudently ordained that all the nobles knights and barons wept profoundly in beholding her for pity that
they had at heart. And than ye kissed each other right curtessi, taking a
cardial leave with out power to speak any more for sorrow. Than he took leave of
her and of the other ladies and damoysells, and with out any more tarieng
mounted on horse beck, for to go to his people against his enemies, where as
he did many fair valiantines* and diverse great and noble feats of armis.

How king Oriant took leave of ye noble queen Beatrice his spouse. And how the
false and peruers Matabrune composed and machined with another matrone to
commise crime and treason toward the said noble queen Beatrice. Ca. v.


When the nobie king hade thus taken his leave of his spouse and of many other
of his friends he went to the war for to be fight his enemies the paynims and
to sustain the faith catholic of god, and to defend his land. But of his
noble feats of arms that he with his knights and many other might do in ye
said war as true knights of all mighty god, and of the victory that they
obtained as now I shall leave to speak any ferther to the end that I may
return to speak of the effect of the matter And also ye more sooner to com
without prolixite to the ture cronicles and miraculou^ histories, of the which
I pretend to make singular m^cion. And consequentli proceed unto ye deduccion
of this present book containing diverse noble feats and notable virtues worthi
of memory and hie recommendacio^s as after this declared. So it happened yt
after ye departing of king Oriant and that he was out of ye limits of lilefort
with all his army and excercite, the right cursed matabrune considering the
ab^^n^e of her son began to compass the treason and evil that she had
conspired to do unto the noble queen Beatrice. And for to come unto her
damnable and cursed will she sent for the midwife yt was chose^ and deputed to
receive of women ye children yt ben borne on earth. The which midwife came
incontine^t at her se^ding. To whom Matabrune said. Mi freende I have sent
for you for a certain secret that I have to tell you and declare under manner
of confession. And therefore ye shall swear and promise to me your faith that
never to any creature living ye shall discover mi secret, and that that I
intend to tell you. But if you will consent and do it in keeping to me faith and
promise I shall give to you so much gold and silver yt you nor none of yours
shall never have defaute ne need of goods. And fe^ (...) more. I shall help you
to mary your children and fre^des highly and honorably, when the old midwife
heard the promesses that Matabrune made to her she consented to her cursed
desire saying. Certainly madame ye may always say and command me as to your
servant, and I promise you mi faith that any thing what soever it be never to
do person living shall it be discovered. Therefore may that I shall do as
if it were in confession. And verelye said Matabrun if ye do so mi desire I
shall hold to you yt I have promised, wherefore in trusting to your words I shall
recite unto you mi secret, and that yt I prete^de to do Ye know and it is true
how my son king Oriant has taked the queen Beatrice that present is to his
wife, yt which was but a simple gentil woman as ye well know And ye wot well
that he might have had and may, one richer and more noble of blood without
comparison tha^ she is, saying and considering the magnifike and excellent
lignage whereof he is spronge. But his said wife has so enchained and bound
him i^ her lines that he may neither eat, drink ne rest, but if he be alwaie
by her, and to make short tale, when his enemies were comen into his lord for
to endomage him for nothing cold he leave her, in any wise to resist the^ for
his defense* wherefore I would that you and I had advised singulerly to turn
his heart fro ye love of her, and set her in so great indignacio^ of him that he
may aquaint him with some other high and noble lady and mary her. Now ye se
that this queen is great with child, wherefore more easily may we cause this
diversity and seperacion of his love by some manner. Madame said ye false old
matrone, eue^ as you please to devise of this matter I accord me to your will,
and if you seem it good I shall make her to waste and sle the child within her
body, and tha^ I shall certify to the king that she would have it slain.
Fre^d? said Matabrune I had thought another means more expedient and that
should be of right great abominacion and horror to ye king as I shall show
you the manner, ye se that she is meruailousli big, wherefore it is to be
presupposed yt she shall have two or three children, therefore when it comes to
the term of her deliverance that shall be shortly ye shall come to her and by
fai^t semblaunt make manner to present and offer you al to her service. And
when she shall be delivered of her children ye shall give the^ to me secretly for
to tra^sporte the^. And I shall ordeine as mani yo^ge whelps yt I shall make to
be taken from under some bitche that has newli whelped, and by this manner she
shall give her to understand ye the has borne them, and that they ben issued
of her body whereby after we may make her, the king, and all the other barons to
believe that she had the company of some dog the which has engendered the
said whelps, by ye which we shall come to our desire without any
contradiccion. For I have one my faithful servant that I have nourished of
youth to whom I shall secretelye give the thildren as soon as they be borne,
and at mine only commandment he shall go and cast them into ye river of whom
shall never be mencio^. And I promise you madame said the false old matron that
I shall do even as it pleases you to aduerte and show me, by so cautelus and
subtle manner that the work shall seem to be sure and notarious like as by our
entendement ye have devised.

How the queen Beatrice childe^ naturally.vi. fair sons and a daughter, the
which in their birth brought each of them a chain of silver miraculously
wrought at their necks. Ca. vi.
queen beatrice,

matabru^



When the time limited and ordained of almighti god approached that the noble
and goodly Queen Beatrice should be delivered after ye course of nature, ^he
false matrone aforsaid went and delibered in her self to execute and put in
effect her mangnus or most wicked purpose and the cursed treason the which by
the exhortement and counseile of the peruers and in grate Matabrune she had
consented for to prepare and do against ye said noble queen Beatrice and her
poor innocent children, the which neuerthelsse were miraculousli kept and
preserved fro death by the divine grace and proteccion of our savior Jesus
christ, as it shall be said here after. And so than at the hour determined
that ye noble Beatrice felt her oppression with grief of childinge incontinent
the said false old midwife was sent for. The which when she was comen by
false semblaunt reasoned the noble Queen of her affairs as in such case is
accoustomed. And she declared to her all ye troth and how she felt her
oppressed sore. Than the said matrone by fained bla^disshinges gave her good
courage in making semblaunt to expose her al to her service, for yt she knew yt
the hour approached to accomplish her cursed intent. And forthwith was se^
for matabrune ye which all ready had prepaired ye whelps for to perform ye
reason. But she comen made m^ners of great wealth to the said noble queen
Beatrice. And suddenly in great pain and traiuable of body she childed.vi.
sons and a fair daughter, at whose birt^ each of the^ brought a caine of
silver about their neck^ issuing out of their mothers womb. In which was
v^tuousli demonstred the pure and singular dignite of the n^ble mother and her
child, and that god would upon then extend his divine grace. But the evil and
detestable herts enforce the^ always to pervert and totally adnichil al good
works. And when Matabrune saw the.vii. little children borne having echone a
chain of silver at neck, she made the^ lightli and secreteli to be borne a
side by her cha^berer of her teachinge, and than took ye.vii. little dogs that
she had prepared, and all bloody laid them under the queen in manner as they
had issued of her body. And anon the matrone or midwife began to escrie with
an high voice saying. Ha lady queen here is a great and marvelous mischief
that to you is presently comen. For I have received.vii. stinking dogs the
which be issued of your body by an horroure over detestable. Matabrun in
likewise endeavored her on the other side to approve ye said injury (by her
commised and purpensed) saienge, Take away lightly this infamite and make to
bear this foulness of dogs into the feeldes, and yt echone hold secret
this mischief and enorme forfaite in such manner that for the honor and
reverence of misonne it never be known ne discovered to any yt lives. Now it
is not to be douted yt the noble queen Beatrice to whom had be done this
injurious treason ne was at that hour greatly travailed and vexed of her bodi
so to have childed.vii. children at one burden, for a woman is often sore
pained to bear one all only. Wherefore she was as dead in her childing and
apparceiued nothing of ye said treason that was to ^er done. But wha^ she was
comen again to her self having somewhat more vigoure than she had before, ye
false matabrune began to cast an eye on her by a false and cursed regard more
mortal than of a Baselike, and repreued her of the fault yt her self had made
and commised argui^g her without a cause and said. O vnhappi and miserable
woman full of shamful harlotri. Here is the midwife that presently has
received.vii. dogs of your body, yt which I have made to be borne to ye
feldes for to hid ^^orrour and infection of your enorme sin. And therefore
confess here your deed and declare to us if ye have had co^pani and habitacion
with any dog whereof this prosedeth and we shall keep your counsel. And when
the noble Queen heard these words she was so sorrowful yt she swouned nere for
anguisshe. And after that her courage was a little renewed she prayed Matabrune
pitiouslye to show her that, that she said to be issued of her body. And
incontinent she made to show her ye.vii. whelps that she had ordained for to
do the treason, whereof ye noble queen wept and sobbed profundly in bearing
her culpe beholding the^ in axing mercy for that she had not done. But that
notwithstanding the false Matabrune alwai redargued her in approprieng the
crime to her saying. vnhappi woman thou ought to be burnt when you haste willed
to conceive with a dog. Ha madame said she I thought it never, ne ye case
never hapened me. And therefore I pray you give me no more great matter of sorrow
than I suffer presentli, but thanked be god mi creator since that it pleases
hi^ to be thus. For it is yet in his might to tra^smut me or any other that
him pleases into some dombe beast and that, that pleases him ought to please
us. Than departed the false Matabrune, and the wicked matrone by faint
simulacion made semblaunte to recomfort her saying. Alas madame take not so
much sorrow yt ye be not worse therefore, for if it please god we shall do in
such wise that your noble spouse king Oryant in no wise shall have cognicion.
And it shall be kept ^o secret that no sclaunder shall come thereof. Ha sweet
love said the good queen, never will the king take any consolacio^ with me, for
he will charge me of this offense without ever to pardon me, and will judge me
culpable of deaeh. But if it pleased his grace to assign mi poor life in sum
religion for ever to serve god and do penance for my sins, alas I would take
it in patience and pray for him, and put pain to apease the ire of god which I
so streatched on me, wherefore I pray you humbly that ye will require mi lady
that she will impetret his grace of the king mi faithful spouse. And thus
suffered ye good queen anguisshe on all sides. For she was betrayed of them
which made manner to be sorrowful and have compassion of her mischief, and of
thiniuries that them self had made by their untrue courages.

How Marks bare the.vii. children into a forest and left them on his mantell.
Ca. vii.
AND after that the false old woman had parfet and done their treason yt they
had enterprised as said is Matabrune called a squire of hers named marks and
said, Marks my true secretary it behooves that presently ye do me a service
the which I shall declare to you. Madame said he it is well reason yt I obey
to you, for I have received mi wealth and honor of your grace only, wherefore
know yt I shall accomplisshe with right good heart yt that ye please to command
me. Now Marks said she mi freende it behooves that to me ye be true and secret
in yt I have to do with you, for it must not be known ne reveled to no person
yt lives upon pain of your life. And also if ye hide and keep it secret I
shall give you goods enough. Lady said Marks command what it pleases you, I
promise you to be true and loyal. It is of troth said Matabru^e yt the queen
of late has childed.vi. sons and a daughter, yt which children has brought
each of the^ a chain of silver about their necks, which me seems an evil
sign and that in their age veril and descret they may be murderers or thieves,
wherefore I have advised yt it is better to drown the^ or make the^ to die in
their child hode than to have a greater sclaunder at ye last and to eschew
the sorrow yt he might have had I have given her to understand yt.vii.
litell dogs ben issued of her body, yt which I have made to slay and cast
into the feildes And I prai you on my peril and my will to take the.vii.
children and goo kill them or cast them in some river, in such wise that
never be tidinges of them. Lady said yt Marks it shall be done wholly as ye have
pleased to ordein me, and I promise you yt of these.vii children shall never be
any nencion. And than at the commandment of matabrune marks mounted on his
horse, and took yt.vii. childred as he was ordained, yt which he took and
wrapped in his mantell and in a great haste transported them out of the city
of Lilefort. And when he was bout.x. mile out of ye said city he entered i^to a
forest he was enspired with the grace of god for to desce^d of his horse, and to
behold how the poor children did. And when he was defended he laid them in
the said plain upon his mantel, and than began for to behold them. And when
he saw the^ so fair so pleasant, and so well fourmed he had great pity at
his heart, and considered in him self that since yt they had brought those
chai^es of silver out of their mothers womb that god has chosen and ordened
them to some perfeccion of wealth and excellent honor. And thus as by love and
benignite he beheld these poor children they begane all to laugh and to
behold him sweetli. And than he was in such wise moeued with pity and
compassion that he delibered in him self to do the^ no harm but by him self
commanded the^ into the holy guard proteccion and mercy of god in manner of
speaking to them saying. Now I pray to god fair children yt he will keep and
preserve you from al evil and encombrau^ce by his holy benign grace and yt
shortly be confounded all your enemies, and the false old witch yt has sent
you hither for to purchase your death and destruction. Alas poor children it
greueth me sore for to leave you here i^ this place as desolate, wa^dred and
haba^doned of your blood. But I hope yt he yt has will led to creat and form
you i^ your good mothers body will not leave you dispurueyed, and fare ye well to
god I command you children, for I shall se you neuermore. And thus amyably
took the said Marks leave of the.vii. little children the which at his
departing took them in his arms and pitiousli kissed them in weping tenderly
with salt teres. And than he returned to Lilefort making much sorrow inwardly
for them.

How the.vii. children were found in the forest by a devout hermit named
Helyas. Ca. viii.


INcontine^t after yt he had thus taken his leave of ye children he returned
to lilefort where as ye peruers Matabru^e came to fore to meet him for to know
tidinges of her cursed will saying. Now my freende Marks have ye done mi
commandment of the.vii. children as I bad you. Madam said he, know you that
ye shall never have tidi^ges of the^ for I have al to hewed their members and
casted the^ in the river. And she said mi friend ye have done well and I shall
reknoledge the pleasure or it be long. For that ye have been faithful to me I
shall content you well. And when my son king Oriant shall be returned I shall
do so much toward him yt he shall make to die his espouse whereof mi heart
shall be glad, and I shall be avenged to my gree. And with these words departed
matabrune and the fornamed marks one fro the other.

Thus leave we to speak of the^, and return to speak of the children yt
which were in the Forest dolorouslye wayling and as all dead for honger. But
by the grace divine of god there came into that place an holy and devout
hermit named Helias, the which had his habitacion in the said forest. And
when he apperceiued the.vii poor little children there abandoned and weping for
honger: he had so great sorrow at his heart that he wept for pity and
compassion to behold them, wherefore he took and lapped the^ tenderly in his
mantel and with all their chains at their necks he bare the^ into ye li^le
house of his hermitage, and there he warmed and sustened them of his poor
goods as well as he could.

How the good and devout hermit prayed to our lord for the aid and succor
of the.vii. poor children, whose prayers were exalted. Ca. ix


AFter that the good hermit had done his possibilite to sustain and rechaufe
the.vii. little children of the noble Queen Beatrice to him unknown. He saying
the indigent puerylite of them had great fear that they should die for fault
of natural food and had none hope but only in the marcie of god. And than for
them he made his prayers saying humbly Sovereign god allmighty very rectour and
gobernatour of all things that by thy divine grace wylled ^o repast the
children of Israel in deserte with manna of heaven And yt in like wise sustained
ye good prophet Daniel in ye pit of Lions And that also sithen in the new
testament have repasted five thousand men beside the women and chldren with
five barley loves and two fisshes I supply thee and require humbly that bithi
biti, mercy and swetnes it pleases thee to repast and sustain these.vii.
poor little children yt which ^i thy grace I have found naked and dei^ge for
hunger in this forest, to thend that wha^ thou have nourisshed them they may
devoutly serve and honor the as thou know. And incontinent was exalted to
ye oraison of ye devout hermit before god, for miraculously there came into
his house a fair white goat, ye wiche beningnely came nere to ye.vii. little
children in presenting to them her milk, and there she gave them suck
naturally as their nource. And than the good hermit knew clearly that god had
vertously sent her for ye nourisshing and sustentation of the poor little
children that he had founde^, whereof he thanked god greatly of his divine
sauitude. And thus this white goat gave milk sufficiently to them and than
returned to the wood. And so long she gave the^ souke that they began to gro
and wax somewhat strong and followed her in ye wood and about the hermitage.

How the.vii. children were miraculuslie nourisshed of a white goat sent by
gods grace. And how Matabrune accused falsely the good queen Beatrice to king
Oriant her spouse. Ca. x


When the forsaid children were come to age of puerilete the devout hermit
Helyas made and appropryed to each of them a cote of leaves of the trees or of
such as he could get. And so they went playing with in the forest where as
they gathered fruit to eat with their bread, for in that point were they
nourisshed under the grace of god, and by the dilygence of the good hermete
which with good heart administered the bread of ye almesses given to him. Now it
happened by space of time that king Oriant their father returned victorious
out of the war that he had against his eneiems wha^ he left his good queen
bygge of the vii children habandoned of their blood, And wha^ the false old
Matabru^e knew that the good king Oreant her son was come^ she went against
him making the good mother and faynynge as she would weep she began to say
for to acco^plishe her fires courage. A my most dear son ye be right hertly
welcome. I am all Joyful that ye be returned in Joy and health accompained of
your barons But on the other part my heart is so heavy and sorye for your wife
and for that is to her hapened ye little lacks yt it ne breaks. And when the
king heard her speak so he was as abashed and said, why madam is there any
harm come to my wife, is she dead or how. Ha my son said she nay: but the
case is much more enorme the which I may not ne dare not well reher^e for the
horror and abhomynacion of the dead, And also I had lever yt an other tell it
you than I for it is well known of al your servants Forsothe said the king
if any ^uyll be happed it is more decent and conue^able yt ye tell me t^a^ an
other with whom I should be a^gry, Ha my child sith it pleases you so I shall tell
you, but it greueth mi heart for ye honor of you and yours Know ye yt when ye
departed fro this country I thuoght yt your wife had conceived a child of you,
but she had conceived of a dog the which is a foul sine. For here is ye
midwyfe yt has received.vii. little doges of her bodi ye which I have made to
kyl and be casten in the feldes for to undo the sclaunder, wherefore ye ought to
make her die and cast in a fire And the matron was with her for to approve the
lie. And when ye king heard these words affermed by false tongues he had so
great sorrow at his heart that none might have more. And by great dispite he
demanded where yt she was. And Matabrune said yt she was recluse in her
chamber, wherout she durst not come for shame of her vilanous dead. And than
the king entered into a chamber with one of his knights and began inwardly
discomforted to say. Alas what is happened to me. Alas what doloure is this,
has mi wife conceived.vii. dogs. Has she haba^doned her to brute beasts
she yt I thought had be ye honor and beauty of al ladies. Has she betrayed me
that I loved more tha^ ever man loved woman. Am I by her dishonored and
brought to confusion in mi realm. Why has not god auaunced my days where as
I was upon mine enemies. I was well borne in an unhappy hour for to se now
this obprobre. Alas who shall counseil me Mi god almighti help me, for I
require no more to approach her yt I have so much loved. In this sharp
anguishe reconforted him the knight in the best wise that he might. But he was
so inwardli disconforted that he laid him on a bed where as he fell on sleep
for sorrow and melancoly. On yt other part was the noble queen Beatrice i^ an
other chamber where as she made no less sorrow than her noble spouse. Than came
to her a squier yt long time had served her, and declared to her al y^ manner
how king Oria^t was returned fro ye war, whereof she was greatly abashed,
and axed the squier if in an^e wise she had been spoken of. And he answered yea?
and recited to her al how ye peruerce Matabrune, and the false and disloyal
matrone had told and affermed to the noble king Oriant of her fait. And than
she began for to make her complaint to almighti god and his glorious mother
saying Right swet lady and sacred mayde^ mother of the savior and rede^ptor
Jesus christ what syne might I have commysed toward thy dear son Jesus christ
that.vii. dogs be^ issued out of my bodi wherbi I have lost the love of my
husband the most pleasant and the best that ever woman might have chosen.
Alas souerayn king Jesus christ that for to wash the crimes and offenses of
all poor sinners has shede wather and blood fro your precious fid whereof your
most worthi mother received so great dolor at her heart I beseech you yt it will
please you to cleanse, wasshe, and purge me of all my sines and crimes that ever
I co^mised against you. And as truly as ye comforted your swet mother the day
of your holy resurreccion, wha^ first and before all other ye showed you to
her in body impassible and gloryfied and consequently to the other holy ladies
and to your most happy apostles I beseech you humbly that ye will reco^fort your
seruau^te inding to requir you, and to restablisshe her to the good grace and
love of her true husband and spouse to whom she never thought to do wrong ne
offense in any manner And thus she abode heui and sorrowful in her chamber
incessauntly requiringe our sweet savior Jesus christ and the glorious Virgin
Mary his right worthy mother for to impetre and get mercy.

How king Oriant assembled his counseyle for to know by what manner ought to
entreat the queen his wife the which wrongfuliy and without cause was
iniuried of the paruers Matabrune mother to king Oriant. Ca. xi


THe king Oriant being reposed in melancoly as it is said made me
incontinent to assemble his counsel, that is to wit Dukes, earls, knights and
other lords of renown, with the bishop and prelate of the church. And when
they were al assembled in the consistory the king arose and began to speak in
saying. Fair lords I have made you all to assemble in this place for to
discute of a matter, yt which to me is heui and grievous to supporte. It is of
truth notorily yt since my retourning it is showed to me and affermed yt my
wife yt which ye know duringe mi viage has be delivered of.vii. little whelps,
which she has conceived of a dog, as it is presupposed, wherefore it were
shame to me if ever I return to her by copulacion carnal. And I will yt by
your advise this manner be consulted, and how I may acheue it. And for to
a^swere of this matter was prefrred, ye bishop yt said. Sir king under
correccion of you and mi lords here present I shall say as be seems of that,
yt is proposed hereof the queen your noble spouse yt which is said to have
conceived.vii. dogs, me seems yt by justice she ought not to receive death.
And here is ye reason wherefore. It is possible yt in her sleep be comen to her
some beast yt has done her this outrage without her knowledge and consent,
wherefore she is in nothing culpable. And fertermore your noble person has
touched ofte^^imes to hers after yt constitucion of the sacrament of marriage.
Wherefore me seems under reverence yt ye ought not consent to her death, but
howbeit ye may make her dyligently to be kept in some honest place by manner of
prison, and of the surplus let the judgment to god yt is ye true judge and
only retribuer of good and evil, and the troth shall finabli be known
apartly. Of this counsel the king was somewhat consoled in his heart, for he had
always a certain love to his wife. But after that arose another knight having
a fires Lions courage saying there against what sir would ye leave this woman
thus seeing yt dishonor and shame that she has done to you? if she be but a
loneli put i^ prison ye may never mari you to another wife and by consequence
this pusau^t realm should be left with out heir of your body. By the which
thing considered if I were believed she should be brent in a great fire, as it
is well known yt she has enough deserved it, and tha^ ye might mari a more
noble lady tha^ she is, yt which would appease the sorrow that he have for this.
Of this counsel king Oriant was not over glad, but without shewinge great
semblaunt as he that desired to save the body of the good queen concluded this
matter saying. Now lords I shall tell you in giving you aduerte^ce, if it so were
that she be culpable of death yet have I vowed and agai^e ward made promise
to god that she being dead or alive never to espouse other wife, for any
treasours or realms that any man living may give or habandon to me and thus I
certify it you. Than all the nobles and great lords of the asistence concluded
with a comune accord yt it was conuenable by this manner yt she held aloneli
prison in likewise as ye bishop had delibered. And at their advice ye king
ordained two of his knights that they should put ye queen his wife into some
gracious prison and that she should be honestly served and administered of
meat and drink as to her noble estate apperteined and yt they should charge
her for to pray to god for hi^, and to advertise her how he had preserved and
defended her from death And when the cruel Matabrun had known the deliberacion
of the bishop she spoke to him reuerentli, and greatly injured him for his
counseile yt he had given to save the queen's life. After that came the to
knights to ye noble queen Beatrice and benignely at ye commandment of the
king and his counseil put her in a fair chamber by manner to hold prison and
there they reveled to her all that had been said and ordined by the said
counseyl. And how the king had defended her from peril, and yet moreover had
commanded to entreat her honistly and yt she should pray to god for him,
whereof greatly she thanked and praised god which saying the case wherein she
wend to be culpable had saved his life. And thus patiently in wepinges she
abode in prison. But she recommaunded her often to ye king thanking him of his
grace done to her for the offense to her imposed, wherbi she was obliged for
ever to pray to god for him. And also she reco^mended her humbli to god and to
the glorious virgin Marie in all her needs abiding long in that place shitte,
tell that one of her sons named Helias delivered her out of prison as it
shall be said here after.

How the devout hermit Helias baptized ye.vii. little children in his
hermitage. Ca. xii.


FOr this time we shall leave to speak of the noble king Oriant and of the
noble queen Beatrice his true and faithful spouse for so^e thing right digne
and worthi of memory yt I hope to say of their.vii. little children esclaues,
nourisshed, and alimented in the poor house of the good holy and devout
hermit named Helias. After that the.vii. children were nourisshed and alaced
of the said white goat miraculously seen of god as before is rehearsed. The
above said devout hermit to thend that they should be acceptable to god by ye
virtue of wasshing in the holy water sacramental made them to be baptized and
christened at his good will and pleasure. And of the said.vii. little children
there was one among the other the which to him was right beauteous and
agreeable and that pleased him much, the which he named and called Helias after
his own name. And when that they were in the age of their pleasant and
fresshe grene yongth they reane all about sporting and playinge in the said
forest about the trees and flowers only cladde and habitued with poor roots
made of green leaves of the trees of the said forest, and were barefeted
euerichone without any covering upon their heads in cold and heat, and in
this estate went they always together the one with the other.

How one of the yomen of the hunte of the peruers matabrune found the.vii.
children in ye said forest, yt which told of them to Matabrune. Ca. xiii


Upon a time it fortuned that a yoman of Matabrunes hunte named Sauarie went
for to chase and hunt in the said forest in the which dwelled ye devout
hermit Helias. Than almighti god our lord willed yt the said ye man should
find the said children of the noble king Oriant and of the good qeuene
Beatrice his wife. The which children satte under a tree echone having a
chain of silver as it is said, under ye said tree they gathred wild appelles
and eat them with bread. The yoma^ beheld the^ gladly, and salued them
beningnely, and they answered nothing but ran away before him. Than he sued
and ra^ne after the^ unto the hermitage, the better and singulerly to know and
consider their estate and their manner. And when the good hermitte saw the
yoman renning after the.vii. children he salued him and said. Good friend I
pray you for the love of god that ye do no harm to these poor children. Nay
for god good father said he. But I am greatly admeruailed to consider their
estate, and of ye silver chains yt I see about their necks. My friend said
ye good aermite know ye for truth that even so as ye see I found them as
young children newborn in this forest. And for to nourisshe them
miraculously came into this pleace a white goat, the which has well sustained
and given them her tetes to suke her milk ye space of three years. And also
to my power I have also diligently kept them winter and somer. Fair father
said the yoma^ god yield you good retribucion, and than he departed fro ye holy
hermit, in taking leave benignely of him and of ye.vii. children. And when yt
yoman was returned to Lilefort he went and salued Matabrune and to her
recounted how he had found.vii. young children in the forest having chains
of silver about their necks, the which were sitting under a tree in gatheri^g
of wild apples. Of whose words matabrune was greatly admeruailed, wherefore she
enquired of him diligently the truth. And when she understood him she wist
well that they were the.vi. sons and the daughter yt the noble Queen Beatrice
had borne and conceived of king Oriant. The which by her wickedness she we^de
to have made to die, but god our sovereign helper that alwaie saves the^ that
he has chose, had kept them from all harms under his holy proteccio^ for he
is yt just judge strong and pacient the which abides the ire of his
vengeance unto the hour by him ordained And ye ought to wite yt Matabrune was
full sorye and pertourbed of these tidinges, wherefore she called secretly ye
said yoman and said. Come hither my freende I would not for no treasour but yt
I had heard these tidinges yt thou have brought. But if yt wilt have my grace
and that I give the great goods it behooves thou take such felawes with thee as
thou will, and forthwith go and slay yt.vii. children that thou have found in
ye forest. And if thou do it not at mi pleasure and commau^deme^t I promise
thee and be thou sure that I shall make thee dye an evil death. But if thou obey
me be thou also sure that I shall reward thee and thy felawes in such wise
that ye shall never have need, Madame (...) the yoman I shall do your desire,
and I promise you to (...) them without doubt, so that ye shall know it
expressly. ^^ll than said she it suffiseth, go and do your diligence. (...)
than Matabrune full of woodnesse and furoure came to ^ur^es that she had first
ordained for to bear the.vii. lit^^ ^^^dren out of Lilefort and to make them
die or to drown (...) a river, yt which he had not done for pity that he had
to behold them when he left them in ye forest, and put out his eyes and
handled him so that many wend that he had be dead.

How at the commandment of Matabrune an hounds man named Sauary came for to
slay ye.vii. little children of king Oriant unknown in the Forest, where as
they were transmued into swannes. Ca. xiiii


AT the commandment (...) the ne^uers Matabrune her yoman or hounds man
named Sauary took.vii. fellows strong and mighti with him for to but in
execucion that, yt unto them was commanded for to slay the.vii. ^hildren of ye
noble king Oriant and his good spouse Bea^rice. And so as the said yoman and
his felawes passed by ^ village they saw much people assembled. wherefore they
^^ew nere. And when they were approached Sauarie de^aunded wherefore they were so
assembled. And they answered for to see a woman executed and brent by Justice.
And wherefore said Sauary, what harm has she done And they said for that she
has murdered and slain the child that she bare in her own belly. Than sauarie
departed thens, and by those words remenbred the execucion and the murder
that he went to do on the.vii. small children of the king and of ye queen,
whereby he was much efmayed and began to refrain his courage and that which he
had undertaken to do in saying to his fellows. My brethren and felawes here is
a fair glass or spectacle for us. How said they? Have ye not seen said he yt
these people go for to do Justice and put to death that unhappy woman for yt
she has murthred and slain yt child that she bare in her own body. And
therefore fair friends ye wot that my lady matabrune has sent us hither for to
go occise and put to death vii. fair little children the which the other day I
found in the mids of the forest, echone of them having a fa^^e chain of
silver at his neck, but cursed be he of God and confounded may he be that any
harm shall do to them. Behold this woman that they go to brenne and execute
for one only child that she has murdered and was her own Consider we than
what punicion might run to us for to put to death the.vii. children of the
which I have sp^ken, the which to us ne to her that commands cannon hinder
nor b^re any damage. Sir hounds man said his fellows ye spoke wiseli, and we
be al of the same aduis^ They shall have no harm said he: but this we may do
for to appease and content the insaciable iniquite of the peruerce Matabrun^,
we shall go to the.vii. children and take al only the chains of silver that been at their necks, and than here them to the cursed matabrune and make her to
believe that we have slain and put the^ to death by ye tokens of the said
chains. To the which thing accordid his felawes as good and true cou^ceile.
And thus delibered they entered into ye forest and came unto ye little hermitage
where as were dwelling the said litell children with the devout hermit Helias.
But at that hour they ne found but.vi. of the said children, for the good
hermit was gone to ask meat in the villages there about and hadled with him
his godsonne one of the vii. children for to bear ye bread and such as was
given to him in ye country for fode of him and the.vii. unknown children. And
when the hou^des man Sauari and his fellows came nere the.vi. children abiden
in the hermytage they set hands on them and took them for to take away the
chains of silver yt each of them had at their necks, but the poor children
began to cry piteously for fear that they had. Than said sauary. Doubt you of
nothing fair children, for we shall do you no harm if it please God. And in
this saying: they took the chains of their necks. And as soon as their
chains were of they were al tra^smued in an instaunt in fair white swannes by
the divine grace, and began to flee in the air through the forest making a
piteous and lamentable cry, whereof Sauary and his fellows were so afraid yt
^hey fell to the earth as in a swonne. And when they were ^isen in trimblinge
all for fear they said one to another alas what have we found here? very
God conforte us, what means this that those.vi. children ben transmu^ed into
swannes? Ha false, disloyal, and traytresse Matabrune by thee have we over
grievously offenced god. And by thee have we merited right greueous punicion,
cursed be yt that ever ye sent us hither into this forest so to commit this
grievous offense and evil. Depart we hence said sauarie for all to long have
we ben here, we have fou^den but vi. of ye children but if ye other were here
present he should have no harm of us ne displeasure. Return we lightli without
showing to any of this meruaylous adventure. But for to render answer of our
commission to that cursed and peruerce Matabru^e we shall bear to her these.vi.
chains of Silver and shall give her to understand that we have lost one by ye
way as were turned. And thus they ben departed out of ye Forest and ben
returned to Lylefort where as they have found matabrune, to whom they have
certified to have slain the.vii. children, and for a witness they her
presented the.vi. chains that they had about their necks. And have given her
to understand yt they had lost one by the way, whereof Matabrune nighe enraged
and waxed mad for anger that they had not brought al seven and in her woodnesse
repreued and thretened the^ sharpli But for to have peace they promised and
offered to her to yield and restore, the value thereof, whereof she somewhat
contented her, and gave them some reward for their traueile. And when
Matabru^e had yt said chains: she sent to seek for a goldesmith to whom she
commanded to make a cup of the Chains. And as the goldesmith had put one in
the fire to approve the Silver: it multiplied in such manner that it alone
molten weyed as much and more than all the.vi. together whereof the said
goldesmyth and all his meyny had great marvel and were all abashed, wherefore
the said gyldesmith gave the five other chains of Silver unto his wife for to
keep and set aparte with in her chamber or coffre. For the said only chain the
which he had so molten was suffycyente for to make two such cups as yt,
that Matabrune had ordained him to make So he forged two cups of yt which he
withheld one for him self with the.v. other Chains of Silver yt he kept till
a certain time ordained of god as ye shall hear. And than he brought the other
and presented it to Matabru^e that was all admeruayled how he might have forged
a cup so great and materyall as it was of so little silver as she seemed to
have given, but there as God list to work nothing abides impossyble to his
divine will.

How the good hermit Helyas returned to his hermitage with his godsonne one of
king Oryant sons, and found not the other children transmued into white
swannes. Ca. xv.


FOr to ensue the orygynall of that I have entreprysed to write I shall return
to speak of the devout Hermit Helyas and of his godsonne one of king Oryant
sons, and of the paciente Queen Beatryce. It is to be known that anon after
that the.vii. children were transmued into white swannes returned into the
hermitage the abouesayde hermit and his Godsonne Helias, yt which found not
the.v. sons and the daughter that they had left there when they departed
whereof they were meruaylosly displeasaunte. And than they began to call them
with hye voice within the Forest, but none answered. The good Hermit sought
on the one side, and his godsonne on the other side on all parts of ye Forest
as long as the day lasted, but they found them not wherefore they ceased not
to make great dole and sorrow all the night long. And on the morrow young
Helyas began again to seek his brethern and his sister weeping and wailing
dolorouslye as all discomforted through the Forest. And so long he went
hither and thither that he arrived nigh to a st^^ge or ponde where as he saw.vi
fair swannes all white swimmyng on the water, the which were his brethren
and sister so transmued by the will of god but it was unknown to him, how well
ye naturally he took pleasure to behold them, wherefore he approached to the^
and they came and feested him, and he gave them bread that he had and stroked
plain their (...) with his hand by nature that moeued him thereto. And as it is
notably recited in the cronycle of this present history ye said young Helyas
their brother went to visit them every day, and did bear them to eat of the
bread yt was given to him for gods sake. And when ye hermit had apperceiued
him diverse times so going to the said stagne he demanded him why he went so
diligently theither to sport him. And he prayed him not to be displeased, for
he had found.vi. fair white Swannes the which made the greatest chere that
was possible to see. Now was the said Helias so fair big, and well fourmed of
body and members that his godfather yt good Hermit took a singular pleasure
for to behold him, for he was as parfite in his adolence that he seemed almost
a man viril in his force. He ne knew his pareyl in prudence of understanding.
There was not a wild beast but he took lightly by renewing. He was honest and
well manered in all his gestes, and well attempred in his force and noble
hardiness, and all by thintusio^ of the divine grace. For he never had
conuersed ne hau^ted the world. And yet was he sufficientli instruct and
right well learned in science and good manners in such wise that his godfather
had enterprised and was delibered for to dedie him to the service divine in
office of a p^^^e, til that the aungel of heaven came down and releued to the
said good and devout hermit that God our soueray^^ Lord almight^^ (...)
otherwise ordained for as it shall be oppressely reherc^^ here after in this
present History.

How the (...) and paruerce Matabrune made malegnelously to aff^^^^ by an
untrue knight named Makayry that the noble (...) Beatrice had forfayted with a
Dog. Ca. xvi
matabrun

Makayre.

King Oriant.



DVring this time was the good queen Beatrice incessably detained of prison,
the whithe pacientli in her aduersite alwaie praised the name of god in praying
for her spouse ye noble king Oriant, and yt it would please him for to succur
her. But ye peruerce Matabrune sought incessauntly the means and occasions
that she might for to make her die. So it happed that she had in her court a
knight disloial and wicked named Makaire the which she suborned so with money
yt she made him to tell and afferme to king Oriant that the good queen Beatrice
his wife had be known and habited of a dog. whereof she had conceived.vii.
little whelps, of whom after is made mention. And that she had moreover
delibered to poyso^ and make the king to die and his mother Matabrun by venim
and other poison that he said that the noble queen Beatrie^ had ordained to do
it with all, whereto yt good queen never thought, for she loved as truli her
husband as ever woman loved hers, and would not have done any untruth to his
body to have died therefore. But ye evil and wicked folk pain them self
always to noye and do accombraunce to them yt ben good and loved of god. And
when the noble king Oriant had heard the false and untrue report that by this
cursed knight was affermed he was merueylously sori and angry of ye tidinges.
wherefore the more steadfastly to afferme this lie the said falls Makaire
presented him to fight against all men that would say or defend the contrari
of yt he had reported, whereof the king was more angry than before and totalye
dispited against his wife, the which was in nothing culpable of all that she was
accused. So he swore god and his oath that for these tidinges she should die,
but if yt there were any that would defend her thereof in champe of bataile.
Than went there a noble squire and told from end to end al these evil
tidings to the good queen and how yt king had sworn his oath that she should die
grievously therefore, but if there were any yt would sustain her quarrel against
the forenamed Makayre, and when yt good queen heard these piteous tidinges
little lacked that she ne died for sorrow, wherefore al lamentably she began to
complain her saying. Alas I have anguisshe on all sides. Alas now see I well
appertly yt I am falsli betrayed, and yet I know no man living that for to
sustain and defend mi right would in any manner dispose himself. But I shall
return me to my sweet Lord Jesus christ the which is the only pillar and
fou^dament of all verite, and I have hope that he will help me. Alas mi God mi
creator that by your divine will reised ye spirit of yo^ge Daniell for to
return to the Iudiement and to save fro death the noble ladi Suza^ne yt which
was publikeli led in justice by to falls judges, the which with wrong and
unjustly had accused her of the vice and sin of aduoutry wherein she never
thought, as afterward before al ye people was notably known and approved the
troth by ye good Daniel the which yielded the two Judges al co^fused. Thou
know my souerai^e god in likewise ye wrong fulli and without cause I am
accused to mi good and faithful spousy king Oriant. wherefore I beseech and
require thee humbli that it will plaise thee to keep and preserve me fro
shameful death and confusion of the crime and sin that I am accused of,
whereof thou know me innocent and nothing worthy. And than benignely
recomforted her the said Squire, and after in weeping for pity he departed
humbly from her company. And the good queen abode always dolorously reclused
and shitte in prison unto the time that god yt which in eueri place succoureth
his servants diuineli had purueied and ordained as afterward ye shall hear.

How the angel of god announced to ye devout hermit Helias that the.vi.
sons and a daughter yt which he had found in the forest were king Oriantes
children, and that he should send young Helias to prove the troth. Ca. xvii.


HOw has god our sovereign lord heard and exalted the devout prayer of ye
noble Queen Beatrice, and has sent his holy au^gel fro heaven to tell and
declare to the devout hermit Helias that the.vi. sons and a daughter which
he had found in the forest where ye children of king Oriant, and that his good
spouse Beatrice had conceived them of him, and had childed them at on only
time. But ye peruerce Matabru^e made him to believe by the midwife that she had
borne and conceived.vii. dogs which were issued of her womb. And also that
ye swannes yt his god son Helias hent eueri day to feed and sustain with
bread in ye ponde where his.v. brethern and his sister in such wise tra^smued
when Sauary Matabru^es hou^des man and his fellows took away the chains yt
which they had about their necks as he has. And yt he should send his god
son for to be fight the false Makaire that with wrong and without cause had
accused his good mother ye said queen by the enhortement of thee peruerce
mattabrun yt would have made him to dye and the other.vi. children, when she
charged a servant of hers for to slay or make them perisshe, but for pit
that he ^ad to behold the^ he left them in ye forest where as the devout
he^mite found them. And since Matabrun (...) good mother in prison, the which
(...) space of.xvi. year, (...) Justice of his enemies, and of succession of
time his br^thre^ and his sister should return into their own form and
nature human as they were before. And of them should come a great fruit. For
of his lignage should descend Godfrey of Boulion, that for to agment the holy
faith of God shall conquer the holy land of Iherusale^. So descended the
heavenly au^gel at the holy commandment of our lord, and came to announce
unto the devout hermit all that to him was ordained of god as is before said.
And when he had done his message he returned and the good hermit abode alone
al rauisshed in spirit. But after as al reioiced he called beningly his
godso^ne Helias, the which came^ fro ye stagne where as he had given bread to
ye Swannes like as he was accustomed by natural inclinacion, and recited to him
all that the aungel had announced to him, saying: Mi godsonne, mi friend I wist
not yt ye were of so noble a blood as ye be, whereof I ought highly to praise
and honor you as well for the honor yt god has done to you as for your
noble pote^tes. And how said he godfather, what tidinges have ye heard? wite ye
mi lord and mi friend said the good hermit that an angel of heaven came to
me yt anou^ced and told to m^ in gods name that ye be son of ye right noble
king Oriant and of the good queen Beatrice his faithful spouse and your mother.
But it behooves that by ye divine commandment of god to you be declared by me
all the tidings as ye au^gel told me. So ye ought to know that your mother
conceived you al.vii. together of your noble father, and since childed of you at
one only time. But the peruerce ^^ta^^un stepdame of your noble mother by the
consentment of the (...) wife that you your.v. brethern, and your sister
reseiued of her bodi ^ade her to believe that.vii. whelps were issued of her
womb ye which they had vnfaithfulli prepaired, and so wend your said mother.
For Matabru^e gave you incontine^t to one of her seruau^ts whom she charged to
sle or droune you But the pity that he had to behold you moeued him to leave
you al naked and nere dead for honger in the same place where as I first found
you. Than short time after the said Matabrun hard some tidinges of you, and
sent some folk again for to destroy you, but they found as than but your.v.
brethern and your sister, fro who^e they took the chains of silver that echone
of the^ had about their neck as ye have, and forthwith by ye divine will of
god they were tra^smued into white swannes, and ben they to whom he gave every
day bread in ye stagne. But in time comi^g they shall return into their own
nature human as they were before, and shall make great fruit, but for the
things beforesaid your father commanded to put and hold your good mother in
prison, yt which has be captive ye space of.xvi. whole years. And now again
matabrune has so much done by money yt an untrue knight named Makaire of your
fathers court has affermd yt she had conseiued and habited with a dog, and
that she had willed to kill and enpoysen him and ye said Matabrune wherefore ye
king has sworn to make to die your good mother, if none befounde that against
the said Makaire will sustain her honor and her quarrel in camp of bataile.
Wherefore by me is ordeided of god that I admo^est and warn you to go and
uphold her good right against the forenamed Makaire and al ye other that
willingly has blamed her. And without doubt ye shall obtain victory and
triumph against al her false enemies.v here by she shall be delivered fro prison
and restablisshed unto greater honor than she had before. And also there shall
issue of your lignage a valiaunte and chiualrous prince that shall be named
Godfrey of Boulion, yt which in his age virill shall conquer the holy land
of Iherusal^m, and other countries of beyond the sea for ever to augment and
increase the right high and puissaunt name of Jesus, and the holy faith
catholic. And wha^ young Helias (wisely taught and enspired of god) heard his
godfather speak in such manner of that he had commanded of god, he conformed
him al holy to his divine will, and loving he delibered him to go see the father
yt had engedred him, and ye good mother that had childed him, and of whose body
he his.v. brethern, his sister miraculously issued. And after al these things
premised to eschew prolixite yt hermit and his godso^ne disposed the^ yt he
should go so clothed in leaves and barfoted as he was with a simple staff in his
hand to succor his said mother, to thend yt more aperili y^ dyuine and
virtuous miracle of god should be showed in him and than in weping they
departed amiably. And at their departing young Helias ententiuely besought his
godfather yt it would please him diligentli to feed with bread the whit swannes
his brethren and sister. And the good hermit promised him to do his best until
it pleased god to dispose for them as he had ordained. And than young Helias
departed and went toward the City of Lilefort for to accomplisshe the holy
commandment of god.

How king Oriant sent for the good queen Beatrice his wife for to expose to her
yt whereof she was accused and to condemn her to death. And how Helias his
son arrived at ye Palais of his father for to defend and succor his mother
fro death. Ca. xviii.
Mata

Beatryce.



IN this time came the day that the noble king Oriant had decreed for to
conde^pne and make to die his good spouse Queen Beatrice by the false
accusacions yt of her vniustli had been made So the knight sent for her to the
prison for to make to expose in her presence the crime of the which by the
said Makarie she had be wrongfully accused. And when she was led thither
publykely before many noble knights and men of council that there were
present assembled: she began incontinent to salve the king her husband
enclining her knees in requiringe of mercy so pytiouslye that all the noble
knights had pitye to behold her, and in like wise the king was so sorry of
her estate that with great pain might he speak a word he had such sorrow
at his heart. Than he commanded the false Makaire to declare in her presence
the crime whereof he had accused her to him And forthwith he assured as a false
murderer began to say on high. Sir I have told you and yet will uphold
before all here present, that I have seen her have compani and habitacion with
a dog, whereof she has conceived.vii. whelps, the which since ben issued of
her own body. And more over she would have given venim to me for to have
enpoysened and made to dye you and your Mother my lady Matabrune the which I
would never do unto you nor to none other person. Now lady said the king to
the good Beatrice his wife, ye hear how ye ben openly accused of a shamful,
horrible, and vilaneous forfaite before me and my baronny, what defense will ye
find. your fault displeases me sore. But if that ye will confess the
truth ye shall not dye, for I shall assygne your life in some holy monastery
of Relygyon for to do there penance and satisfaccion for our sin and pray
to god for you and me. And if you confess not your deed: I promise you that
shamefully I shall make you dye, if ye find not any that will sustain your
quarrel against him that has accused you. Alas my lord said the good queen I
cannot find any knight ne other that for to sustain mi good right in any
manner will expose him. But I promise you and swear here tofore all by the faith
of gentylnesse that with great wrong and unjustly I am here before you
accused. And how be it yt it has pleased the divine grace to so send me this
yet I never co^mised ne thought for to commit any vilany forfaite against you
ne against mine honor. And I complain me to god almighty of this that I am
accused in requiryng him vengeance of all mine enemies. And thus as this said
assemble was made for to condemn the good queen to death in the kings
palais, thither came the young Helyas son to king Oriant and of the queen
Beatryce, the which having a staff in his hand was delibered in courage in
in the confydence of god to sustain his good mother. And when he was comen to
the gate of the palais he met first with a boistous churl that rigorousli
axed hi^ what he sought there? I seche (said he) a false and traytrous knight
na^ed Makayre. And he weeninge to mock him said that it was he. And Helyas
than lift up his staff and with a free will hit him on ye head that he felled
him to ye ground. And forthwith came a sergeau^t that took him and wenyng that
he were a fool for yt he was poorly clothed and barefoted and mocked hi^ that
had ye stroke, saying yt he should not play with a fool. Than Helyas drew him
vigorously out of the sergeauntes hands and said to him. Let me go, for by
the faith that I owe to god I shall never cease until I have vengaunce of the false Makaire that wrongfully has done great iniurye unto my mother the good
queen. And among ye other there was one in that place yt wha^ he herd him
speak so, told him yt makaire was in the consistory in the hall of the palace
whereas he accused the queen before the king of certain crimes the which him
seemed to be falsely imposed, and said yt the queen was a right notable ladi and
full of virtues, and that with great wrong ye same day they would make her dye.
And when Helias heard him say so he came lightly to him and enbrasing him
said, Gentil friend I pray thee that it please thee to lead me to the place
that ye say, and he led him straight. And when Helias entered into the
consistori where as many folk wear assembled to se ye domayne of the noble
queen Beatryce, and yet many other yt came to see (...) Helias would do that
seemed to be a wild man. Than the noise came to king Oryant which demanded
what it was. And it was told him that it was a yongling as al naked yt axed
after Makaire, and says yt he will fight against him and put him to death for
to sustain and defend the good quarrel of the queen the which he says is
his mother. Ha said ye king it is tha^ a fool, sir said a knight I have heard
him speak wisely. And than ye king made to question him what he sought there.
I seek said he makayre And than one showed him, and than he approached to him
and said. Ha false traiter and untrue knight I defy thee thou shall abie. And
therewith he gave to Makaire such a buffet with his fist that he felled him to
ye ground inco^tine^t and held him so that he would have cut his throat if ^e
had any knife for to do it withal. But he was lightly taken from his hands,
and than he fled away al be bled with his own blood. How well yt many noble
knights were right glad of that hie adventure, for they were sore displeasaunt
to see him so vilaynously accuse the noble queen so pacient as was possible.
And when ye king had seen him give so great a stroke to Makayre with his fist he
repreued him and said. How art thou so hardy to do this outrage in my
presence. Ha sir said he, know ye that I am come hither at the only
commandment of God in likewise as ye see, for to tell you the verite of the
cause and of al ye fait wherefore ye ben here assembled presently in this
consistory. And how said the king. And Helias answered. Sir I shall show you,
but or I proceed any ferther I will go enbrace and kiss mine own mother yt I
se yonder. And incontinent he approached the good queen and in kissinge and a
colling her said. My right dear and faithful mother be no more sorrowful at your
heart Cease your waylynges for this day. I shall yield to you all Joy and
consolacion by the pleasure of god, and shall show that falsely and with great
wrong ye have be betrayed of the^ yt should have kept you Than of this thing
ye king was meruaylously abashed thinking and saying to himself. Here is
some token of god, and in likewise were admeruayled all they that were there
present. Than Helyas perfurnisshed his purpose saying. My lord my father I
do you to understand for truth that wha^ ye left in ye keeping of your
mother matabrune my mother the which was big of child with me my brethren
and my sister and that ye went to war and fight against your ennemies, your
said mother Matobrune conceived such an envy against my mother that she
accompanied with the false old midwife by silver suborned delibered for to do
as ye shall heart. And for truth at the deliverance of her burden she
chylded.vi. sons whereof I am one and a daughter, and also we brought from her
womb echone a fair chain of silver at our necks such as ye se me have one.
And when we were thus borne she made to tra^sport us from this place. Than she
took the said little dogs and gave my good mother to understand that they
were issued of her bodi, the which she wend to be true for that she perceived
us not for the great anguisshe that she had. Consequentli she had given charge
to one of her servants for to slay us or to drown us in some river. But when
he was in a forest he beheld us on a plain, and of pity that he had to
behold us he left us there al naked and perisshing for honger without doing
us other harm. Sithen were we founde^ by a good and devout hermit named
Helias, the which beninegli bare us into his hermitage within the forest where
as he dwells yet presently. And there he warmed and sustained us with his
small gooddes as much as to him was possible. Than he made orayson to god that
he would puruey us, the which at his devout prayer sent thither myracuously a
fair white Gore yt sustained and nourisshed us with milk, and the good hermit
fed us with bread yt was given him for gods sake. And one day among all other
as we were al vii. little children under a tree gathering of wild apples in the
forest the hou^des man of Matabrun found us having each one a chain of silver
at our necks of whom he made to her report. And she sent him again for to
slay or make us to die. And an other day as ye good hermit and I were gone in
provision for to sustain our lives the same hou^des man came with.vii. other
fellows the which took away the chains fro my.v. brethern and my sister, the
which incontinent by the will of god were transmued in fair white swannes,
and ben yet presently in a fair stagne or ponde in the said forest, where as
often times I have fed and given them bread for to eat. Sithen finably is
come^ the aungel of god that has recited al to the good and devout hermit my
godfather, in making him commandment by god that this same day he should se^d
me into ye place where as I am present for to save mi faithful mother. And for
this intencio^ I am come hither with courage dilibered in the confidence of god
for to sustain and defend her from scathe by natural inclynacion, and to be
fight the traitre and untrue Makaire that by his wickedness would openly blame
her. And for to make this notabli to be verified ye may make ye said makaire
and me to be kept in prison til ye please to send for ye good hermit for to
witness the truth. And when his father king Oryant heard hi^ speak thus he
was yet more admeruailed tha^ before. So he began to speak to the noble queen
his wife saying. How say ye lady, what seems you of ye words of this yoge man?
Certainly my lord I wot not how it is for I was at ye hour of mi childing so
sore travailed that I had not on me onie feling. How be it I know well that mi
ladi your mother never loved me, wherefore if she have done well ill I believe
that she shall find it. Thus I report me to god and this yongeling that I se
yonder, which he has sent me for my champion and I pray you that it please
you to make him be entreated as your son and grant him that he requires,
desiringe above all to sustain your noble honor and mine.

How the king Oriant commanded to make armoures for his son Helias to fight
against Makayre, and than went to the good hermit in the forest. Ca. xxix.


AFter these words the noble king Oryant made to with draw the queen
Beatrice honorably into a fair chamber, in praysynge god his creator as all
recomforted. Than he recited to Matabrune his mother all that young Helias had
declared whereof she blusshed all red and began to have fear, but not
wtstandinge she wend well assuredly to have renied all the case. How be it yt
the king made not over great semblaunt for that time: After consequentli he
commanded to inprisone and make sure the untrue knight Makaire the which was
done at his commandment, for he doubted him of the great treason and
malignite co^mised upon his noble spouse. Than after he gave charge to.ii.
noble knights to make forge armours propice and meet for young Helyas, the
whice by the divine will was so pleasant and hardi of courage ye echone loved
him with good heart. And when the king had ordained all these things he made
manner as he would go bou^t and was meruailousli glad of these tidinges he
purposed for to go to the good hermit in the forest, for to be al assured of
that that his son had said and promised before him and his counsel. And thus
is departed the noble king Oriant with diverse of his secret knights, and is
come^ in to ye said for^st, and without making delay they have so long sought
that they have found the hermitage of yt hermit Helias. And when ye king saw
him he descended of his horse, and in their saluing reuerentli the king
demanded his name. And the good hermit said. Sir I am brother He^ias, and
than knew the king that it was he yt he sought whereof he was right Joyous, and
took him aside me^eli to be confessed of him. In the which confession he
declared to him all the case as the child had said. By the which ye good
hermit in likewise declared ye hour, the day, and the time that he had
founden the.vii. children in the Forest and all that was happened by the self
manner as the young Helias had told his father. And than king Oria^t knew
certainly the malice done to ye good Queen Beatrice. It is not be doubted of
the sorrow that he made for the pain and greauous vexacion that so long time
and unjustly he had made his wife to suffer by false and traitrous reports. O
said he my right faithful lady. O my right dear and noble spouse, how may I
make thee ame^des how may I satisfy to thee? O false and peruerce tongues much
worse than deadli venim. Have ye ben so hardy to make strife between the
husbunde and the wife. Have ye made to lie in the bead of tribulation between
ye sheets of wepynges those yt were wont to be in all mirth and consolation. O
good lord god I beseech thee of merci, and pardon me mine ygnouraunce. Thou
know how I have done it, for I my self have be traied, and malignelousli
deceived by falls report. In this wise disconforted took the king leave of
the devout hermit. To whom he made for to deliver a great some of gold and
silver to the entente that he should found and edify a church of religion
for the honor and reverence of the glorious virgin our lady saint Mary, And
for ye remuneracion of his vii. children the which in such wise myraclusly
there had be nourisshed and sustented by the divine providence of god. And than
he returned to his city of Lylefort with his people for to comferme the
journey that he had ordained of his son young Helyas and of the false knight
Makayre, and to dispose all the matter as him seemed best.

How the noble king Oriant delivered out of prysone good queen Beatryce his
wife. And after ordained all thing to his son young Helyas for to fight
against his enemies. Ca. ^x.
matabrun

Geyler.



When the noble king Oriant was returned fro the hermitage, and that he had
known the verite of ye. vii children he made incontinent to deliver the noble
queen Beatrice out of prison, and captivity, and restored her to al liberty
and fraunchyse, the better to love and honor her without comparison more tha^
ever he did before, so that she might go and come where as her pleased, as
innocente and not culpable of that to her was imposed, whereof right humbly she
yielded graces and praisynges to god. And also for her deliverance made Joy in
thanking our lord. After he made to take Matabrun and put her fast in prison
with.iiii. sergeau^tes to keep her yt she should not fle the^s til her case we
redetermined by Justice. Than consequently he sent for the untrue knight
Makaire for to be at the Journey (ordained by the king) for to fight against
his son young Helias, that god has sent for to sustain the just quarrel of
his good mother the queen Beatrice. Helyas than was well armed by two knights
that ye king had ordained thereto al manner of pieces of harneys right well
steled. The helm of the same richeli besene as it apperteined unto a kings
son, with precious devises to him condese^t. His sheilde on his arm, and his
spear in his hand the which he couched in the reest as al enspyred of god.
After they gave him a fair armynge swearde well steeled and cuttinge. And
finably they mounted him surely upon a good and mighty courser well barded and
trapped as it belongs to such a point. And on the other part was
apparrelled the false Makayre, the which was not over glad of that, that him
behooved to do. For he considered well that he had no good cause ne just quarrel
of yt that he sustained against the faithful queen Beatrice. And moreover yt
he saw her all ready delivered of prison at her free liberte, and the false
Matabrune straitely holde^ in prison. But al these things notwtstandinge yet
made he manner to have just cause in his fayte, but there is no wisdom against
the will of god. And when they were both ready on the one side and other, there
assembled anon many knights the which made them to swear that each of the^
thought to have good cause in that quarrel different that the one against the
other would sustain. The which Mrekaire like as did Helias, but or he left ye
field him self confessed the contrary before the king, ye queen and many
other noble knights and damoyselles.

How Helyas the noble knight of the swanne vainquisshed and overcame the false
Makayre in Camp of battle. Cap. xxi.


THus has Helyas and Makayre sworn before the^ that were ordained for to
Judge the champ of battle, and of that, that should be done. And for to se
this noble adventure of arms there came so great multitude of people that they
could not be numbered.

And also there was present king Oria^t with his good spouse Beatrice
accompanied of great lords yt which desired meruailously yt the honor of the
good queen might be sustained in the place. Than entered the.ii. champions in
to the place, and with young Helias that was appointed as a kings son came
many great lords of the court, and he was al asured as he that had ye grace of
god with him to whom none may noye. And on the other part was ye said Makaire
as all heavy and malacolious of the favor and good grace that every man bare to
him. But as al fires and proud he began to say, Come, come, draw nere my
minion ye shall see this day if your ouerwening youth may resist against me.
And how be it that he wend to show himself hardy yet he said these words but
for great fear that he had. And on the other part ye noble Helias said. A
trayter I am now right glad to see thee hear in this place, as I have
desired, For I come to thee humbly in the name of our lord and at his
commandment for to sustain veritably the Just quarrel of my good mother the
which untruly thou have over much defamed wherefore in my good confidence I
hope this day to show against thee, the strength and hie praise of the right
arm of god. Now come, come, said Makayre approach. So I will said Helyas. Than
with great course of horse and the spear couched in the reest they met with
such raundo^ that Helias made Makaire and his horse to foundre to the earth.
Of ye which thing Makayre was greatly admeruayled and said. Ha young son
will ye show the might of your pleasant youth against me, truly ye shall
feel this day that there is strength in my arm. well well said Helias, come
nere, I am all assured of thee. And tha^ with course of horse Makaire came
wening to smite him al vnwars, so that by treason he made him a little wound so
yt a little blood issued. And when the queen saw yt she was right sori at
heart, wherefore she prayed mekely unto god and his holy mother that it would
please them to succor her poor child, that sustained verite, and proclaimed
her voice saying. Sovereign god of paradise that gave victory unto the
children of Isarael against the froward Pharaon that unjustly held them in
captivity. I pray thee if it please thee to give victory to my son, the
which it has pleased thee to send hither for to deliver me out of prison, and
reprove the treason and falsnesse that wickedly and with wrong was propenced
against me as ye know the truth. And also all the assistentes were sorry
for that stroke, for echone had set their love on young Helyas but he could in
no wise perisshe in the kepinge of god. And when he felt him self so
traitrously wounded he resembled the knight yt takes courage when he sees his
blood shed. And in escrienge high he said to makayre. A traytre, false, and
disloyal had yt at this hour thought to betray me. Suffiseth it thee not
to have wylled to betrayed mi good mother without wylling to betraye mortally
her son. Now return to me, for I hope in ye pleasure of god to mete thee in
such wise that upon thy bodi presently by me shall be executed the insuperable
right arm of god wherein is all my trust. well said Makayre come nere I defye
thee. So shall I said Helyas in such wise yt it shall not need to return any
more. And in this saying Helias broched his horse with his spurs and couched
his spear in the reest with such courage so yt he reuersed Makaires helm to
the earth and uncovered his head. And when Helias saw that he alight of his
horse and drew his swerd of arms wherwt he gave him such a stroke that
skantly he might remove. And on ye other part came his horse against Makaires
horse, ye which by might of flynging brake his reins behind, and since
miraculously made him to fall from his horse, whereby young Helyas recovered to
smite upon him virtuously smote of his arm with his sword to the earth. And
when ye false Makaire saw him self sodainlye vaynquisshed he began humblye to
yield him to Helias saying. Ha young son, that have overcome me, and I yield
me wholly to thee but I adjure the in the name of god yt thou tell me what thou
art. I am said he Helyas son of king Oriant and of his good queen Beatrice
that am comen hither at the commandment of god for to sustain her good and
just quarrel against thee and all her enemies. Ha noble kings son said he I
require thee take me to mercy and pardon me mine offense. A false recrau^t
traytre said Helias thou shall not escape so. For I will se the consumacion of
thy life or I leave this feeld. Yet I pray thee said Makaire yt it will please
thee to save my life for this hour till I have told thee, ye truth of ye
falls treason that has be done to thy good mother and to her children without
to hide any point before the king thy noble father, the mother, and the
assyste^tes. And also I shall name and tell where the goldesmith is that has
chains of silver that theuisshely and by violence were taken fro thy brothren
and sister, whereby they were forthwith tra^muted into white swannes as thou
have said. And when Helias heard him speak so he differred to put him
straight to death to the end that by him self, should be confessed the
treason that to his mother himself, with his brethren and sister had be done.
And when he called them yt were ordained to make report of them two done in
the said feelde.

How Makaire confessed openly before the king and the queen all the people the
treason done to the said queen and his children. And how he was hanged as a
falls traitor on the galowes. Ca. xxii.


THan they came reverently as to him that miraculously had abtayned victory and
tryumphe over his enemy. And he had them incontinente that they should make the
king, the Queen and ye knights to approach thither and told them that
Makayre had promised to recite the treason yt he and Matabrune had done to his
good mother and to her children. The which thing was incontinent reported to
the king, whereof he and his good queen were right Joyous, and came nygh to the
two champyons with all their noble barons, and chyualry. And than the king
questioned diligentli with the said Makayre saying. Now Makayre be ye confused,
demand ye mercy of your vainquissher? Alas sir said he, yea. And what sai ye
more: Certainly sir I yield me humbly unto your son, and mow I know well
that a good deed is never unrewarded ne an evil unpunished, and that none may
resist against thee will of god, But indemaundinge you pardon I shall tell you
truth of all the treason that before has been done to your noble wife and to
your children, and than do with me what it pleases you, for I have well
deserved ye death That is well said quoth the king, now say on. Sir said
Makaire it is of truth ye Matabrune your mother cou^seyled her with me of all
that she has done. And first she gave the good queen your wife to understand
that she had conceived, vii. dogs, but know ye yt it was a lising, for she
childed.vii. fair children, that is to wite.vi. sons and a daughter, the
which brought at their birth each of the^ a chain of silver at their necks.
But Matabrune sent them to be lost or slain by one of her servants named
Marks, how be it he did not so, but left the^ in a Foreste as your son has
said. whereof when she was aduertysed and that she had ridinges of them: her
self put out both the eyene of the said Marks so that he is yet blind. Tha^
the sent thither other of her servants for to put them to death, but they
found but.vi. children, to whom they did nothing but took away their chains
yt was about their necks whereby incontine^t they were mued in white swa^nes.
And of the said chains Matabrune made to make a cup by her goldsmith, for
who^e ye may send and know the truth. And of this that I charged culpable ye
good queen to have poisoned you and your mother, I confess here presently
before you and your baro^ni that she never propenced it, but my self adiusted
it to her at thynstygacion of your mother. And here I cry her mercy, and you
also of the offense that I have commised. And when the noble king Oriant heard
Makayre speak in this wise he began to weep tenderly and sith benignely he
came and enbraced his good spouse the noble queen Beatrice in saying. My love
I have done you great wrong, but pardon me if ye please, for I have done it
by ygnorau^ce, which displeases me greatly. My lord said she I forgive it you
with right good heart, for I know well that ye be sorrowful of my grievous
mischefe, And therewith the king and the queen went and kyssed their soon
Helias in blessing and thanking him of the victory and tryumphe that he had
and yielded graces unto god. And in likewise all the knights, squires, and
ladies with all the whole comynalty that there were feasted him and made Joy
and solempnite for so hie and sumptuous a miracle, whereby they saw the king and
the queen remised and set in good love and unite of heart together. Than by the
commandment of the noble king Oriant the said falls reproved traytre Makayre
was drawn to the galowes and there shamfully hanged and strangled as a
recreant knight that he was.

How king Oryant sent for the goldsmyth the which brought the other.v. chains
that he had detained and recited all the miracle done with them. Ca. xxiii


When young Helyas son of King Oryant and of the good queen Beatryce had
myraculously obtained victory of his enmy Makayre as it is said, the king and
the queen returned ammerousli together into the hall of the palace with their
said son. The which by his knights was incontinent unarmed for to refresshe
him. And after with so great Joy and honor he was so nobli feasted that non has
possiblite to tell it. Every person rejoiced them in their degree, Conuiues,
dau^ces, and sports were incontinent raised in ye palace. Trompets, clerous and
mani other instruments of music were assembled there to rejoice his company.
The bishop and ye clergy wythal the habytauntes and burgeyses were honestly
received. Open court was holden to all comers, for to collaude in magnificence
the said noble adventure. That on the morrow were made devout processions
whereto all the people came in giving graces and thanks to god of all his
divine benifites, and at the retourninge was song and celebred a mass
solempnely by the said bishop, in ye presence of the king, the queen, their
noble son Helyas, and al their cheualrye. and after mass echone were
received better than they were before, i^ such wise that bilonge space of time
was madefeest, game, and tourneimentes so that there was never seen such, And
during this feast ye goldsmith was sent for, to whom Macabrune had given the
chains of silver to make a cup, for to know the troth of him. The which
came incontinent and brough.v. of the said chains and a cup of silver that
he had over when he made ye other, as it pleased god for to recover ye vi.
children. And so freely he came to the king and said. Sir here ben.vi. chains
of silver and a cup the. which myraculously I have had of the surplus of the
cup that. your mother, Matabrune gave me to make, and how was this done said
the king: wit ye sir said the Goldsmith yt your mother brought me.vi. chains
of Silver for to make a cup, such as she devised. But when I began to melt*
the first of the said chains it multiplied so by the grace of god yt it weyed
twice as much as all ye.vi. chains together. wherefore I reserved one for
paynent of the facion. And since I have kept reuerentlye ye other.v. chains in
my coffre as precious and full of virtue, the which I present you here. And if
in this doing I have offended or mysse done against your riall majesty: I
offer me to make amends. Certainli said the king ye speak wisyly and like a
good man, and if ye have commised oni wrong in this I forgive you hertely. Than
the king, and the queen took those precious chains and kissed them
reverently i^ weeping and bewayling naturally their poor children that by so
great treason were mued and converted into swannes. And soon upon yt came
Marks yt was blind by Matabrune. and by ye furour of her rage had both his
tyne put out* when the king saw him he demanded him who has done it. Alas
sir said he, your mother has done this evil. And wherefore said the king:
Alas sir said he, wha^ your.vii. children where borne she gave me them for to
drown or make them die to the end to make ye queen believe that she had
whelped.vii. dogs. But when I was i^ a forest I laid them all in a plain
upon my mantell for to se them. And as I began to behold the^ they began all to
laugh upon me so louinglye that for to have lost my life I cold not have done
them any harm but yet it grieved me sore to be constrained to leave them in that
place all dispourueyed. And when she wist that they were yet alive, and that I
had not fulfilled her wicked will she herself by her madness put out both
mine ey^ne. And when Helyas heard him speak thus he had great pity on him.
wherefore humbly he turned him to god saying. Sovereign god of paradise yt by
thy divine goodness and insaciable mercy enlumined and gave sight to the
poor blind man the which satte in the hie way begginge for his life. I thee
supply and requyer humbly by ye benignife yt it will please thee to enlumyne
and g^ue sight to this poor blind creature, the which has been cause of the
salvation of my life, by the which he has lost his ceyen And when he had made
his prayers he made ye sign of the cross upon the eyes of the said Marks, ye
which incontinent after by the grace of almighti god saw as clearly as ever he
did, wherefore the king and the Queen with all ye whole assistentes were
greatli admeruayled. And incontinent they gave lauds and thankynges unto our
lord. with him the which was newlye enlumined of his sight. In reknowledgyng
the graces and vertus. of our savior, and redemptour Jesus christ the which he
had myraculousli showed at the prayer and supplycacion of his good knight
Helyas.

How the false Matabrune made the kepers of the prison so dronkin that they
slept whiles she fled away. And how the Swannes, returned to their form
humayne. Ca. xxiiii


NOow ye ought to wit or we proceed any ferther that the same day that the
Iustes were made between Helias and Makaire that Matabrune being in prison
made in such wise to drink them ye king Oriant had co^mysed to keep her that
she made them to sleep all dronken. And since found manner to escape, and with
certain of her folk she withdrew her in a castle of hers named Maubruiant to
thend to keep and preserve her from harm which she thought should come to her,
for the peruerce treason and untruth that she had commised against the king
and his good spouse the noble queen Beatrice. wherefore ye king made grievously
to punysshe them that had her in keeping But for to return to the subgect of
the crony kill of the noble Helias knight of the swane. It is to be noted that
the said Helias knight of the swanne demanded of king Oriant his father that
it would please him to give him ye chains of silver of his brethern and sister
that the goldesmith had brought. The which he delivered him with good heart for
to dispose them at his pleasure. Than he made an oath and swear that he would
never rest till he had so long sought by pondes and stagnes that he had found
his.v. brethren and his sister, which were transmued in to swannes. But our
lord that consoleth his friends in exaltinge their good will showed greatly
his virtue. For in the river that ran about ye kings palace appeared visibly
the swannes before all the people. And when Helias had seen them: he called
diligentli ye king and the queen his father and mother saiing. I pray you my
lord and my lady that ye will lightly come and se your other notable children
mi.v. brethren and my sister. The which ben now presently arrived upon ye river
that is about this palace. And incontinent the king and ye queen descended
with many lords, knights, and gentilmen, and came with great diligence upon
the water side, for to see the above said Swannes. The king and the queen
beheld them piteousli in weeping for sorrow that they had to se their poor
children so transmued into swannes. And when they saw ye good Halias come nere
them they began to make a meruaylous feast and rejoiced them in the water. So
he approached upon the brinke, and when they saw him nere them: they came
lightli fawning and flikering about him making him chere, and he playned
louingli their feathers After he showed the^ ye Chains of silver, where by they
set them in good order before him. And to five of them he remised the chains
about their necks, and sodeynlye they began to return in their propre
humayne form as they were bofore, and before al miraculsly they showed:
them.iiii. fair sons and a daughter. To whom dilige^tlie the king and the
queen ran, and naturalli kissed the^ as their children, whereof every man
had marvel, and ioyed of ye divine miracle of god so notably showed. And when
the other swanne (whose chain was molten for to make the cups as before is
said (saw his brethren and his sister returned into their human fourmes he
lept again all sorowfully into the river, and for dole yt he had he plucked
almost al his feathers to the bare flesh. And wha^ the good Helias saw him so
dolorously demean himself: he took him ^o weep for sorrow, and recomforted
him saying My dear brother my freende, have somewhat patience, and discomforte
you not, For I shall make someeke and humble prayers unto god almighti for you,
that yet I shall se you ones a noble knight. And than the swanne began to
enclyne and bow down his head as in tha^king him and sith plunged himself
all together in the water. And for him in likewise the king and the queen
made much lame^tacion. But Helyas conforted them sweetly, and said to them
that he would in such wise pray unto our lord for him that in short time he
should return into his own natural form. And thus they ceased somewhat of
their sorrow by the consolacion and goodly words of the said Helias for their
other son, wherefore than they took benignely the other.v. children and led
them to the church where they made them to be baptized. And the maiden was
named Rose, of whom afterward descended a noble lignage and worthy of
praising. And the other son were named and called at the font after the good
discrecion of the king and the queen. The which sons also in likewise were
right noble and virtuous knights and beloved of god. Than after their
baptising they were solempnely conduited and led into the palace, and there
feasted in all Joy as it apperteyned well. And thither ca^ many for to see
them in laudinge and magnifienge the name of our almighty savior, that so
miraculously showed his great virtue.

How king Oriant gave his Realm to his son Helias, whereof he made to
crown him king honorably And tha^ gave him leave to go take his mother
Matabru^ in the castill of Maubruyant, and there he burnt her in a great fire.
Ca. xxv
matabrun

King Helias.



AFter all these things before said king Oryant knwledged the grace of god that
was sown in his son the noble Helyas: he made to call before him diverse great
Barons and knights with his peers which were alwai with him. And they comen he
made to call in present the noble Helias and said to him. My right dear and well
beloved son. I have knowledged and also my lords her present have seen yt ye
be fulfilled of gods grace, as notabli apereth by ye miracles and digne faites
yt by your holy prayer have here be^ showed. wherefore I depose me presently of
al my realm constituing you king and lord of all my lands and countries, and
will ye fro hens forward ye be honored and served and obeyed without any
gaynsayinge. And in ye witness of this thing, and for to show that it so
pleases me, hear is the crown of the realm, the which in the presence of
the queen your mother and all the noble assistentes I set upon your head and
give it to you as king. My lord said Helis I thank you humbly, how well yt I
am not worthy ne suffisaunt to rule and govern one so noble and puiff^an at
realm as yours is. But since that it pleases you so to do, and that it is the
will of god in nothing will I gain say you. For sothe said king Oriant I give
it you with all my heart. Moreover my son noble king I do you to wit that
Matabrune my mother the which I had made to enpryson for the treason and injury
that she did to your mother and her children whereof ye be one, has found manner
to escape, and is flede for warrandise into a castle of hers called Maubrua^t.
So I tell you that I put her case toward you for to do right and Justice, such
as by you and your counceyll shall be found and ordained, but I will not be
present. well my lord said Helyas sith it pleases you so I promise you my
faith yt I shall never cease till I have won and taken the said castle named
Maubrua^t and done right Justice upon her that in such manner with wrong has
wylled to betray my mother and us her children. And after that the noble Helias
was crowned and constituted king and lord of the Realm of Lilefort with all
honor and triumph as before is said in the presence of his mother Queen
Beatrice and of all the noble princes and knights of the Realm, the which
were right joyous. He made to prepaire a little host of men of war to go with
him to Maubruyant, that is to wite about. four. thousand Crosbowe men,
two.M. men of arms, al chosen folk beside fotemen that were about vi.C. And
than accompanied with an.C. noble knights he departed fro Lylefort, with his
people he went and besyeged ye castle of Maubruyant, and to make short he gave
so strong and meruaylous assaute to al them that were within that they might
nothing resist. wherefore he and his men well armed entered their in valyauntlye
without any gaynsaying And in entringe in to the said castle escried king
Helias with an hie voice to his people sayi^g Upon your lives keep ye that the
false Matabrune issue not out of this place. The which vntruelye would have
betrayed and caused to dye my good mother and all her children. And when
Matabrune had heard the noise, and that she saw the Castle taken, she
fortified her within a tour with certain of her gentylmen and damoyselles
wening to hold her there in saufte. But when king Helyas knew it he came to
the door of ye said toure with certain of his folk and brake it open, and
found her therein. And as soon as the king apperceyued her: he came to her
with great courage and kest her to the earth saying. Ha false old witch thou
have betrayed my mother and made us to suffer so much evil. If it were not
for the honor of god, and the blood whereof I am comen my self should flea
thee. And that she wist not what to say but that they should led her to king
Oria^t her son. But Helias told her yt she should never se him, and made to lead her down to yt base court, where as a great place was made with a stake and
wood and coals for to brenne her as she had deserved. whereto echone besied. And
when she was so bound at ye stake, and that there was no more remedi of her
life she was somewhat moved with contricion, and cried unto king. Helyas in
saying. Ha my son I cry you mercy. I knowledge and it is true that I have well
deserved the death for I have falsely betrayed your mother, and made her to
understand yt of her body were issued.vii. whelps, and she of troth
childed.vii. fair children, ye which at their birth brought each of them a
Chain of Silver at their neck but by mine untruth I sent the^ by on of my
servants for to droune or flea them, but god preserved them fro ill, And yet
by my wickedness I thought to make to die the good queen Beatryce your
mother, in imposynge to her crime that she would have betrayed her spouse king
Oria^t and me, wherein she never thought, so is it good right that I die, for
toward god I have deserved it. To whom I beseech yt he pardon me, and that
the pain yt I shall suffer in dienge may be turned if it please him to the
satisfaccion of all my sins. And also I require you to pardon me for I die
willingly, and I forgive you mi death. Truly said king Helias I pardon you as
to my part, but yet shall ye die by Justice, and I pray god forgive you. Than
was wood and dry thorns laid about her and fire set therein and so she was
brent for her demirites before al ye people And when the execucion was done,
the king with his people returned diligently to Lilefort where as he was
honourabli received, and tha^ he went and told his mother what he had done
saying. Mother rejoice you, for ye be revenged now of ye peruerce matabrune,
for I have made her to be burnt for her demerites. And the queen answered. My
right dear son I thank you. Jesus forgive her soul. And thus they abode
amiable in good peace whereof all the people rejoiced.

How Helyas took leave of the king his father and of his mother for to follow
the adventure of his brother the swanne that appeared on the river before a
ship. Ca. xxvi


AFter certain time that the victoryous king Helyas had posseded ye Realm of
Lyleforte in good peace and tranquilite of Justice it happened on a day as he
was in his palais loking toward ye river yt he apperceiued yt swa^e one of his
brethren yt was not yet turned into his form human, for that his chain
was molte^ for to make matabrune a cup as it is said. And ye said swa^ne was in
the water before a ship the which he had led to ye wharfe as abiding king
Helias And wha^ Helias saw hi^: he said in hi^ self. Here is a signification
yt god sends to me for to show to me yt I ought to go by ye guyding of this
swa^ne into some country for to have honor and consolacion, under the bounte
and magneficence of his holy and excellent name. And in this good purpose
inspired of the holy ghost he assembled his brethren and his sister, and came
to king Oryant his father and queen Beatrice his mother, and in ye presence
of all his parents he said. My right dear and honored father, and you also
my sweet mother with all my brothren and sister and friends here present. It is
now needful and convenient that I take leave at you. For here by within ye
river is mi brother the swanne that comes to f^tche me in a ship that he
ledeth and gideth to the wharfe in abiding me. wherefore know ye my lord my
father yt I render to you ye crown riall the which it pleased you to give me.
And I remitte whole into your hands the Realm of Lilefort. And thus humbly I
take leave of you in leuing this noble country for to go at the commandment
of our lord by ye condutinge of my brother. For I have steadfast hope in me yt
our lord has done all for the best, and that he will leave him yet in the
form of a swanne for to guide and lead me surely to some good port where as
I may to his digne will do some virtuous fruit. And thus will I go with him,
and to Jesus christ I command you. And in this saying: he went and kissed the
king and ye queen his father and mother, his brethren and his sister. The
which wept so tenderly that it was pity for to se them.

How the swanne brother of king Helyas conduted ye said ship wherein Helyas
was till they came to the City of Nymaie. Ca. xxvii.


ANd when Helyas had thus mekelye taken his leave of all his parents and
friends he made to bear his armures and arms of honor into the ship, with
his target and his bright sheelde, of which as it is written the telde was of
Silver and there on a double Cross of gold. Than after the noble king Oriant
came and presented to his son an horn, and said. My right dear and
well-beloved son, here is an horn yt I give you, ye which ye shall keep if it
please you, for my sake. And be ye sure yt it has such virtue yt what man
soever blows it loud may not have anoy ne damage at ye pleasure of god. And
I beseech god humbly that he give you Joyful going and honor at your
retourning, and saufte in your viage. And thus as Helias was yet in the palace
with the king the swane kest three or four meruaylous cries as by manner to
call his brother, whereof the king and the queen withal them yt were there
were greatli abashed. So descended anon the said Helyas with his parents and
friends, the which came to convey him unto the brinke of the water. And when
the swanne saw hem he flickered and regoysed as in making manner to mete the
said Helyas. And there every man blessed the said swanne saying. It is damage
of this poor child yt has lost his form humain the which god send him. But
yet was not the time co^en ordained of god that he should turn in his
humanite, for a more greater wealth that should ensue after. And there was the
king and the queen with their children wepi^g profoundeli for pity that they
had to behold their noble blood so transfigured into a swane. Tha^ entered
Helias into a ship taking general leave of all his friends. The which
returned weping and sorowing for ye good Helias the noble knight of the
swanne, that went at his adue^tures in strange countries at the good
commandment of god, and the guiding of ye swanne. So the swa^ne put him (...)
ye (...), the which he made to scour upon the water in such wi^t that they
were anon far fro Lyleforte And thus conduited the swanne from river to river
the noble Helyas till vnt^ ye place ordained of god for to give him a wife, of
whom should issue a fair daughter that should bear three sons, by whom
should be gratli exalted the faith of our lord Jesus christ. Of the which ye
first was Godfrey of Boulyon, the which sithen conquered and posseded the
realm of the holy land of Jerusalem. The second was his brother Baudwyne the
which succeeded him in the said realm. And the third was their brother
Eustace the which was a right noble knight. But that not withstanding yet was
he not a king as ye two first were for that he sucked another nourice than his
mother because the child cried. And the mother was maruailous angry, as
hereafter shall be showed in folowinge by order the true cronycle.

How the Earl of Frankbourke made to come and appear by Justice Clarysse
duchess of Boulyon at Nimaye willing to usurp her of her duchy, in gyuinge
false understanding to Otton Emperor of Almayne, the which held the court
of his Parlyament at the said city of Nymaie. Ca. xxviii.
TO come always to the effect of the noble Cronycle the which I have begone to
treat to the verite of that which is written in many other notable hystoryes. I
shall leave a little to speak of the noble Helyas knight of the swanne that is
fletinge on the wate^ coming to the eytye of Nimaye before the emperor and by
divine prouydence to sustain the right (...) good d^chesse of Boulyon, as
after it is said.



It is so that the right noble emperor of almayne named Otton first of that
name, yt had under him the land of Dardaine, of Lyege, and of Nammur, held his
syege of Justice and the court of his parliament in ye city of Nimay And
thither al they that were oppressed, or domaged ca^e to axe right of
the emperor, that was a very just judge and good Iusticier. So than the earl of
Frankebourke made to apere the duchess of Boulyon before him, unjustly to
usurp the duchy by false giving to understand. And at a d^y set appeared ye
earl demaundaunt in matter of nouelte on the on part, and the duchess of
Boulyon defendresse on the other part. The which had brought her daughter with
her yt was a fair damaisel. And wha^ ye counsel was comen and assembled before
ye emperor, the earl made to plede his cause. In the which plea he made
injuriously to pose and put in faite that the said duchess had made to
enpaysen her husband, the which was his brother. And the her said husband about
ye space of.iii. years was in strange countries without retourning home.
During ye which time and in his abscence she had conceived and borne a
daughter, ye which for the said cause he would say that she was not of
legitime marriage. And moreover that the land and duchi of Boulias was comen of
his father. By the which he would say and promise by his pleding that ye
duchess might not of right possede ne hold ye said duchy as dowayresse of her
husband, ne her daughter in likewise as heir of the said duke, for she was
not ligitime as he said before, and that he offered to prove it, te^daunt to the
end to take and hold in his hand the said duchy of boulio^ as a successor
and seul heritier of his brother (in his life husband to the said duchess) and
duke of Boulion. Than after the pledynge of the said demau^daunt, ye duchess
defended her cause to the best she might, denienge all that he had proposed
against her and her daughter, whose honor he had hurt in protesting of
theniuries. Certes ladi said the emperor, here is an injurious matter and that
will cause your death if ye pouruei not, seeing that he offreth him to prove it,
if it be not let by your opposites. Sir said ye earl to the end yt ye seem it
not to be true here is mi gauge for to sustain it to the vtteraunce, and
befight it to the death that it is as I have said. wherefore she is culpable to
die and not to possede the said duchy. Now ladi said the emperor ye have heard
ye offer that he makes you, which seems me way of right, wherbi I cannot
refuse him his demand And therefore make diligence to seek a knight for to
sight and sustain your quarrel, by the which ye may deny that which has be
now proposed by your adverse party And if ye think that ye may find any yt
will take this charge for you: I shall gladly give you space and delay to
pouruey you. Than the good lady as al abashed looked about her if there were
any present that in her need would help her. But none would meddle seeing the
case to her imposed. Wherefore she committed her to God prayinge him humbly to
succor her, and reprove thiniury that wickedly to her was imposed by the said
earl.

How Helias the noble knight of the swanne aryued at Nymaie for to defend the
duchess of Boulon, who the emperor received gladly. Ca. xxix.


FOr to return to the myraculous history of ye right noble and valiant
Helyas knight of the swanne, ye which has be somewhat interrupt for to recite
this that before is said seruinge to the matter following. It is to be noted
that so as the earl of Franckebourcke and ye duchess of Boulyon were so
pledynge before the emperor of Almayne in his parliament at the Town and
city of Nymaie for the matter aforesaid, approached thither the the good Helyas
guided by the swanne the which began to blow hyghly his horn that his father
king Oriant had given him, in such manner that they that were in ye parlyment
with the Emperor were all admeruailed to hear a sown so loud. Than in
continent they looked out at the windows and saw the swanne come ledinge a
ship, within the which was the noble Helias knight of the swanne, well
garnysshed of spear, sword and armures as belongs to a knight. And when the
Emperor saw him arm he had great marvel. For he apperceiued the swanne
that returned with the ship incontine^t that the noble Helias was out with his
armoures, wherefore he sent for him. And in this wise beheld him ye noble
Clarysse duchess of Boulion. The which to this purpose told a dream to her
daughter, whereof she had visyon the night before saiynge. Truly daughter I
wene yt our Lord this day will help and succoure me by his divine grace. For
this night me thought in my dream that I pleaded against the Earl of
Frankenbourke that by his Treason accused me of crime of death wherbi I was
condemned too be burnt in a fire. But there came a Swanne fleing that
brought me water that put out the said fire. And of this water issued a byg
fish the which fructified in such wise that echone lived therewith til into
Jerusalem and all the country. whereby I believe at the pleasure of god that the
swanne which has guyded this noble knight hither shall be cause to deliver me
of the crime whereof I am falsely accused. And thus as the Duchess of Boulyon
devised with her daughter thy there came the good knight Helias, which at the
commandment of the emperor aryued in the halle where as he held his
parliament. And there reverently he salued the said emperor. And the emperor
againwarde received him much honestly, in demanding him of his tidinges and
how he was theither come^. Sir said Helias I am a poor knight aduenturous for
to serve you truly when ye shall have any need of my simple saruice. Than said
ye emperor. My friend I thank you, and ye be welcome. And since you seek
adventures in feats of arms and chyualry ye may find them here without
goinge ferther. And for to declare you all the case. Here is this noble ladi
duchess of Boulyon with her daughter, the which ye earl of Frankebourke her
present has accused her of a crime enough to make her die, and also to
disheryte her daughter of the said Duchy of Boulion, if she find not some
cha^pion or noble knight that would defend her right a gaynst the said Earl
before named, ye which has casten his guage for to sustain publicly against
any defendaunte that which he has proposed. And now ye have heard ye case, ye
which should be a fair adventure, if ye would sustain it. And I shall save
her in restablysshynge unto her her heritage, and also ye shall have her
daughter in marriage, which ye se so gracious and a right fair maiden. And when
the good Helyas had heard the emperor he beheld the duchess the which seemed
him much beninge and of noble mayntene. Also he considered the beauty and
gracous countenance of her daughter, ye which to him was meruayiously
pleasant and agreeable to behold. Than he demanded of the emperor that it
would please him to give him leave to speak a little secretly with ye duchess
of boulion. which he granted gladly, wherefore he thanked him And than Helias
took her by ye hand and drew her somewhat a part, and said to her. Fair
lady it behooves if it please you that ye tell to me and swear ye troth of
this yt I shall demand of you. And this same dai by the pleasure of god I
shall be your faithful servant. Alas noble knight said she. I promise you by
the living god and on the faith of gentilnesse that I shall tell you al ye
troth of that ye shall are me. Now madame said he by ye oath yt he have here
made, be ye not in any thing culpable of this crime whereof ye be presentlye
accused? By mi troth my friend said she, nay. And I beseech god that he never
do me any grace to my body and soul if I ever thought of that whereof I am
falsely and without cause accused. And truly madame said he than have ye found
a champion of me for to sustain and defend your right in such wise that by
the pleasure of god that it very berite this day your enemy shall be overcome.

How Helyas the virtuous knight of the Swanne did fight against the earl of
Francbourcke, the which he conquered and slew. Ca. xxx.


When the noble knight of the swanne had interrougued and questioned the
duchess of Boulyon he came straight to the Emperor and fayde. Sir make him
to come hither that iniustly accuses this noble Lady, for to disherite or
make her dye, for I am redye for to defend her. And with these words issued
the Earl saying My freende what demand ye? Ye show you much o^^r wenynge to
me^le you of a thing that touches you not. Vassal said Helias here is my
glove that I deliver you, in suchewise that the honor of god and for this
ladies sake ye shall se what an aduenturous knight can do And the earl received
his guage. So was the bataile accorded incontinent by the emperor, the which
received their oaths, demanded when they would fight. Than Helias required
the emperor that it would please him to ordeyne it presently, the which he
grant. And the earl for shame durst not refuse him. Than forthwith the feeld
was prepayred, the listes dressed, and the champions surely armed as behooved in
such a case. Incontinent the noble Helias took his spear, his swearde, and
his sheelde of Silver with a double cross of Gold, the which he set upon his
left arm. And on the other part the earl was mounted on his horse. And sith
they came into the feelde arrayed for them. And there was present the emperor
with his counseyl and the duchess of Boulion with her daughter, accompayned of
many lords and ladies. And when the duchess and her daughter saw cominge
Helias their noble champion, they prayed god that he would keep him fro harm,
and give him victory over his enemy after the right of that he justly defended.
So incontinent was ordained the battle of the two knights, the which with
course of horse came rinning one against the other the speres in the rest, and
encountered so rudely that both their speres shiuered all in pieces. And than
they drew their swerdes wherewith they smote together so long that the earl
might scarce do any more. But the noble Helias had always good courage as he
that had set all his trust in god, and that with just title sustained
charitabli the right of the noble duchess of Baulion. Than the earl demanded
of the noble Helyas that it would please him to give him trewes for to speak
with him, the which he granted. Certes free knight said ye earl if it would
please you to apease this battle and that I may win yt yt I demand I shall
give you my daughter in marriage, and ye shall have my land of Dardayne that is
a noble and fruitful country. And than answered Helias. Traytre wenest you to
make me of thy consorce. wit thou yt I would sooner let me to be hewn in all my
members than I would commit treason as thou have done, and therefore speak
no more of it. For of me getest thou no merci for this deed. And I promife thee
that this dai by the pleasure of god which has sent me hither I shall deliver
ye noble duchess of thy treason, and I shall espouse her daughter maugre thy
wicked will. Now defend the against me. Than Helias approached the said earl
and smote him so couragiousli with his sword that he frusshed al his helm
wherwt the earl fell backewarde upon his horse. Than the earl thought to reuete
him self and came to Helias, the which he smote so hard upon his right arm
that he made ye sword flee out of his hand. And when Helias saw that he was
dystytute of his sword, he descended lightli from his horse, and came and
seized ye earl by the body, and valiauntly by force kest him to the earth. And
would he or not be arached his shield fro his neck. And since by strength of
his hands he deseased him of his swearde maugre his tethe. And when the earl
felt him so dispourueyed he began to yield him to Helyas saying. A knight save
my life and I shall give thee my lands. Ha false traitor said Helyas you shall
not escape so. For I will have whole victori of the for to ve^ge ye noble
duchess and her daughter yt you have sclau^dred. And therewith he lift up the
sword yt he had taken fro the earl, and gave him such a stroke yt his helm
went of and than he cut of his head and so he dyed mischeuousli. And than the
duchess and her daughter gave lauds and graces to God of the victory of
their enemy which they saw vain quysshed by the grace of god, which had sent
the noble knight to be their helper.

How the good Helias wedded the daughter of the duchess of Boulyon. Ca. xxxi


THan after that ye noble Helias had victorious ye conquered ye earl of
Frankebourke his enemi: he came benigneli and salued the emperor Otton which
received him benignely as a prue and noble knight. After he sa^ued Clarysse the
noble duchess of Boulyon, ye which thanked him reverently of that he had done
for her, for he had saved her life, and the heritage of her noble douchy. Than
Helias took the duchesses daughter by ye hand and enbraced and kissed her
benignely in saying. Miloue ye ought well to be mi wife, for I have frelie
bought you, and saved your honor in champ of battle. And ^he maiden answered
humbly. Certainly noble knight my mother and I ben beholden to god and you of
the right happy iurney that this day we have by you received. wherefore at the
good pleasure of mi mother I yield me totalli to you, as it has been promised.
And forthwith the emperor came to ye duchess saying. Ladi I yield to you your
land and duchy of Boulyon playnle and peasybly, and restablysshe you in honor
without any culpe of cr^me as the truth is seen. Certes said the duchess I
thank you highly. But as to the regard of my land and duchi of boulion I
give it freely to this valiant knight that notabli has conquered it. And also
I give him my daughter in marriage the which from bensforth with him shall be said
and called lady. For I will shortly go and yield me a nune or religiouse in
some nonery, as I have auowed to god ye which this day has succored me by so
noble a knight. And when the Emperor called to him Helias the noble knight of
the swane, unto whom he declared publicly and openly before all that he was
duke of Boulyon, and that him behooved to wedde ye daughter of the noble dame
Clarisse like as he had promised. whereto benignely consented the said Helias.
And thus by consentement of both parties was in continent made apparaile for
the morrow to make the feast and solempnite of the spousayles.

And all that night til on ye morrow echone were delibered to sport and Joy.
Knights and gentilmen rejoiced the^ of this maruaylous adventure. Ladies and
domoyselles dau^ced with them in all games and merye cheres, and in such wise
that it should be to long for to tell al ye games daunces, and turneymentes
that were done at the said feast. And on the morrow was reverently celebred the
marriage in the church where as came many great Lords ladies, and other
estates. And after was ye feast made in themperours halle, where as every man
to his poor rejoiced with all his heart. Trumpetes, clerons, tabourins and other
minstralsi was there in that place assembled to make mirth melodiously. And to
make short there was the greatest triumph that ever was seen. Tha^ at night
the good Helias duke of Boulion lai with his spouse the which night she
conceived of him a daughter that at her baptism was named Ydian, of whom
issued the prue and worthy prince Godfrey of Boulion, and since his two brethren
Baudwin and Eustace. The which were to noble and valiau^t knights as their
deeds showed afterward And thus appears that the noble Helyas knight of the
Swanne conquered and wanne victoriousli the duchi of Boulion with the swearde.
And after that the feast and ^ylempnite of the weddinge had lasted about.xv.
days, the said Helias duke of Boulion and his noble wife dysposed them to go
into their cou^trei with their estate. So the said new duke took leave of
the emperor in sweringe and promisinge to him homage of ye said duchi as it was
of right, and in thankinge him honorably he departed from him and fro al his
noble barons and knights for to go to Boulyon. But in goinge he found many of
the parents and friends of the foresaid earl of Frankebourke, the which
assailed him on the way weening to aue^ge his death. But he showed him so
valiant and knightli yt they were not ye most stro^gest, for he and his folk
had passage at their own pleasure whither his enemies would or not And
triu^phantli he came unto ye said place of boulion where as he was honourabli
received with great joy and exultation. After he held on a dai open court to
al co^ers In which were received honorably all the noble barons and lords of
the country, and this time hanging waxed great with child the noble duchess
his wife in such manner that at ye end of.ix. months she childed of a fair
daughter. The which was honestlye baptized in great company of diverse noble
lords and damoyselles. And she was named Ydain at the font, the which sith
was mother of the prue and valiant prince Godfrey of Boulyon, and of his
brethren Baudwin and Eustace. And during the childebed of the noble duchess
were made many notable conuiues and merry pastimes. Then afterward grew and
sprainge the said maiden by the will of God that she was in pleasant age of
flouringe youth. And upon a day as the duchess went in sporting with her
husband the good Helyas, she demanded of him pryuelie of what country he
was, and what friends he had. but he said nothing, and defended her never to
speak thereof, or he would go his way and never dwell with her any more So she
held her still for that time, and they abode the spa^^ of.vii. year living in
love and cordialite one with the other.

And in this time during the ancient Duchess mother of the good Helias wife
was yielded in religion, like as she had promised and vowed to god.

How Helias the noble duke of Boulion left his land for that his wife
disobeyed his commau^diment, and after the swanne his brother brought him to
Nymaye to the emperor Otton. Ca. xxxii


ON a day as the Duchess of Boulion lay in bed with her husband Helyas there
took her a meruaylous will to ask again of him of what folk he was comen.
The which notably he had defended her, or yt he would go his way. But as a
woman that is light heart and will sooner do the contrary to yt her husband
commands her tha^ otherwise. It hapened on a night as they were to gether
she was not at her ease because she durst not say and fulfill her will. But at
the last she was hardi enough, so that she said. Certainly my lord I would
feign know of what place ye be come, and who ben your parents and friends,
as otherwhyle I have asked? wherefore I would feign yt it would please you to
tell me. And when ye noble Helias heard her sai so he was greatli angri at his
heart. And in anger said. Certes ye shall know nothing. And I swear and promise
you by my faith yt to morrow erlye I shall depart fro this country. And at
Boulion shall ye se me never more. And I shall go straight to Nimaie and take
leave at the emperor and of you in the presence of all his barons.

And wha^ the duchess understood him: she began to weep tenderli, and since
arose from her bed and came and complained to her folk saying. Alas, alas my
lords and ladies now have I lost the company of my good and faithful friend,
by mine ouermuche speaking, and could not hyde my courage. And anon after she
came to the bed of her daughter Ydain that her father loved derely, and told
her thereof. And than she adressed her to her fathers bed weeping piteously
saying. Alas mi lord my father have pity on my good mother and me. Alas will
ye leave us: Virgin Mary help, shall I abide orpheline in mi young dais. Alas
father leave us not for gods sake regard your blood, and take pity thereon. And
than the noble duke yt was meruaylously sorye recomforted her saying. Fair
daughter make not such sorrow, for I shall well pouruey your mother and you if
god will, or that I depart. Tha^ in the morning Helias arose and tenderly
weping he went and hard mass devoutly as he was accustomed. And after mass
he said to his knights and familiers. Lords I require and pray you charitably
that ye will guide my wife your lady and my daughter unto ye city of Nimaie
whereas the emperor is, to the end yt I may take leave of him honorably as
apperteineth, and that I may commau^de also to hi^ mine affair in these
parties, for I shall never return, The noble knights accorded gladly his
demand And yet he said again. My friends I you recommau^de that ye be always
ready to keep and defend this noble country of Boulyon and the honor of my
wife your duchess a of my daughter. And so they promised him to do at his good
will. Now my lords said he I thank you al, prayinge you yt ye hold me faith
as ye have promised. More over my lords and friends the hour is comen yt I
must depart fro this place, for anon ye shall se come nere ye swa^ne the which
by the will of god shall led his ship for to guide me to Nimaie. And as they
spoke thus together ye swanne arrived myraculously as he had said, and kest a
meruaylous cry in calling his brother Helias. And than he took leave mekeli
of al his knights, gentilmen and damoyselles yt wept tenderly ye departi^g of
their good lord with ye noble duchess and her daughter that it was piti to se
them. And semblably all the Citezins wept a wailed ye abscence and departing of
their noble duke, that so swetlie had sustained the^ in good peace and liberte
without to vex to trouble them with oni subsides or tailies, but for to take them
from grefe had anulled al false vsages and set good customs and fredomes
wherefore they wend never to recover such a another. Than entered Helyas into
the ship, where as he and the swanne feasted them ioyusle as brethren, for
the hour approached yt he should return to his form humayne. And so they
left Bulion and drew toward Nimaie to go to the emperor as the noble Helias had
proposed to do for to put his wife and his daughter in his saufgarde with their
noble country of Boulion.

How the duchess of Boulion complained to the emperor for the departing of
Helyas. Ca. xxxiii.
Clarysse


INcontinent after that ye noble Helyas was departed fro Boulyon, the duchess
his wife and her daughter Ydain companyed of many noble knights and
damoyselles prepared them for to go to Nymaie before the Emperor. And when
they were comen into his palais she fell down before him we pynge and
complaining her of her good husband that would leave her, saying. Alas noble
emperor I pray you if it please you have pity on me and on my poor daughter,
for if it be not by your mean and benignite I shall lose this day the noble
knight that here in your presence took me to wife and spouse. How lady said the
Emperor is your husband dead? Alas sir said she, nay, but he will return
into the country fro thens he came when he aryued here in this place for to
succor me, as echone saw clearly. For the swanne that ye saw is returned with
his ship to fetch him, and he is gone with him. It must be than said the
emperor that ye have done him some offense, whereof he is anger with you.
Than the said duchess told and recyted to him how and what manner she had
trespassed his commandment, wherefore he repreued her, saying that she had
not well done.

And thus as they spoke together: came Helias that by the guiding of his brother
the swanne arrived nigh to the palace of the emperor. wherefore he began to sown
his virtuous horn, as he had done when he arrived first.

And when the Emperor had heard him he meruailed and said to the duchess that
he had heard her husband. Alas said she I know well that he would come hither.
But it is to take leave at you, without ever to return but if ye moeue him by
your high sapience.

How Helias arrived at Nimaie where as he was goodly received of the Emperor.
Ca. xxxiiii


At these words arrived Helias before the emperor, the which he salued humbly.
And the emperor received him benignely in saienge Noble duke ye be right
welcome. Sir said he pardon me, for I have forsaken my duchi, and never will I
possede any thing of it, for it behooves me singulerly to return to the
country fro whens I first departed by the will of god. But this not
wythstandyng and all stryle premysed right affectuously I recommau^d you my
wife. And semblably my noble daughter the which presentli I give you as your
daughter. And I pray you yt it please you of your benignite to be her good
father and friend and to mary her wha^ time shall come at your good discrecion.
Al ready of your grace and bounte ye have be mean of the cause of our marriage,
so again I require you to keep their honor, and maintene them under your
safgarde in the fraunchise of your countrei, and noble duchy of Bolio^ for I
will never return. A noble duke mi dear friend, if ye have made any oath
thereof as ye say, it is not of necessite to hold vows against charity. For ye
shall sooner have pardon to break your oath that is not lawful than to
accomplisshe it. If ought be misdoone, and so shortly to leave your wife is
against god and charity, ye have also your fair daughter Ydian that ye se weep
so piteousli before you of whom ye should have pity. Certis sir said Helias
me behooves to go lightli into an other region by the commandment of god yt
calls me for an other wealth. wherefore I pray you pardon me for I may abide no
longer. yonder is the swanne that abides. My freende said the emperor, since
it is the will of god I will not gaynsay it. And than he came nete to his wife
and his daughter ye which he kissed tenderly weeping, so that he left them as
al in a swonne before the emperor, or whom he took hu^bli leave in
recommau^ding the^ again to his good grace. And he promised so to do, and to
mary his daughter nobly without fail. And so departed the noble Helias, and
went toward ye river where as his brother abode hi^ in likeness of a swanne
For he keep the ship al way till that his brother were returned. And wha^ he
was comen the swanne rejoiced for to see him So she departed with great
dilygence fleting always fro river to river till they came into ye countrei of
Lilefort that was the land of their natiuite

How Helias the noble knight of the swanne returned into the City of Lylefort
within the ship of his brother the swanne. The which myraculously and by the
will of our lord returned before his parents and friends in his first
form humayne. Ca. xxxv.
his son the swanne.

King Orint.



Upon a day as the noble king Oryant sat at the table, and his noble spouse
the good queen Beatrice with their.iiii. sons and their daughter, there arrived
their two other noble sons Helyas and his brother the swanne that had guided
hi^ in his viage as it is said. And wha^ Helias knew the place of Lilefort he
began ioyously to blow his horn upon the river, in such manner yt the voice
thereof came to his father. The which incontinent arose fro the table as all
rejoiced saying. My wife and ye al mi children have ye Joy and mirthe at
heart, for here is mi sone Helias. Tha^ diligently they arose and went to the
windows of ye palace. And in beholding to the river they apparceyued the noble
Helyas the which al ready issued out of the ship. And anon there ran to mete
him his four brethren with their sister for to welcome him. And there they
enbraced and kissed him for Joy that they had to se him, and after ioyously he
went with them into the palais before his father and his mother, where as was made
so goodly meting that it is not possible to tell. For incontinent his father and
his mother kissed and enbraced him wepinge for Joy yt they had to receive him
for the noble virtues and miraculous deeds ye god had showed in him. The one
feasted him, the other rejoiced him. They were allrauisshed for to se him and
when they had well received hi^, his mother axed him beni g^^ly. Swet sone where
have ye be? It is now well nere.viii. years yt we have hot seen you. Mother
said he ye shall know it a another time if it please god. And where is said she
my son the swanne that led you in a ship. Certes mad (...) said he, he is
returned into the water. Certainly said the noble queen, me seemed this ^ight
in my slept that the swanne should be turned to his own form humayne, if
that we had the two cups that the goldsmith forged of his chain, and make to
be made of the^ ii. chalices. And than set the chalyces upon two aulters in the
church. And between the aulters make a bed and lay the swanne therein, and
after make to say two masses by two good and devout priests upon the said
aulters and consacre in the chalyces. Than yt each of us dispose our conscience
well and devoutly so yt we were worthy to pray our savior Jesus christ. And I
believe that he will streche his virtues over him, and he shall return to his
form humayne. Than king Oriant and Helias held her counsel good.

How queen Beatryce made great Joy of her son that was returned to his
right form. Ca. xxxvi
Beatryce


THan incontinent they sent for the goldesmith that had forged the two cups
of the chain of silver And he comen to ye king made to deliver to him ye two
cups for to make two chalices, as it had been ordained. And for to make it
short were well and duli ordained two aulters and a bed as it was said. Than
came the noble Helias to the water side where he found his brother the swann,
and made manner to call him. And familierly he came to him, and followed him as
his good and faithful brother. And in likewise as before time he had conduited
the said Helyes, so Helyas conduted him to the church before the crucifix^
And in the presence of the king, the queen, their children and other lords
he was laid in the bed between the two aulters, where as were devoutly said
two masses, which al they above said heard well and devoutly being mekely
prosterned on both their knees prayinge almighty god that by his divine bounte
it would please him to show his virtue. So it happened that the time ordained
of god was acco^plysshed that the swanne should return in his form humayne.
Right so as the priests consacred the body of our Lord at the mass the
swanne returned into his propre form and was a man. And thus transmued he
arose fro the bed Joining his hands, and eseried saying. Lords I thank you
humblye. Jesus by his grace yield you the devout prayers that ye have made for
me, for by his mercy I am delivered and put fro great pain. And than went he
and mekely kissed the king his father, his mother. and after al his brethren
and his sister. Than after ye mass were the belles solempnely rongen, and Te
deum song for Joy in thanking god of his divine virtues. After that were made
processions and praysinges to god. And at the retournynge was baptized the said
child, and named Emery. The which since was a noble knight. And at the coming
fro the church the tables were arrayed in the kings palaice where as echone
were honourabli received with great Joy for love of ye divine adventure so
clearly showed tofore all. And thus the noble king Oriant and the good queen
Beatrice finabli recovered all their children by ye grace of god, wherefore fro
than forthon they lived holyly and devoutly in our lord.

How the noble. Helyas took leave of his para^tes and ferendes, and made him
self religious there as he was nourysshed with the good hermit, where he made
to build a castle like to that of Boulyon. Ca, xxxvii.


When the good and worthy knight of the swanne named Helyas had since his
retourninge abiden a space of time in Lylefort with his father and mother in
the company of his five brethren and his sister the which he loved of a
synguler, fylyall, and fraternall love, he disposed him self to go into ye
hermitage where he had be nourisshed with his godfather the good devout hermit
Helyas, the which was disceased in our lord.

And in that place his father king Oriant had do make a religion for the
honor of god and memory of his.vii. children, as it is said before. So the
said noble knight Helias assembled his parents and friends, and to them
recou^ted all the adventures that to him were happened since his departinge. And
how he had espoused the noble duchess of Boulyon, the which had conceived of
him a fair daughter named Ydain. And when he had told to them as it is said,
he showed them his courage and that that he had intencion to do saying. My
lord mi father and you mi lady my mother, my brethren my sister. and al my
friends. I will here in general recommau^de you to god, and say farewell, for
to go amend my life and yield me religyous. For seeing the graces and divine
benefyces that god has pleased to show for us, it behooves to his divine will
that I take pain to save my soul and pray for all my friends. wherefore
humbly I reco^mau^d you your subjects that ye treat them amyably without to
oppress them with any greuousnesse. And my brethren and friends I pray and
require you all that knightly ye keep and defend always your country as good
and valiant knights. And in these words saying there was none that durst
gayn say him for the love of god the which in all their anguysshes had
succored them, but began all to weep dorolorusly for the departing of the
good Helias. The which all thing, promised took his leave of them benignely,
and kyssed them al at his parting louyngly in weepynge, and thus he departed
from them with a simple staff in his hand. Sith as a good and devout knight
he came to the place of the said hermitage that he had chosen for to save his
soul. And there he was mekli received of the other religious men yt his father
ye king Oriant had there founded. After that he made to edyfye and build in
that place a castle semblable and like to that of Boulyon. The which when it
was ended he made in like wise to name Boulion, and ye forest that was about it
dirdayne. Than in the said castle of Boulyon he ordained certain markettes
and fayres, the which he made s^^e and quite of all customs and imposicions to
all merchants going, cominge, and soiournyng at the said fayres in that
place of Boulion, for the augmentacion and profit of the said relygyon. In
such wise that he ordained xxx. religious men for to singe and ministre the
divine service in the said relygyon. And there he abode relygyous obseruinge
the rule that there was constituted, and used his days in our lord Jesus
christ.

How the puyssaunt and virtuous emperor Otton espoused the earl of Boulyon to
the fair Ydain daughter of the noble knight of the swanne Helyas. And how
after the dream that she had the angel of god announced to her that she
should conceive and have three noble knights. Ca. xxxviii


When fair Ydain daughter of Helyas the noble knight of the swanne was at the
will of god comen to the age of.xiii. years. Otton the puissaunte Emperor, of
Almayne married her to the noble Earl of Bouleyn named Eustace. And the feast
was made in the emperors palace at Nymaie. And theyther came many great
lords and noble knights, gentilmen, and damoiselles, the which were well
received. And among the other laydyes was the noble duchess of Boulion mothe
of Ydain The which in weep piteously bewailed her good spouse the noble
Helyas. Than was the feast great, and the wedding honorably solempnised as
the emperor would for the love of Helyas. And the night comen the said earl of
Boleyn lay with his spouse fair Ydaine. The which c^ceyued of him the prue
knight Godfrey of Boulyon. And he same night in her sleep she thought that she
found in her bed three fair children. The which she elacted and gave to souke
of her own milk in so great habundau^ce that they were well and
substauncially nourysshed. And than her seemed that the two first had each of
the^ a crown of fine gold upon their heads, but the crown of the third was
broken by cause another woman than his mother had given him souke of her milk.
And at this point the noble ydain a waked of her dream. Tha^ hard she ye
voice of an angel that god had sent her saying. ydayn god se^deth the
greeting. Know thou for troth that thou shall conceive of thy husband three
male children which thou shall nourisshe with thine own milk. And god shall
give them his blessid benediction. For they shall co^quere the realm of the
holy land of Jerusalem, and shall deliver the holy sepulcre of our lord Jesus
christ out of the puissaunce and captivity of the unbelieving Sarazins. And
therefore govern them well. And when the good ydaine had heard these tidinges
she thanked and praised our sovereign lord god of his good aduertising^, and
of the grace yt he did to her. And thus by three years following she conceived
and childed three fair sons. That is to wit the first Godfrey of Boulion,
the second Baudwin and the thrde Eustace. The which she loved and nourisshed
diligently. But in a solempnite of penthecost arrived at Boulion the bishop of
Liege, the duke of Brabant, ye duke of Fryse, the earl of Flaundres, the earl
of Na^mei and many other great princes and mighti barons. The which were there
assembled for to make a certain parlyament touching ye preuysyon of some
affairs ye was to do in the country. So that the countess was at the mass ye
right solempnely was songen before the said princes. B. the which she left
young, Eustace somewhat to long fro the breast, wherefore he began to weep so
fast that a woman being one of the nourices ran diligently for to apease
him, and gave him her pappe for to souke, And when his mother the countess
returned for to visit him she found the said nourice the which gave him to
souke of her milk. wherefore she was so greatly angered and displeased yt she
said. Ha woman evil aduysed what have ye presently done. Now shall my son
Eustace lose his noble dignite for to have taken of your milk, wherefore I
ought well to hate you Alas madme said the nourice for gods love pardon me,
for certaynli I wend to have done well because he wept so fast to the end to
have stylled him So the said countess abode all the day by her three children
without any meat or drink for the displeasure that she had of that an other
woman than she had given souke to her child. And after dinner the earl of
Boulyon led all the princes, lords, and barons before named into his secret
chamber for to show unto them his three fair sons, Godfrey Baudwin, and
Eustace. And when yt they saw the noble countess beside her three children
they salued her and them right benignely. And in likewise on her sede she
received and fested them with her speech as much as to her was possible, and
to the^ showed her.iii. children, but for to make the^ any welcoming she would
notons arise. wherefore her husband the earl was for displeased, but he
conveyed each of them to his loging with out making any semblaunt thereof. Than
he returned again to her al angry for to blame her thereof and said. wit ye
lady yt ye have greatly angered me, when ye dayned not ones to arise before so
high and notable princes, before whom a queen of any realm should well have
risen for to salve them. A my lord said she be not disconte^t with me if ye
please. For by the honor of your three sons I may preaise mi self as much
as any queen how noble that she be. How so said the earl. Certaynlye my lord
said she all the world ought well to honor and praise me for their dignitees.
For they shall yet venge ones more the death of our savior Jesus christ. And
shall conquer the realm of the holy land of Jerusalem, whereby they shall
deliver the holy sepulcre of our lord fro ye hands of the misbeleuinge
sarazyns, the which there is no king that dare undertake. what said the earl
I trow that ye dreme: And of truth who that should here you say and
prefer such words would say that ye had not good mind. Ha my lord said
she, hold not for a vain thing this that I tell you. For this has told me
and announced the angel of our lord god by holy prophecy. And at these
words her husband the earl of Boulein regarded her no more. But that he said,
god give that it be so as ye have said.

How the noble duchess of Boulion sent many squyers and mesengers over all
countries and regyons for to find her noble husband the good Heiais knight of
ye swanne. Ca. xxxix.
Ponce.

The abbot.



BY the holy will and commandment of god ye good countess of Boleyne ydaine
was nourisshinge diligently of her three children Godfrei Baudwyn, and Eustace.
And in this doing held her compani her good mother the noble duchess of
Boulyon, the which of times devised with her of her good husband Helias. For
whom she had sent many messagers squyres and other in diverse countries and
regyons to the end that they might find him, or in any manner bear tydinges
of him as she right for desired. And among the messagers that sought him one
her squyre named Ponce arrived in Jerusalem, for to know and diligently
inquired if the said Helias had enterprysed the viage of ye holy sepulcre for
his remissyon. And in such wise that he was the space of.xv. days within
Jerusalem and in ye pylgrymages and devout places cyrcumiace^tes accustomed to
be done in ye said holy vyage, So he came into a church, at the entering
whereof he found an abbot of a church, clothed after the French facion of his
religion. whom he demanded of whens he was. And he said. Mi friend I am of
the Country of Gaul not f^rre fro Boulyon, and am abbot of Saincteron named
Girarde. And tha^ in likewise the abbot demanded of whens he was. My lord
said Ponce the noble squire I am of Boulyon proprely My friend said the abbot,
you be right well found. Glad am I of your coming, and since it pleases god
thus we two together shall return into our country. Than the good abbot
Gyrarde of Saincteron led the squyre Ponce to his lodging where as he feasted
him greatly. And there they devised one with another of their affairs. And it
it to be noted that at that same time were assembled in Jerusalem many princes
and great Lords, Sarazins and painims of Turkey. As the sowdan of perse. The
king Dorbrye, Abraham of Damas. The king of Dortaine. Dodekin of Thabarie. The
king of Anthyoche. Solyment of Nikes. The king Feliston. The king of Scabon.
Dodequin of damas. king Mabru^ of Oliferne, and Corborant his son. the which
were co^me^ al thither at ye commandment of king Corbadas, yt in their
presence and duri^g his life would give his realm of Jerusalem to Cornumarau^t
his son and crown him king thereof. The which was.xv. year old. And the said
new king was crowned by the consentment of the said princes resygned fro the
father to the son in great feast and solempnite within Jerusalem like as they
were accustomed to do after their gestes and ceremonies. And it is for to be
known that the said Cornumeraunt the new king of Jerusalem found manner and
space for to speak to the abbot of Saincteron ye which for that time was in
ye cite of Jerusalem of whom he enquired diligentli of the state of the
princes of Gaul and of their manner of doing, The which abbot told and cited
unto him truth, wherefore greatly he praised and loved him. Than all wisely
the said abbot of Sainteron demanded of him familiarly the saufconduyt and
acquit for the countries and lands of beyond the sea for him and ye said
squire Ponce the more sureli to return into their countries. The which the
king Cornumerau^t him granted benignly, in presentinge to him larglye of his
goods for the wisdom and the honor of spekinge that he had found in him.
And after their saufconduyte made they took reverently leave of the king and
on the next day in the morning they departed fro the holy city of Jerusalem
and since came unto the port of Iaffe otherwise named Ioppen. And fro thens
mounted upon ye sea and after by valeis and mountains they went till they
arrived within Rome.

How the abbot of Saincteron and ye squyre Ponce departed fro Rome at their
retournyng fro the holy sepulcre. And since by the will of god they arrived at ye
new castle of Boulyon. Ca. xl.
Ponce.

The curat



AFter that Gyrarde the abbot of Saincteron, and the squyre Ponce had done
their deuocions within the cite of Jerusalem they departed diligently for to
return into their country. And even as they were in the feeldes almighti god
(yt alwai does for ye best) would yt they should be wandered of their way. And
in such wise they were fro their way in a place inhabitable that they wist not
what to think, So it happened that after mani travails pains, and labaurs
they arrived nigh to the said castle of Boulyon that the good Helyas had newly
made to edify after the form and construccion of the other Boulion toward
Dardayne. wherefore Ponce said to the abbot. Certes my lord hear is Boulyon,
we ben in our country. In our country said ye abbot I trow yt it lacks a
great deal. Certainly my lord said ponce, yet is this castle like and of the
same form of it named Boulyon, and I believe that he that made it had intecion
so to do. And after al these words because the night came on, they went and
lodged them in a vyllage nigh enough to the said castle. And in their lodgis
they sent for the curat of the vyllage for to wit of him in what place and in
what country they were arrived. Truly lords said the curat, you have passed the
greatest forest of Dardeyne and ben presently arrived nigh to the castle of
Boulyon. Now said the abbot we ben of the country yt ye name, and it is
well.CC. leges fro hens. It is troth my lord said ye curate, I have be in the
country yt he speak of. But for to declare you ye troth the Castle yt ye
have seen is called Boulyon le restaure, that is to sai restored, for that a
noble and virtuous knight named Helias son to the mighty king Oryant and of
the queen Beatryce his spouse went in a ship upon the guyding of a swanne, that
so led him by adventure to Nimaie, were as he wanne a champ of battle against
the earl of Fraokebourke, wherbi the emperor made to give him in marriage the
duchess of boulyon whereof ye speak. In such wise that he was about.viii.
year there and than after he returned into his realwe of Lilefort by ye leding
of the swanne aforesaid. And at his coming he did do make this castle and
named it boulyon as the other and the forest about it dardayne. And wha^ ponce
herad him speak so he wist well that he should have certain tidi^gs of yt he
desired, whereof he thanked our lord, and than without making semblaunt he said to
the curate. Good sir ye king and the queen yt ye say to be father and mother
of ye knight ben they now abydyng in the castle: Certes sir said he ye For they
loved so much the said Helyas their son that they have left Lilefort and
ben comen to dwell here for the love of him And the noble knight said Ponce yt
ye speak of is he dead: Nay forsooth said there curate, and it is not.vi. days
since I saw him. But for to declare you ye verite, he has be^ during his youth
of so good life that almyghtye god has done and showed mani fair virtues and
divine miracles at his holy prayer and orayson whereby he has mad him
religious. And is now in a deuote religion yt his father has edified for the
honor of god and in ye co^memoracion of him and his brethren, where as he
prays god and does penance for to save his soul. Verily said ye squire I am
all rejoiced in this yt ye say. wherefore said ye curat? For I was said he
servant to the said Helias that was duke of boulion, and am yet servant to
the duchess his wife, the which has sent me i^to many countries for to seche
him and thanked be god I have heard of him. And so-Ponce abode merry there al
night. And on the morn the abbot and he went to the said castle. wherein at
coming fro the mass they met king Oriant. the queen, their.v. sons and
their daughter. And when Emeri the last transmued son of the king saw them
and had known their habit he came to them and made them chere asking the^ of
whens they were. And Ponce said* My lord we ben of Boulio^ in ye land of
Dardein. And what do you in these parties said Emery. Sir said Ponce, it is
long sith I cesedret to go i^ many countries and regions, as well on this side
as beyond ye se for to find a noble knight yt a swa^ne quided and led out
of boulyon, when he left his wife the noble duchess of Boulyon, whose servant
I am. And when Emery heard him he began to laugh, Certes my friend it is my
brother Helias. My lord said Ponce, lives he yet: Yea truly my friend said
Emery, and ye shall se him if god will or ye pass this country. I pray you
thereof said Ponce. Than Emery called the king, the queen, his brethren, and his
sister and say. Certainly if ye will hear any tidinges of the duchess of
Boulyon my brothers wife, and of Ydan his noble daughter, here be^ to notable
lords, that be^ of the same countrei. And forthwt they came to Ponce, the
which recyted to them the contency of the noble duchess of Boulion yt was
meruailously soroful for that her good husband Helias had left her. And of her
noble daughter Ydaine, of whom he told them to have received certain
tidinges yt she was married to the mighti earl of Boulein Than said the king and
the queen, would god yt they were here. And therwt they enbraced and kissed ye
abbot and ponce. And than he led them into the castle, where they were feasted
and served of the king sons and other barons. In ye which chere they
soiourned a whole day in visiting all ye places of the castle. And on the
morrow the noble Emery led the abbot of Saintero^ and the good squire Ponce to
the place where as his brother Helias was relygious. And there his brother
Emery found him kneeling on his knees before the high altar in the church.
So he salued hi^ humbli. And reuerenli he yielded him his salute in saying Fair
brother Emeri, what is there of new: Brother said Emery. Here ben two notable
lords that I bring you. The which will tell you tidinges of your wife ye
duchess of Boulyon and of your daughter ydain, yt is married to the earl of
Boleyn. Tha^ Helias knew ponce for he had before seen him. wherefore humbly he
came and enbraced and kissed him saying. My freende ye be welcome, tell me if
it please you some tidinges of my wife, and of my daughter ydain. And than he
told him how she had sent him into many countrees, and of his adventures sith
his departing And than he asked him if he would return into his country of
Boulion. Certes said Helias, nay. For never by ye will of god shall I depart
fro this regyon where as I pretend to save my soul be his holy and worthy
grace. certes my lord said he, I am right glade to see you, and also mi ladi
shall be greatli reioysed for to here of you. My friend said Helyas ye shall
recommaunde me singulerli to her good grace. and also to my daughter ydain. Of
whom I am right joyous yt she is honourabli married with ye noble earl of
Boulion. And than in weeping he took the abbot of Sainteron by the hand and
with Ponce led him to se all the places of his religion. Than with his brother
Emery he made them good chere and fested them greatly and after all these
things the squire Po^ce prayed him humbli of his good pleasure to give him some
true token, whereby the duchess might notably know that he had done his
deuoyre to find him. And Helias said. My friend ye speak wisely. And for a
toke^ of me ye shall bear her this ring. The which or now she gave me right
amerously. Than after the good Helyas gave great gyites to ye abbot and to
Ponce. And with them he sent to his wife and his ^oughter ydain great
treasoures and mani fair gifts Than took they leave humbly of the said Helias
and with his brother Emery they returned to the castle of boulion restaure,
where they were again honorably received. And than king Oryant and ye queen
his wife prepared rich and sumtuous gifts. The which they sent to their
daughter the noble duchess of Boulyon, and also to her daughter the noble
countess of Boleon, in recommaunding them singulerly to their good grace. Tha^
the abbot of saincteron and the squyre Ponce took reuere^tly their leave of the
noble king Oriant, and of the queen his wife and of al their court, and
departed fro the^ for to retourn into their country, in the place of Boulyon
i^ Dardayn^

How the squyre Ponce arrived at Boulyon for to bear tydinges to the duchess of
the noble Helias knight of the swanne, the which was at that time yolden a
religyous. Ca. xli.


Upon a day of the feast of the ascencyon of our lord Jesus christ as ye earl
of Boulyo^, his wife ydain, and the noble Duchess her mother with many other
lords and damoyselles were sytting at the table and held court plenayre by
manner of consolacion, arrived Ponce the noble squyre at the castle of Boulyon,
the which led a mule charged with diverse gifts and rich presents and came
into the halle whereas was the feast aforesaid. And incontinent yt the noble
duchess apperceyued him she arose fro the table, and cam^ tenderly enbracing
him and said. My freende Ponce ye be right welcome. Have ye found my husband
or can ye any tidinges of him. Cyrtes madame said Ponce. yea? By the same
tooken that here is his ring that he gave me to bear to you. And when she saw
the ring she was al rejoiced, and kiss it mo than an.C. times, in weeping and
bewayl^ng piteously the abscence of her good and faithful husband Helyas, and
than said. Truley Ponce my freende this is a good tooken that ye have found
him. Madame said he highli I have also brought a mule charged with many notable
gifts and rich presents that he and his mighty parents have sent to you.
and to my ladi the countess ydain your noble daughter. For I do you notably
to wit that he is son of the right puyssant and redoubted king of Lylefort
named Oriant, and of the illustred and noble queen Beatrice his wife And eke he
has five noble brethren and all valiant knights. And he has also a fair
sister, and shortly he is of right great kine of these words was greatly
inioyed ye duchess his wi^e his daughter and the noble earl, i^ such wise yt
they wept for joy yt they had at their hertes to here such good tidinges.
Than the said Ponce recited to them that he was religious in a fair abbai that
his father and he had made to constyt^e and edify for the honor of god. And
how he had seen all with the abbot of Sainteron, in retourning fro the holy
cite of Jerusalem. where upon says the cro^icle and gest of this myraculous
history that wha^ ye noble duchess of Boulyon knew and understood that her
good husband helias was yolden religious, she made incontinent to prepare her
estate. And with her daughter ydayn she set her on the way with the said Ponce,
which they took for to guide the^ to the religion where he had found the good
Helyas Than took they leave of the noble earl of Bolyon in recommaunding him
his three sons Godfrey, Baudwin, and Eustace. the which were all ready in age
adolescent. And after they departed fro Boulyon and trauayled so long by
mountains and valees that they came to the place of religion where as the
noble Helias was yolden religious Than the noble duchess his wife with her
daughter ydain demanded so much after him that they came and found him lieng
in a bed right sore sick And god knows than in what joy they beheld each
other The wife be wept her husband, ye daughter bewailed her father. And he on
ye other side wept tenderly to se there his wife and his daughter, so that all
they that beheld them wept for sorrow and pity. And after that they had be^
there a space of time, the good Helias was so sike a weyke of pains and
trauayles that he had sustained in his yough that holili and deuoutli he
desceased in our lord Jesus Christ, the which called him to be with him for to
reward him for ye pains and grievous, vexacions that he had suffered and
wyllyngli borne at his holy and dyuine commandment and to give him space in
the glory pardurable with the happi sainetes of the realm of paradyse, And
when the duchess saw her husband dead, she was so sorrowful at her heart that
she disceased with him in our lord. wherefore her noble daughter, ydain and all
the lords and da^oyselles yt were come^ with her made such sorrow ye pity was
to see. And after al things all the religious of the said abbay assembled them
and honestly with great reverence they buried ye noble Helias and his wife in
one tomb before the high altar of the church. And their service was well and
devoutly done as it apperteined to their estate. Tha^ the noble ydain departed
and gave much of her goods to the said abbaye for the honor of god and for
the love of her father and mother the which there were engraued. and so
departed fro ye place with her folk, and returned into her country and duchy
of bonlion where as she found Eustace her noble husband. To who^ she recited
in weeping how her good father and mother were discesed in our lord, and both
buried together by y^ divine will. And wha^ the said Eustace her husband heard
these tidinges he was much sorrowful and dolen at his heart. And he with his
wife and all his household did bear the doole as long as it was expedient for
such a noble prince.

How Ydain the noble duchess of Boulyon end^ctryned her three sons, Godfrey,
Baudwyn, and Eustace in all manner of good operacyons, virtues, and manners, Ca.
xlii.
Godfrey.

Baudwin.

Eustace.



AFter that ye noble ydain duchess of Boulyon was returned into her countrei
she kept syngulerly her three sons Godfrey, Baudwin and Eustace. which she
made to be instruct by a wise master. And she herself endoctryned. them in
all good manners and honest of life saying Alwai above all things give laud
and glory to god i^ all your works, and said. My children ye ought to know yt
ye be extract and issued of a lignage as noble and virtuous as is possible to
be. That is to wete of the noble knight of the swanne son of the puyssaunt
king Oryant and of ye good queen Beatryce his spouse. And ye have.v. kings
and a queen of your excellent and illustryous parent. The which all
myraculously and by ye announcement of an aungel have been producte in valor
and you also in likewise. And therefore than my fair children abide always in
the fear and love of god our sovereign protector in giving him laud and
honor. Be swet, soft, and curteys to your subgectes without oppressyng or
domaginge them in any wise if ye be able and possible to reedifie the churches
of god, and offer willingly your own bodies insacrifice in susteyning the holy
faith catholyke. Keep and defend Justly your country. Bear and sustain the
right of poor widows and orphelins. Distribute and deele of your gooddes to
the nedy, conforte the sorrowful, and think for to save your souls for to
have ye grace of god. And I promise you my children that if ye govern you thus
ye shall prospere in this world and have heaven at your end. And in this manner
where by their good mother ydain devoutly introduct and taught these three young
sons godfrey, Bauwyn and Eustace the, which were al way together in their
youth, often times to remember the good and helthfull doctrine that she had
given them. And semblably also they were by their notable scole master
suffyciently enstructe in science and in all good manners.

How the three noble brethren Godfrey, Baudwyn, and Eustace appropried and used
them in all manner of noble games and assayes of worthynesse. Ca. xliii.


ANd when in there adolescence they were somewhat comen to the age of strength,
they beg i^ to practyse them in shootinge with their bow and arbelstre, to
play with the sword and Buckeler, to run, to Just, to play with a poll axe,
And to wrestle. And began to bear harneys, to run horses and to approve the^
as desyringe to be good and faithful knights to sustain the faith of god. And
thus they grew al three in strength and height meruaylously and in such wise
that of their age was none found like to them they were fair and well fourmed
of body, wise, curteys, and well taught. They served god gladli, they made
them to be beloved of great and small And echone honored the^ echone gave them
benediccion, and also they gate grace of great Princes and noble Lords. And
when Godfrye the first borne was comen to the age of.xv. years accomplisshed
his good mother Ydain made to dispose and put him in point as to him well
apperteined for to go to Nimaie to the emperor for to receive the order of
knight hode, and said to him. My fair son Godfres ye be the eldest of your
brethren and are of age competent for to be knight, wherefore here is a robe of
honor the which I have diligently prepaired for you to receive the noble
degree and virtuous title. Your squires and pages ben well appointed of
liuerayes to you apperteyning, and all they of yours also. wherefore ye shall go
into the city of Nimaie to the emperor the which has good knowledge of you
because of your grant father the noble and virtuous knight of the swanne, and
my good mother his wife, whose soul^s god pardon. And so of hi^ you shall be made
knight in giui^g you the swearde of honor. And your two brethren shall go with
you for to bear you company. And than answered Godfrey My right deary lady and
mother I hertelye thank you wha^ you procure me such honor. And I am al ready
to depart and go toward the emperor at your good commandment. Now go than my
son your case is al ready. And than departed Godfrey of Boulyon mounted upon a
horse of price accompanied of his two brethren, and of many noble and gentill
knights, squires, and pages. The which have riden so long yt they came to
Nimaye. And incontinent the good Godfrey came and pe^ented hem tofore the
emperor, in saluinge him debonayrlye. And he received him gladly and al his
company with good heart saying. Right noble child, and my dear friend, ye be
right hertli welco^e. I know you to be extract and issued of the most noble
and illustrious Helias knight of the swa^ne. Therefore for the love of him and
of your mother his daughter, the which I have married and conjoined i^ my noble
palace by their good consentement wherefore by the pleasure of god I shall adube
you knight or ye depart fro me. Sir said Godfrey, I thank you humbly. And
than the noble emperor made to prepare and ordeyne a sol^mpne feast for the
love of Godfrey of Boulyon. Than incontinent after the feast wree ordained
Iustes, turn me^tes and mani other games and noble feats of arms In the
whichy the noble Godfrei showed him right prue and valiant, in such wise that
by the said Emperor he was made and ordained knight with right great honor
and Joy. And when the feast was passed Godfrey returned honourabli to Boulio^
with his brethren baudwin and Eustace. The which since i^ their age were mad^
noble knights as their brother Godfrey. And thus the^ aryued at Boulyon with
their company, where they were received with great Joy and honor. Than
certain t^ me after their noble father Eustace duke of Boulion an^ earl of
Boleyn disceased in our lord. The which by hi^ grace and mercy have him into
his infinite glory with the holy saynctes and blessed company of heaven. And
thus abode the said Godfrey duke of Boulion, as ye first borne of his
brethren. And he was so good and so prue to right and govern the wealth
publyke, and so polytike i^ keeping his country that he was beloved of every
person. Than began soon after to approach ye time that our Lord God had
ordained for to put and reduce the realm of ye holy land of Jerusalem into
the hands of prue and noble godfrey of Boulyon. In the which time chosen of
god and by his good enhortement should be united and congregeed the princes of
christendom for to pass over the sea and sustain the faith of god Jesus
christ against the misbeleuinge paynims As it is written and recited in the
cronicles and faytes of the said Godfrey and his brethren. And al by ye will of
god ye which exalts his friends in this world and after their bodily death
brings them to ye life everlasting of heaven. To the which bring us, the
father, ye son and the holy ghost. Amen.

Thus ends ye life and myraculous hystory of the most noble and illustryous
Helyas knight of the swanne with the birth of ye excellent knight Godfrey of
Boulyo^, one of the nine worthiest, and the last of the three chryst^n
Imprinted at London by me Wyllyam Copland.


