SPEECHES DELIVERED TO HER MAJESTY THIS LAST PROGRESS, AT THE Right Honorable
the Lady RVSSELS, at Bissam, the Right Honorable the Lord CHANDOS at Sudley,
at the Right Honorable the Lord NORRIS, at Ricorte.

printer's device of Joseph Barnes, McKerrow 336: "The arms of the University
of Oxford" AC: OX



At Oxforde, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1592.

TO THE READER.
I GATHERED these copies in loose papers I know not how imperfect, therefore
must I crave a double pardon; of him that penned them, and those that read
them. The matter of small moment, and therefore the offense of no great danger.

I. B.

At the top of the Hill going to Bissam, the Cornets sounding in the Woods, a
wild man came forth and uttered this speech.

I Followed this sound, as enchanted; neither knowing the reason why, nor how
to be rid of it: unusual to these Woods, and (I fear) to our gods
prodigious. Syluanus whom I honor, is run into a Cave: Pan, whom I envy,
courting of the Shepherdess: Envy I thee Pan? No, pity thee, an eie-sore to
chaste Nymphs; yet still importunate: Honor thee Syluanus? No, contemn thee:
fearful of Music in the Woods, yet counted the god of the Woods. I, it may
be more stout, than wise, asked, who passed that way? what he or she? none
durst answer, or would vouchsafe, but passionate Echo, who said She. And
She it is, and you are She, whom in our dreams many years we Satyrs have
seen, but waking could never find any such. Every one has told his dream
and described your person, all agree in one, and set down your virtues: in
this only did we differ, that some said your Pourtraiture might be drawn,
other said impossible: some thought your virtues might be numbered, most said
they were infinite: Infinite, and impossible, of that side was I: and first in
humility to salute you most happy I: my untamed thoughts wax gentle, and I
feel in my self ciuility, A thing hated, because not known, and unknown,
because I knew not you. Thus Virtue tameth fierceness, Beauty, madness. Your
Majesty on my knees will I follow, bearing this Club, not as a Saluage, but to
beat down those that are.


At the middle of the Hill sat Pan, and two Virgins keeping sheep, and sowing
in their Samplers, where her Majesty stayed and heard this.

Pan. Pretty souls and bodies too, fair shephardisse, or sweet Mistress, you
know my suite, love, my virtue, Music, my power, a godhead. I cannot tickle
the sheep gutts of a Lute, bydd, bydd, bydd, like the calling of Chickins,
but for a Pipe that squeeketh like a Pigg, I am he. How do you burn time, and
drown beauty in pricking of clouts, when you should be penning of Sonnets?
You are more simple then the sheep you keep, but not so gentle. I love you
both, I know not which best, and you both scorn me, I know not which most.
Sure I am, that you are not so young as not to understand love, nor so wise as
to withstand it, unless you think your selves greater tha^ gods, whereof I am
one. How often have I brought you Chestnuts for a love token, and desired but
acceptance for a favor. Little did you know the misterye, that as the husk
was thornye and tough, yet the meat sweet, so though my hyde were rough and
unkempt, yet my heart was smooth and loving: you are but the Farmers daughters
of the Dale, I the god of the flocks that feed upon the hills. Though I cannot
force love, I may obedience, or else send your sheep a wandering, with my
fancies. Coyness must be revenged with curstness, but be not agaste sweet
mice, my godhead comes so fast upon me, that Majesty had almost ouerru^n
affection, Can you love? Will you?


Syb. Alas poor Pan, look how he looks Sister, fitter to draw in a Harvest
wayne, then talk of love to chaste Virgins, would you have us both?


Pan. I, for often I have heard, that two Pigeons may be caught with one bean.


Isab. And two Woodcocks with one sprindge.


Syb. And many Dotterels with one dance.


Isab. And all fools with one fair word.


Nay, this is his meaning; as he has two shapes, so has he two hearts, the one
of a man wherewith his tongue is tipped, dissembling; the other of a beast,
wherewith his thoughts are poisoned, lust. Men must have as many loves, as
they have hart-strings, and study to make an Alphabet of mistresses, from A.
to Y. which makes them in the end cry, Ay. Against this, experience has
provided us a remedy, to laugh at them when they know not what to say, and
when they speak, not to believe them.

Pan. Not for want of matter, but to know the meaning, what is wrought in this
sampler?


Syb. The follies of the Gods, who became beasts, for their affections.


Pan. What in this?


Isa. The honor of Virgins who became Goddesses, for their chastity.


Pan. But what be these?


Syb. Men's tongues, wrought all with double stitch but not one true.


Pan. What these?


Isa. Roses, Egle^tine, harts-ease, wrought with Queens stitch, and all right.


Pan. I never hard the odds between men's tongues, and weomens, therefore they
may be both double, unless you tell me how they differ.


Syb. Thus, weomens tongues are made of the same flesh that their hearts are,
and speak as they think: Men's hearts of the flesh that their tongues, and both
dissemble, But prythy Pan be packing, thy words are as odious as thy fight and
we attend a fight which is more glorious, then the sun rising.


Pan. What does Jupiter come this ways?


Syb. No, but one that will make Jupiter blush as guilty of his unchaste
iugglings, and Juno dismaide as wounded at her Majesty. What our mother has
often told us, and fame the whole world, cannot be concealed from thee; if it
be, we will tell thee, which may hereafter make thee surcease thy suite, for
fear of her displeasure, and honor virginitye, by wondering at her virtues.


Pan. Say on sweet soul?


Syb. This way comes the Queen of this Islande, the wonder of the world, and
natures glory, leading affections in fetters, Virginities slaves: embracing
mildnes with Justice, Majesty's twinns. In whom nature has imprinted beauty,
not art painted it; in whom wit has bred learning, but not without labor;
labor brought forth wisdom, but not without wonder. By her it is (Pan) that
all our Carttes that thou see, are laden with Corn, when in other countries
they are filled with Harneys, that our horses are led with a whipp: theirs
with a Lance, that our Rivers flow with fish, theirs with blood: our cattle
feed on pastures, they feed on pastures like cattle: One hand she stretches
to France, to weaken Rebels; the other to Flaunders, to strengthen Religion;
her heart to both Countries, her virtues to all. This is she at whom Envy
has shot all her arrows, and now for anger broke her bow, on whom God has
laid all his blessings, and we for joy clappe our hands, heedlesse treason
goes hedlesse; and close treachery restless: Danger looks pale to behold
her Majesty; and tyranny blusheth to hear of her mercy. Jupiter came into the
house of poor Baucis, and she vouchsafes to visit the bare Farms of her
subjects. We upon our knees, will entreat her to come into the valley, that our
houses may be blessed with her presence, whose hearts are filled with quietness
by her government. To her we wish as many years, as our fields have ears
of corn, both infinite: and to her enemies, as many troubles, as the Wood has
leaves, all intolerable. But whist, here she is, run down Pan the hill in
all have, and though thou break thy neck to give our mother warning, it is no
matter.


Pan. No, give me leave to die with wondering, and trippe you to your mother.
Here I yield all the flocks of these fields to your highness: green be the
grass where you tread: calm the water where you row: sweet the air, where
you breathe: long the life that you live, happy the people that you love: this
is all I can wish. During your abode, no theft shall be in the woods: in the
field no noise, in the valleys no spies, my self will keep all safe: that is
all I can offer. And hear I break my pipe, which Apollo could never make me
do; and follow that sound which follows you.


At the bottom of the hill, entering into the house Ceres with her Nymphs in
an harvest Cart, meet her Majesty, having a Crown of wheat-ears with a
Jewel, and after this song, uttered the speech following.

Swel Ceres now for other Gods are shrinking,
Pomona pineth,
Fruitless her tree;
Fair Phoebus shines
Only on me.
Conceit does make me smile whilst I am thinking,
How every one does read my story,
How every bough on Ceres lowreth,
Cause heavens plenty on me powers,
And they in leaves do only glory,
All other Gods of power bereuen,
Ceres only Queen of heaven.
With Robes and flowers let me be dressed.
Cynthia that shines,
Is not so clear,
Cynthia declineth,
When I appear,
Yet in this I Will she reigns as blessed,
And every one at her does wonder,
And in my ears still fond fame whispers,
Cynthia shall be Ceres Mistres,
But first my Carre shall riue asunder,
Help Phoebus help my fall is sudden,
Cynthia, Cynthia, must be sovereign.
GReater then Ceres, receive Ceres Crown, the ornament of my plenty, the
honor of your peace, here at your highness feet, I lay down my feined deity,
which Poets have honored, truth contemned. To your Majesty whom the heavens
have crowned with happiness, the world with vvonder, birth with dignity, nature
with perfection, we do all Homage, accounting nothing ours but what comes
from you. And this much dare we promise for the Lady of the farm, that your
presence has added many days to her life, by the infinite ioies she
conceyues in her heart, who presents your highness with this toye and this
short prayer, poured from her heart, that your days may increase in happiness,
your happiness have no end till there be no more days.


At her Majesty's entrance into the Castle, an old Shepherd spoke this saying.

VOuchsafe to hear, a simple Shephard, shephards and simplicity cannot part,
your highness is come into Cotshold, an vneue^ country, but a people, that carry
their thoughts level with their fortunes, low spirits, but true hearts,
using plain dealinge, once counted a Jewel now beggary, these hills afoorde
nothing but cottages, and nothing can we present to your highness, but
shephards. The country healthy, and harmeles, a fresh aier, where there are noe
dampes, and where a black sheep is a perilous beast, no monsters, we carry our
hearts, at our tongues ends, being as far from dissembling, as our sheep from
fierceness, and if in any thing, we shall chance to discover our leudnes, it
will be in over boldness, in gazinge at you, who fills our hearts with joy, and
our eyes with wonder, as for the honorable Lord and Lady of the Castle, what
happiness they conceive, I would it were possible for them selves to express,
then should your Majesty see, that al outward enterteinment, were but a
smoke rising from their inward affections, which as they cannot be seen,
being in the heart, so can they not be smoothred, appearing in their
countenance, this lock of wool Cotsholdes best fruit, and my poor gift, I
offer to your highness, in which nothing is to be esteemed, but the whitenes,
virginities color, nor to be expected but duetye, shepards religion.


Sunday, Apollo running after Daphne, a Shepherd followed uttering this.

Nescis temeraria; nescis,
Quem fugias; idioque fugis.
A short tale, but a sorrowful, a just complaint, but remedelesse, I loved,
(for shephardes have their Saints) long I loved (for beauty binds prentices)
a Nymph most fair and as chaste as fair, yet not more fair, then I unhappy,
Apollo who calls him self a god (a title among men, when they will commit
injuries) term themselves gods, pursued my Daphne with bootelesse love, and
me, with endless hate, her he woed; with fair words, the flatteries of men,
with great gifts, the sorceries of gods, with cruel threats, the terrefiing
of weak damsels Nec prece nec pretio nec mouet ille minis. me; he terrified
with a monstrous word metamorphosing, saying that he would turn me into a
woolfe and of a shepherd make me a sheepe-biter, or into a Cockatrice and
cause mine eyes which gazed on her, to blind hers which made mine dazell, or to
a molde that I should hear his flattering speech, but never behold her fair
face, tantaene animis caelestibus irae? sometimes would he allure her with
sweet music, but harmony is harsh when it is lusts broaker, often with
promise of immortality, but chastetye is of it self immortal, ever pursuing
her with swiftnes, but virtue tying wings to the thoughts of Virgins, swiftnes
becomes surbated; thus lived he twixt love and ielousy; I twixt love and
danger; she twixt fear and virtue. At last and alas, this day I fear of all
my joys the last, I cannot as a Poet (who describing the morning, and before
he tell what it is, make it night,) stand on the time, love coyneth no
circumloquutions, but by the sun, a Shepheardes Dial, which goes as true as
our hearts, it was four of the clock, when she flying from his treason was
turned into a tree; which made me stand, as though I had been turned into a
stone, and Apollo so enchanted as wounded with her loss, or his own crueltye,
the fingers which were wont to play on the Lute, found no other instrument
then his own face, the goulden hair the pride of his head pulde off in
locks and stamped at his feet, his sweet voice, turned to howling; and there
sits he, (long may he sorrow,) wondering, and weeping, and kissing the
laurel, his late love, and mine ever. Pleases your Majesty to view the
melancholy of Apollo, my distress, and Daphnes mischance, it may be the sight
of so rare perfection, will make him die for grief, which I wish, or Daphne
return to her old shape, which must be your wounder; if neither, it shall
content me that I have revealed my griefs, and that you may behold his.


This speech ended, her Majesty saw Apollo with the tree, having on the one
side one that sung, on the other one that plaide.

SIng you, play you, but sing and play my truth,
This tree my Lute, these sighs my notes of ruth:
The Laurel leaf for ever shall be green,
And chastety shall be Apolloes Queen.
If gods may dye, here shall my tomb be plaste,
And this engraven, fond Phoebus, Daphne chaste.

After these verses, the song.

MY heart and tongue were twins, at once conceived,
The eldest was my heart, borne dumb by destenie,
The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts bereaved,
Yet strung and tunde, to play hearts harmony.
Both knit in one, and yet asunder placed,
What heart would speak, the tongue does still discover,
What tongue does speak, is of the heart embraced,
And both are one to make a new found lover:
New found, and only found in Gods and Kings,
Whose words are deeds, but deeds nor words regarded:
Chaste thoughts do mount and fly with swiftest wings,
My love with pain, my pain with loss rewarded:
Engraue upon this tree, Daphnes perfection,
That neither men nor gods, can force affection.

The song ended, the tree riued, and Daphne issued out, Apollo ran after,
with these words.

NImpha mane, per me concordant carmina neruis.
Fair Daphne stay, too chaste because too fair,
Yet fairer in mine eyes, because so chaste,
And yet because so chaste, must I despair?
And to despair, I yielded have at last.
Shepherd possess thy love, for me too cruel,
Possess thy love, thou know not how to measure,
A dunghill cock does often find a Jewel,
Enjoying that, he knows not to be treasure.
When broomy bearde, to sweep thy lips presume,
When on thy neck, his rough hewn arms shall move,
And gloate on thee with eyes that drizell reume,
When that his toothlesse mouth shall call thee love,
Noght will I say of him, but pity thee,
That btauty might, but would no wiser be.

Daphne running to her Majesty vttred this.

I stay, for whether should chastety fly for succor, but to the Queen of
chastety, by thee was I enterred in a tree, that by craft, way might be made
to lust, by your highness restored, that by virtue, there might be assurance in
honor: these tables, to set down your praises long since Sibillas prophesies I
humbly present to your Majesty, not thinking, that your virtues can be
deciphered in so slight a volume, but noted; the whole world is drawn in a
small map, Homers Illiades in a nutshel, and the riches of a Monarch, in a
few ciphers, and so much ods, betwext explaining of your perfections, and the
touching, as is betwixt painting and thinking, the one, running over a little
table in a whole day, the other over the whole world in a minute, with this
vouchsafe a poor virgins wish, that often wish for good husbands, mine, only
for the endless prosperity of my sovereign.


The verses, written in the tables which were given to her Majesty.

LET fame describe your rare perfection,
Let nature paint your beuties glory,
Let love engraue your true affection,
Let wonder write your virtues story,
By them and Gods must you be blazed,
Suffices men they stand amazed.
The third day should have been presented to her Majesty, the high
Constable of Cotsholde but the weather so unfit, that it was not. But this it
should have been, one clothed all in sheepes-skins, face and all spoke this by
his interpreter.

MAy it please your highness, this is the great Constable and commandadore of
Cotsholde, he speaks no language, but the Rammish tongue, such sheepishe
governors there are, that can say no more to a messenger then he, (Bea), this
therefore, as signifying his duty to your Majesty, and al our desires, I am
commanded to be his interpreter, or shepherds star, pointing directly to
Cotshold, and in Cotshold, to Sudley, made us expect some wonder, and of the
eldest, ask some counsel, it was resolved by the ancientst, that such a one
should come, by whom all the shepherds should have their flocks in safety,
and their own lives, all the country quietness, and the whole world
astonishment: our Constable commands this day to be kept holliday, all our
shepherds are assembled, and if shepherds pastimes may please, how joyful
would they be if it would please you to see them; which if you vouchsafe not,
as pastimes too mean for your Majesty, they mean to call this day the
shepherds black day; in all humility we entreat, that you would cast an eye
to their rude devices, and an ear to their harshe words, and if nothing
happen to be pleasing, the amends is, nothing shall be tedious.


After this speech her Majesty was to be brought among the shepherds among
whom was a King and a Queen to be chosen and thus they began.

Melibaeus. Nisa. Cutter of Cootsholde. Mel. CVT the Cake, who has the bean;
shall be King, and where the peaze is, she shall be Queen.


Nis. I have the peaze, and must be Queen.


Mel. I the bean and King, I must cammaunde.


Nis. Not so, the Queen, shall and must command, for I have often heard of a
King that could not command his subjects, and of a Queen that has
commanded Kings.


Mel. I yield, yet is it within compass of my authority to ask questions and
first I will begin with you in love, I mean Shepheardes love, for I will not
meddle with Gentlefolkes love, which is most constant, the man or the woman?


Nis. It is no question, no more then if you should ask whether on a steep
hill, a square stone, or a globe stood most steddye.


Mel. Both loving, which is most loving?


Nis. The woman if she have her right, the man, if he be his own Judge.


Mel. Why does the man ever vvoe the woman, the woman never the man?


Nis. Because men are most amorous and least chaste, women careless of fond
affections, and when they embrace them, fearful. But unless your questions
were vviser, I command you to silence. You sir, that sit as though your
wits were a vvoole-gathering will you have a question, or a commandment?


Cut. No question of a Queen, for they are hard to be answered, but any
commandment, for that must be obeyed.


Nis. Then sing, and you sir, a question, or commaundment?


Do. A commaundment I, and glad that I am?


Nis. Then play:


Do. I have plaide so long with my fingers that I have beaten out of play al my
good fortunes

The Song.
Herbs, words, and stones, all maladies have cured,
Herbs, words, and stones, I used when I loved,
Herbs smells, words, wind, stones hardness have procured,
By stones, nor words, nor herbs her mind was moved;
I asked the cause, this was a woman's reason,
Among herbs are weeds, and thereby are refused,
Deceit, as well as truth speaks words in season,
False stones by foiles have many one abused,
I sight, and then she said my fancy smoaked,
I gazed, she said my looks were follies glauncing,
I sounded dead, she said my love was choked,
I started up, she said my thoughts were dancing,
O sacred love if thou have any Godhead,
Teach other rules to win a maidenheade.

Mel. Well song, and well plaide, seldom so well among shepherds, but call me
the Cutter of Cotsholde, that looks as though he only knew his leripoope,
amorous he is, and wise, carrying a sheep eye in a calves head.


Nis. Will you 3 questions, or 3 commaundments?


Cut. Half a dozen of each. My wits work like new bear, and they will
break my head, unless it vent at the mouth.


Nis. Sing,


Cut. I have forsworn that since cuckow-time, for I heard, one sing all the
summer, and in the winter was all balde.


Nis. Play on the Lute.


Cut. Taylers craft, a knock on the knuckles, will make one fast a fortnight,
my belly and back shall not be retainers to my fingers.


Nis. What question shall I ask?


Cut. Any so it be of love.


Nis. Are you amorous?


Cut. No, but fantastical.


Nis. But what is love?


Cut. A single Accidens. In love there are eight parts. Joy Hope Truth
Co^sta^cy
all tolerable. Sorrow Anger Jealousy Despair
all intolerable.

These contain all, till you come to the rules, and then in love, there are
three concords. 1 The first, betwixt a Bacheler, and a maid, 2 The second,
betwixt a man and his wife, 3 The third, betwixt any he and she, that loves
straggling.



Nis. The fool bleeds, it is time to stopp his vain, for having wet his
foot, he cares not how deep he wades. Let us atte^d that, which we most
expect. the starr, that directs us hither, who has in Almanacke?


Cut. What mean you, a starmonger, the quipper of the firmament, here is one.
I ever carry it, to know the hye ways, to every good town, the faires,
and the fair weather.


Mel. Let me see it. The seventh of September, happiness was borne into the
world, it may be the eleventh is some wonder. The moon at the full, it is true,
for Cynthia never shined so bright, the twelfth the weather inclined to
moisture and shepherds devises to dryenes, the thirteenth, summer, goes from
hence, the sign in virgo, viuat clarissimae virgo. The diseases shall be
melancholies, some proceeding of necessity, some of superfluity, many shall be
studying how to spend what they have, more, beating their brains to get what
they want. Malice shall be more infectious then the pestilence, and Drones more
favored then Ants, as for Bees, they shall have but their labor for their
pains, and when their combs be full, they shall be stilde; the war shall be,
twixt hemlocke and honey. At four of the clock this day, shall appear the
worlds wonder that leads England into every land, and brings all lands into
England.


Then espying her Majesty, he and all the shepherds kneeling, concluded thus.

THis is the day, this the hour, this the star, pardon dread Sovereign,
poor shepherds pastimes, and bold shepherds presumptions. We call our
selves Kings and Queens to make mirth, but when we see a King or Queen, we
stand amazed. The sun warmes the earth, yet loses no brightness; but shows
more force, and Kings names that fall upon shepherds, loose no dignity, but
breed more fear. Their pictures are drawn in colors, and in brass their
portraytures engraven. At chests, there are Kings, and Queens, and they of
wood. Shepherds are no more, nor no less, woodde^. In Theaters, artificers
have plaide Emperors, yet the next day forgotten, neither their duties nor
occupations. For our boldenes in borrowing their names, and in not seeing your
Majesty for our blindness, we offer these shepherds weeds, which, if your
Majesty vouchsafe at any time to wear, it shall bring to our hearts comfort,
and happiness to our labors.


The 28. of September, her Majesty went from Oxforde to Ricort, where an old
gentleman, sometimes a soldier, delivered this speech.
VOVCHSAFE dread sovereign, after so many smooth speeches of Muses, to hear a
rough hewn tale of a soldier, we use not with words, to amplify our
conconceites, and to plead faith by figures, but by deeds, to show the
loyalty of our hearts, and to make it good with our lives. I mean not to
recount any service, all proceeding of duty, but to tell your Majesty, that I
am past al service, save only devotion. My horse, mine armor, my shield, my
sword, the riches of a young soldier, and an old soldiers relics, I
should here offer to your highness, but my four boys have stolen them from
me, vowing themselves to arms, and leaving me to my prayers, fortune gives
success, fidelitye courage, chance cannot blemish faith, nor truth prevent
destinye, whateuer happen, this is their resolution, and my desire, that their
lives may, be employed wholly in your service, and their deaths, be their
vows sacrifice. Their deaths, the rumor of which, has so often affrighted
the Crow my wife, that her heart, has been as black as her feathers. I know
not whether it be affection, or fondnes, but the crow thinks her own birds
the fairest, because to her they are dearest. What ioies we both conceive,
neither ca^ express, suffices they be, as your virtues, infinite. And
although, nothing be more unfit to lodge your Majesty, then a crows neste,
yet shall it be most happy to us, that it is by your highness, made a Phoenix
neste. Quicolor ater erat, nunc est contrarius atro. Vouchsafe this trifle, A
fair gown.
and with this my heart, the greatest gift I can offer, and the chiefest, that
I ought.


On Sunday, her Majesty going to the garden, received with sweet Music of
sundry sorts, the old Gentleman meeting her, said thus.

PArdon dread Sovereign, the greatness of my presumption, who having nothing to
say, must follow still to wonder, but saft, some news out of Irelande.


A letter delivered by an Irish lacque, in which was enclosed, a Darte of gold,
set with Diamonds, and after the letter read, delivered to her Majesty, with
this motto in Irish, I fly only for my sovereign.
MY deuty humbly remembered. It is said, the wind is unconstant, I am glad
it is, otherwise had not I heard that, which I most wished, and least looked
for. The wind blowing stiffly in the weste, on the sudden turned easterly, by
which means I received letters, that her Majesty would be at Rycort,
nothing could happen to me more happy, unless it were my self to be thereto
do my duty. But I am a stranger in mine own country, and almost unknown to
my bestfrends, only remembered by her Majesty, whose late favors, have made
me more than fortunate. I should accu^ot my ten years absence a flatt
banishment, were I not honored in her Majesty's service, which has bound all
my affections, prentises to patience. In all humility, I desire this Dart to be
delivered, an Irish weapon, and this wish of an English heart, that in whose
heart faith is not fastened, a Darte may. I can scarce write for joy, and it is
likely, this lacque cannot speak for wondering. If he do not, this is all that
I should say, that my life is my duties bondsman, duty my faiths sovereign.


The Dart delivered, a skipper coming from Flaunders, delivered another
letter, with a key of gold, set with Diamonds with, this motto in dutch, I
only open to you.

MY duty remembered, The enemy of late has made many braueadoes, even to the
gates of Ostend, but the success was only a flourish. My self walking on the
Ra^parts, to over see the Sentenels, descryed a pink, of whom I enquired,
where the Court was, he said he knew not, but that the 28. of September, her
Majesty would be at Rycort. I was ouer-ioyed, and in making haste to remember
my duty, I had almost forgot it, for I was shipping my self for England, with
this Skipper, but to come without leave, might be to return without welco^e.
To signify that my heart is there, I most humbly entreat, that this Key may be
presented, the Key of Ostende, and Ostend the Key of Flaunders, the wards are
made of true hearts, treachery cannot counterfeit the Key, nor treason her self
pick the lock. None shall turn it, but who^ her Majesty commands, none can.
For my self, I can but wish, all happiness to her highness, and any occasion,
that what my tongue delivers, my blood may seal, the end of my service, that in
her service, my life may end.


The Key delivered, a french page came with three other letters, the one written
to the lady Squemish, which being mistaken by a wrong superscription, was read
before her Majesty. In the second was enclosed a sword of gold, set with
Diamonds and Rubyes, with this motto in french, Drawn only in your defense.
In the third was enclosed a trunchio^ set with Diamo^ds, with his motto in
Spanish, I do not command but under you.

A letter, written by a Soldier to his Mistress the Lady Squemish.
Fair Lady and sweet Mistress, I seldom write, because I write not well, if I
speak, you say I chatter, because I speak so fast, and when I am silent, you
think me careless. You say love cannot be in soldiers, I swear it is, only
this the difference, that we prove it by the sword, others, by their Sonets
theirs ink, black for cold, ours blood, read for heat. Often have you
told me, that I know not what love is, and often have I told you, that this
it is, that which makes the head ache, and the heart to; the eyes ielous, and the
ears to, the liver black, and the Splen to, the veins shrink and the purse
to. Wit is but loves wier drawer, making of a short passion an endless
persuasion, yet no more metal. You object, that I have many Mistrisses, I
answer, you have ten times as many servants, and if you should pick a
quarrel, why should not I bring my Mistresses into the field against your
servants? But inconstancy is a soldiers scarre, it is true, but the wound came
by constancy; what a patient virtue is staidnes? like a nail in a door, rusty,
because never removed, I cannot be so superstitious as these nice lovers, who
make the pax of their mistress hands, it is flat popery. I would not purchase love
in fee simple, a lease of two years to me were tedious. I mean not, to have my
tongue ringed at my Mistress ear like a Jewel, always whispering of love, I am
no earewigg, nor can I endure still to gaze on her face, as though my eyes were
bodkins to stick in her hair. Let me have my love answered, and you shall
find me faithful, in which if you make delays, I cannot be patient, the
wind calls me away, and with the wind, away shall my affections.


The second Letter.
MY duty to your L. remembered etc. Being ready to take shipping, I heard
that her Majesty would honor Ricort, with her presence, which wrought no small
content, but to have made it full, I wished I might have seen it. In this place
is no choice of any thing, whereby I might signify my dutiful affection, but
that which a Soldier makes his chiefest choice, a sword, which most humbly I
desire to have presented to her highness. With this protestation pourde from my
heart, that in her service, I will spend the blood of my heart. Eloquence and I,
am vowde enemies, loialty and I, sworn brothers, what my words cannot effect,
my sword shall.


The third Letter from the Sea coast.
MY duty humbly remembered, the same time that I received letters that her
Majesty would be at Ricort, the wind served for Britaigne, I was over ioied
with both, yet stood in a mamering whether I should take the opportunity of
the wind, which I long expected or ride post to do my duty, which I most
desired, necessitye co^troled affection, that bid me unless I could keep the
wind in a bag, to use the winds when they blew, I obaide yet, wishing that
they would turn for a while, to serve my turn, being unfurnished, of al fit
presents. I would have this my excuse that cheapside is not in my Ship, and
therefore have nothing to offer but my Trunchio^ the honor which I received of
her Majesty, by whom I am only to be commanded, and ever else let me be only
miserable and ever.


These Letters read, and the presents delivered, the old man kneeling down
ended thus.

THat my sons, have remembered their duties, it is my hearts comfort, that
your Majesty accepts the^, their hearts heaven. If fortune, and fidelity had
bin twins, they might have been as rich, as faithful, but this is the
Iubyle of my life, that their faithes, are without spot, and your Majesty I
hope, confident, without suspicion. Among my ioies, there is one grief, that
my daughter, the Mistress of a Moole hill, has so much forgotten; that most she
should remember, duty. I doubt not her excuse, because she is a woman, but
fear the truth, of it, because it must be to her sovereign. For my self, my
crow, and all our birds, this I promise, that they are all; as faithful in
their feathers, as they were in their shells.


This being done, there was swcete music, and two sonnets which ended, her
Majesty went in.

On mu^day morning, as her Majesty was to take horse, a messenger, coming out
of Iersey, and bringing a Daysie of gold, set with Rubies, delivered it to her
Majesty with this speech.

AT length, though very late, I am come, from the Lady of the Moold hill,
sent long since, but the passage troublesome, at every miles end, a lover, at
every sentence end a lie, I staide to hear, the conclusions, and found
nutbrowne gyrles to be cheapned. But none to be bought, but the amyable. Thus
much for my excuse, now for my Mistress, who hearing that your Majesty would
enter this cabbine, was astonished, with joy, and doubt, joy, for so great
honor done to her father. Doubt, by what means she might show her duty to
your Majesty. At the last, sitting upon the top of a moole hill, she espied, a
red Daysie, the fairest flower, that barren place does yield, which, with all
humility she presents to your Majesty, it has no sweetenes, yet many
virtues, her heart no tongue, but infinite affections, In you she says are all
virtues, and toward you all her affections.


FINIS.

