CERTAIN BRIEF NOTES UPON A BRIEF APOLOGY SET out under the name of the
Priests united to the Archpriest.

Drawn by an unpassionate secular Priest friend to both parties, but more
friend to the truth.

Whereunto is added a several answer unto the particularites objected
against certain Persons.

FORTE EST VINVM, FORTIOR EST REX, SED SVPER OMNIA VINCIT VERITAS ET MANET IN
AETERNVM. 5. Esd. 3.

Imprinted at Paris, by PETER SEVESTRE.

With Privilege.

NOs subsignati Doctores Theologi Parisienses, ex relatu virorum fide dignorum
testamur Annotationes has grauissimi and litteratissimi Viri D. H. Ely
vtriusque iuris Doctoris peritissimi, in librum quemdam dictum Apologiam etc.
Anglice scriptas, nihil inse continere contra fidem Catholicam aut bonos mores,
sedmulta cognitu dignissima, tractare erudite. In cuius reifidem nomina nostra
apposuimus.

IAC. LANGAEVS. IOH. MVLOT.


A GENERAL PREFACE.
WERE it not a principle well known to all men by the very instinct of
nature, that every one has greater reason to defend his good name, then any
other part off his riches: and that they principally, whose credites are
necessary for the behoof of others, are by the law of God bound thereunto:
I should besorie (I assure thee good Christian reader) to hear of any more
writing of this lamentable subject, of our civil dissension, who ought
(like brethren) to live together in perfect peace and unity. But having read a
most indiscrete and odious Apologye [published under the name of united
Priests in the maintenance of a nevve founded Hierarchy,] which Wandering
far and vvide from the Question in controversy, see^eth occasion to stir in
the vnsauorye puddle of human frailties, such as he deemeth to have happened
among our poor exiled countrymen, for above this twenty years: I could not
(I say having seen such a pitiful piece of work) but esteem him to have
no feelinge of a true English nature in him, that would not be much moved at
that not Only Vnchristianlyke, but uncivil and Barbarous behavior: and
should not also think it very requisyte and necessary, that a reasonable
answer were returned, to preserve and defend our dear countries, and
country men's reputation.

Which has been the cause that M. Doctor Ely [a very ancient, wise and
ledned Priest, lyuinge in honor and at his ease, far from his native soil,
and farther from all such debate and contention] hapeninge to read that
venomous Apologye, could not hold his hand any longer, but quittinge his own
repose, hastened to come to succor them, whom he (to his great grief)
perceived, to be very injuriously set upon and assailed. Not unlike the good
blood in a man's body, which feelinge the heart assaulted, flies from every
part, to assist aid and confort it.

And truly whosoever knovveth this right vvourshipfull Doctor (as his ancient
sta^dinge in the seminary, even from the beginning, and his kind hospitality
sithence to all co^mers, has made him well known to many:) cannot think it
strange, that his fervent affection unto our Common father, CARD: ALLEN off
godly memory (with whom he was very intrinsecall) and his tender love
tvvardes us all, has pushed him on, to set pen to Paper and to employ some
part of his goodly talent, about the decision of this controversy, and
appeasinge of our troubles.

And to speak in differently, who is there of our nation that should be
sooner hearkened unto, or better believed in this cause, then M. D. Ely? For
first he not being partial, but alike affected unto both parties, (as in his
Epistle folovvinge he shows at large) has with all indifferency heard,
read, and diligently perused, what either side has to say for them selves.

Then his sound natural judgment, refined and accomplished with a profound
knovveledg of both civil and canon law, (whereof he has been public
professor in a famous university for many years:) inableth him, to discern
and see on whose side the right is. Finally his sincere honesty, void off
dissimulation, full of Zeal to truth and equity, makes him bold to deliuet in
plain terms that which in conscience he knovveth to be the verity.

Wherefore enery considerate an advised reader, must needs give singular
regard to his opinion, and may without any doubt safely rely upon him, as
upon a most probable Author.

Notwithstanding it is to be ^eared lest some [ouer vvillfully bent to dvvell
in their own errors, and who cannot in any sort endure to be controled]
not having any exception against the workman, will coin some cavil against
the work, that so plainly discovers their deceites: and not findinge any
other pretext, may peradventure say, that his holiness Brene of the 17. of
August 1601. Does debarr them from readinge all such books as this is. Which
scruple I thought expedient to remove in this Preface. Because those good
fellows that thrust into their blind folovvers hands, books flatly
prohibited by that Breue, with vvarrantise: are as earnest on the other side
to dissunde them from touching others: lest readinge them they should epsy
their errors, and so for sake them. First then it is to be considered that
these learned notes of M. D. Ely come not within the compass of the books
forbidden by the Breue. Because they be not written by any of either party, to
kindle more coals and to increase discord and debate: but by a charitable,
discrete and indifferent person, to quench the flames of strife and to
induceboth sides to atonement. Again if there were such a prohibited book,
yet may they now be read securely, without incurringe the peril of that
Breue. For the said Breue was not at the first received and admitted.

The one part seeinge how it was abused appealinge from it. And the other,
to wit M. Archpriest, deludinge and defeatinge of it. For it being sent to
wards him from Rome shortly after the 17. of August, and comning to his hand
about Michaelmas, he kept it close and suppressed it until toward the end
of Ianuarye folovvinge; that in the mean season, the goodly piece of work of
their Apology might be hatched: and then it peepinge out with an antidate,
might seem to the simple, to have been made before the Breue.

What boldness and presumption was this? Vievvinge his hol. will and
Commandment, under so severe a penalty as the greater excommunication, even
holdinge his breue in his hand to be so audacious as at the very nose of it,
to thrust out books so oposite to it, as darkness is to light, was certainly
to contemn it in the highest degree, and to the greater scorn off it, they
gave out, that the breue did only forbid books of our side, but admitted all
of theirs. It being made without partialitye as well against the one as the
other. This was the first pagea^t they played against it, but was this all?
Noe. For some months after both the publishinge off the Breue, and their
Apologyes, one in Latin, and another in English: To the infamye and
exasperation of diverse sorts off persons both Ecclesiastical and temporal,
there creeps forth an Appendix to them of the same railinge qualitye: which
very peartly plays at bo-peepe with his holiness Breue. The Author confesses
ingeniously, that he had in deed heard of such a breue, but had not see^ it:
orels he would not for all the good in the world, have so violated it, for
what vvilfull contempt should that have been? and yet the seely man was so
ouerseen, as to relate in the same place the sum of it, and runninge over it
orderly as it lies, to cite certain sentences of it AD VERBVM, word by
word. which plainly bevvrayeth his dissimulation, and declares
sufflciently, that he had both seen and perused the Said Breue, but meant to
jest with it. So obedient be they to the sea Apostolic.

But I would feign know what shift they have yet in store for their larger
Apology which is reported to be already published. Shall that also bear date
before the breue? Or shall it be fathered upon some one that lies in an
unknown corner? who will say in like manner, that he had not seen the said
Breue: or what other ioly devise shall we see next? be not these to vvardly
and dutiful Children, who under the pretext of such triflinge excuses dare so
delude and resist our holy fathers authority? we were by them styled,
enormous disobedient, rebels, worse the^ Magitians and Idolaters, for that we
delaid to subscribe to a lately devised subordination, erected by a Cardinal
his letter: what do they then deserve to be called, who so vvilfully
trangressed our supreme Pastors Autentike vvritts? for even as there is
incomparable difference betvveen the Popes Parson and a Cardinals, betvveen
his Breue and this man bare letter: so was there in that which was
commanded. For the Card: imposed an intolerable burden upon us of that
lavveles subordination: VVheras his holiness charged us only to refrain from
offendinge one an other by inuectiues and bitter writing. Every one therefore
that is not blinded by affection, May easly see what Difference there was in
the breach of those two comandementes. I will here pass over a fifth
pamphlet. Which they have also put to light since the Breue. Because the
subject of it is so absurd in it self, and so ungrateful unto all our
Catholics that be in persecution, that it cannot be vvelcome into England. It
is [if it please you] that we notwithstanding our long indurance of
manifold afflictions, should not accept of a tolleration in matters of
religion, noe not if her majesty of her singular clemency, would offer it
unto us. Need you hear any more? do you not think these men to have lost four
of their five senses? or else that lyuinge to long out of guneshott at their
ease, have cast of all human compassion of their Brethren? and shall we be
so assotted on them still that we will uphold all they Say? And tather endure
any hardness then once mislike their folish opinions? But to return to our
purpose, saying they have four or five times by ouuert act gone against that
his Hol. Breue, they have made it frustrat and of noe force For (as the learned
Casuistes hold) after a Superiors law or precept published, is by two or
three open acts contraried and resisted: it does not bind any longer, when
the Superior understanding off it, does not rebuxe or punnish such
transgressors and renevve his former decree. Now we have long since given
his hol: to understand, by his Nuncios in France and Flanders, and by our
Brethren at Rome, of their often violatinge off the said Breue; and yet he
stirs not in it which signifies that he is content that Breue exspire, and
bind no longer. But as I aforesaid, if the Breue did stand in former force and
virtue, yet it comprehended not these notes, written so modestly, by such a
Venerable Person, who in the spirit of mildnes charitably commends or
reprehendeth both parties, as he takes either of them to have deserved. And
here I would end this preface, were it not that I thought it expedient in
this place to examine briefly, that which is cited in the Apologye out of
Card: Cap: 2. f: 11.
Allens letter unto M. Mush. For that he now folovvinge our common cause at
Rome, cannot as yet answer for him self. After the good Card. had exhorted
us secular Priests to love, honor, and respect one another, according unto
every ones age, order and profession, he has these words: And those of the
secular order, specially those that have been brought up by the fathers, and
have found so great love, charity and help at their hands (as very fevve of
late have done) to be correspondent in all gratitude and thankfulness,
reuerencinge them in word and deed, as is requisite to their merits and
calling, etc.

Out of which words the Jesuits and their adherentes dravve, the Card: to
have been of opinion, that the secular Priests should take them for their
Superiors, or at lest, should give them the preeminence in all places. All
which is far vvide both from his words and meaning. For as I will not say
but that they, Who have found Courtesy at their hands, are tied to
acknovvledge and requite it: see do I affirm, that to fish out of his words
any kind of superiority or equality either with secular Priests, sauoreth of
Ambition: the Card; I grant advises and charge us to reverence them,
according to their calling: but their calling and profession requires not,
that they be preferred before us, as out of the Ancient Fathers, and holy
canous may be proved at large: but this place does not permit it: take for a
taste the decree of a council holde^ at Rome abovve 1300. past, vnde pope
Siluester, where (charge being given that inferiors give reverence to their
Superiors) it is declared who be those Superiors and inferiors, in these
words as it is related in the decrees. PORRO PONTIFICI PRESBITER, did 93.
li: a Subdia^^no.
ET CET. Let the Priest do rerence to the Bishope. The deacon to the Priest.
The Subdeacon to the Deacon. Tha Acolite to the Subdeacon, the exorciste to the
Acolilite, the lector to the exorciste, the portor to the lector; OSTIARIO
ABBAS, ABBATI MONACHVS IN OMNI LOCO REPRESENTENT OBSEQVIVM: let the Abbote give
obeisance unto the keeper of the church dooer in all places asvvell in public
as with in the church; as the monk Does to the Abbote. behold the judgment of
the primitive church concerning secular Priests and religious, in their
opinion (which was most pure and sound) a secular Priest so far excels a
religious man: that the Abbote who is Chief among them, is to exibite and to
do reverence, unto a door keeper the meanest minister aut attendant upon a
secular Priest. Which is confirmed by another Canon taken out off that true
religious, and most learned Doctor of the Church S. Hierome. Who being
demanded by Heliodorus a Bishope, whether the order of secular Clerks, Cap.
16. q. 1. alia causa.
or of the religeous were more worthy, gave answer that the order of
Clerks was far vvorthier, And proves it by four several reasons as is to be
seen in that place. One of the principal is, that they are of the
ecclesiastical hierarchy their calling being to take charge of souls, to
teach others the word of God, and to administers the holy sacraments, which
are the diuinest offices, that the Almighty has communicated unto men. And
therefore said this great holy father. MIHI ANTE PRESBITERVM SEDERE NON LICET.
It is not lavvefull for me to fit abovve a Priest. True it is (as the gloss
upon the former place signifies) that since the religious took holy orders,
an Abbote is to take place before a secular Clearke; but noe other monk or
religious. As the ordinary practice of the Christian world in public
processions and all other solemn assemblies Does make most manifest. Where
the precedence is alvvayes given unto the secular. And that these sharp
censurers take no exception of the word MONACHVS, used in the former places.
and say that secular Priests be there only put before monks, but not before
such religious as they are: it is to be understood, that in those Authors,
MONACHVS, is taken for all sorts of religious, for that in those days there
were noe other manner of religious: or if they will needs have a distinction
between them: then monks will be the vvorthier, and must march before other
poor friars, as the ordinary course of the world allows. And among all
mendiants, or begginge friars (in which order the Jesuits reckon them selves)
they are to march in one of the lowest ranckes not only because, their
societi is one of the last founded, but also for that they have fevvest
religious obseruances; they not being bound to rough and rude apparel, osten
and long fastes, or continual risinge at midnight to Canonical hours, as
other ligious me^ are the, kepinge only the esse^tiall vows of religion: of
which also some term all those that have not made their last profession but
tenantes at will, and noe freeholders. For when it shall please their
general to dimitt them, they inco^tine^tly become secular and be no longer
Religious. All which I say, (God is my vvitnis) not to disgrace any order of
the religious, for albeit in the ra^ckes of the world they be the lowest: Yet
in the sight of God for whose sake the leave all, they may be of the hiest, if
they excel in virtue: as many good devout poor woman, shall in the
kingedome of heaven, be placed far abovve many ladies not so virtuous as they.
Yet as we giuinge the place to a lady before a poor woman here, do not
offend God or man: so whosoever prefers a secular Priest before a religious
man, does not offend against Card. Allens grave advise, of giuinge them such
reverence as is requisite to their calling. Their vocation being inferior to
the other, as has been proved. Neither can the addition of religious joined
unto their Priesthood greatly advance the^ (of which yet I have heard some to
bragg) when as the hiest dignity of religion, is not equal unto a poor
portershipp in the church of God, as is by record of antiquity abovve declared.

And because I am a little entered into this matter, Ca. 16. q. 1. Eccles.
I will to this purpose add one sentence more, out of the next Canon of the
same question. The sum and substance whereof is, that it is not lavvefull
for monks and religious to do any thing (specially belonging unto the
ecclesiastical hierarchy), without the counsel of Priests. Thus taught
blessed S. Hierorome 1200. ago: and this holy charch esteemed convenient to be
ra^ged among her sacred decrees. What shall we then say to those wise men,
vvo leppinge out of the limittes of their own profession, durst avovve, that
Priests were out to be trusted with the guidinge of the consciences of
layfolkes, unless they depended on some religious man. The discipline of holy
church sends religious for direction and Counsel, unto secular Priests:
this unadvised writer clean contrary, would not have secular priests
credited with the charge of souls, if they be not ruled by some religious:
which is also so much the more absurd for that the managinge of lay persons
spiritual salvation apparteyneth most properly unto secular Priests, that
being their peculiar vocation and profession. And (as all men confess,) God
most assuredly assisteth and concurreth, with those instruments, of which he
makes choice him self for any purpose: now the very institution of secular
Priests by our blessed Savior, was to give them the charge of both
converting, instructinge, and guidinge men's souls into the knigedome of
heaven: wherefore by the divine law of his ordinary providence, he does more
specially perfitt this his holy work by the service of secular Priests, then
by any other what soever. He then that leaves them, and seeks after others
for the directinge of his conscience, may be resembled to him that forsakes
the hight way, and follows bypathes, of which be cannot be so well
assured.

For as I take religious men to be the fittest to handle religious affairs so
it cannot with any color of reason be denied but that secular Priests are
the most proper for the conductinge of secular men's consciences. And therefore I
chiefly take them to be calsecular, for that they live in the world to be
lanternes and guides unto vvorldly men. Which should be a singular motive unto
all lay men, to cast their eyes principally upon them and to love honor, and
respect them abovve the rest, as their ordinary Pastors, who have quitt
their own friends and all other things to line and dye among them, and to
assist them vvhih the word of life, and the holy sacraments living and
dieinge: VVheras the religious (love they them never sovvell) must needs
forsake them on the sudden at the commandment of their Superiors.

Which I do not relate to Diminish in any sort the orderly affection, that
any man or woman carries toward them: but to correct the fond opinion of
them, that think nothing ca^ be well done with out them. And to complain a
little of the incongruity of such religious, who contrary to their rule and
profession, plunge them selves over head and hears into ecclesiastical
affairs, with such audacity and obstinacy, as they have turned all topsie
turnie. And how can it almost be other wise so long as they meddle so
peremtorily in matters, vvherin they have very small skill: having neither
studied much in the holy canons, by which principally the discipline and
regiment of the church is directed: nor had any great practice in
ecclesiastical affairs; they living as it were out of the world, in a
distinct and far different gouernmente. And finally God does seldom bless
their enterprises with good success, who run before he send them, and
intetmeddle farther then they have commission from him or his vicar and
vicegerent in earth. VVhefore (to conclude) I most heartily request them, to
retire them selves with in their own bounds, and to observe that golden
rule, REGVLARIA REGVLARIBVS, let religious men deal in matter appertayninge
to religion and the cloister: and leave SECVLARIA SECVLARIBVS. The orderinge of
the Common affairs of the church, to secular Priests, and so we shall come
to line quietly together. Which Almighly God; of his infinite mercy and
goodness grannt us spedely, throught the merits of our blessed Savior, Christ
Jesus.

Amen.

THE OPINION OF M. KOB PARKI^NSON PRIEST and licenciate in divinity touching
this controversy with M. Archpriest: with is word for word taken out of a
letter of his ost the last of May 1602. The which was thought worthy the
relatinge, because he was long since Card. Allen Confessor and one of the
seniours and readers in the seminary at Rhemes.
In his second assertion to wars the end he has these words
I Know also by relation of many and am fully persuaded, that you have
sustained injuries by the erection of your Archipriest, and some Jesuits: and
I confess unto you unfeignedly, that if you had kept your selves, within the
co^pas of your Appeal, and plainly and orderly proposed to the sea Apostolic
(where at first although you were repelle, yer in the end doubtless, you
should have had audience and justice) I would never have given any sign in
mistike of your doings, but rather to the vtermost of my power, have
furthered it, as just and lavvefull.

In his postscript thus he says.
IF God spare me health and life: fine days together, I will write to F.
Persons, concerning many co^plaintes, that I have heard off his hard dealinge
with our youths at Rome, and likewise off the nevve erection off the
Archipriest in England. It was thought of long before F. Persons. began it:
and by Gregory the 13. suppressed and forbidden, as a jurisdiction, which
could not be practiced in England. I suppose F. Persons did it with good
intention, etc. But by experience and contradiction, he should have forseen the
misehiefe that was like to follow, and sought means how to prevent it,
rather then by force and authority, to bear it out.

Thus much by the way the good old man vvrote well. But in his maine discourse
against our sovereign lady, he very grossly goes against the common opinion and
practice of all our learned countrymen. Which may be imputed partly to his
lack of experience, and partly to those his superiors: that commanded him so
to do, as there he confesses. Some of the same humor object as a great
fault unto diverse virtuous Priests and Ancient Confessors, that they in
fair humble sort deal with the temporal magistrate, about their own
deliverance, and for the manifold eases of sundry others. Where nothing is
more evident by the very light of nature, then that we may by all honest
means possible, both help our selves and do good to all others. And if we
needed in so clear a case any longer probation; I could by many examples, of
the most Ancient, best learned, and valiantest Christians, both Martirs and
Co^fessours, convince it to be neither dishonest nor dishonorable, for
Catholics in persecution to fly unto the clemency of them in whose hands
they are, and in most seemly humble manner to beseech the^ to have compassion,
on such their poor afflicted countrymen, as be ready to spend their best
blood either to do any of them good in particular, or for the service of their
country in general. But some do say, bevvare of the counsel, they mean only
to deceyne you, but vvil do you noe good: we confess their honors to
surpass our brethern in wit and policy exceedingely, yet hope, by the help
of God, that ours are of sufficient discretion to look to them selves: and
their long tried constancy in prison, does with any indifferent man vvarrant
them from all suspicion of trachery in the Catholic cause, until there be
plain proof to the contrary. on the other side, are not the hearts of princes
in the hands of God? and are not all men inclinable to mercy, upon true
declaration of our innoecency? it is the^ rather a singular blessinge of God,
the^ matter of exclamatio^, to have obtained the favorable ear of our
governors, that we may have the opportunity to purge our selves from those
heinous crimes of attemptinge evil against her majesty's royal person, or
dealinge with foreign nations about an inuasio^; of which through the
sinister information of our adversaries, we have been heretofor holde^ in
great ielousy. It may be that they who are not so well able to discharge them
selves of such imputatio^s, dislike of this favor: fearinge lest their by,
their plottes be easlier espied and them selves become more odious. But the
innocet (who is by that means like to find more favor) must acknowledge him
self much bound unto unto that venerable Ancient Priest and Confessor M.
Bluett, if he have (as the Apology reports) in some part pacified the wrath
of our Gracious Princess, and of her right honorable council tovvars the most
part of us, by cleeringe us from the suspicion of the aforesaid wicked
atte^ptes: and if he could not do as much for some others (it being over well
known unto the counsel, that they had meadled to to much in such matters) he
is not to be clamed, if he let the fault lie where it was, and leave them to
answer for them selves. But I refer it to him him self (wen he shall have
leisure) to treat of this subject more at large.

AN ANSWER UNTO THE PARTICVLARS OBJECTED in the Apology against Master
Doctor Byshope.
CONSIDERINGE that nothing can be more just and honorable, then to defend
grave and innocent men, specially such, whose travails have been very
profitable unto the church of God, in the service of their country: I trust
that my pains shall not displease the indifferent reader, if I do bestow
one chapter, in the defense of the vvourshipfull PRIEST M. DOCTOR BISHOPE. Who
being well descended, and trained up accordingely in virtue and learning,
for the love of the Catholic Religion and holy Orders, forsook the hope of
200.l of yearly inheritance, and ledd in the Colleges abroad, an exemplare
life. Whence retourninge home Priest, he was taken and cast into prison, for
his profession. Where for three years space, he did good service to the
cause, by often exhortations unto his fellow prisoners, and in disputations
with many accounted learned Ministers: Connertinge by the grace of GOD, diverse
unto the faith, and among others six who abovve this Dozen years, being
Priests, have laudably labored in their vocation. At length banished into
France, he renewed his study in divinity, in the renowned university of Paris,
and in five years finished the laborious course of Sorbone, as much to the
credit of our country, as to his own good and preferment.

Afterward retourninge into England, employed his talent among his country
men, abovve seven years at liberty, noe less helpinge his brethren the
Priests, then soccouringe many poor Catholics: all which notwithstanding,
because he moved of Charity, did travail, to prevent those pitiful broiles
and contentions, which he forsavv long ere they brake out, he is in sundry
places of that Unchristian Apology, not a little touched it reputation, but
very vvrongefully, as by ansvveringe to all that therein is laid against him, I
will now let you understand.

First then before the preface of that Apology, where the principal Authors
of two book, (written against Mr. Archpriest, F. Persons and their
accomplices) are scored up, M.D. Byshope is said to be one of the three, that
have put their names in printe unto diverse parts of those books.

I heartily desire the upright reader, to run those two books over the one
is in English, containinge the copies of certain learned discourses, there
other in Latin, entitled, DECLARATIO MOTVVM ET CET. And if he find D. Bysp. His
name, at any other part thereof then at one letter of his own, written in
answer unto an other of F. per. to him: let him hardly repute this nameles
Author (shrouded under the shadovve of united Priests) for such a one, as may
be believed on his word. But if not, as in truth it is not, then bevvare how
you trust him hereafter who begins at the first to deceive youi again,
neither did M. D. By: put his name in printe, Unto that his letter: but others
desiringe to make known to the world how some things had passed, caused
it to be printed: as they did also F. par. letter.

with his name at it. Wherefore if he must needs be holden for one of the
chief doers in those books, because one letter theirin is subsigned with his
name: By as good reason F. par. him self, may be reputed and taken for a
principal Author off them ^his name being a swell set down in printe to a
letter in them. And albeit D. By. make fart better account of those books,
then F. P. does, never the less it is as untruly inferred of him, as it should
be off F. P. that he was one of the principal doers in them. So that in one
line almost, and that the first which touches D. By. there are two
untruths: one in that he says him to have set his hand to diverse parts off
those books, when it is but at one only: The other in avouchinge him to have
put il to, in printe when others did that, and not he. See (I pray you)
whether this Apologist, be not like to prove an unfortunate pilote, that thus
before he put to sea, Cap. 19. f. 129.
makes shipwreck of his credit, as it were in the haven. Of like sort is
that vain flourish of his where he says, Neither is that fond shift used by
D. By. in his answer, and by this felovve censurer upon F. P. letter, of any
valevve with men of judgment, but rather shows that they proceed not by
conscience, but seek euasions by cauillation, when they say, that the Notary
being a father off the College, might put in and out what F. P. would have
him etc: all this is naught else but a fo^d amplification of a very tale: for
their is noe one such word of that Notary in all M. D. By: letter, as every
one that list, may see. Of the same base qualitye is this counterpoint of his,
to wit, that his holiness Breue made in confirmation off the Protectors
letters was dated the 6. of Apriell 1599. And yet in the same chapter shortly
after in favor of one of F. P: letters, Ca. 10, f. 140. f. 143.
that Breue is made to bear date of the 21. of Apriell. But why stand I to
note by the way as it were for a taste, some of those gross misshapen
forgeries, when as with the like paltry stuff is patched up admost all that
peevish Apologye. it grieueth me I assure you to have to do with such a
peltinge adversary, QVI POSVIT MENDACIVM SPEM SVAM, whose whole confidence
lies in conninge conueiance of lies: But being driven for the necessary
defense of my dear friends honor, to coope with such a mate, I must entreat
the gentle reader to bear with me, if I do now and then, take him up, some
what roundly. before I enter into the particulars of M. D. Of the Sorbons
sentence.
Bishops negotiation, I will speak a word or two in behalf of that piththy
and grave sentence of the Sorbon Doctors (who declared those Priests, that
delaid to receive M. Cap. 8. f. 116. and 317.
Archpriest, until his hol, Breue, not to have offended) because D. By, is
coated in the margent to have been one of the sollicitors of it. Many odd idle
exceptions are there by the Apol. taken against that weighty and sound
declaration: VVherof some are in the former learned notes, very sufficiently
rejected, yet so, as some what more may be thereunto added.

Certain it is first, and there well proved; that the addition of
protector, unto the title of a Cardinal, was impertinent to that purpose.
Because that circumstance altered not the case, in giuinge either any nevve
power to his person, or more credyte to a Card: it being of far meaner
quality, then the dignity of a Cardinal.

The second exception is, for that in the information of the said dd, it was
related, that the Card: instituted that subordination, SEQVENS VOLVNTATEM
SANCTISSIMI: VVheras the Apol. averreth it to have bin done EX SPECIALI
MANDATO, by his hol: special commandment. Although he repete this often, and
urge it greatly yet is it a very fiction, without any good ground or
probabilitye. For in the Card. his letter of M. Arch. Constitution, are these
express words NOSSANCTIS1. PIISSIMAM ET PROVIDENTISSIMAM VOLVNTATEM
SEQVENTES, HOC IPSVM STATVERE DECREVIMVS: We (says the Card.) folovvinge the
most godly, and most provident will of his holiness, have determined to
institute this subordination. Which are the very words used by the
informers. Now those terms, EX SPECIALI MANDATO, are put down before in
the proeme about a another matter, of making atonement between the lay
Catholic gentlemen and the Priests, Relat. co^p. page 11.
as in the letter it self now in printe, is evidently to be seen wherefore
as many times as the Apol: does inculcate in this matter, HIS EX SPECIALI
MANDATO, (which he does often) so many times does he tell a special untruth.

The third exception is that the informers concealed, how the subordination
was demanded by the English Priests: true it is that noe mention was made
of that, because they knevve it to be most false. As has been often hertofore
declared.

Fourthly he excepteth against these words off the information: many Priests
refused to subscribe unto that subordination: when (as he signifies) there
were scarce ten that refused so to do: What voluntary lesinge is this? they
knevve full well, That D. By and his companion M. Charnock, Carried with them
more the^ twenty hands against it. Moreover not they only who vvrote
against it, refused to subscribe to it, but all those too, who would not
meddle on either side. Who were more in number, the^ all they set together,
that were on both sides formalli: which partly by F. Listers railing against
neuters, partly by this worthy Authors reckening up of the^ that subscribed,
might be proved, if the matter were not clear of it self. Cap. 8. f. 106.
and 107.
For the Apol. accountinge them that subscribed in particular, gathers but
57, hands, to that subordination, comprehendinge the assistantes vvithall. So
that of three hundred Priests approbation, they every where vante and Bragg
of, there were not threescore expressly for them. And consequently not only
ten refused to subscribe to that nevve Hierarchy, but more then two hundred.
now to suppose that for breuityes sake that Author (who is so superfluous in
recordinge many letters off less moment) would omit to set down in Cipher
at the lest, the summa totalis of the rest, were extreme folly. Weigh also I
pray you the advantage they had over us: as well through the color of the
Card: his authority, as by the aid of their 12. assistantes, and all the power
of the Jesuits, with the terror of taking away facultyes and displacinge,
and the thundringe out of schism: And can you marvel then, if they obtained
the hands of some fevve more, then we could do, being destitute of all
those helps? sithence many at more leisure having considered better of the
matter, are come to join openly with us so that our Brethren who now are
at Rome about it, had with them more hands for us, then they have sheued for
them. But not to stray from these exceptions, the fifth is a mere cavil. Were
he blames the informers for saynig, that they sent speedely to know his hol:
pleasure. And were ready to obey it. As though (says he) they meant then to
yield, and to be quiet: when as they never thought any such matter. This he
mightily presses in enery Chapter almost, thorovve out his whole book. But
plain proof to the contrary is set down in the former notez by the
protestation of all on our side, which is also of record in the latin book
Dedicated to his hol, Page 61.
and in all other writing of shat tenor. And because it is a point of great
importance, whether we meant sincerely therein or not, I will, to put it out
of all doubt, recite the Confessions of our adverse party, registered by them
selves, in this their Apology. First M. Archpriest in his letter of the 3.
Cap. 10. l. 147.
of June 1599. to F. Persons: gives plain testimony of it, in these words:
NOX PRECESSIT, DIES APPROPINQVAVIT: dissension is put to flight, PAX HABITAT IN
TABERNACVLIS NOSTRIS, peace dwells amongst us M. Colingeton and M. Mush,
have procured the submission, of M. Ed. Benet, watson, Champney an the rest.
Note how they submitted themselves upon sight off his hol: Breue. The same
vvitnisseth F. Garnett (superior of the Jesuits in England) sayng in one of
his of the 26. off may to F. Persons. I hope all will be well, nay all is well
already. M. Colinglon and M. Mush submitted them selves to the Archpriest the
19. of may and promised to do what lay in them, to bring in others. Which
also F. Persons himself, in his to M. Mush, of the 17. of July, acknowledges.
Finally this great Apologist, (whose saying you must take to be of as sound
record, as the oracles of Apollo) clearly delivers the same in the argument
of his tenth Chapter, Cap. 10, f. 141.
thus: Of the endinge of all controuersyes upon publication off his holiness
Breue, and how by the art off the Common enemy, matters were brought, to
worse Breach then before. So that it is most manifest, and was confessed by
both parties, that the Priests not only meant to yield and to be quiet, but
were so in very deed, as soon as they savve his hol: Breue. What unspeakable
malice and impudency, or dotinge blockishnes, (or what shall I learme it?) is
it then, to repete more then a hundredth times over and over, that they never
thougth, to submitt them selves, to be quiet and to obey? do they not deserve
the prick and prise off audacious and shameless lyeinge, that so often, so bodly
and roundly gaynesay that, which in express terms, they set dovvnc them
selves. If the reader be not vvilfully blind, he will easly discover, see and
detest such shamefully false and most desperate assertions.

The Sixth and last exception they take against that information is, That there
vvanted at Paris some body on the behalf of M. Archp: to have shevved, their
reasons who informed against him, not to have been good: namely those two, to
wit, that the subordination seemed to be have been granted, upon false
suggestion: and that there was great partiality used, in the choice of the
Archp. and of his assistantes. This the Apol. affirms: but does he bring any
thing in reproof of those two reasons? Little or nothing. He might in like
sort be put backevvith a bare denial: but that I hold it not sufficient in a
different, to presume upon the readers credulity as he does, but desire to give
him some satisfaction. Wherefore I will prove those reasons to have been very
good. First co^cerninge false suggestion, the two principal causes, why the
Cardinal instituted the Archpriest and that subordination were both false; as
by the Card: own letters is evidently to be proved. The former was
general, which moved him to think off some good means of pacifieinge all
parties: For that (says he) Satan had stirred up the lay Catholics and the
Priests to Knock and beat one an other, (VT INTER^SE COLLIDERET:) to the
utter ruin of the walls of Union, and cet. Now of this runninge one upon an
other, and war between the lay Catholics and Priests, fevve I vvene ever
heard of, besid^s these false suborned sollicitors, yet this gross gooyeon they
made the good Card: fvval owe down first: the other untrue suggestion was,
That the English Priests exhibited many gentle persuasions unto his holiness,
for that rare hierarchicall subordination of an Archp: and 12. Assistans. For
as I have abovve said, either that matter was never spoken of in England, till
it was dispatched in Rome: or in such secrecy, as it could not be, but a very
shameful lie, to bear his hol: in hand, that is was the Common request of
the Priests in England. It remains them most assured that there was very
false suggestion in the Chiefest motives of that subordination. Yea that the
informers used great modesty in saying only, there seemed such default, when
it was most apparent and manifest.

Concerning the other reason off partiality in that choice of M. Archp: and
his Assistantes, because I mean not to touch their Persons in particular, I
will leave it, to the upright judgment of them, who know their capacityes,
and have well observed, their odd manner of proceedinge these fevve years
past. Yet one plain point of partiality may not be omitted, which was in
making choice of such to be arbiters, who were all affected unto the one
party; and therefore being no indifferent men, were never like to compose
matters and to make any perfitt atonement, as by the lamentable effects of
some years experience, all the world no we sees.

Thus much about the frivolous exceptio^s of the Apologist against the
iuditious, and learned decision of the venerable facutly of Paris. Which
proceedinge from deep experienced men, Upon due consideration, must (no doubt)
were passion bears not the sway, be holden for most sound and true: as his
holiness (being thoroughly informed by both parties) has already, VIVAE VOCIS
ORACVLO, declared it: and shall be [as I hope] shortly published Authentically.

Unto this sentence of the Doctors off Sorbone, is shall not be inconvenient to
join another act done at Paris, which in the Apologye is delivered in these
words. Fol. 154
M. Charnock goeinge to Paris where. D.B. resided, both of them took
scholedegrees upon them, the one of Bachelar: the other of Doctor in diuinitye:
not with standinge his hol, by an express Breue had forbidden the same unto
all Englishmen some years before, without such license and approbation, as in
the said Breue is set down.

The incongruity off this Breue is shevved in the former notes. Of the Breue
against proceedinge.
For what a disgrace is it unto good students, that when their time of
procedinge comes, they must be cast behind their fellows, if they cannot make
friends both to the Rector off the College, vhere they studied, which may be
in spain; and to the Protector, who is suer ordinality to be no nearer then
Rome. And so be forced both to leese their places in the universities, and
their preferment abroad. But what cared the procurer off this breue for that:
who seems to take great pleasure in bridlinge them, who be not at his
beck, and in heapinge such yokes of bondage upon his poor afflicted
contrimen, as no other nation I think in the world is subject unto.

But to stand avvhile upon this Breue: It may first be doubted, whether there
be any such or not, it is so diuersely reported. This Apologist (as you have
heard) Makes it to prohibit all Englishmen to proceed either bacchelor or
Doctor in divinity. The Copy rehearsed in the former notes, says nothing of
Bacehelars yet forbids not only Doctors in divinity, but d. also in one of
the laws. A third (who supposes he savve the original it self with the
seal at it) affirms that neither Bacchelars in divinity, nor Doctors in any
of the laws, but only Doctors in divinity are prohibited to proceed. Of
other rumors that runn against licenciates I will not speak, because they
have no certain hedd: but to whether of these three opinions, which all come
from the same fountain must we give credit? or until there be better
agreement about the matter, may we not very well (for fear off doeinge
wrong to the rest) believe noe one of them? but rather suspend our judgment,
and stay until we shall see (according to the law and Common practice of
the world) a Canonical publication and reception of that Breue, in the
Catholic Country, where we live, and that so much the more in the Case of
this Breue, as it seems to have been obtained by surreption. Hear the
preface of it: For As much as diverse young men goeinge from the Colleges took
by the way the degree of Doctor in divinity: Where upon Cominge into England,
and there taking their place, according to their degree, before many ancient
grave Priests, great disorder did ensue and cet. This is the preamble in
substance, wherein are two falsehoods: the one that many young men had
proceeded dd. on the way: when one or two at the most had so done, who for
their ripe knovvleage in scholediuinity, were esteemed worthy that degree.
The second untruth is, that any such disorder grevve of it in England: where
no graduat lightly does take his place, Priests seldom meetnige together, and
then in disguised habits. Again if a young graduat, should take place before
an elder man, yea better learned too then him self: that would not bread any
disorder. The Common Custom and order of all Christendom being, that youger
men having taken degree, should be preferred before more aged, not alike
qualified. This Breue then being granted. Upon wrong information, let
others judge of the validy of it. Concerning M. D. Bishope, certain it is,
that he seven or eyeght years before that Breue was gotten, had done all his
acts, and had his grace given him to proceed Doctor. But not being so
ambitions, (as they would make men believe) stayed tenn years after his due
time, before he would stand in act to take the degree which at lengh he took
being first by decree compelled to make his abode in the same university, and
therefore could nor without his disgrace and great hinderance, put it of any
longer. He then also to avoid braulinge and all color of contempt, requested
the Rectors Consent as the Breue goes: but being vvithoust just Cause
refused, let not to take the degree, following the best counsel in the
university and city: first for that he had, more then seven years before the
date of that Breue, taken some of the most substantial points, of Doctor
Shipp: his exercises being all made, and his grace granted: wherefore such a
penal decree as the Breue is, being to be restrained as much as may be, can
take no hold on him, that was so far passed into the degree before. Secondly
for that this Breue was never published, much less received in France, where
he remained: and according to a very probable opinion (which by all learned
men's consent, may in practice be follovved, without all peril of offense:) a
decree made at Rome, and not published canonically in others countries, has
noe force there, nor binds any man in that place. Thirdly noe humane law
brings any obligation in conscience when it is manifest, that the principal
cause, for which it was made ceesseth, which is to be gathered out of the
proeme that in this Breue is, to debarr young men from proceedinge. Upon their
departure from the Colleges, before they have studied four years after in
some other university, now this cause wholy cessed in D. By. Case. For from
his departure fro the College of Rome, unto the time of his proceedinge: Was
little less then twenty years: and he had ten years before the taking of the
degree, studied almost six years in the noble university of Paris, and
venerable Faculty of Sorbone. So that it could not be any meaning of the
Author of the Breue (if any such be) to let his proceedinge. yet because of a
petty addition in the end of the Breue (which for his advantage, this
Apologist would make the only clause) he did (to preuente all exceptions) ask
leave of F. Persons: Who was then Rector, the which at that time he refused
to grant, yet about ayeare after, not spoken to about that matter, offered it
of his own accord, and caused, both the protectors and his holiness, to
ratify, confirm it, if it neaded any such rehabilitation: as F. Persons own
letters of the 28. of July 1601. to the said Doctor do testify. Mary all this
courtesy was after he had labored under hand what he could, to have the said
Doctorship called in question as it is very credibly reported. Which might be
the cause why this Apologist, having taken to task to stir in all matters
that sound ill in his ears would not let this pass, with out giuinge it
one dashe with his blottinge pen.

Having done with matters of Paris touching D. Byshope: Of their apprehension.
let us now come to the affairs of Rome which belong to him, vvher first
presents it self, his apprehension, shortly after his arrival which being
contrary to the course of law, contrary to equity and all good custom, Has
been ever sense greatly misliked, and much complained of by many virtuous and
wise men. Cap. 9. f. 123.
Wherefore the Apologist casts about far and near, to find some colorable
excuse for that fact. And brings in two or three bad ones nothing sufficient
to serve the turn. First not that far featched, out of certain letters
written from Flanders, long before there was any talk, of any such matter
as appears by the date of them: and besides there is never a word in any of
them either of those messengers, or of that negoriation: and vvithall not one
of them addressed unto his holiness. How then could he Pike out of them any
raisonable cause to cast Priests in to prison unheard? Certainly this Apol.
VVittes begin to fail him that to no purpose laid down at large such
impertinent letters. Touching the letter from douay, and that of D.
VVorthingtons, both written from partial places and Persons, it is not meet
that they be valued at more then their reason is vvorth, which is just
nothing. For (says he) If these Captains of nevve broiles do find favor,
they will stir up great storms in England, but if they be kept down with
sharpnes, all will be quiet. You have heard this divines auguration: You have
also long ere this seen the contrary event. For they being hardly handled,
much more trouble was raised then before: VVheras, if they had been
Courteously dealt vvithall, all might have been quietly composed. So that this
first kind of excuse, is far from the purpose. The second is not much better.
Which was (say they) That his holiness being advertised by his Nuncios from
Prance and Flanders of their Cominge, resolved to have committed them at
farrara, if they had come thither. Here seem to be more lies then lines. First
there was at that time noe Nuncio in France (as far as I can learn) but a
Legate the Card: of Florence, who had noe Correspondence with the Archpriest
and therefore: neither received nor sent any such aduertissement. As for the
right reverend Nuncio in Flanders he might well give intelligence of those
messangers cominge, but was to wise to vvish his holiness to imprison them,
being sent to his see about ecclesiastical matters, before they were heard.
And for his hol: who is renowned through the world, for his mild co^siderate
manner of proceedinge, with out any such have and precepitatio^, it is
impossible, that he could upon the only clamours of adversaries, resolve to
Comitt Priests before they were heard. Suerly they do him no small
dishonor, that so osten and that in printe report so evil of him. But to that
wicked audaciousness some are now grown, that to excuse them selves, they
stike not to lay there own faults upon their supreme Pastors Shoulders.
What then might be the cause, why they were committed before they were
heard? The right R: Bishope of modina (his hol: Nuncio in France after wards)
hearing how all had passed, said that it might vvelbe done with out his hol
priuity, By Card: Caetane his order, who being lord high treasurer had
sergentes at his commandment, and so might commit of his own authority: or
it might be perhaps, that at Card: Caetanes great importunity, his hol:
having heard many heinous complaints against them, condiscended, to have them
retired to the College to conferr in private after a friendly sort of their
matters: meaning nothing less, then that they should be there used like
prisoners, as they were, well of this, our brethren that now follow the
matter at Rome will be better able to say more here after.

But what I pray you were those complaints, where with the pope ears
were filled, against the messengers? forsooth, That they were tumultuous and
seditious fellows, that they obstinately resisted the right R. Archp: and
stirred up many others to do the like, to the great scandal of both
Catholics, and and Heretics that they went about to disereditt the pope and
Cardinal: that they were come to Rome to make nevve Garboiles in the College,
and finally would fill the court of Rome with rumors, if they were not
restrained. These were those irreligious and damnable slanders, which D.
Byshope in his letter said were no less falsely then wickedly invented against
them, to have them laid up, before they were heard. Unto which the Apo.
answers after his old fashion, clean camme as they say: in this sort. Is it
so heinous or damnable to restrain a coople of Priest, fol. 177. Cap. 11.
where so many complaints be made of their presumption, contempt and scandal
raised by their contention? does not every Prince do so? No good Sir, not one
just Prince does so, when the party presents him self, and means to stand
to his trial, as they did. For by what law or reason can he upon hear say,
and falls bruites perhaps Chastise him: Whom he may duly hear at leisure, and
findinge him guiltye may punish according to his deserts? But to our purpose,
the enormous slanders, where of D. By: Complained in his letter, were (as
every one may see) not the Castinge of him and his Companion in prison, as this
Apol: misconstrueth it: But those vile and mischievous rumors abovve
rehearsed: to wit, that they were tumultuous and factious, and obstiuately
disobedient to all sort of superious and cet. Which faults are as farfro M.
D. By: manners (of whom I now treat) as white is from black, and light
from darkness. For his behavior for twenty years before, as well in the
colleges as in all other places, was well known unto all that knevve him,
to have been very mild and quiet: having never had his finger in any such
sturres, and therefore most injuriously styled, tumultuous and seditious.
Moreover vndertakinge that journey to Rome at the request of diverse venerable
personages, he was so far of from making any uproar against that late
erected authority of the Archp: that he acquainted none of the house where he
risided, with the particulars of that affair. Yea he conferred most quietly
with M. Archp: him self of the matter. Mary perceiuinge that no good Could be
done therein with out F. Persons, on whom all depended: he determined for
Common quietness, to undertake that painful and perilous journey, giuinge under
his hand the cause of his goeinge unto M. Archp: and taking with him a copy
of it subscribed by M. Archp: that it might appear unto all, how peaceably
he departed from him. What presumption and contempt of the Archpriest, what
dispargement to the Card. letters, what scandal and offense of the world in
all this? Who saying any thing amiss, and desirous to seek redress of it,
could more orderly or more quietly have done it? The like mild and temperate
course held they in Rome, presentinge them selves to both the Card. Protectors,
and dealinge with F. Persons him self about some reasonable pacification of
all parties: as in M. D. Bishops letter is to be seen more at large Most false
therefore were all those slanders, with out all conscience cast out of them,
and consequently very irreligious and damnable, of their mission.
as M. D. By: termed them. No^ we let us come unto their mission and
Commission. VVherabout D. By: being asked, who sent them? With what
authority? Why he and his felovve abovve the rest? and other like points:
Was somevvhat troubled in his answer, saying, NESCIO QVIS FV^RIT: J know
not who was the first Author of this mission, nor I know not for certain,
why we were chosen for this missio^ abovve the rest. These are his words,
by this you may perceive, what an authentical mission and commission this
was. Fol. 132.
Hitherto the Apologist. Nay rather you may view and behold what fraud and
Coseninge he uses, to backbite those good Priests, and to abuse and deceive
his readers.

For suppressinge vvilfully D. By: his answer unto those questions, Who sent
him? and with what authority? he choppeth in his answer unto an other
particular demand to wit, who was the first author of that mission? unto
which, the Doctors answer is direct, that he knevve not who was the first
man, that moved that mission. These Questions were much urged, because they
thought they had great advantage against them, for that they vvanted a Princes
letter of Credence for their message, and brought the Priests testimonies in
small peieces of Paper.

Unto all which D. Bysh: ansvvered in particular, and keeps a copy of it.
The which I have gotten to set down in this place, that you may more lively
discover the paltry dealinge of this Apologist. who vvantinge subject of just
reproof would needs forge and coin some. To those Questions then, who sent
them, and with what authority, this was the Doctors ansvere. There was not
in England either Prince, or Catholic Magistrate, to give us any Customary
letters of Credence. Nor any noble lay Cath: could write for us to his
holiness, without imminent danger of his liberty and life. And we have no
other Ecclesiastical Prelate, Besides M. Archp: who neither was confirmed in
that authority, nor was it to be expected, that he should write in our
comendation. Knovvinge full well, that we went about the moderation off his
power. Whom nevertheless we gave to Understand of our enterprise, and he
would not prohibit it. we bring with us the humble petitions off nine and
twenty learned and virtuous Priests, which were for the most part addressed
unto his holiness in form of supplication. Seven of the auncientest of them,
committed the charge of presentinge off them unto us, as their letters do bear
witness. Neither are simale pieces off Paper brought out of an yland, where
most norrovve search is made at every port, to be smally esteemed: which off
purpose we made choice of, for the saffer conveiance: misdoubtinge nothing
less then that the virtue of a testimony, should lie in the largeness of the
Paper, vvherin it was written. As Soon as we came into a Catholic country,
we got letters of commendations, from the right R. Byshope of Paris, in the
name also of Card: Gondy his uncle, unto Card: Aldibrandino his holiness
nephevve. Thus furnished we came, presuminge that his hol: grave wisdom and
experience, would not stand upon such formalityes with us cominge out of a
country, where was neither magistrate nor Notary Catholic. Neither were the
humble requests of fewer Priests then they, to be contemned: consideringe
with what peril of their lives, and with how small vvorldly recompense,
they had a long time labored in our blessed lords vineyard. Principally
when some of them were of the most Ancient, best qualified, and best esteemed
Priests of England.

Thus far his answer, which you see to have been some, thing else, then
NESCIO QVIS FVERIT PRIMVS AVTHOR. And this might the Apol: have set down as
well as the other, and should in honesty have done it, because it was the
direct answer; but it would not fit his purpose, which was to deprave and
calumniate, but not to tell the truth.

Of these Questions, with their answers I collect and gather two things.
First that it is a palpable untruth that D. By: being demanded how many
Priests he knevve of his party in England, should answer that he knevve but
twelve, as the Apo: affirms: fol: 131.
vvheras you see by his last answer, that they had ^9. suflrages for them:
besides their own two, and sundry others, both in and out of England, whom
he knevve to favor their party, although they feared to set their hands to it.

Secondy by these and such like ioly Questions, is iustyfied that which D. By:
said in his letter, that many vain impertinent Questions were asked them: as
for example, was it not fond, to demand of them, whom they knevve to enter
into a matter long after others, who was the very first that motioned it?
but it passes all wisdom and folly, to ask messengers upon their oaths,
why choice was made off them, before all others, for that message: as though
they could enter in to the secrets of other men's hearts, and did se their
hidden counsels. if no Princes Ambassadors commission, should be allowed,
before they had resolved those two Questions, Who was he that made the first
motion af that imbassade: and why they vverc chosen abovve all others in the
realm to perform it. I vvene we should have fevve Ambassadors or agentes
admitted any where. These and such like peevish intertogatoryes D. By: taxed
upon great reason. And did not write (as the Apol: falsely charge him,) that
he was not examined at all, upon any substantial point of their message: but
he said that those material points were barely and nakedly taken without
there proofs and persuasions: Copy of dis: Page: 171.
yea were often wrested and perverted. See his own words. Let us go on
to a while, and hear what the Apologist has more to object against him.
Mary [saith he] those two messengers seemed scarsly agreed in the cause off
their coming. For M. Charnock did say and swear (orels the Apol: lies)
that their only coming was, either to have the Archpr: Changed, or if he
were already confirmed to have some other order appointed with him. D. By:
enlarges him self unto six causes. Fol: 13^.
The first was devotion to see the holy places. The second, to have Bishops,
the third, if that would not be granted, then that the power to confirm and
consecrate oils, might begiuen unto some of the Auncientest Priests. 4. that
their sodality might be confirmed, 5. that order might be taken to compose all
matters in wisbech, 6. about the like order for the Colleges. They had not
then so little to say as F. Pet: in his letter (page: 58,) affirms of them. In
all which there is scantly one [as the Apol: avverreth] which concurneth
fully, with his fellows petition. Now I pray thee (good Reader) judge,
whether if Bishops had bin granted, (which is D. By: second cause,) Mr.
Archp: must not have been changed, or else some other order appointed with
him, which was M. Charnock only petition, as this false companion blusseth
not to affirm here: and yet in the very next leaf, forgettinge him self, he
brings M. Char: in sainge that among other things, he came to demand, that
noe such books should hereafter be written by Catholics, which were like
to exasperate the state. Oh how necessary a thing it is, for a liar [as the
proverb goeth] to have a good memory, otherwise he may sone shame him self:
as you see here by this Apologist, who in the next leaves, Brings in one man
speekinge contradictoryes. But pardon him I pray you, for it was for a good
end. For what good end must he needs lie in that sort? Mary to prove those
two Messengers to have disaggreed in their matters. For M: Charnock would
have such books prohibited. But D. By. did not like that point. If they
agreed in the other more material points, it imported the less. But D. By:
being asked about that, says that he remembers not, that he was examined
thereon, nor knovveth not why heshould. But in private talk he might have
said, that he knevve some in England who liked of that book of titles,
because it opened very particularly the state of that high Question. For that
point [he saith] the book was liked, but for many other respects, he
affirms it to be much misliked, and chiefly for two of very great
weight. VVherof one is in the former part of that discourse, of the peoples
power over their Princes, which if it be not very vvarely read and discreetly
understood, is a most perilous and pestiferous piece of doctrine. The other
toward the end of the later: Where his lavvier having argued at large of
seven or eight several houses, pretendinge right to the crown after her
majesty, and [like a good contry man] blemished most of them borne with in
the realm, with bastardye, he nevertheless concludes very gravely, and like a
sound lavvier, I vvarrant you. That every on of their titles is good in law:
And vvarranteth on his credit, each pretendor, that he may rightofully put him
self in arms, and call his friends about him, to porsue his interest. A
paradox; and very strange assertion, that so many several prete^dors, to one
and the same thing, can each one have lavveful title to the whole. And if
after his holy counsel, so many should push at the crown with all their
forces, (as who will not give the venture for a kingedome, having just
claine to it,) it would set all England together by the ears, and the whole
country in combustion. Which perauenture, Might be part of his meaning, who
made that treatise, that vvhiles they within the realm, were bickeringe one
with another, some stranger might stepp in, and conquer them all. Those
points the^, as, I said with some other D. By: utterly, misliketh. and
touching other books against the state, [as that vnpure and loathsome one of
leysters common weal, and that malepert and ra linge one of And: plilopari
is, with such like] he does upon mature consideration of that matter, greatly
disalovve off them. As books wholy unnecessary, and vvherin to small purpose,
much folish passion and spleen is uttered against some mighty personages, who
thereby being highly offended do vvourke our Catholic brethren that live
under them in England greet vvoe. Wherefore he takes it for an intolerable
oversight, to publish so far out of season, such satiricall invectiues.

Now one word (before I make auend) of D. By: his answer unto the
Comissarye enquiringe of him, what he knevve of the man who vvrote the letter
off presidences. It was that he was so far from knovvinge the Author of it,
that he had never before, heard one word off that matter. But supposed it to
have been framed by their adversaries to vvourk their disgrace: and that the
letters vvhervvith it was said to be subscribed, agreed unto Mr. Archp: as
well to him: For that copy was shevved him in Latin to which F. Par: said
his name was subscribed. And so might as well be Georgius Blackvv: as Guil:
Bysh: then F. Per: replied that is was on M: VVatsons letter: yet he had
before (contrary to his own knowledge) charged D. By: with it. Note his
tender conscience. after he demanded of D. Byshope whether he knevve M.
Watson or what he had heard of him: to which the d: answer was far other
wise then this Apologist reports. to wit, L. 139.
that he had heard exceedinge well of one Mr. vv: Watson priest, how he had
many years very fruitfully travailed in his vocation, reducinge diverse unto
the Cath: faith, and by the assistance of God his grace had caused 25. Aulters
to be erected to the singular service of our blessed Savior. Which fevve in
England had (as he thought) done besides him: Sorry I am that to some blemish
of his former virtues, certain books set out of late, carry the letrers off
his name. Because the style seems to sharp, and some thing in them sounds
harshly in sundry Catholic ears. But to mytigate the matter, the occasion of
vvrittinge, which time and place ministered must be duly considered, and
vvithall how he and others were before grievously hurt in their reputation
by the other party; and that in defense of their just honor, they might
lavvfully Discredit the injurious aggressors. but of this, some other time,
more at large; to dravve now unto the vvindinge up of this matter conceringe
M. D. Byshope, finally the Apol: says, that the Messengers duringe the time
off their restrainte had all manner of justice offered them for their defense:
and after their deliverance were bidden to follow their matters, etc. For
answer unto this fair tale, see what is said in M. D. By. letter and in the
censure upon F. Per. letter. I will here repete most Briefly and most truly,
how they were used, and leave the judgment of it, unto the reader: being
both apprehended, all their letters and instructions, were taken away from
them, and they were kept close prisoners apart, so that one could have no
help off the other. Yea were severally examined to try if they could dravve
out of one, that which might hurt the other. their adversaries were their
kepers, examiners, and judges, not alovvinge them any help of counsel, so
much as of one another.

And by interrogatoryes (such as it pleased them to propound) they were
compelled to deliver the message they were sent about. Thus stood the case
with them vvhyles they were in durance: neither goes the Apol: about to
confute any of these particularites. Then before they were delivered, they had
sentence to depart the city within ten days, which respite they obtained to
visit the holy places. One being enlarged, tho there was kept still in the
College safe, as it were in hostage off the others good behavior abroad. And
not thinkinge that enough, for more suerty they lodged the Doctor enlarged
with D. Haddocke and M. Array, that they might look unto him for dealinge
with any body. All this is so certain, that noe one jot of it can with any
honesty be denied. now let the upright reader determine, both of the form
of justice held within the College, and what possibility there was after, to
seek for redress.

This is that I had to say touching those points, vvherevvith M. D. Byshope
stands charged in the Apology. And [as has been shevved] look how many
charges, and assaults so many either apparent falshoodes or covert guyles and
deceites, to infect the vnvvary and credulous reader, with error and evil
opinion of him undeservedly.

What good Christian, would not vvonder to see men esteemed other wise
neither folish nor dishonest, so to forgett them selves in their own cause,
that they seem, duringe the mood and humor, either to have lost their
vvittes, or to have cast aside all honesty. How could they else contrary to
their own knowledge, so misreporte, disguyse, and pervert other men's
sayings and doeinges, and so contradicte them selves, which are certain
signs of voluntary blindness.

And if the Author of this Apologye by long custom of canuassinge and
vvranglinge, or that his judgment in his elder years begins to fail him,
do so grossly ouersee, and ouersute him self. Yet [I hope] that you whom
he terms the united clergy of England, (for that you belike join under his
ensign) remembringe the holy honor of your coat and calling, will not any
longer endure to be made such base underlings, as to suffer that deceitefull
vvourkema^, under the pretexte of your names, to disgrace and bring in
contempt our whole order. Wherefore (dear brethren) take heart and courage:
Disavovve, and disclaim boldly from all such lyeinge, staunderous and wicked
libels: pull of your maskes, from other men's faces; teach them hereafter so
much good mamers at the lest, as either to ask you leave first, and make you
acquainted with what they write, or else hardly to speak in their own
Persons. Otherwise by your silence, (as you best know) you ratifyeinge and
confirminge their factes, are made partakers of their faults. And so
consequently you stand deeply charged and your consciences deadly vvounded
with that heinous crime of backbitinge and infaminge your felovve laborers in
our lords vineyard, to the great scandale of the world, and exceedinge
hinderance off the Catholic cause. Our blessed Savior give you grace to look
to it in time, and to amend it.

AN ANSWER MADE BY ME CHARLES PAGET ESQVIER, TO certain untruths and
falsityes, tochinge my self, contained in a book, entitled a brief Apology
or defense, of the Catholic Hierarchy and subordination in Englance, and cet.
IT is not long since that I savve your book entitled a brief Apologye or
defense of the Catholic Hierarchye and subordination in England, and cet.
VVherin you treat off many matters, name many persons, and enterlace and
mingle the one with the other, in such disorderlye and confused manner, as one
may easlye see that your meaning is not to make appear to the world, what
is the veritye; but think you have gained much, if by your obscure and dark
narration you may color and cover the defects, errors, and faults, that
iustlye are to be imputed to you and your associats and dravve men to doubt if
not to condemn the sincere and honest proceedinge of those you esteem the
contrary part. How absurdlye you have behaved your self concerning the
matters and persons of others you write of, I refer you to their answers: but
how vncharitablye, and levvdly you have governed your self toward me, is to
be seen by that I shall set down in this my defense.

Jn the 3 leaf of your book after you have said that in the year 1578. the
contention began between doctor lewis late bishop of Cassano and the English
scholars at Rome and cet: and that the samevvas nourrished by some spies sent
from the counsel of england, namelye vaughan and Aldrid and cet. and vvithal
the counsel of england endeavored by all means possible, to maintain
suspicion, ielovvsye, and emulation, between those that favored doctor lewis
on the one side, and the rest that were joined with doctor Allen and the
Iesuistes on the other, though much no doubt against both their wills. Then
you say that that attempt of there is was helped soon after by a new accident
that fell out in paris in the year 1583. and 1584. vvher two or three lay
gentilmen belonginge (as was said) to the Queen of scots, then prisoner in
England, fallinge to be discontented with doctor Allen, F. parsons, Sir
Frauncis Englefielde, and others united together in the affairs of our
country, these gentilmen partinge them selves and their actions from them, and
goinge by an other way: increased the foresaid breach, and made a far
stranger opposition against the foresaid men, and whole body of Catholics
joined with them at home and abroad: vvherof many great inconveniences did
ensue, and among others as the world does know the overthrow at lenght
of the Queen her self and many more of her friends: as more particularlye
shall be shevved when it comes forth in our larger apology. These be your
own words. Upon the margent you name my celf, master Thomas Morgen, and
master Thomas Throck marton, as the three foresaid persons you speak of.

By this speech of yours you taxeme with two things: the first is that
vvheras there was a breach between doctor lewis and his party, and doctor
Allen, F. persons, Sir Frauncis Englefield with them of the other party, that
I was one of those, that increased the sameand made a stronger op(...) you as
a detractor. In the mean while until you have uttered better stuff then yet
you have done, for the reprehendinge of my dealinges and actions in France, it
is not vvorth the loking on and much less worthy any credit.

Jn the S. Leaf and year 1589. you say priour Arnauld was sent to spain to
discredit the Cardinal Allen with the king of spain, and to set up his
emulator against him in the same dignitye while he lived and cet.

It follows not that Doctor lewis was Doctor Allens emulator, if he had
sought to be Cardinal, or those that should assist him in that course should
be counted factious, as you would have men to think, since his good parts
did merit the dignitye for as there be of French, Italiens, and of other
nations diverse of one nation that be Cardinals, and yet they be not esteamed
emulators one against an other: so with any charitable interpretation may there
be the like in our English nation. But in truth I was nether priuye nor knevv
of that priors goinge into spain, or what he negotiated there. So that your
naminge me in the margent, as one to be touched herevvith is of no force, and a
manifest untruth.

Jn the 6. leaf and year 1594. you say they began in Flaunders against Father
william holt an English Iesuist (in great credit with the Governors there)
and master Hughe own conjoined with him, under pretense that they were
partial, and furthered not those of that faction, in their pensions, and other
suites by them pretended. and cet. in the margent you set down master Charles
Pagets letters and memorialls yet extant: by the which you would have it
thought that J was the principal cause thereof.

True it is that the said Own was called in question, by the count de
fuentes then Governor of the low countries for the king of spain, (and as
I have hard by the solicitation of Father Creton a Scottish Iesuist) for some
disseruices he had done to the said king, (vvherof as I hear he is not yet
purged) two Commissioners, one Monsieur Martin and one other, Counselors of
Macklin were appointed by the said count to examine not only Own of his
vndevvtifull behauyour toward the said king, but also had authority to
force any they vvoulde by justice, to say upon their oaths, what they could
to such articles, as were to be ministered to them, by the said commissioners.
The late Earl of west merlande, Sir Thimothye Moket, master William Tresame,
master Pansfote, master Ligon, master Stonor, master Broune, master Gage, and
my self with diverse others, (vvherof some were reverend Preistes) were
summoned by justice to appear before the said commissioners, before whom we
were examined. We ansvvered sincerlye and truly upon our oaths to that we
were demanded of. Father Holt Went to the said Martin and told him, that he
was not to geaue credit unto us, for that we were men transported with
passion and partialitye. We the said noble men and gentilmen understanding of
his said information given against us, and that he meant to deface us as men
that were corrupted, and respected not our oaths: complained of him to father
Oranus his Superior: desiringe to have satisfaction of him for it. His said
Superior charged the said. F. holt with it. He denied it. And said he was so
far from doing any such thing as he never savve the said Martin in fine
proof was made that he had been with the Said Martin in form aforesaid.
Where upon his Superior willed him to declare the truth upon his obedience.
(And as I have been crediblye informed) then the said. F. holt ansvvered, that
it was true that he had been with the said Martin as is before rehearsed: but
with intention, his Superior should not know of it. His Superior being
iustlye offended with his equiuocatinge answer, vvorthelye) as I have hard
enjoined him a good penance for the same. And both for this his irreligious
behavior toward us, and many other foul and most vnseamlye parts played
with us in general, and with every one of us in particular: being the
chief and only cause of our disunion and separation, who were before in
charity and unity one with an other: we the abouesaid with many more (and
not I alone as you would have men think) did present diverse articles: vvher
in (as I remember) we shevved that he was of a rude and insolent nature,
subject to passion in the highest degree: very inciuill in his behavior,
very credulous of false reports, very suspicions in his conceits, very
obstinat in his opinion, partial in presentinge, and aduauncinge of pretenses
to the Governors: that he nourrished faction and division, and was chief head
of the same. That he was disdainful and of a commandinge humor, that he was
improper to give or take counsel: easy to break amitye, and ready to tax
revenge: and in fine was incompatible to live vvithall. All which things
were so true, as even some that loved him very well much misliked him for the
same. And these errors did we find in him by experience: how so ever you
comende the said F. Holt for his modestye and mildnes.

I can assure you that when these differences aforesaid, were before Seigneur
Babtista de Tassis (now Spanis Ambassador in France) and Father Oliuerus
Iesuist appointed by the Archduke Albert to hear them: F. Oliuerus said to some
of his friends in conference, that we the said noble men and gentilmen, that
bare the svvorde, were more mete to be church men, for our quiet and temperat
behavior, then F. holt and his associats; who proceaded with great passion
and coler, which I repeat to show the error of your opinion touching Father
Holt.

And when by your larger apology (which doubtless will be some bulbegger to
fear children vvithall because almost in every leaf you threaten us with
the same) you shall further urge what is rehearsed of the said Father holt,
then shall it be seen what proufes and probabilityes were of these things
objected against him, as also shall be set down his malicious dealinges against
the lord Dacres, the lord Paget my brother, master Bridgvvater, master Covert
Prestes: Late master Thomas Throckmarton, master Godfrey Fouliambe, master
Broune, master Gage, master Thomas Morge^ with diverse others and my self:
which now for breuityes sake I let pass. as also I would have it appear
how loath I am to discover his turpitude and vnsauorye dealinge now he is
dead: Vnlest you or some of your faction force me there unto, for the defense of
the noble men and gentilmens reputations, and mine own, you seake so much to
stain and blemish.

Only at this present for that which concerns this point, I shall pray
those which be free from partialitye, to consider the qualityes of these noble
men and Gentilmen aforesaid: their sufficientye, the cause they endure for,
their constancye therein, the losses they have had for the same: their long
exille with many comendable parts that be in them: and let-them Judge from
whence these broils and sturres did spring, what service. f. holt did for
the aduauncinge of the comen cause, and what good to his so cietye, when as
with his said imperfections he disgusted the said noble men and gentilmen and
joined most intrinsically with master Hughe Own, George Herbert an Inkeper,
George persons a black smith his son, Daniell an apostat, tipins a double spy,
George Stoker an ordinarry seruinge man, Rouland alias verstegan a coupers son,
with such like, who were the famous Body of the Catholics in Flaunders on
f. persons side, that you so much vaunt of. and who in deed were of. F.
holts priuye counsel, and most emvvin (...) presented fishers Papers, and
examinations you speak of, vvithall things he could devise or imagine, to
prove Master Doctor Gifforde and my self to be the inuentors of the said
memorialls, and cheafe instruments of the broils among the Scollers at Rome.
We were sent for by the said nuntio we appeared. For my self the nuntio used
some speeches with me to accord with. F. Persons: which I offered to do, so
as he would geaue me that satisfaction, that reason and conscience bound him
unto. But nether then, nor since to this hour, was there either accusation off
fisher, or any other, by word or writing objected against me, to prove me
to have known of the said memorialls, or to have meddled with the broils
off the English College at Rome. Which F. Persons with his lienge
affermatio^s vvoulde needs face me out was so. The matter being so clear on
my side the Nuntio never spoke to me of it again. But prayed me to be a mean
that some good end might be made between Master Doctor Gifforde, and F.
Persons. F. Baldvvin urged as much as he could Master Doctor Gifforde to give
some satisfaction, he utterly denied it, and said there was no cause: and
wished for the clearinge of all doubts that F. Baldvvin would proceade by
order of justice against him: and then whosoever were found culpable should
be forced to give satisfaction. F. Baldvvin would in no wise harken to this
course: for that in law there must be an accuser against Master Doctor
Gifforde, who if he could not make his allegations good, was to receive the
same punishment, and shame, as the said Doctor should have done, if he had been
found culpable. It is evident that what F. Baldvvin was to say and allege
was of no substance against Master Doctor Gifforde: or else he would not have
refused to have proceeded by the course of Justice. Which advantage comenly
he and some of our English Iesuists do not use to let slip and specially the
broyllers, when it is for matter of revenge. To be short as the said nuntio
told me him self, F. Baldvvin desired that those differences between Master
Doctor Gifforde and the Iesuists might be ended. Whereupon they both being
with him, he sittinge in his chair and they standing, he took one hand of
each of them, and held them fast together, F. Baldvvin and the said Doctor
stoupinge down together, the said father began and said to this effect: that
if either the Iesuists or F. Persons had any way offended Doctor Gifford that
in their names he did ask them forgiveness, and afterward the said Doctor in
like manner repeted the like words in effect, that the said father had used:
and said that if he had offended the Iesuists, or F. Parsons, that he asked
them forgiveness, and so they parted good friends, both promisinge before the
said Nuntio, that the accord should be published, but the manner thereof kept
secret, and (as I remember) he told me likewise, that in their presences the
Said Papers and writings were burnt, or to be burnt afterward: which was
done to the end these things should never be spoken of again. The Said
Nuntio vvrote in particular to Cardinal Cayetan then protector of our nation,
how these matters passed, and were accorded. F. Persons got a copye of the
said letter, and vvrote to one (as I remember) in doway, that Master Doctor
Gifforde had asked the Iesuists forgeuenes upon his knees, and Said Nothing,
how F. Baldvvin Began in form a foresaid: but leaves it out, knovving it
would have been to his disaduauntage. In this you may see he left out that
which was against the Iesuists, which clean changes the matter And by his
seditious report, he was the cause of a new breach: And if he had told the
truth in the whole, then should it have been found, that, F. Baldvvin had
been ihe seaker and beginner of this accord. And so F. persous had had no
cause to triumph against Master Doctor Gifforde, as he did. But rather the
said Doctor against him. It is well known that this is not the first time
that. F. Persons has used these trikes, as in addinge, deminishinge,
equiuocatinge, vsinge of subintelligiturs, yea and if need be flatlye to lie,
so as it may serve his turn. All which narration of these things I have made
because one may see, that you rather discover your malice, then advance your
pretense, in speakinge of the foresaid memorialls and letters: as also of
fishers papers and depositions, which you say be reserved, when as by the
said Nuntio they were condemned to the fire, not worthy after ever to be
remembered.

You say fisher was very repentant for the offenses he had committed, and
confessed of him self frelye such matters, as you allege from him against me
and others, but I say if he be free from fear of punishment, and came face to
face before them he has accused, he vvoulde for the dischardge of his
conscience, (at least if he be a good Christian) acquit them of the most
principal points you take most advantage of, because they be false, and
excuse him self by the rigor and roughnes you caused to be used to wards him,
which makes many times men of vveake spirits and courage to say whit is
black. And for that concerns me, I do not so far despair of the
acknovvleginge of his errors and faults, but that if I might speak with him
before indifferent persons, I would make him lay down the truth of the
speeches and actions (which were very fevv) that passed between him and me,
and to show that they were nothing in that sort, and sense, you give them
out, but were very well to be justified before God, and man, and tendinge to
no other end, but to the advancement of gods cause, and reformation of such as
hinder the same. And vvher as you rehearse diverse pieces off letters of the
Cardinal allens and others in the leafes 36.37.86.87.88. vvherby you would
make men to think that Master Doctor gifforde, Master Thomas Throckmarton, and
my self, were in faction against the said Cardinal, (all which letters if
they be well examined, prove nothing to the purpose) it is well known that
the said Cardinal did so esteem of Doctor Gifforde, for his virtue,
learning, and other singular gifts, as until his dieng day, he made account
of him as his son: and used him, about him, as for his Theologall, which is
a place of honor and confidence, and as for master Thomas Throckmarton, he
esteemed him so much, for his rare and virtuous parts: as he determined, (if
he had lived) to have married him to one of his neces. Which shows he
tookenether of them in faction against him, how soever it pleases you to
interpret the said Cardinals letters contrary to his meaning. And put the
case there might have been some small difference in opinions among us about
some private matters, which happens many times between the dearest friends,
that afterward was lapped up in a louinge and kind manner: it follows not
that they be in faction one against an other, as you vvoulde have it.

And as for the concepit which the said Cardinal had of me, you shall hear
out of his letter written with his own hand, not long before his death
dated the 16. of July 1594. as follows. Good Master Paget, Doctor Gifforde,
and Master Mushe told you no lie, when they advertised you of mine affection
and desire of your friendship: for so it is in deed, and so have Jeuer thought
of your calling, discrete and honorable comportement, that you are worthy to
be employed, and to join with me, or any other in the service of our
country. I never had other opinion of you in my life. and cet.

This letter is of latter date then any I am sure you can show to the
contrary. And in truth I have diverse letters written with his own hand of
latter date then this, that witness the good conceit he had of me, and the
confidence he reposed in me, by comunicatinge freelye unto me matters of
weight, which it seemed he would not have nether you, nor Father Persons
know of: because there was some straungnes grown between him and F.
persons, and as I have been crediblye informed, by those who were most
intrinsicall with the said Cardinal, he began in his latter time to mislike
yours and F. Persons violent humors in such sort, as if he had lived he would
have courbed you shorter, for meddlinge either in matter of state, or in the
seminaryes, or mission of Priests. And this was seen by his causinge F.
Cresvvel to be removed from the government of the English college at Rome,
whose in discrete and tirannicall behavior deserved the same. And for the
which act, both he, and F. Persons used against the said Cardinal among
their secret friends and folovvers, such uncivil and irreuerent speeches, as
ever after there was but holovv likinge between them.

Now you Master Libeller or Father Persons (because I would be sure to hit
rightlye of the author of this libell) I address my self to you both, and do
ask you. Who have been the beginners of these sturres and broils, among
English Catholics at home and abroad, has it not been you that have
assaulted men in their reputations and credits, by causinge to be spread abroad
of them slanderous reports, and calumnyes, for that they vvil not yield and
subject them selves to your obedience and pride? the chief grovvnd of your
exceptions to me, is it not for that your selves say, I would not make you
priuye of my courses and actions? and if I had dealt in any matter of practice
for our country besides you (as I never did) but that you were the inuentors
of the same, and the persvvaders of me thereunto, (the more infortunat that I
had such directors) upon what prerogative do you challenge of me that slauerye
that I must deliver to you my conceits and whole course of life, by what
authority do you demand it. have you such commission from his holiness? or
any foreign prince, that is to force me to render you account, of what I
speak or do? I am sure you hane it not. Or if you had it, I vvoulde not obey
it, no farther then my likinge, for temporal jurisdiction: for that I owe in
that case no obedience but to my sovereign Prince. If you demand the same in
repect you think your selves to have a superlatiue vvisdome, experience, and
pietye above allothers of our nation, you are deceived, for men see that many
off your practices be rash and vngo dlye, and to have failed: And your lives
to be full of errors and imperfections, and are to be amended. If upon hope off
vvorldly preferment, or profit, their has been or perhaps may be some of our
nation so folishe^, and childishe, that being temporal men do make vows
unto you in such sort, as they have and will vvholye be disposed of by you,
both in spiritual and temporal affairs, and that you have and do place
diverse of them in honorable houses and else vvher as your spies to make
secretlye relation to you of all that passes in their houses, I am not to be
brought to that bent, therefore never look for it, for you shall never have it.
I will acknovvledge that devvtye to my sovereign Prince, and country, that I
am bound unto, that respect to my superiors I ought, that affection to my
parents and friends they shall deserve: but to such as I esteem mine enemies
as you be, that seek to spoil me unjustly of mine honor and reputation, I
am not to be blamed, if I seperat my self from your company and actions. And
if men would but observe, as both I and many have done, your ambitious desire
of directinge and comma^dinge both private Persons, Prelates, and Princes, and
vnlest you obtain it there is nothing but war with you, they would be of
my mind and should see that wheresoever you live, the most of your actions and
practices tend to that end.

I presume in answer of this, there shall come nothing from you but
detractions, I will say with Plato being injured: continue to detract, for
hardlye can you speak well: and I will say with lisander being outraged
with bitter words: vomit boldlye and often your slanders and calumnyes, and
spare not, it may be a mean to emptye your minds of envy and malice, vvher
with they be much infected and posoyned. For mine own part the profit I
will reap, shall be to make me more vvarye, and fearful to fail, more
careful and diligent to direct my manners, to conduct mine actions and to
reform and correct mine imperfections, which things God grant in me, and
that you may have repentance of your faults past, and a charitable behavior
for the time to come, which is the right and rediest way, to procure peace,
an quietness, among us, of every one to be desired and embraced.

THE EPISTLE OF THE Author to his friend. M.D.VV.
Right Worshipful.
I Have received the Apology you sent me as a token of your ancient good
will continued toward me, and a sign that you are not forgettfull of me,
for the which I yield you most humble thanks, earnestly requesting your wor.
to continevve the same courtuous good will still toward him, that will not
be forgetful thereof, nor omit any occasion to acknovvledge and requite it
according to my poor ability. And in fevv words to tell you the truth, the
book was at the first vvellcome to me, as new things ordinarily are to all
men But when I had read it over, it utterly misliked me, for the causes you
may see in this discourse annexed. Truth it is, as your vvour coniectured, I had
the other books, but not sent me by any of that faction, with whom I never
had any dealing or intercourse of vvriting, but out of Ingland from one who
with the rest acknowledged the Archpriest at his first institution. He sent
them upon this occasion.

In August last N. N. (who passed by you) having occasion to go into Ingland
I dealt with him to go down into my country to see vvhither my friend
wear living or no, and to bring me certain nevves thereof. He seeeng these
books upon his table and telling him that they were nouellties in these
contreys, he sent them to me by him: and so receuing them in Septembre last,
when I had read them curssorely over, I threvv then in a corner never thinking
to look on them again (so unpleasant are contentious books unto me) but
having received this Apology and conferred them together, I began to perceive
what the grovvnde and substance was of this sandalous controversy, the
which before I neglected and cared not for. And findinge this Apology to be
written rather to augment then to extinguish the contentions, and perceuinge
that the others went simply to work, in setting down truly and simply the
causes of these controversies, but the Apologye to fly as from a serpent the
true causes thereof. And beside seeing the chief hedd of this controversy, to
depend upon a point of law, I could not hold my hand, but was driven in
recompense of the book you sent me, to send you these points vvherin I
mislike the Apology, and vvherin they ought to have satisfied (as they do not)
their friends and readers. I hope in reading it without affection you shall
perceive who those be that Sibi imputare debent, qui causam dederunt, quique
illi sunt, as you note of our holy Martyr S. Thomas, and upon them the vae
illis etc. is like in thend to fall. For my part I mislike with the
disconte^ted brethren for one thing, with the Jesuits for 2. things: with
the Archpriest for as many: and with the Apology for a great number of faults
it has committed, as by this discourse is made evident. With the discontented
pristes, not for vvriting, for it was necessary for them so toe do, because
it stood upon their honor, honesty and credit: but for vvritting as they did
hardly both of the whole society, and of diverse particular Fathers and
priests. If they had kept the^ selves with in the compass of their matter in
the latin book to his Hol: as they did in the latin book to the Inquisitors:
the Apology maker must have held his peace for any advantage he could have had
against them. The first fault of the Fathers was, for that they meadled in a
matter nothing at all apparteinning to them. For what have religious men (that
have a distinct body, and a distinct common weal, and have distinct
Superiors,) to do with an other body, and common weal distinct and separt
from them? What had they to do with the affairs, associations and
contentions of secular priests? yea what had the Jesuits more to do to
meadle in it, then the Benedictines, Charterhovvse Moncks, and Capuchines? of
which orders we have diverse of our nation as desirous of, and as zealous for
the good of our country as the English Fa. can be? Their second fault was, in
vvritting of that unlearned and scandalous book of schism against the
Priests that were innocent thereof and far from the note of sedition and
rebellion, for that vvithstanding the Archpriestes institution upon a
Cardinals letters, without his Hol. Bull: as in this discourse is
sufficiently proved. I find not so great fault with the vvritter (for he might
be commanded to do it) as with the Superior for commanding it to be done, and
when it was done so unadvisedly by his subscription to approve it. for our
rule in law says: ea nostra facimus quibus nostra impartimur authoritatem.
We make those things our own, to the which we do impart our authority.

One of the ARchpriestes faults was, for that without judgment and prudence
he subscribed also to that book and by his approbatio^ made it as current as
he could. His other fault was, his over much severity toward his
brethren: as well appears by his answers to them laid down in their
appeal, and neither checked nor controuled by this Apology. I might join to
this his tossing of the censures without any regard or reverence.

Now for the faults of this Apology, I refer you to that which
follovveth. If I have vvro^ged the Authors thereof either in my words, or by
mistaking the sense of theirs, I submitt me self to the just reprehension of
any learned and vnpassionat man whosoever, and promise all due and charitable
satisfaction. And that I my self was free from all affection or passion when
I vvrote it, (except that some times I may utter some sharp word, their
fault being so evident and exorbitant, that an Angel would have dipped his
pene in gaul) may be easily co^iectured, by that I was never, (as I have
said) of the one faction or the other: but all way kept me self free and
clear from all passion, loving and honoring both sides and parties as my dear
contreyme^, having wished and desired that some good peace and appointment
might be made amongst them. Now for more proof of my neutralitie first, I
never vvrote or subscribed any letter in my life either against the Fathers for
the others, nor for the Fa. against them, nor ever was dealer in any actio^
Pro or con, for either party. Secondly, there have passed through this town
men of both sides, and also have lodged with me sometimes men of either
faction, at one and the self same time: The which were equally vvellcome unto
me, I gave them always the like and equal countenance, because I loved them
egally, for that they were English Priests or Catholics. And for this I
refer me to the report of such of either side, that have done me that honor
and pleasure as to visit me. Lastly if I could be parciall or affected more to
one side then an other (as in truth I cannot be) there are many reasons and
causes, why I should lean rather to the Archpriest and his side, them to
the other. for that I have many old and dear friends of that side, both at home
and abroad: to omit the Archpriest him self with whom I have been acquainted
above these 35. years, as well in Oxford, as in Doway, and since that in
Ingland. My brother who should be the dearest to me in this world (as I
vndrestand) is of that side: So is M. Henry Shavve my oldest friend, one of the
6. assista^ts named by the Card. M. Bra^ston, and M. VViggs, we having been
brought up together and fellows of one and the same colleage. and to the last
very particulary bound for a singular frendshipp he once in Doway shevved me.
Besides M. Archer (whom these nicnamed the discontented brethren seame egerly
to pursue) is my dear friend and godsoon. To omit a great nombre of my
acquaintance that are amongst the united Priest (as they are named) the
supposed Authors of this Apology. On the other side I know no man with whom
I am familiarly acquainted but M. Edward Bennett, nor to whom I am bound for
any benefitt or extraordinary frendshipp received, but to M. Bluett, who some
25. years since, did me a good turn, the which if ever occasion shall be
offered, I mean to requite in eodem genere amicitiae. By these fevve you may
perceive how free I am from faction and clear from all passion to either
party. You may ask me then, how chauuce you begine now to entremeadle, the
strife and stir being at the vvhottest? I answer. If I had never seen the
Apology, I should never have thought upon the matter: but seeing such fond and
foolish matter therein, and by that book perceiving the justice of the cause of
those called discontented Priests, I could not hold my hand I confess, but for
your sake and in recompense of the book, to send you my advice there upon,
hoping you will look more deeper into the cause and consider of it beter and
not geve such credit to the Apology as you seem by your letters to do, and
with all to see more clealy where the faults of all these scandalous and
uncharitable troubles are to be laid, and who were the first occasioners of
it, and after that, the renevvers thereof. This is the end and scope of my
vvritting. I have not respected my fore said friends, nor the Fathers amongst
vvho^ I have many a good friend quia magis mihi amica est veritas. truth and
true dealing between Priests and Religious, ought to be preferred before all
vvorldly respects and carnal friends: as I have endeavored to do in these notes
of mine. And so after my humblest and hartiest commendations to you and by you
to all the Seniors of my acquaintance with you. I committ you to god and my
self to your devout Memento from Pont. a Musson.

Your Wour. to serve and honor. H. E.

TO THE UNITED PRIESTS.
MY Reverend and dearly beloved in our savior the united Priests, the
supposed Authors of a brief Apolog. which is set out under your names,
against certain venerable Priests, ancient and constant Confessors your
brethren and companions in this fight against heretics, and defense of the
Catholic cause, by you yet termed and called Discontented Brethren, I have
seen and read that Apology not without great grief and sorrovve of mind, to
see the, children of one happy and virtuous father (I mean that learned pious
man of worthy and famous memory Card. Alle^) to be so amongst themselves
divided, to be so in heart and mind separated, to be so in love and affection
disunited, that the one part vvriteth against the other what do I say,
write? nay do so calumniat one an other, and as it were tear in pieces the
fame, name, and good renown, one of the other. A lamentable case no doubt to
see such as are in durance and fetters for the faith, so far from Charity;
to see holy Confessors and designed martyrs so far from brotherly love and
affection: to see such good Priests quite forgett the second chiefest precept
of Christian Religion which is Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum. how can
any man be persuaded that you love your selves or your own souls helths,
that do not love your egall Christian, men of your own coat and quality?
men of your own educatio^, with whom you have been brought up in the hame
house, in the same study, and at the same table. I doubt not but that blessed
prelate does see it VViih great compassion; as I myself one of his eldest
children, and one of your aucientest brethren do most heartily. Seeing
therefore this dissension among you, and my fathers house as it were ou fire,
imitating that holy man Aphraates of whom Nic^pherus makes mention, Lib. 11.
c. 25.
I have gotten out of mine hermitage, that is, I have left for a time my law
books, and am come to advertise you my united brethren friendly and brotherly
of 2. things especially. The first is, that if you be the Authors of this
Apology, that then you leave and desist to pursue this contention and
controversy, because you hane the vvorser end of the staff; and defend
against your conscience and knowledge (as in these notes is manifestly proved)
an unjust and ruinous cause. The other, if you be not the Authors (as I
suppose you are not) that then you do not suffer your selves to be any longer
abused, and your names to be borrowed, to the end to continue contention and
dissension betvveene you and your brethren, to one of these, to consent or
satisfy you are bound in conscience. for how can you or dare you being in
persecution and as it were at the persecutors disposition, being once
advertised of your fault and errors, continue still in the same, without a
notorious mark of obstination, vvch is the mother of heresy? And with what
conscience can you lend your names not only to the continuing and furthering
of conte^tion: but also to the debasing, disgracing and defamation of your
own coat and vocation, yea and to the defacing of your own selves as is
often noted and told you in these notes. I have doo^ mine endenour to vvarne
and advertise you, it is your part to follvve the good counsel of a friend, and
especially of a common friend, as you all do know, I am unto you all, both
united and discontented. For mine own part, (as I hane often protested and
still do) I am not passioned, nor leaning more to one side then the other, nor
affectioned more to the one, then to the other: but have many more dear friends
amongst thvnited then amongst the other. Yet the truth which is to be preferred
before all vvorldly ftendship, and the infinite faults of this Apology, have
driven me to run amongst you with Aphraates, to see if I can quench the
fire, that begins to ruynate and destroy our Saluiours church at home in our
country: by shevving you how unjustly you receued the Archp. upon a Cardinals
letters, how scandalouslie and falsely your brethren for their just resistance
were sclandered to be schismatics: and how unjustly and uncharitably the
Archp. and Jesuits after the Popes bull was come^, and their submissio^ made
thereto, these were nevvlie and freshlie slandered to be schismatics for the
former occation. I do here show you that these are the chiefest points
now in controversy, that your brethren had both law and reason for them,
that this your Apology is so far from coming near to these questions, and
the handlinge there of, thath it has not ansvveared any one of abdoue 30.
Reasons, which your brethren bring for their defense. How can you by this
kind of vvriting, I will not say satisfy your reader, but your own
conscience and knowledge? This pain I have taken both for your sakes, and
your readers also, to thend they be not deceived by this Author whosoever he
be. if you take it in good part, and with that affection that I vvrott it, I
shall have thought my pains well employed: but if you take it in evil part I
cannot do with all, mine intention being to do good. If you reply, I vvil
triplicat as well as I can. If you shall judge me partial, in time and place I
will prove the contrary, so that you shall beconstrained to confess as
much. if by this means I shall open but sum of your eyes and make you to
conceive the indignity of the thing I have my desire. I beseech God so open
your hearts and eyes, that you suffer not your selves to be carried away
hereafter with toys and trifles, as it seems hitherto you have been, and
to give you the grace to look more deeply in to the matter, and not permit
your selves and your names to be borrowed and abused for the extolling of
sum and the depression of your selves and of your quality, and vocation, as
you have suffered hitherto, to your own discredit, the contynuance of strife,
hindrance of the cath: faith, Gods dishonor, and our contreyes great hurt, and
so I committ me self to your devout Memento, and to your chains.

THE PREFACE.
TO omit the 2. places of scripture, put in the beginning of your Apology,
because the first is impertine^t, for neither the Protector nor the Archp. was
their superior before his. Hol. Bull. came, as is often proved in these notes.
the other may be very aptly applied to the Archp. and our english Jesuits in
England, who were the first Authors and causers of all these contentio^s
abroad and at home, by vvriting and teaching that the Priests which refused
to receive the Archp. upon a Card. lettres without scripp or scroule from his
Hol. were Schismatikes, seditious, rebellious, and I know not what: as also
is proved in these notes. Beside, the Archp. after the Bull was come and the
priests had submitted themselves thereto, began the broyle again by
pronouncing and proclayming them Schismatics as before, which also is set
down in these notes. S. Paul wills unquiet people but especialy the
Authors of unquietness to be repressed (as you say) or to be rebuked (as I say):
but the Arch. and Jesuits were the Authors of this unquietness, as is shevved
at large in these notes, ergo you have brought S. Paul against these, whom
you pretend to defend and clear from unquietness. I beseech you then (my united
brethren) to look better to the matter, and to pluck of the mask of affection
that now blinds you, and to consider well that the renewing of the crime
of schism by the Archp. was the only cause why they vvrote in defense of
their good name honor and fame, as is proved hereafter.

But these scriptures are not so impertine^tly brought, as the place which you
allege out of S. Augustine, which is flatt against you for in this Apo. (as he
says) you know not to distinguish betvveene true and false yea you dare not
once approach and come near the truth. nor betvveene probations and
criminations: many criminations indeed you put down, but you bring noe
probation at all. between instructions and fictions: your Apol. being wholy
compiled of fictions and fittons, of toys and trifles, so far is it from
giving any instructions, pertaining to the matter in question and controversy.
betvveene handling the cause, and running from the cause. never were men so
lively described by these words as you are for you are so far from handling
the cause that all your drifte is to run from the cause as is manifestly
shevved in these notes: and I doubt not but that your readers having once read
these notes will much vvonder at your audacitie for alleging a place in the
very front of your book that makes so evidently against you: and that does so
palpably control and descrie your Iuggling, fraud, and guile. if you know
it not? viz that this your Apol. does not distinguish betvveene true and
false, that it has many Criminations and noe probatio^s at all of the matter
in que^tion that it is full of fictions, and void of all instructions: that it
handles not the cause, but runs and roveth quite from the cause, if (I say)
you know it not? then Jam not sorry that I hane had this care to instruct you.
and if thereby. your hearts will not be turned to peace, yet our peace
returns to us as it did to S. Augustine.

In the very beginning of your epistle to the Pope, ^n the epistle to his Hol.
you tell his Hol. with what grief of mind and confusion of countenance you
are constrained to defend the ecclesiastical Hierarchte which God inspired him
to institute amongst us. you may well say: with Confusion of countenance for
to make so false a report to his Hol: in the very entry of your book: which
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy I pray you do you defend in this your Apol? you
should here hane distinguished with, S. Augustine, betvveene true and false
for there were (you know) two institutions of this Hierarchy, one by the
Card. letters, as you confess in the 8. page of your epistle and in the 10.
you talk of an other institution made by his Hol: breue 1599. In defense of
which of these 2. Institutions, I pray do you write? if of the first, the^
may you well in deed, have grief of mind and be confused in countenance,
yea and cautherized in conscience for abusing his Hol: with so notorious a
falsehood. But tell me in good earnest is, This Apol. written to the Catholics
of Ingland in defense of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy, instituted by the
Cardinals letters? if you say yea: these notes do utter your impudency, and
do shevve to all Catholics in Ingland and out of England, that you never dare
come near the question, but that you fly from it as from a Toade: and thar
you have not as yet ansvvered one only reason of more then 30. that your
brethren bring against it, albeit your account the^ but fond and of no force
at all. Let all Catolickes now Iudgee if you ought not vvorthely to be
co^fused in countenance to make so flatt a fitton to his Hol: and that in
print, in making him and all men to believe that you write this your Apol. in
de fence (forsooth of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, by him so fatherly and
prudently instituted amongst us: when as (I say) I show to all such as are
not stark blind, in these my notes: that you fly from and shoone that
matter, as from a venomous Serpent: if then you have abused his Hol: touching
the first institution how can you excuse your selves and say: that this your
Apol. is written in defense of the second institution, made and confirmed by
his Hol: bulls? A fair piece of work who I pray you does or has impugned
it? you fight with your own shadovve in making his Hol. believe, your
vvriting is in defense of his institution of the Archpr. you should first have
proved it to be impugned, and then to have defended it. Nay, it is so far
from being impugned by your brethren, that you confess frankly in this and
many other places of your Apol. that so soon as they savve his Hol: Breue they
by and by yielded and were reconciled to the Archp. now the cause both of
this first and latter breach also, which was, for that they were holden and
proclaimed by books and lettres, and confirmed by the Archp. sentence, for
schismatics, rebellious, and factious (which is the head and ground of all
this controversy) you mention not at all. and yet you are so shameless, as to
tell Christ's vicar, that you write in defense of the Archp. for the resisting
of whose institution upon a Card. letters your brethren were defamed with
the horrible crime of schism. Well, if you have in this your Apol. defended
neither the first nor last institution how are you able to defend your selves
from a most hayno^s falsehood? I charge you with it and that in good earnest,
and in your next either discharge your selves in shevving, that you have
defended the one or the other institution, and that by solid and substantial
prooffes, orels I will leave you the vvhetstone, as vvorthily gained by you,
and that in fittoning to the highest power and Potentat upon earth.

The reader may gather by this epistle, how substantially you handle the
matter through out your Apolog. for the same order you keep here, the same
kind of prooffes you observe and bringtherein. you have taken upon you to
defend the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy institured by his Hol. let us see how
coningly and learnedly you do it. First, in the year 1558 her Majesty began
to reign, and the Protestants gained more in the first 10. years of her
reign, then in the 34. that have eusued, ergo, the institution of the Arch.
made, by a Card. lettres, was law full and to be obayed. In the year 1568.
the college at Douay was erected by D. Allen. ergo, the institution of the
Archp. was lavvfull. And here is to be noted, you have set the Cart before
the horse. for first you me^tio^ the seminary of Douay, and fondatio^ thereof,
and then after, how learned men placed them selves in diverse universities, and
vvrote books in confutation of heresy. whereas, these men you mean, had
written their books many a fair yeare-before there was any Seminary thought
or dreamed of. I would pray the Reader here to mark well the order of this
tale laid down in their second note, and I vvil marvel if thou marvel not
much at it.



Rhemes ergo the Archp. etc.

Rhemes so long as D. Allen gouernd it with this therefore, as with a
manifest fitto^ I charge you, discharge your selves for your own honor in
your next: and in that you name Banes, I would you should know, he was not
sent thither as a spy, but there in the Seminary he became a naughty spy,
and was taken and punished there as a spy, by the uniform consent of all
from the highest to the lowest: so far was he from making any sedition
there, as indecently you inform his Hol. in this place. But I pray you, what
seed of sedition sowed John Nicols, or Solomon Alread, or Monday, or Sledd,
in Rome? I do oppose you now. I believe as well as you that they were
spies, and I know that they were afterward in Ingland very naughty
fellows, and did much hurt there: but I am ashamed that you should either say
or think that such base varlets could sovve any seed of sedition in Rome:
all those that knevve those companions will control you of oversight in this
point, asvvell as I do. But be it they sowed sedition in Rome in the year
1578. go. the institution of the Archp. made by a Card. letters in the year
1598. (just 20. years after) was good and lavvfull, for this must be your
conclution, otherwise all that you have there set down is to no end or
purpose, neither do you show thereby to write in defense of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy instituted by his Hol. amongst us, but rather of
other gugavves and by matters.

In the year 1580. fa: Parsons, and fa: Campio were sent into Ingland. go. if
the sky fall, we shall have larkes, beit that by their cominge, religion
began to go with more feruor yet is not that true that diverse ancient and
grave priests went in with them by their example and persvvasion. not by
their example (I say) for many a priest was gone in many years before the
Jesuits went in. and those that went in eithervvith the^ or after them, were
priests sent in by the ordinary mission, and not by their example: only 3. or
4. that had been Chaplyns in the Romans College vver^ persuaded by D. Allen
(from whom you would take this praise) and not by the fathers, to go into
Ingland: and this I refer to the conscience and report of M. D. Bauande, who
only is yet living (as I understand) of all those ancient and grave Priests.
now as I would not take any right full praise from the fathers: so can I not
endure other men's praises to be unjustly attributed to them.

In the years 1582. Tyrell, fol. 26.
Gifford, and Gratley to join and treat with the^. for in your book you lay
it down thus: A combination was made by sum of our order with walsingham
to the prejudice of D. Allen and fa. pa. and in your mergent you put down the
confession of G. G. suppose that he were VValzinghams spy, yet I do not
believe that the Gentlemen knevve so much, and you are not of such credit with
me, that I should take all that you speak for gospel. They have both wit and
means to defend their honor, seeing you have given them the occasion, and so
often blotted your Apolog. with their names.

etc. go. Povvles steeple and charing Cross. may meet.





Wither any laufull subordination, or any dignity may be given or instituted
by the bare letters of a Cardinal saing he did it. Ex expresso mandato
Sanctissimi. without the Popes bull or breue? your brethren and I with them
say no. and both they and I, have proved our assertion. you say yea, but do
prove nothing in all this your Apol. albeit (as you do falsely flapp is Hol.
in the teeth) you have written it in defense of his Institution but I hope at
length after your long vagaries and running at Rouers, you will be so good as
your word and prove that the Ecclesiastical Hierarhis was lavvfully and duly
instituted by the Card. Protectors letters without the Popes Bull. for this
you must prove, or else you may look with a confused countenance and be much
grieved in mind, to have promised more to his Hol. then you have hitherto, or
ever shall be able to perform. I pity your case, and am in deed full sorry, to
see how you hane plucked an old house upon your head. With this
Subordination all good and obedient Catholics were contented and co^forced
(you say) go it was lavvfully instituted. but vvheare you say, it came from
the sea Apostolic; by your leave you fitten. for nothing is said to comme
from the sea Apostolic, except it come under the Breues or Bulls of that see,
as in these notes shall be proved. but here was no Bull from that See, go you
say not well, that it came from the Sea Apostolic, seeing it came but from a
Card. Protector who had no authority to do it, nor any jurisdiction or
power at all in Ingland. you add: that they called in question the Card.
letters, and that which follovveth, so they did in deed and that instly, and
still do, for any thing you have, or can say to the contrary, or in defense
of the Card. or his letters.

In all this your Apol. (which you make his Hol. believe is written in
defense of the Card. institution of the Archp.) you have not one word or
reason. I say, not one, for the defense of the Card. and his doings: you say:
they impugned his Hol. meaning. how I pray you could they do that, having
nether that breue, bull, nor letter from his Hol. explicating or declaring to
them his meaning? it is but your imagination. how (I pray you) can I tell
what your meaning is, except you explicat the same to me, either by word of
mouth letter, or express messe^ger. But his Hol. by none of these means
shevved or declared his meaning unto them. go. they could not impugn it.

But that which follovveth is a mere calumny: yea they called into quostion
your authority it self, vvhither you could do it without them or no. this
to be a nanghtie slander and a foul calumny is often proved in these notes,
to the places I refer you.

At last we are come to the Popes breue in co^firmatio^ of the said
Hierarchy, to the which you confess your brethren did obey, but after sought
occasions to break again. what were these occasions? for shooth, as you
calumniat: the^ they were so engaged to the council that they could not hold
long. The counsel serves you well for a mask, to cover the cause of this
last breach: which yet they lay down otherwise both simply and plainly,
and lay it upon the Archp. and Jesuits back, and that so firmly, that in all
your Apol. you cannot as yet clavve it of, neither in deed do you go about
it, the matter is so plain and evident. How justly they appealed, is
shevved hereafter. I know not what you mean in this your epistle by
Scandalous and temerarious propositions: But sure I am, that you your selves
have accused and accounted the chiefest points of our Cath. religion, for
scandalous, dangerous, and offensive doctrine, to your eternal shame, as in
these notes will appear.

I would to God they or any other could get liberty of conscience in Ingland,
under condition that all the fathers were out, and I my self banished with
them never to comme in so long as I live. if you or the fathers had that zeal
and charity to your country, you should not mislike of this condition, if
liberty could be gotten by it. But I see well, you are far from the zeal of
S. Paul. why (my Masters) cannot Cath. religion, be taught and planted in
Ingland without the fathers? it should seem you are of that opinion, because
you like not of that condition, which all good men ought to like of: if we
could have the liberty of our conscience restored unto us so good cheap.

Well, as you began with a fitton, so I perceive you will end with a flatt
lie: for (say you) in this Apol. we do late down by clear historical
narration and authentical testimonies the grounds of all. Of what all? of
the controversy betvveene the Archp. and your disconte^ted brethren? nothing
less, as has been often said. your historical narratio^ is nothing but a
recapitulation of the seditions of the Romans college, of the factio^s in Paris,
against D. Allen and fa. pa. of the factions in Flanders against fa. Holt and
M. own, of G. G. spierie and books against D. Allen, and fa. par. of R.
Fishers examination, of the praise of the fathers, of M VVatsons common wealth
and of the sturres in wisbech. No narration at all, either historiall or
legal, of the controversy now in question. your authentical testimonies are
a great number of tedious letters written by private men, either the fathers
creatures, or wholy addicted to their faction: which yet for the more part
prove not that for the which they are brought and alleged. Authentical
(qnoth you) even as authentical, as an obligation sealed with butter, and all
one. who ever heard private men's letters missiues to be called and termed
authentical testimonies? in deed such are the authentical prooffes you bring
and none else. how durst you so abuse his Hol. without blushing, as to tell
him, that every private man's letter is an authentical testimony? God of his
mercy open your eyes, that you may see your own error and folly, that
thereby yielding to the truth and leaving all contention, you may go on
forwards as you have begun, to vvynn Souls, to advance Gods glory, and
relieve and comfort his afflicted English church, which groneth more bitterly
under the weight of this dissension, then it ever did, or does under the
greauous burden of persecution.

There you abuse your Reader again making him believe that your Book was
written to lay forth the progress and success of the whole Controversy, by
a serious and orderly narration of the Chief matters: a strange thing to see
your vanity, you lay forth in deed a serious narration of all the factions
that have been since the Seminaries begun, but what is that to the Question
now in controversy? have you laid down by a serious and orderly narration
the cause of those 2. breaches the occasion of this dissension? Mumme. have you
laid down their Reasons that moved them, not to receive the Archp. upon the
Card. letters? No. have you laid down how fa. Liester by vvriting would
prove them schismatics for the same? Neque: have you laid down how after
their union with the Archp. the same Archp. pronounced them Schismatics for
nor admitting him upon the Card. letters, and forbade all Priests to absolve
them? no forsooth. And why so? bicavse we will not talk of it, and are
sorry that ever it was mentioned. these are the controversies in question,
these are the chief matters, and hereof you should have set down a serious
and orderly narration. but you dare as well eat your fingers as to come near
to these questions and chief matters: you ly a loofe, for fear of knocks. I
cannot blame you, Leo est in uia. the Truth is so dreadful, that you dare not
approach it. you stand a far of, and cast your shuttcock of Romans seditions,
factions of Paris, and fla^ders: examinations, common wealths, and bundels of
letters, as it were at their heads. but therevvith you cannot hurt them. and
to approach and close with them in the chief matters now in controversy,
you dare not. Fie upon impudency, you ate not content with your serious and
orderly narrations of your flym fla^bs: but you will also set down their
untruths etc. as they lie, that thereby the reader may judge of their spirit
and manner of proceeding. In Gods name go on then.

First, you find no less then 5. or 6. deceipts shifts, and falsehoods in
th'inscription of the latin book. to use your own words, Reader heerby thou
may guess what truth thou may expect at these man's hands in the rest of
their book, vvhem they begin with so deceiptfull a calumny. For, fol. 111.
and seq.
in the place by me here noted is shevved, that they have not committed any
one deceit, shift, or falsehood in the inscription of that book: but that you
(united brethren) have committed so notorious and gross a falsehood, that it
passes all their 6. wear they such as you term them,

The second, is out of the 3. page and not out of the 2. as you qnote it. these
are their words: hinc enim etc. on one side we are grievously vvounded and
murdered by the common enemy, on the other side we are grevvously oppressed
with mutual contentio^s and strifes. what deceit, shift, or falsehood, is
theare in these words? are you not wonderfully blinded with malice to set
them down for such? no (say you) because fevve of these men have been
vvounded or putt to death by the common enemy. For putting to death I believe
you, for they are all yet living: but if you dare say, that none of those that
have been of their opinion have suffered death: then dare I say, you dare say
an untruth. VVounded (qnoth you) why? have not many of these endured
imprisonement, banishment, loss of their goods and liberty for the cath.
cause so well as you my united brethren?) and do they not by Gods grace,
stand as firm and stable, against the common ennemy in defense of the cath.
cause, as you do? Impudency it self cannot gainsay it.

To omit the slander of their secret nourishing by the counsel: you answer
fondly that their oppression is none, but such as they list to imagine, when
all men have seen the^ without imagination in fact and deed to have been
oppressed these many years. let your Reader consider here, with what goodly
toies you fill your book: and with all, your infidelity in nipping of your
latter word of the sentence, which shevved wherein they vvedre greuousely
oppressed with mutual contentions, the reader may well conjecture with what
spirit you write, and in what manner you intend to proceed.

The 3. Cogimur, etc. we are forced te fly to the feet of your Hol. etc.
what untruth is here? did they not fly to his feet by printing their book?
knovving that sum copy thereof would come to his Hol. hands or knowledge,
vel per notum aliquem (as they say elsvvhere) vel ignotum amicum vel inimicum,
casu vel dedita opera. but how prove you this to be a falsehood? because they
never sent yet any of their appellations to his Hol, nor any man to prosecute
them. fol. 54. cum seq. and fol. 110.
I give you a sufficient reason therefore in these notes. But how does this
follow they never sent any of their appellations as yet to his Hol. ergo, it
is false and feigned, in that they say, they are compelled to fly by this
their printed book to his Hol. feet. this argument is tied together with
points. pagin. 5.


The 4. Haec autem etc. we are forced (sai you) to diuulgate these things in
print etc. but they say thus: we are forced full sore against our wills
(inuitissime sane) you have herein descouered your own falsehood in nipping of
these words in the Parenthesis, when you go about to shevve a falsehood,
where there is none at all. And of this compulsion against their wills, they
add immediately 3. reasons, which you deceit fully omit. what deceit, shift,
or falsehood are in these words my blinded brethren? or in the 3. Reasons they
yield for this their doing? O how malice does blind, if not a religious
man, yet designed martyrs? this force (say you) came from the council. how
soever it came, they committed neither deceit nor falsehood, for saying they
were forced to do it. Nay, this force proceeded of fa. listers scandalous
book, and of the indiscrete subscription and approbation thereof, by the
superior and the Archp. they were forced (I say) to defend their honor, good
name and fame, so stained and blotted with the haynons crime of schism by the
aforenamed, as in their. 3. reasons here they tell you plainly. but you are
blind and deaf: your (for informing his Hol alone,) printing was not
needful, is refuted in these notes follovving.

Your 5. Is in the 6. and not in the 5. page as you vvote. Jgitur dum, etc.
Wherefore while Card. Alle^ our common father was living, etc. cough out?
why, have you the chyncough? thus they say: wherefore while the Common father
of us all (Priests and Jesuits) and the health and sauegard of ovvr Country
was living, that honorable man of blessed memory Card. Allen a most wise and
holy man, all our affairs as well abroad in the Colleges, as at home amongst
the Priests that labored in the Englisch vineyard, vverre happily governed and
manured. what deceit, shift, or falsehood find you in these speeches? Does
the Author envy the Card. just titles? dare he deny that all went well so
long as that blessed man governed? he seems so to do, else know I not why
he should reckone up these speeches amongst deceit, shifts, and falsehoods.
how soever they glory of the Card. now dead, yet commit they no falsehood
nor deceit in the words by you alleged. By the same words they
secretlye infer that these contentions brake out after his death, and not in
his life. which is so true that you your selves confess it in 3. Fol.
6.48.6.65.6.
seue rall places of your Apol. This my brethren is to play at smallgame
rather then to sit out. but rather then you would not thaue them noted of
falsehood, you vvil accuse them of true and orderly speeches, as fondly you do
in this preface for deceit and falsehood.

The 7. Desudantibus, etc. Page 7.
while the seminary Priests did thus sweat in the harvest of Ingland (which
harvest was then well manured and almost ripe) sum Jesuits were called in
by D. Allen to help them, whose intention was that they (the Iesuitz) should
be ayders, helpers, and fellow laborours with the Priests in our lords
work, this whole Narration you say, has many falsehoods and vanities. let
us see one. Mary, how well manured and ripened was the Inglish Cath. harnest
22. years ago, when the Jesuits vvear sent first in? I answer: So well as
it has been at any time since, for the space of time, and the number of the
workmen. you say, noe and I say, yes. you talk of 22. years manuring by the
travel of 400. Priests and Jesuits to help them. and I talk of 5. years
space only, and of 100. and odd workmen, If the Priests in that time had not
manured it well and brought it to sum repenes, where had the Jesuits found
harbor or houses to receive them, or men to maintain them in that order they
wear maintained? it was the secular Priests that brought them into honor and
credit, and this thank they have for it. who is so blind, that does not see
by this place, that the Author of this Apol. is a Jesuit, attributing to him
self and his, the manuring and ripenes of our English harvest: and that 2.
Jesuits (although otherwise learned and virtuous men) could do more good to
the ripening of the harvest, then a 100. seminary Priests: this in deed is
both falsehood and vanity. But let us examine your brethrens words, and see
what falsehood and vanity they have committed. Theysaie, that the seminary
Priests did sweat in the harvest of England before the Jesuits came in. if the
falsehood be in that there were seminarye Priests in England before the fathers
went in? I can assure you there were sum for v, years space before the
fathers entered. and that there were at the least a hundredth before they went
in. M. Barlovve being the first seminatye Priest that entered, can testify so
much. So can the R. Archp. and diverse of his assistantz who had been in
Ingl: sum years before the fathers. Is the falsehood or vanity in that they
say: they svvet in the harvest? if the suffering imprisonement and close
imprisonement and martyrdoome (as sum of them had done before the coming of
the Jesuits) loss of goods and liberty, may not be termed svveating? then I
confess they have committed falsehood and vanity for saying so. But lies the
falsehood and vanity in that they say: there was a harvest then in Ingland? O
vanity of vanity! o blindness! o shameless writer! are these falsehoods? are
these vanities? are they not the very solid Truth it self? what poor
Priests are you to write against your own knowledge, and against your own
consciences, untruth? vae vobis that say: darkness is light and light darkness.
But peradventure there is falsehood and vanity in the words follovving:
which harvest was then well manured and almost ripe, sum Jesuits wear
called in by D. Allen to help them. why? was it not well manured? were not
men taught to leave hanting and frequenting heretical service? did not the
Priests preach and teach, say Mass and administer the Sacraments? you vvil
say peradventure the falsehood or vanity is in the word well, because nothing
is well done, but that which the Jesuits do. and by consequence, before they
appeered in the world, there was nothing done well. Is the falsehood in
Almostripe? yea forsooth. and why so? because nothing can be ripened, but hy
the Jesuits. where they comme, all is ripe incontinent. Is it a falsehood or
vanity to say, that sum Jesuits were called in to help them by D. Allen?
why, all the world knovveth this to be truth: and I vvonder how the Author
of this Apol. is so shameless, either to deny it, or count it a falsehood or
vanity. Let fa: par: call to memory, that which I set dovve in these notes
of D. Allens going up to Rome, Fol. 13.
and he must needs bear witness, that D. Allen procured the sending in of the
Jesuits into Ingland, and that to help the Priests that traveled there. By
this you hane proved your selves both falsyfiers and vain men: to extenuat
your own trauells and labors, and togeue the praise thereof to others that
then deserved them not. But let us now see your own falsehoods and vanities.

First your say: that There were but fevve Priests in Jngland. were a
hundred Priests but a fevve? and that theare were a hundred, I can shevve out
of the Register of the years they went in, and of their names. it follovveth:
as having had but one only Seminary until that time the Jesuits went in: if
this be falsehood or no, let the Reader Judge. The Romans Seminary was
instituted (as you confess) in the year 1578. Fol. 3.
the Jesuits went first into Ingland in the year 1580. about mid summer: so
that that College had been founded at the least 2. years before. and yet
there was but one only seminary till that time and so by an arithmeticall
substraction, of 2. you make but one. and that the Reader may better perceive,
this to be a notorions falsehood: Diverse Priests vverre sent out of the ro^.
College in to Ingl. before the Jesuits vve^t thither: as M. Sher martyr, M.
Haddok, Array, Hide, and Meredeth. And fevve known Catholics. this is
indeed a vanity. where (I pray you were all these seminary Priests
besides the old Priests, which were then many in number, receuied and
harbored? by heretics or schismatickes by like. where (I pray you were the
fathers received and almost a hundred Priests that entered the years 1580. and
1581? if there were then but fevve known Catholics? I confess the number
then was not like to the number that was afterward, and to that that is
now: because time and number of workmen, have gained more. And this that I
have said is known to most men that know our case, and for this your
misdemeanor are to lament our common case and cause.

The 8. Ostentans, etc. A certain Jesuit vanting him self among our people as
though he had been Legate to the sea Apostolic, etc. It may be their vanity
is in saying he vanted himself to be, etc. but sure I am in fact and deed he
used the Authority of a legate in assembling Synodes which you confess, and
say that neither D. Fol. 164. b.
Allen nor fa. pa. did allow of it. wherein lies then the falsehood in these
words? for sooth, that he did not vant himself, etc. but in truth and in act
as you your selves confess, he played the Legate. it is not then a material but
a verbal falsehood, such as you commit full many in this your Apol. And to
prove this falsehood, your say it is spoken Of fa: Hayvvood, a grave and
learned man as all men know: as who should say a grave and learued man
cannot be ambitious, or sin in ambition, or as though all Jesuits wear
Angels and saints, and cannot be ambitious, or commite the like sins. I
would to God they wear, for then this lamentable division had never happened
in our country. Now where you refer us to the third chap. of your book,
and to the 11. chap. to see how false and malicious this lie is, with diverse
others uttered against him. I have read over very diligenth your 3. chap. and
find no word there, of fa. Hayvv. at all. Is not this then, a flat lie) to use
your own terms) to say you shevve in such a place how false and malicious
the lie is, where you make no mention at all of it? except under the general
name of Jesuits (whom you defend in that chap.) your Reader must conjecture
that you defend fa. Heyvv, perticularly in the 11. Chap. you say: Fol. 164. b.
And as for that biting flourish brought in page 8. against fa: Heyvv. that he
did vant and brag in Ingland, as legate of the sea Apostolic, called a
provincial Counsel, abrogated the vigils and fasts of our lady, prohibited
the Acts of our Martyrs written by D. Allen, they are partly plain
Calumniations, and partly odius and malitioas wresting of his doings. well,
touching the word vant and bragg, I am content, let them be a Calumniation,
for albeit they peradventure can prove it, yet cannot I. how say you? is
that also a Calumniation, that he called a Provincial Synod, that he vvoulde
have abrogated the fasts of your lady, that he hindered and let the Acts of
our Martyrs to be published? speak out? if you affirm it to be a
Calumniation, then you condemn your selves, for in this place you confess
that it is true, that 16. or 17. Priests met together, behold the Synod, that
they would have had all the national customs of Ingland about fasting, to be
reduced to the Common order of the Romans Church. and what is this, but to
abrogat the fasts of our lady in Ingland. and you confess that D. Allen and
fa. par. and others did not allow thereof. Tell me in your larger Apol. in
which word of theirs consists this Calumniation, odious and malicious
wresting of his doing? when as you your selves confess, all they say to be
true, and his doings to be disliked by D. Allen and fa. par. how have you
shevved in this chap. how false and malicious this lie is? you are poor
Priests, united in falsehood and malice against your innocent brethren. they
say the truth, you do confess it, and yet your Reader must needs believe and
think, that in the places by you quoted, they may see how false and
malicions a lie is made against fa: Heyvv. a grave and learned man. and yet such
is your impudency, that in one place you say never a word of it, and in they
other, you confess all and more too then your adversary does say. you know
who aduertiseth that in accusing honest men ought to be precise and punctual.
Fol. 190.
Can there be greater accusations then to committ a false and malicious lie?
then to be Odious and malicius vvresters of men's doings? these be your
Accusations. you are taken for honest men, therefore you ought to have been
precise and punctual in your prooffes. but what tell I you of prooffes? for
you have sworn as it seems in this your Apol. to say what you list, but
not to prove any thing at all.

The 9. touches the Rectors government of the College: my opinion touching
that you shall find in these notes.

Page ibid. Conspectis, etc. Fol. 15.
where is reported that D. Alle^ was vvo^t to say, that the fathers sought
more their own good then that of their Country or the College. you answer,
it is mere false and a notorious untruth. how do you make, or prove it a
notorious untruth? you refer us to his letters in the 4. Chapt. and for any
thing in those lettres, he might have said so much. you refer us to your 11.
Chapt. where you have these words: All that they tell after this of Card.
Fol. 164.
Allen from page 6. that he favored them or misliked the Jesuits, or concurred
with these factious and their emulations against them, is refuted largely
before in the 3. and 4. Chap. of this treatise. well, in the two chapters you
allege here; this saying is not proved mere false or an notarious untruth.
let us see the 3. Chapt. I have read it diligently over with my spectacles,
Fol. 24.
and find Card. Allen once only named in it. but no one lettre of his in
that chapt. to the which yet you send us. you say there, that the Jesuits
procured the first 100. Crowns for the seminary of Doway, as the world
knovveth and Card. Allen did always confess while he was living. ergo by
Card. Allens own letters and doings this report is mere false and a
notarious untruth. such comonlye are your prooffes throghout your Apol. well
for all you have said as yet to the contrary it may be true which they report
of Card. Allen. I do not say it is true. but for any thing you say or bring
here or elsvvhere to improoue it, it may be true.

You ask, what private good can the Jesuits pretend for them selves vvorth
their labors and perils in Ingland except the good of souls? they have
ansvveared you and still do: that the Jesuits seek to rule the roste, to have
all me^ at their beck and commandment, to have nothing done vvhithout their
advice and appointement and that they vvil have all Priests their Prentizes.
thus they answer the question, but how true, Time will hevve.

And where you ask: of what conscience then are these men that print so
manifest Calumniations? I answer: of the same conscience you are, which print
and in this Table, have imputed deceit, falsehoods, untruths, manifest lies
and Calumniations unto them, when there is no such thing, as has been
shevved. Look in to your own consciences first and cleanse them, and then
ask hardlye, with what conscience your Brethren can print such manifest
calumniations, after you have proved them such: other wise, you do but dally
in words, and with exclamations abuse your. Reader.

The 10. page 11. it is the 10. Iam tu, etc. you nippe their words, for thus
they say to his Hol: At that time both the College, and all the scholars had
been vndoonn if you hol. had not sent Card: Tolledo, who after he had heard
both parties and judged the Controversy with equal, balance opposed himself
as a wall for the scholars, our country being desti tuteof Card. Allen their
father. you have nipped of, that he was sent by his Hol. to be a Judge in the
Cause. by which your Readers might perceive that Card. Tolledo seeindg the
scholars to have right on their side, stood with them and for them all his
life. he was not then a fauorer of troublesome and seditious scholars against
their superiors as you would infer, but a patron and defender of the youths
from the unjust dealings and gouuerneme^t of their superiors, and that sent by
his Hol. as they say and you confirm by nipping of these words: missus. a tua
S.

The 11. page ibid. VVhiles these things, were a doing in Rome, the troubles
of wisbech began, Fol. 6.
etc. Do you not say so much your selves, where you join the troubles of the
Romans College, of slanders, and vvisbieh Castle together? but where is the
deceit, shift, Ju tabul. Apologiae.
and falsehood of these speeches? for this cause you have thought it convenient
to note some points touching their untruths, etc. why did you putt down
these words, can you tell? No suerlye, but only to make up a number.

The 12. you will your Reader to note the phrase of United. and why could
they not name them selves the united Priests? you answer: because they were
far the lesser number. a good reason a fevve in number cannot be united, or
so termed. where were your vvitts? Nay, (say your) besides this, they were
divided from their head. how could a company that have no hedd, be divided
from their hedd? for the Arch. was not then their hedd, but an usurper, and an
intruded person, Fol. 47. b.
till the Popes breue came, as is proved at large in these notes. seeing there
was no hedd, there could be no body. and so could they not be divided from
the rest of their body the English Clergy. you seek very narrovvly and are
desirous of contention, that hunt so after words and syllables, and yet when
you have all said, they might be justly united Priests, not as the united
Provinces term them selves, for they have a hedd, the king and Governor. these
had none in Ingland, that was their superior, nor out of Ingland, but his Hol.
only.

All that which follovveth, till you comme to the 18. are matters of story
and fact, and therefore to be omitted by me, and to be ansvvered by the Actors.

The 18. you reprehend them for their association and choosing to them selves
Prelates, being but a fevve and that they would do it vvhout Commission and
consent of the rest of the Clergy or vvhithout license of their Superior.
how and with what face can you reprehend 13. Priests (for you grant they
wear so many in wisbech, besides those that wear at liberty and of their
association) for choosing of Prelates, when you have had a prelat given you by
the information of 2. Iesuitz and one secular Priest only, and that without
commission and consent of the rest of the Clergy. which is the greater fault
and greater absurdity, for secular Priests to think of choosing themselves
Prelates (for as yet they were not comme to the choice) or for Religious men to
meddle without Commission to procure a hedd to the secular Clergy, without
their knowledge or consent.

That which you add: Without the license of their superior is a mere fitton.
for they tell you page 23. Si quando id (^. Pater) tibi approbandum videretur.
to whom not the election (by ordinary law) but the confirmation
apperteyneth they might then lavvfully choose their Prelatz without license of
any superiors, but they are to be confirmed by the superior before they can
administdrat and exercise their dignity or office. The Rest of the Articles,
touch not the Controversy, but the estimation of particular persons, whom I
deem to be unduly and uncharitably both named and taxed, and there fore leave
it to their satisfaction, which they are in my Judgment bound to make, and
that in print.

I must yet aduertize thee (gentle Reader) of an egregious untruth before I
make an end that is: where this Author says in the end of his table, that he
will not cite any thing out of the English book, because he has examined the
same sufficiently in the 1.2.7. and 11. Chap. mark (Reader) when thou come
to those places how sufficiently he has examined it. there it shall be shovved
thee, that he has left the chief points and Reasons thereof, both vnansvvered
and unexamined.

But you say: it may be sum other will examine more exactly these books.
indeed so he has need, for you hane examined them as lightly and as
slenderly as any man well could do. If fearful fleeing from the Truth,
ansvvearing to no one Reason, and filling your Readers ears with tittle
tattle, be an exact examination. and as you conclude, this will in deed be
sufficient for him that will not take the peaynes to Read your Apol. but to
believe you or your word. but to him that will read it with care and
diligence and seek on which fide the Truth lies, the same will prove very
insufficient and not vvoorthie the name of an Apology, which is a defense of
truth: and so shall see to your Confusion of countenance how poorly,
faintly, and vveakly you defend your Eccliastical Hierarchis set up and
iustituted by a Card. Protetectors letters. And for an end of this table, I
must advertise thee (Reader) that the Priests have printed another book in
Latin dedicated to the Inquisition, in which they hane simply and plaiuly
set down the controversy, and have not roved therein at bymatters, nor
touched the name or fame of any parson in particular or in general: to the
which book, these men are so far from ansvvearing, as they do not once
name it, or make mention of it, in this their brief Apol. I know not what
they vvil do in their more larger and ample which they promise thee. and if
the Priests had kept them selves with in the compass of their matter, in this
book sent to his Hol. we had lost this worthy piece of work, the which
is written in the defense of sum particular men, and of the society, and
not in defense of the Hierarchy, as they untruly would make his Hol. believe.
for, as I have often said, and must oftentimes hereafter note, the Author never
comes near the matter or the controversy. which I must aduertize (the
Reader) to note and mark diligently.

In the preface to the Reader, In the preface to the reader.
you are of a sudden become very holy and charitable men, for those whom a
little before in the table you accused of untruths, shifts, deceipes,
falsehoods, Calumniations, and slanders, are now forsooth your most entierly
belooued Brothren. O hypocrisy! when the fox precheth, bevvare your gheese,
bevvare their gaul hidden under sugared words. your Reader forsooth must
think and believe that this Controversy which is betvveene fomme Priests,
the Archprieste and English Jesuits, to be against the church of God and all
good men: as though there were no good men, but such as stand with the
Archpriest and Jesuits, and as though they, made the church of Christ, or at
least were the principal menbers thereof. O folly! And why may not that
which you bring bring out of S. Cyprian touching the later sort, be applied to
those, whom you take upon you to defend. who were more troublesome then
they? who began this contention and strife: but they? wear not the Jesuits
the chief informeres and persvvaders of this subordination and that it should
be instituted by the Protector and not by his Hol.? you confess so much your
selves. was not fa: lister, the second cause of all this trouble by vvriting
that book, wherein he would prove them schismatics, for not obaying the
Protectors letters? his book is printed verbatim in theirs to the Inquisition,
the which you do not ansvvear. were not fa: Garnet and the Archp.
mayneteyners and incensors of this trouble, by subscribing and authorizing that
book? you confess it by your deep silence in not refuting them when they
object it. was not the indiscreat letter and opinion of the Archp. the cause
of this last breach, by vvriting and pronouncing them schismatics for not
receiving him upon the Protectors institution? page 63. page 60.
they put down his epistle in both the latin books, and his decree after
their appellation. you slyly let all pass without answer and yet will needs
have us believe them, and not you, to be the Authors of all this trouble. You
obiectt to them their association, page 21.
they confess it, and give you the reasons why they made it. you accuse them
of the troubles in VVishich Castle, page 51.
they tell the Pope thereof, and put down the story: (truly or falsely,
that is elsvvhere to be examined.) you accuse them of disobedience to their
superiors, the Protector and Archp. they prove and that by 21. reasons al in
row, that nether of them was their superiors. You are dumb, and answer
not any one of those reasons. you accuse them of disobedience, and contemptuous
speeches against his Hol. in diuets parts of these notes, you are shevved to
speak untruly of them. you accuse them, of all the factions and seditions,
that have been betwixt englishmen, in diverse contryes, ever since we have
lived in banishment, and yet sum of them were the^ unborn, and the greatest
part of them, but young stvdients, when those dissentions happened. Let any in
different reader judge now who have been these trouble sum fellows, and
apt to set debat, and of whom S. Cyprian talks whether you discontented
brethren or those in whose defense you writ this Apology?

You say full well (but you follow it not) That scandal should have
vvitheld you from vvriting. for how can it othervvize be, but you must
continue and mainteyne scandal, when you defend these that wear the
Authors of this scandal? your brethren wear unjustly accused of schism,
rebellion, contention, and sedition, lo, the scandal given, they were forced
to defend their name and fame by vvriting, and to prove they wear not
schismatiks. you come on their backs with this Apol. do you not mainteyne the
scandal? I ask pardon: in deed you never come near the mark, neither will
you make mention of this schism, which yet is the fundation of all this
controuersye. I know not what points your reader knovveth al ready, but
sure I am, they are not like to know or perceive any point that is in
controversy by this your Apolog. I know they shall be choked with the Romans
sturres, G.G. his spieries, Paris factions, Flanders tumults, Fishers
examinatio^s Wisbech contentions, praises of sum religious men, detractions
of the discontented with heaps and bundles of private men's letters (which you
term authentical testimonies) from all coasts, and sum of them (as by
reading you may easily conjecture) intercepted, but none of them to the
purpose. and at last (to make you merry) with M. VVatsons common wealth. lo
here, the substance of this Apol. this if you knevve not before, you shall now
know and perceive by this Ap. but you shall not know all. why so? Mary,
much is kept for the larger Apol. which shall out as soon as the Informations
comme asvvell out of our country (to Rome where the penner lies) as other
foreign Realms. tys great liklihood, that singular matters will be contained
therein. for things far fecht, are deinty.

You send out this your Apol. to fore vvarne and forearme men lest, their books
infect the good and trouble the strongest: when they see such enormous matter
pass without controulement. suerly for any thing you say in this Apolog.
touching the matter in question, the good may continue infected, if to hold and
believe the Truth be infection, and not only the stro^gest, may stand still in
his strength: but also the vveaklings may be made strong: as I doubt not but
many will be, having read these notes: in the which your weakness and
nakedness is laid open to the sight of all that be not vvilfully blind. I
know that by enormious matter here you mean, not the question in
controversy, but either the indecent speeches they have uttered against the
society, or other particulars in their book. tell them home for it hardly,
and take them up bitterly, for they seem to have deserned it: but do not
mock your Reader, and make him believe, that under these words, you comprehend
the fact and matter betvveene you and your brethren in question. for as I have
often inculcated, you come as near the question as London is to Lincoln.

If this I have said prove true, then the more grauo and vviser sort of
readers will consider with them selves, of the justice of the cause and of
your iniquity and unjust proceeding, that make his Hol. and them beleene, you
write in defense of the Hierarchy, by him instituted: whereas you write
only in defense of sum certain men, defamed, and uncharitably used, by the
penner of the Latin book to his Hol. and not one word for the defense of the
Hierarchy: which you confess your selves here so apparently, that a very
Idiot may perceive it. The principal point (you say) that by ansvvearing you
can note to the^ is: first the Extreme passions of these libellers (note you
write against their passions, and not in defense of the Hierarchy) in
descending to such kind of revenge, if they had been iniuried. against this
revenge then, you revenge your selves, and care full little for the matter in
question.

If they had been iniuried, quothd you) why, can there be a greater injury
offered to catholic Priests, that employ their trauaill in an heretical
country, with the hazard of their lives, to with dravve and reclaim others
from heresy and schism, then to be called, compted, published, pronounced,
and by written books proved to be schismatics them selves, See fa. Listers
book. 7.
yea to be men worse then vvytches soothsayers, pagans, and Idolaters? do you
not know thus much? how can you be ignorant of it? if you know it, with
what brazen face, dare you write to englishmen, and Cath. men, If they had
been iniuried? where is your conscience? nay where is you charity? are you
vvorthie the names of confessors, or of Priests either, that so impude^tly in
print, and to English Catholics, that knevve full well, they were called
and counted schismatikes, you dare say If they had been iniuried? Read the
greiuous punishments enacted against Schismatikes, set down in fathers
Listers book, and you shall see vvhither they were iniuried or no, by being
esteemed, held, and called schismatikes. You go on: the most bitter and
opprobious style of speech this then, and not the matter in controversy has
sturred you up to write, and to revenge. and these, (as you note in your
mergent) are the points to be considereed in the libels set forth. Mark
(Reader) is it not true I have often told thee, that these united priests, do
neither defend, nor touch the matter in controversy, but only defend the name
and estimation of certain persons, bitten with this bitter and opprobious
style and speech. I do not find fault with them therefore: but am sorry
they abuse his Hol. and you english catholics, in making you believe, that
this their Apolog. was written, in defense of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy:
when it is written in the defense of particular men only, and against
contumelious libelling and vvriting, wherein worthy men are defamed. Not a
word of the Hierarchy. you should have shevved that the Archp. was lavvfully
and duly instituied, by a Card. letters, without the Popes bulls. you should
have proved the disconte^ted to have been scismatikes, for vvithstanding and
not receiving the Archp. upon those letters: you should have ansvvered the
Reasons, they bring in defense of their doings: you should have controvvled
them, for denying the Protector or. the Archp. to be their superior you should
have declared, that the Arch. did duly and lavvfully, pronounce them
schismatikes for not receyving him upon the Card. letters, yea after they had
yielded to the Popes bulls: these are the questions in controversy, these are
the points which the more grave and vviser sort ought to consider of. these
are the points to be considered in the libels set forth. but in these points
you are so dombe, and fly so willingly from them, that I am ashamed (for
your sakes) of your covvardlines.

you add: no certain author, etc. of this point I have talked in these notes,
little to your credit.

I hope and presume with you that every discreet reader will of himself
now ponder both your points, and the others that I have laid down, and
thereby judge, how well you defend the matter in controversy in this your
Apol. And with all will consider What manner of men these be you write
against, and how they have adventured, backed by the laws, Canons and
co^stitutions of the Church, to with stand justly, lavvfully, and in
conscience, the intrusion of the Archp. thrust upon them by a Card. letters,
against all law, justice, and practice of Gods Church. By this that has
been said, and is hereafter in these notes to be said, the reader shall easily
see, who are the authors of so intolerable a scandal in our English Church,
and how impudently without all kind of proof or shevve of proffe, these
united Priests would thrust it from the true Authors upon innocent men.

your Conclusion then is, that this brief Apol. (being sent out as a cock boat
before the great ship your larger Apol.) is vvrirte^ for the honor of our
nation (but to the little honor of the Author) and for sum defense of
innocence exceedingly iniuried in these vvritings. so, as I said before, this
is not a defense of the Hierarchy but of private men, which pretend the^
selves to be iniuried, and so you may have a confused countenance for
promisinge his Hol: cheese, and give him in stead thereof Chaulke.

you vaunt, that you have written this Apol. in a far other style then the
Authors of these books have: let the Reader judge. I believe he shall find
as bitter a style and as opprobrious speeches in this your Apol. and that
worthy men are (if not defamed) yet taunted, as bitterly by name, as thothers
are in whose defense they write.

But you promise a larger Apol. which shall be more substantial and authentic.
wherefore? because you will have informations and letters, not only out of our
country, but also from foreign realms. as who should say, that private men's
letters, especially of the assista^ts and of such as are creatures or fautors
of the Jesuits, are to be accounted, of any grave or wise man, either
substantial or authentic, mary, if you bring us the signs and public seals
of Princes, or cities, then I will hold with you, and call them anthentick,
other wise to think your Reader will take private letters for substantial and
authentic matter is to think him to be a very fool and an ass.

Well, you will get informations, letters, and other vvritings concerning this
affair. which affair I pray you? to defend the institution and subordination
of the Archp. made by the Card. letters? there is no need of other writing to
prove that, but by the canons, the interpretors, and the Gloss. other
writings are of no forse in this point. or is it to prove your most entierly
belooued Brethren to have been Schismatics, for not receiving him? I am suer
you can do no more, nor say more in that point, then fa. Lister has done, or
is it to prove that the Archp. received a letter from the mother city by
which he was advised to hold them for Schismatics after they hadd obayed the
Popes bull, for with standing the Card. letters? this matter your beloved
brethren have committed to the inquisition to judge and resolve, to whom and
not to any private letters, the decision apperteyneth. Or to be short, will you
bring authentical informacion to prove that the Protector of Ingland has
power or jurisdiction, upon Inglishmen, in Ingland or out of England? this in
deed were a work worthy such wnited hedds. But in truth, this affair, is
the defense of the name and credit of sum that have been uncharitably bitten
by your brotherne and nothing else. you have wearyed us alredie, with your
Roman sturres, Paris and Flanders factions, Giffords and Gratlies books, fa.
Westons praises, Wisbiches troubles, fishers memorial and examinatio^s, Watsons
common welthe, and with a great bundle of tedions letters. for the love of God
no more. But if you will be doing, touch the points in controversy, twang upon
that string: shoot at the mark, and riun not a rouing, as you have done in
this: otherwise you will loose, both your pains, costs, and creditt: and of
this I warn you as a friend, and as one that wishes your honor, and your
quietness. for if you set down things at length, in your next in that order,
and after that fashion you have done here: certainly, both those that live
presently, and the posterity after us, will wonder to see how God has
blinded you, and left you to your fantasies, and made you to pronounce your
selves, to be the chief disturbers in this cause, to impugn the Canons and
constitutions of the Church, and not to decide, but to run quite from the
Controversy now in hand. Besides I pronosticate unto you, that if in your
next you give not better stays and stoppes then in this: the diverse good me^
who urged you to write and at whose request, you have published this book,
if they have so much wit as goodness in the^: will not only be sorry to have
requested you to write so foolishlie: but also, will quitt you, and pronounce
you to have more care to write against the intemperat manner of proceedinge, of
your brethren, then to defend the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, instituted by the
Card. letters, as in your Epistle you promised his Hol. well, when these
informations come from so far contreyes, I doubt not, but they will be veiwed
and sifted, as well as these are, that came not so far. and then the Readers
will weigh and consider, which side writes, Without all regard of truth and
modesty, and on which side the truth lies and leanethe.

In the mean time, till your other be ready to succeed I shall desire the
reader to pervse this diligently, and to confer these my notes there with:
whereby they shall see, how you are bound to do that, you wish your brethren
here to do, that is, christianly to correct your selves, confess and
satisfy for the faults, you have committed, in slandering and calumniating
them, for such faults (I say) as your own consciences shall accuse you of,
and then to amend and correct all the fault I note herein against you. For if
it pleased God to give you this spirit of humility, this controversy would
quickly be at an end, and all should be in order and quiet again. And as you
wish your brethren to do in respect of them, whom they have iniuried or
infamed, so do I wish and exhort them to it, as they are bound in conscience
to do. and you to do the like again on your part: you (I say) my united
brethren, or whosoever (be he Religious or priest) that is Author of this
Apology. for your so doing, the Angels in heaven will rejoice, all me^ will
be thereof full gladd, the common enemy shall be confounded, the harvest at home,
will be better cultiued, Gods glory will be augmented, love and amity between
brethren will be increased, infinite Souls will be gained, your old glory and
renown recovered, and all strifes, troubles, and controversies removed, and
forgotten, yea and many a one of you with martyrdoome for this hu^blenes
crowned, but if you go on as you have begune, and as you seem to continue, the
contrary of all this will happen, to your dishonor and discredit in this
world, and to your shame at the dreadful day of judgment. God of his infinite
goodness mollify your stony heart, open your eyes, make you yield to the
truth, and in the end bring you, your brethren, your Readers, and my self to
his eternal bliss. Amen.

CHAP. I.
THe first fault I find with you (united Brethren) is that by vvriting of
this Apology, you blow (as it were) the trumpett to an new onsett, as men
desirous to continevve in wrangling and dissension still, and provoking your
discontented brethrene to break their silence, for their own defense: by
which doing you have not only broken Charity (which in such a nombre as you
be, should more abound, then in a lesser number, not so well united as you
are) but also highly disobaied his holiness commandment (which disobedience
you often object in this your Apology, to your brethrene) who in his last bull
sent into Ingland for the pacification of these contentions, forbadde all
books written on both sides, to be read of any with in Ingland, or others to
be written, under pain of excommunication. If you (united brethren) be
herein obedient childrene? let all men that have either seen or heard thereof,
be Judges.

Besides that, you might very well have spared his labor, for you do nothing
in all this your book, but rove up and down with by and impertine^t
matters, never touching or coming near the prick: filling up your book now
with old quarrels, apperteining neither to the matter you writ of nor to the
men you write against: then, with letters, examinations, and other trifles
(as those of M. vvatsons devises) not vvorth the labor (certz) of such men as
you are, and much less worth the reading of any wise, grave or learned
reader as in place shall be noted.

The second fault I find, is with the title or inscription of your first
chapter (imitating herein your selves, who find fault with the title of the
latin book, but how justly, shall be shovved in his place) which you have put
down in general terms and yet in deed do prove nothing at all of that
which you pretend. So as it may well be said of this title, as our Lavviers
often times say of our Rubrickes, viz, that Rubrica est generalior nigro, the
Rubric (or title) is more general and ample then the text. yon say: The
emulation of secular pristes against religious: both these word secular
pristes and Religious being put down indefinitly, that is generally, for in
law Indesinitum aequiparatur universally. An indefinite proposition, is equal
to a universal proposition. So that you say thus, (if you say any thing) The
emulation of all secular priests against all sorts of religious men, has
brought great hurt to Ingland. And all your profes yet are but of some secular
priests, against other secular priests and religious. And when you have all
done, and come to the point of this controversy, you grant it is the
emulation of 13. priests, (brought afterward to 7.) against their fellow
priests, and one Jesuit. and elsewhere you confess again, that this emulation
is but of sum few secular priests against the fathers.

By this generality of speech then, you do not only accuse your selves, (for
you are also secular priests but do also draw me and others with in the
compass of this emulation, who were never of the one nor of the other faction,
but have hitherto and so will still keep our selves indifferent and free, from
passion or affection to either side, in this so pitiful and slanderous
dissension.

Now as touching Religious. all this emulation is but against one order of
Religious viz: the fathers of the Society, as you confess throughout the whole
book, and so it must needs be, because there are not many in Ingland of any
other order. Thus then you should have entitled your chapter: what great hurt
has come to Jngland by emulation of the laytie against the Clergy, and of a
fevv secular Priests against other secular Priests, and the Religious of the
Society of Ihesus. For other emulation then this, your do not prove, either
in this chapter, or in the whole book it self: I fear much that the united
Priests, are not the Authors of this book, for that I cannot judge so hardly
of them, that to extol, praise, and defend the society and some certain
persons of the same, they would so far forgett them selves, as to accuse
men of their own coat and order, of so hainons a crime, as not only in our
days, but from the beginning of Christianity in our country, the emulation of
secular Priests against Religious should bring great hurts to our Nation: Out
upon such base Priests, as so unjustly and uncharitably, accuse them selves
and theirs, to please others, out upon such unnatural birds, that defile their
own nestes, by slaundering their own vocation in words without any profs, as
anon shall be showed.

In an other place, to a base and bring in to contempt, your own order and
vocation, you say: That the greater part of you were serving men, soldiers
and wandrers. but to be plain with you, I do not thinck that any secular
Priests would be so injurious and ungrateful to this order and vocation. And
therefore I think some religious man has borrowed your names, the better
thereby to extol his religion, and companions, and to abase and bring into
contempt, both with layty and Clergy, the state of secular Priests: to thend
he may so reveng him self, of some of them his adversaries, and so for the
fault of afewto offer injury to the rest. This is no no veltie for the report
goes of a religious man, that borrowed M. Dolmans name, (a secular Priest in
a book dedicated to the Earl of Essex, when he was in his ruff: the which
trick, as it brought that Priest, into some danger then, so this toy is like to
bring you (the united Priests) into disfavour, mislick and discredit, with
all well meaning and vnpassionated men, both Priests and lay: to see you so
far from all love and charity toward your brethren, that you are made not
only, instruments to vex and discredit them, but also Authors, to renew, and
proclaim the war a freash against them, with fire and sword, which will
fall out but little to your own creditt.

If you do justly mislike the discontented brethren, for touching the whole
body of the Jesuits, you have to pardon me, if I mislike with you in touching
so generally, the body of the secular Priests, where of I am a member. But
let us see first wherein the seculer Priests have emulated the Religious with
so great hurt to Ingland? Sure it must be that they envied them, for their
lands and livings, for their Jurisdiction and authority, or for their lives
and behaviors. Now touching the first twoe, it is well known our secular
Clergy in Ingland, to have had such honorable means to live, as they had
little cause to envy the religious herein. besides who knows not the
authority, and Jurisdiction of secular Pristes, to hane been far greater,
then that of any religions order: yea to have extended it self, over the
Religious them selves. And as for the last point, the Priests are so far
(especially in this age) from envying the lives and manners of the Society in
special, that I am assured, and all men will confess, more secular Priests
to have entered, and daily do enter, into the Society alone, then into all the
other orders of Religion, putt them all together. If you know any other cause
why the Priests should envy them, let me understand it, for my learning in
your larger Appologie, for sure Iam that in this Apology you have not as yet
prooved, that the secular Priests have emulated the Religious, either in any
of the foresaid 3. pointtes, or in any other point else what so ever. Now to
your examples.

The first is of Ihon of Gant, which prooveth only this, that there was (for
that Prince his sake) Emulation of some secular Priests, against the 2.
Bishopps there named, and the rest of the secular Priests, and Religious, that
took their part as it is now between some secular Priests and the Archpriest,
which the rest of the Priests and Jesuits that hold with him. Does this
prove the emulation of the secular Priests in general against the Religious
in general? and yet very likly it is, that the kniges uncle duke of Lancaster
had both Abbots, Priors, Monks and friars, that took his part, as well
Bishops as secular Priests, and so was it emulation of Religious and secular
Priests against Religious and secular Priests, which prooveth not your
intention. You, your selves also do in that place, restrain the word
Religious, to such religious men, as had possessions: excluding the 4. orders
of sriers, which yet are contained under the generality of the word Religious
in the title of your chapter.

You seem elsvvhere to contradicte your selves herein, Fol. 15. b.
saying: That some of the Clergy banded them selves against the rest with John
of Gant to set up Wicliff. theare you say, that the statute of Praemunire,
was begone to be treated of, about the time that Wicliff arose, when emulation
was in heat against the Clergy. If against the Clergy, then this emulation,
was of the laytie against the whole Clergy, secular and regular. How can it
stand, that in Wichffes time emulation was whott against the whole clergy, and
that some of the clergy emulated the rest of the clergy? these two cannot
well stand together.

In the next example you bring in 3. kings, like Mummers, for they say nothing:
neither do you there prove any thing but in the margent, you note a malicious
suggestion. of whom, I pray you? you name no man, and yet would you have your
reader to understand it, of the secular Priests, against religious: and that
the secular Priests did suggest these kings to take away the Abbay lands.
for if you mean not so? then the example is to no purpose to prove the hurt
that has come by emulation, of secular Priests, against Religious. If you
mean so? then turn your note in the Margent upon your own malicious hedds,
in so maliciously slandering men of your own coat, without desert of their
part, and without proof of yours. For who knows not, that if the secular
clergy would hane yielded, or agreed to suppress Abbeies, then especially.
when heat of emulation was great, against the whole clergy, (as you say:) but
that all had been lost, both howses and lands. No, no, the secular clergy was
so far from joining which the envions laytie in that issue, that their
constant withstandinge and charitable cleaving to the Religious at that time,
conserved both their lands and possessions.

From those 3. kings, your make a great stepp down to Henry the 8. god be
blessed, that our secular Priests, for 200. years almost, bare no emulation
against the Religious. but lived in love and charity together, till this kings
latter days, when all the Religious wear turned out of their howses, and
their lands taken from them. But happened this (I pray you) thronghe the
emulation, that was between the secular Priests and the Religious? Put your
hands to your consciences, were the secular clergy the doers and sticklers
herein? If you say, they gave their consent in the Parliament, I grant. But not
for any emulation, they had against the Religious. Was it not for frailty and
fear? Fol. 15.
or was it not (as you say well elswheare of the bringinge in of the statute of
Praemunire) for that our Catho. Bishopps and Prelatz did not willinghy consent,
but sore against their wills, was it passed in the Parliament, by the stream of
temporal power and emulation against them. Why may not our Prelates of king
Heury the eights time, be as well excused for consenting, to the supperssing of
Religious howses, as the Prelates of an other king, for consentinge to the
statute of Praemunire? who is so blind as to thinck, that the united Priests,
are the Authors of this book? or they there would be so shameless, as to
accuse men of their own coat, the whole clergy of England, in kindge Henry
the eighths time, by emulatio^ and malice which they bore to the Religious,
to have consented to their destruction, and to the euersion of their houses
and Cloisters? Suerly, if this were true, you said some what. For this
emulation in deed brought, unspeakable hurt and damage, to our poor country of
Ingland. I guess therefore (as I said before,) that some other has borrowed
your names, to make emulation amongst you secular Pristes your selves. If I
guess amiss? I ask perdon. seeing it is lawful for every man (as you
know,) to defend his order, vocation, name and estimation, so it be not done
which contempt, disgracing or dishonoringe, of any others order or vocation.

The 4. example which you bring, to prove the fore said emulation, is of Q.
Mary's time which seameth very strange to me. For both at her coming to the
Crown, and duringe the time of her reign, there were but fevv Religious men
(God knovveth) specially of such as had possessions, to be emulated or envied:
a fevv Benedictines in Westminster Abbay, and a fevv Carthusicas only
excepted. How lykly is it then, (I pray you) that the emulation of the secular
Priests against the Religious in Q. Mary's time, bronght great hurt to
Ingland? But you seem so deeply plonged in this emulation your selves, that
you date against the known truth say: that the fore said emulation hindered
much in her time the reconsiliation, vvherby no perfect reformation could be
made, nor such restitution of Religious orders, as in justice should have
been, and as the good Q. Her self desired. And here you cannot cover your
selves under the cloak of the Layetie, saying you mean here of the emulatio^
of the Layetie against the whole clergy: because you say: by the same
emulation, that was in John of Gants time, for you repete in all your
examples, that do follovv that of Iohu of Gant, by the same emulatiou, that
is: of secular Priests against Religious. But each one of my age, or elder,
that savv the beginning and end, of that virtuous Princess her Reign, can
controvvle you in this point, and tell you: there was no such emulation at
all. every man desiring, the perfect reformation of Religion, and entire
restitution, of religious orders and houses: and the cause, why neither the
one, nor the other was performed, was not (as it pleases you to say,) the
emulation of secular Pristes against religious, but rather the shortness of her
Reign, with the difficulty to get the Abbay lands, out of the possession, of
the Nobility, and Gentlemen, who kept them, as hitherto most unjustly they
do.

You are vvellcome at last, to her Majesty's Reign, without any good or
lavvfull proof, of your former proposition: (which the Reader must have in
mind) that the emulation (forsooth) of secular Priests against Religious has
brought great hurt to Ingland. Now you are come to the last cast, I hope you
will say some thing. Truly as much as you did before, which is just
nothing. You say: There was small union of diverse clergy men amongst them
selves. What is this to the purpose? The emulation or small union and affection
was betvveene secular Priests, and not against the Religious. And so you are
well come home, having made a long Iurney of 200. years, and brought us home
nothing: you have fayrely fished, to catth a frogg. If all were true you say,
in the disgrace of our constant clergy, (which you shall never be able to
prove,) and if diverse clergy men, holding with Heretics and polliticks, gave
occasion of the total overthrow of Religion in England, yet does it not
prove, your pretended purpose. For that was the emulation of secular Priests,
against secular Pristes, except you take the word Clergy me^ in general,
Can dno. 12. q. 1.
as it does comprehend under it, both secular Priests, and Religious men: then
as well Religious, as secular Priests, did hold with Heretics and politiks,
to the total overthrow of Religion. And so in this case it was emulation
between the secular Priests and Religious, against secular Priests and
Religious, and so without the compass of your proposition. Suppose I say,
(for we must be Pythagorians, to believe what soever you say upon your words,
(quia ipse dixit) that some clergy man, follows the time, and holds with the
Heretics, in heat of faction: will you therefore, in heat of detraction
conclude there upon, that in the beginning of her Maiestates Reign, the
emulation of secular Priests against Religious, has brought great hurt to
Ingland? You might have spared this pain, with Inck and papier.

The 3. Fol. 2. a.
fault. That the true opinion, of not going to Heretical service, was taught
then, by Priests and Religious men, from beyond the Seas. I perceive that this
Religious, the Author of this book, would willingly hane his part, with
secular Priests, when they do any thing praise vvorthie. But I tell you (my
united brethren,) you might hane putt up the word Religious, in your purse.
For the best opinion, was known, taught and followed, many a year, before
the Jesuits (whom you mean) came or vvrote into Ingland. It came from beyond
the seas I confess, but yet out of a secular Priests shop, Doctor Sanders
having written a book in English of Images, made a long preface to it,
vvherin he admonished, and exhorted all such as were Catholics in heart and
mind, to shun and avoid, all Communication with Heretics, in their
service. The which book made many to abstain, from their conuenticles, and
amongst the rest, (I give God hearty thanks therefore) I my self was one, and
therefore can best tell, which way and from whom it came, that I forsook the
heretical church, which is now 37. or 38. years past: at what time, the
name of the Society, was scarsly hard of in Oxford, I am assured. I speak not
this to detract any thing, from the virtuous, painful and profitable labors
and travells, which the fathers of the Society have taken, in manuring the
afflicted viniard of or Conutrey, but to give every man his due praise:

The second praise, of pla^ting and teaching this better opinion, belongs as
well to many ancicient Priests, of Q. Mary's days, that stood firm and
stable in their faith, and drew daily some out of the mire of schism, by
their preaching and teaching, whereof I my self am a vvittnes, having known
many that were reconciled by them, many a year, before any Religious, either
from beyond the seas, or at home, taught this doctrine. And as for our
Seminary Priests also who entered some years before the fathers, there were
(when they came in) above an hundred, which had travailed in this point to
with dravve men from communicating with Heretics, And God so blessed their
travaills, that the fathers found the harvest well advanced, before their
arrival, to their great joy and consolation, as I can best testify, who
went into Ingland with them. Besides diverse of our Seminary Priests, had
suffered glorious Martyrdom, for teaching and preaching this doctrine, before
any Religious writ thereof, or came into Ingland, as M. Cutbert Maine
batcheler of divinity, and the first Martyr of the Seminaries, M. John Nelson
and M. Everand Hanse. What meand you then (you united Priests,) to take away
the praise from your selves, and to give or divide that which is due to your
coat only, to others, or with others that have no part therein? There was, as
I said before, (as by the Registre thereof vvhe^nead shall require, I can
shevve) above a hundred Seminary Priests in Ingland, that taught this perfect
doctrine, some years before any religious man, putt his foot into Ingland. If
you knevv not thus much before, learn it now. But let us putt the case, that
the foresaid true doctrine, of not going to Heretical service was taught by
Religious men from beyond the seas, will you therefore conclude that the
emulation of Secular Priests against Religious, has brought great hurt to
Ingland? This you must prove, or deceive your Reader. For the title of the
chapter imports so much. In your next edition, or in your larger Appologie,
which you promis, putt out hardly, or else correct, this brag of Religious
men teaching, from beyond the seas, the perfect doctrine, of not going to
Heretical churches, because they came too late, to have that glory, which is
only due to Secular Priests: albeit you united Priests, do seem both
wrongfully and unjustly, to give it to others. such honor bear you to
Religious, that you will for their sakes, dishonor both your selves and your
brethren.

At last we are come, from John of Gant, to wisbech castle, where you say,
was emulation of secular Priests against Jesuits. ergo your have proved that
which you took in hand to prove. Nothing less. because that emulation (as
you confess) was but of some fevve against one Jesuit and 19. other secular
Priests, and so proves it not that which you pretend. You say, those fevve
Priests were the cause of that contention. They say: fa: Edmonds and his
adherents were the cause. so that Lis est adhuc coram Iudice, to be decided
and resolved not by these Appologies, but by our Superiors authority. I pray
God it may be so done with charity.

But for better proof of this emulation you all eadge the first contention, of
the English Roman College, then G. G. and G. vvrittinge against D. Allen
and fa. Parsons, which appertain nothing at all, to this contention between
the discontented brethren, and the Archpriest and Jesuits. This contention
being grovvnded upon two other matters. the one for not receaving the
Archpriest, upon the Card. Protectors letters, for the which fa: Lister proved
them Schismatics. the other, for that after the coming of his Holl. breue, and
their submission, the Archpriest then, would not admit them to be absolved,
of any Confessor, except they confessed their schism, and abiured it. This is
the state of the controversy, in question between you, and your discontented
brethren. This is the cause of their vvritting, both in Latin and English, in
their own defense. But this you vvinck at, and will not see, yet this you
must prove, not to be the state of the question, and cause of this contention,
or else you must ask them forgiveness, for so slanderous, and scandalous
injuries done to them. These questions you touch not: but with toies and
trifles, fill up your book and cast dust (as it were) in your readers eyes,
to blind, or at the least wise to hinder them, from vievving the question,
and controversy it felf.

For example what do the troubles in Rome in the year 1578. or the death of
Vanne the spy 1581. or the division that fill amongst Englishmen in Paris
1580. or all there memorialls made against the Seminary, (if any such were)
1583. and 84. or B. Sega his visitation 1585. or G.G. and E. G. Writting
againsts D. Allen and fa? Parsons 1587. or all the factions that were made
against D. Allen: or M. Watsons common wealth, appartaine to this
controversy? What does all this stuff (I say) appartaine to the sturres begone
in Wisbiche 1595. and the contentions which since has followed? were your
discontented brethren, either Actors, Abettors, Doers or sticklers in all
these Tragedies? Had they their hands or pens therein? Nothing less. You
might as well accuse them, of all the contentions and quarrelles that has
happened between the Englishs, since Noes flood, as with these. Many of them
to my knowledge, being but young youths in those days. To what purpose then
is this unprofitable and vnsaverie rehersall, ripping up and reviving, of the
faults and follies of many yet living, who peradventure are sorry for the
same? Is this charity? comes this from a peaceable, or a contentious spirit?
to revive old soars quite forgotten, and buried many years since in deep
oblivion? and that to no purpose at all? Does it prove the great hurt, which
the emulation of secular Priests, against the Religious, has brought to
Ingland? as just in sooth as Germans lips, that stood 9. miles a sonder:
even so these actions stand at least 10. or 11. years one from an other.

The ripping up of the Actions of those 2. Priests of the Roman College G.
G. and E.G. the willing discovery of their filthiness after 20. years almost,
makes me believe, that the Author of this book, is not you (united Priests,)
who for shame would not, nor without your own dishonor could not, ripp up the
rotten naughtines of men of your own coat, the one (as I have been advertised,
by a good father his Confessor) dying very sorry and penitent, for his sins
and offenes: the other yet living, and of ability and learning, to set upon
you, and to refute you, of many things, unduly set down in this your
Apologi^e. And yet all that you have said of theirs and other men's frailties,
makes nothing to the matter now in question, as I have noted before. I pray
God, some Religious Parson then offended, has not kept this upon his stomach,
till time has served him, to vomitt it out, to the disgracing of secular
Priests. If it be so, God forgive him, and send him grace, not by such
indecent means, either to divert others, from esteaming of secular Priests,
or to make secular Priests, to less esteame him and his compaignons, as he
geveth them just occasion: seeing he seeks every cornere and hole, and omnem
mouet lapidem, to disgrace them, with the faults and follies of some one or
two, deserving reprehension.

And because you make mention, of some former troubles happened in the college
of Rome, I will for the readers better instruction set down in order, the
five several troubles, that have fallen out in that unfortunate Colleage, with
in the space of 20. years. since the fondation thereof which was in the year
1578.

This colleag had bin an hospital, to receive English pilgrims at their
coming to Rome, and there were some 8. priests in it, under a hedd: the which
hospital, by the procurement and industry of D. Jews, afterward B. of
Cassano, (as they confess) was erected by Pope Gregory the 13. into a,
College: the 8. priests by violence (almost) put out, because they would not
obey to the Popes commandment. Scholars were sent from Rhemes to supply
their places, and one of the said priests M. Do: Morris Clenock a Welchman,
being Do. Jews friend, was made Rector there. Into this college were received
as well welsh as Inglish, as to this day they are indiflerently received. There
were not then many welsh men, but some 32. Inglish scholars. Their first
complaint was, that the welchmen were better clothed, and better looked unto,
the^ they were, and that the Rector was parciall, in so much that there grew
great strief, and dangerous quarrels In the end the Protector (who was the^
Card. Morono, a great friend and vpholder of D, Morris: and it may be M. Do.
Jews for friendship and country sake, might also back him) expelled the 32.
English scholars upon a Shrouetewsday: whiles this stir was amongst them,
The English for the causes you mention, and with great zeal desired to be
governed by the Fathers of the Society. Being thus expelled the next day being
Ashwensday, they dispersed them selves in diverse Churches, requesting the
preachers to recommend their case and poverty, to get them some money, for
they had determined to return altogether in Procession (as it were) and with
a cross before them to Rhemes or Ingland. In the mean while his Holl. was
informed of all by Father Parsons, and Fa. Alfonso, who gathering such of the
scholars together as he could meet withal, and bringing them to the Pope,
there was old weeping and crying on both sides. The good old ffa. Weept, as one
loath to loose so many zealous and to Wardly children, and they on the other side
cried for sorrovve, that they should be constraind against their vvilles to
leave and forsake so loving a father. But after they had wiped their eyes, the
Pope sent the^ with one of his chamber in their compaine, to command the
Rector to receive them again: and at their return, they took 2. others into
the college with them, who afterward proved naughty fellows called Novvell
and Moonday. Not long after, they had their desire: for the government of the
college was given to the Fathers, to the scholars great contentement and good
of our country, and so ended this first stir and dissension.

The second, happened the next year 1579. which was rather a certain murmr
then dissension: the which if by ffa. Parsons wisdom and industry it had not
bin prevented, would in time have grown to an open sedition. The cause was
this. Our scholars having obtained their desire and falling to their studies
used very zealously all the godly exercises of mortification, in such sort, as
some one or tvvoe of them became so contemplative that they would needs be
Jesuits. Which vyhen their companions understood, they begane to mislike of
those spirits, alleging that the college was founded for the education of
virtuous and learned priests to help their country, and not to bring up men to
enter into Religion, and leave the harvest at home. Where upon fa. Parsons
procured D. Allens coming up to Rome, who obtained of the Pope, to command
the General of the Jesuits to send of his Religious into Ingland. the which
appeased all this murmur. For (quoth the Scholars) let as many now enter into
the society as will, for when they have been sufficiently brought up
therein, they shall be sent into Ingland. And thus each party was pleased. The
fathers, for that they might receive of the scholars into their society,
without grudg or mislike: and the scholars, by cause such as entered, most of
all (if not all) should be in time employed for their country. And so the 2.
scholars that first entered into the Society of that college were M. Wright a
constant Confessor now in Ingland and John Barton, who after fell from them
and looked back to the world again, as I am credibly informed.

The 3. was that, wherein M. Doctor Bagshavve and M. D. Stafferton (dead long
since) M. Warford (now a Jesuit) and diverse others had their part. I have
heard, they would have had the government of the College given to the
Dominican friars, or to have it governed by English secular priests. In the end
it fell out that good fa. Alfonfo was displaced and an other put in his place.

Not many years after fell out another controversy betvveene the scholars and
father Cresvvell then Rector, D. Allen being then Card. and a spectator. I
know not well what the cause was. but this I am suer that a virtuous priest
now a holy Martyr in heaven named M. John Ingram, was not over well used.
This stir in the end procured father Cresvvells removing from thence to
Spain.

The last stir which was the vvhottest endured longest and vexed most the
fathers. It began (as you say) after Card. Allens death about the year 1594.
upon this occasion, as you afterward insinuat, and the Actors confess: father
Harvvood the minister finding 2. youths clapping them selves on the breeches,
or rather one for some reveng ierking his fellow on the buttock with a rodd,
before he was out of his bed, had some suspicio^ of vvorser behavior and
should (as I have heard) say, he found the^ at Buggerie, which when the rest
understood, it did gtieue them full sore, that the fathers (and specially
Inglishe fathers) should suspect any of our nation with that abominable
sin, and calling to mind some of the fathers former actions tending to this
suspicion, as cutting the privy doors beneath shorter by half a foot, to see
if there were any more then tvvoe feet at once at one privy, and cutting
down a faier grove in the vineyard, because they used on their days of
recreation, to walk there by two and two. They fell first into such a hatred
of the said fa. Harvvood, that they made a supplication to his Holl: desiring
him to send the said fa. to the Galleys, for dishonoringe and discrediting the
College, them selves, and their nation, with such a calumnious report. Upon
this they fell every day more, and more, into mislike with the fathers, and
into this last sedition. Whither the scholars had cause to be offended, and to
complain, I leave it to the judgment of others. Thus much touching these
troubles, vvherin if I have misreported any thing, I desire to be better
informed, for I tell it, as I have heard it of others, according as you tell
your tales also by hearesay. My meaning herein not being to defend the
scholars, or discredit their Superiors, but to tell the truth only,

If any do muse at these frequent seditions, and would know the causes
thereof, albeit my opinion is, but one doctors opinion: yet such as it is, I
will communicate it to you, having duly marked the causes my self, and having
heard other men's iudgmente also therein, That which I will say now, I sent
once to father Cresvvell then Rector upon an occasion which were to long
here to set down, and nothing to the purpose. After I had called to his
mind the contentions, which had often before that time happened in the
College, and recounted the number of Spies, and revolters, from the faith
which had been menbers of the same college, and that till that time, there had
never happened any one sedition in the Seminaries of Douay or Rhemes, nor any
known or notorious spy, gone ont of them, one Banes (a revolted priest,
which yet was apprehended and imprisoned) only excepted: I told him that I
thought the causes of those seditions in Rome, wear one of these that
follow. Either the air did infect them, or else our country men were of a
lewd and seditions nature, or other wise that the government of that
college, was not convenient for our English natures. If the first should be
the cause, then there was no other remedy, but to transport the college into
a better air. For the second, I could not so hardly judge of my country men,
especially having seen them always in Rhemes, to be both virtuous and
obedient youths: and to the third, I neithet would nor durst attribute it to
the fathers. F. General and Provincial, the Rectors, superiors being so
near, and having so vigila^t an eye on the government. What shall we the^ do
now quoth I? Mary, father, change the government for a time, to see if they
will do better, and live more quietely. And if they do not, then the world
must neads attribute it, to our evvill and seditious natures. Until then we
must suspend our judgment. this was the effect of my letter. for the which he
courteously thancked me, and said he would communicate my reasons with his
superiors.

But seeing I am on this point, I will boldly set down what I have all ways
thought in that government, to be not convenient to out English nature, but is
rather the cause both of rancor and division amongst the scholars, and of the
dislike and coffeehouse of the government and Gouerners.

I was pensioner in D. Allens company in in that Colleage 4. months and
more, and then I marked and understood the mislike of this government, by those
that had been most desirous of the fathers government, I mean M. Sherwin, M.
Array, M. Haddock M. Rishton, and others my familiares then in the colleage.
The first is, their open penances done in the hall, and their dicitur culpa.
which is as far from all good orderly discipline, that when a man does it at
the first, he is so far ordinarily from amendment, that in his heart he does
grutch, and repine at his superiors, for the giving of it. But when he is used
3. or 4. times to do it, then he makes a very scoff and mocking or may game
of it: so far it is from a true penance, at is engenders (as I said) both
hatred and mockery. If you say it is not the superiors fault. I say it is, if
he knows it will bring forth no other effects and yet will use it.

The second is their Spies, which the Rectors have allwaies in store, which by
an honester name are called Angeli custodes.

These spies at recreation time, and in other places, speak liberally against
their superiors, of their government and usage toward them, of their apparel,
meat and drinck, and against the straight keaping of them in, and against what
soever they think is not well done in the colleadge. And all this to sound
their compaignons. Now if one or twoe hap to discourse, as he does against the
Superior: these spies carry the wholly discourse straight to the Rector. After
a few days the other are called Coram nobis, and are either punished or
rigorously reprehended for the same. These good fellows afterward recall to
mind, before whom, and in whose presence and what company, they spoke such
things, and having discovered this good fellow, they from that day forewards,
hate him as a spy and traitor. If this be a charitable way of government judge
you, and whither this be true, and practiced continually or no, I refer it to
the conscience of as many of you (united brethrene) as have been brought up in
that Seminary, and to the knowledge of all others, that have been brought op
therein, yea to those them selves that have been these good Angels. Nothing so
contrary to an englishmans nature, as to be betrayed by him whom he trusts.
If such spies were in Oxford (whose colleges have as good statute and
ordonances for bringing up of youths, if they were put in practice (no
displeasure to the Fathers) as they have or can devise) if such spies I say
wear in our colleages of Oxford, they would be plucked in pieces.

The 3. cause of coffeehouse, mother of sedition, is when such scholars as
have wholly addicted them selves to priesthood to serve their country, see
others which entend to be of the society, to be more favored, more cherished
and more often in Fa. Ministers chamber at collations, have more free access
to the Rector, and to be better countenanced then they: this affection which
the Fathers bear to such, can neither be wisely hidd of the one, nor well
digested of the other.

The 4. and which aggrauated the contention in Fathers Creswels time, and was
the occasion of these last and gretest troubles, as you seem to confess
afterward, is: that the Rectors and Ministers are over much suspicious of our
English youths thinking them to be given to that sin, which is not to be
named. thereof came the cutting down of a fair grove which was in their
vineyard wherein they used sometimes to walk for their recreation, two and twoe
or more together. Which doings did wonderfully animate the scholars against
their superiors, as I understood by a virtuous priest, who since by Martyrdom
is no doubt a blessed Saint in Heaven.

The cause, ground and beginning also of these last troubles came they not of
that which Father Harvvood said (albeit after, he swore the contrary:) that
the found two, of those libertine ladds committing that abominable sin? the
man you note in the margent and your fellow priests now in Ingland say so,
and you your selves understand so much by your Sum things much amiss. If it
be true that Father Harvvood affirmed so much as in the 43. leaf you
insinuate: their dissolucion in corners to hane been so secret a sin, that he
could never be brought to utter it for the saving their honors and the nations,
till (forsooth) he was commanded by obedience a little before his death. that
he might die, belike, with that glory, to have infamed the students. Had not
those Northen and southren laddes good cause, thinck you to defend their honors
and the honor of their country? Had they not just cause to require the Pope
(as they did by supplication) to send Fa. Harvv. to the Galleys, for defamyng
both the colleage and nation? Whither it wear true or false god knovveth,
neither will nor can I decide it: yet was this Father much more to be
commended, then a another Father, who in revenge of the factious scholars,
without respect of their honor or of the honor of our nation, or of his own
conscience, let not to send about the world general articles against all
the scholars and priests of that faction, the which contained more grievous
and abhominable^ sins then Father Harvvood discovered. Of this occasion then
begane all that foul stir which as the disconted brethren say, had like
to have undone and ruynated that College.

The 5. is, that the Rectors (yea our English Rectors) in the Roman College
have no respect of such Graduates as are made in our Universities in Ingland,
but will make more of a boy, and give him better countenance, and place him
higher at the table, then to a Baccheler or a M. of art, which cannot be but
a great corisiue to such graduats a great fault and in gouerme^t especially of
English Fa. who either do or should know, what esteem leatning and
degrees taken in schools (albe it many in deed are unworthy of them) are in
Ingland: and how an unlearned man having a degree, is of greater respect and
credit then a more learned then he having no degree. This is the good custom
of our conntrey that carries such respect and honor to the degree, albeit the
Graduat be not vvorthie thereof, because all men presume he has the learning
requisite to the degree. But the Fathers, whither it be under the color of
making them humble, or for sum other cause best known to them selves, do
give very little, or no credit or countenance at all to Graduates. And a another
thing) which has been noted of sum men) they never sent any from that
college into Ingland with any degree of schools on their backs 2. only
excepted, D. Barrett. D. Stillinghton.
who being specially favored and loved of Father Alfonso were made Doctors in
Rome before their mission, yet neither of them went into Ingland, but were both
stayed at Rhemes.

You go abont afterward to defend the Fathers from this calumniation (as you
term it) how I pray you? Fol. 92.93.
Mary they have receued many Graduates into the Society. What is this to the
complaint of not respecting Graduats in the Seminary? yes (say you) for many
Graduates have lived in the Seminary with them much esteamed and honored by
the Jesuits. You name 4. and yet 3. of them upon my knowledge, were favored as
the first Authors and bringers in of the Fathers to that government, and
honored not for their degrees, but as Priests, and as Priests they sat at a
higher and more honorable table then the rest. But if rheise 4. have been
respected, how many others have been neglected? You confess in the same place,
that they are greatly made of by the Fathers, if their vettue answer to their
degree. Who sees not, that you confess, they are not respected for their
degree, but for their virtue only? Put case he be not so virtuous as his
superior would have him, shall he thereby loose the respect that is due to his
degree? There are punishme^tes for his fault, his degree still respected. But
with the Fathers who you say, are men of order, in this case of degrees, is
keapt little order.

To the man you note in the mergent (who complained of the disgrace of degrees)
when he was sent from Rhemes to Rome, I said thus to him. Master Bagshawe your
are going to Rome and in your company such and such (namyng 2. poor scholars
that served him and the rest at the table) when you come theare, you shall see
these boys (your servants here) as well clothed, lodged and served there as
your self, paraduenture more in favor, and better liked of the superior then
you, and to sit higher at the table them you, can you abide this? thinck on
it, for so it will happen, as it did in deed. Which made him, Maester
Stafferton, Warfotd (now a Jesuit) Fixer, D. Cicill and others having been all
Graduats of and good account in Oxford to dislike and storm at it, as many
others have done since, and still will do, till Graduate, be better respected.
If one poor Doct. judgment might be heard and allowed, I thinck verily, if
those fore said impedime^tes wear taken away, the Fathers and our yonthes
would live lovingly, and in peace together. But if this be not remedied then I
say (though I be no Prophet, yet bear I a Prophets name) that these
discontentments may well for a time lie smothering in their breasts: but one
day, do the Fathers what they can, they will flush out into flames of
dissentio^ as the others have done before. It is natural to that college the
foresaid impedimente not removed, but remayninge in their force.

And to augment men's suspicious and surmises of the small account the Fathers
make of degrees and Graduats, they have obtained a strange and exttaordinary
Bull to the discredirt and dishonor of our whole nation, to stopp all English
students in their banishment from the degree of Doctorshipp either in divinity
or law, I wonder they putt not in Physic also, (Doctor Norden, a Doctor of
Physic being so great an enemy to them as you the united brethren do show in
this your Apology) and by consequence to stopp them from all perferment and
promotions in straung countries in this time of their banishments. I may well
call it strange, because all strangers do wonder strangly at it. And I may well
term it extraordinary, for that since Saint Peter sat in the Sea of Rome,
and that Universities have bine erected, theare was never such a Bull sent out
into the world. The Sea of Rome has ever been so favorable to learning and
degrees, that it has instituted and confirmed many Universities, has given
authority to certain, to give degrees and make Doctors. Yea Canons that are
bownd to residence, Quia datur beneficium propter officium, And to serve in the
Church Yet in favor of learning may be sent to the Universities to study, and
theare to receive their fruits till they have taken their degree. But alas? our
poor Englishmen are not sufficientlye afflicted with banishment from our
countreye and parents, but more affliction must be putt upon their shoulders,
and as it wear segregated from all other nations, and bound to be men
unworthy and incapable of Doctorshipp and that by the highest judge, and
Tribunal on earth. And why? for sooth because our young Doctors must not sit
above (I will not say Jesuits, but) other grauer and elder Priests. For this
cause the Pope has annulled and abbreged the Ptiuilegs of all Universities in
respect of us poor Souls. This is a point of Mortification in deed, but let
us here the Bull, which in effect says thus. Our will and pleasure is, that
none of the english nation hear after so long as Heretics prevail in Ingland,
etc. do take degree of Doctor in Divinity or in one of the laws, unless
they have studied 4. years in the same science or profession. Those ended, to
study 4. years more to make him prompt and solid, and to become more mature
grave and learned: Nor then neither shall he proceade, without the consent and
approbation of the Superior of the College or Seminary wherein he has studied
or been brought up, nor without the approbation of the Protector of the Nation
or his vicegerent in those parts where those Englishmen would be promoted,
etc. Who soever then shall take the degree of Doctor in any place or country
with in the time and years above prescribed, or without the leave of his
Superior, Protector or his vicegereut, we pronownce the degree to be none, nor
such a one to be called a Doctor. And besides this he shall encurre the sentence
of excomunication, the absolution there from we specially reserve to our selves
and to the Sea Apostolic, etc. And we will this to be in force, not with
standing any Apostolic decree what soever, or any statute, custom or
previledgs of Universities given them by the Apostolic Bulls, etc.

The reason of this Bull is, least youg men be made Doctors and by that means
the degree come into contempt in Ingland viz: So great care had these informers
of preserving the respect of degrees in our country: for in all other nations
in the world, young men may be made Doctors this reason not withstanding. An
other reason is, least by this doctorshipp, they should go or sit before
ancient Priests and learneder, then they are. And this last reason seameth to
be the chiefest motive why, this Bull was procured, and yet not with standing
this Bull, a young man may march and sit before an elder and grauer Priest.
For example. If a young man be a Bacheler or Licentiat either in divinity or
law (which is nothing else with us, but an Inceptor Doctor) would not an elder
and grauer Priest thinck you, give him place in respect of his degree? Noe
doubt he would. Then what have you gotten by your Bull? You must get out an
other, if you will stopp them from Bachelorshipp or Licentiatship, or else those
that tak such degrees will sit above you, be you Jesuit or united Priest not
graduated. Be of good cheer all you that have not studied in the Seminaries,
for this Bull touches you not. Next note that it says in altero Iuris, that
is, in one of the laws, as if it would say. No man can proceed Doctor in the
Civil law alone, or in the Canon law alone, without the foresaid conditions.
But upon my words you may procead in both laws without incurring the penalties
of the Bull, because it is a penal Constitution and therefore to be restrained
to his case, which is in altero Iure in one of the laws, and not to be
extended ad Doctoratum in vtroque Iure to Doctorshipp in both laws, for the
rule is. Odia restringi and fauores conuenit ampliari.

Besides, if I should say the bull to be of no force because it may easly be
proved to be Surreptice, as also it was not promulgated publicly, and in the
place, and with the solemnity, that all like penal Constitutions are
accustomed to be, you would have much ado to prove the contrary.

This Bull was obtained immediately after the peace made with the scholars in
the Roman College viz. the 19. of Sept. 1597. but yet was it not printed till
3. years after (when it pleased such as had obtained it) viz in the year 1601.
The cause as I suspect was for fear least others would follow the example of
D. Bagshaw D. Stafferton (dead long sinces) Do: Weston (who has been a Reader
of Divinity many years in our Seminaries of Rhemes and Doway) and D. Norris
(Whom in contempt you call Italian Doctors) who going from the College took
their degrees by the way.

See yet the great diversity of Judgment between D. Allene the Father of our
Seminaries, and the Procurers of this Bull. When D. Bagshavve and D. Stafferton
came to Rhemes and had signified to him they were Doctors, he was so far from
contemninge them, that the next day at dinner he brought them into the hall and
placed them him self in their due places, next to the other Doctors in
Divinity, the one above M. Licentiat Parkinson and the other above me, being but
Doctor of Law. And this place they keapt so long as they remained there, to
all men's liking and contentment. If such a Bull had either been necessary
profitable or honorable to our country, would not do: Allene (who had as great
care of our country as these Informers have) have pro cured it? Yes I warrant
you. But god be blessed that some of us wear Doctors before these men came to
govern the court and country, else might we have gone beg our bread, and many
a one blovv their nails besides. But will you see the absurdity of it? In
most universities (as in this also of Pont a Mousson) theare are certain
benefices affected to the university, and due (when they fall) to the Senior
Doctor. Put the case an Englishman has studied his time and is made Licentiat
in Divinity (as those are here before they be Doctors) with one or twoe more
with him whose Senior he is. when the time comes to proceade Doctor his
fellows pass, and he is stayed by the virtue of this Bull. Some months
after falls out a benefice, which one of his fellows catches, and he by
reason of this bull loses it. See what good then it brings to our Nation.
Again one that has studied the laws some years is Licentiat, and may when he
will take his Doctorshipp. he is in a university where a Doctors place falls
vacant and he is otherwise found capable for it, but by reason he prooceded not
Doctor (it being a Doctors place) he loses it. And so by this buggy Bull, all
hope of promocion and preferment is taken away hereafter from us poor
Englishmen. Honos alit arts. Who will now study with any courage either in
Diuitie to convince heretics, either in the Canon law to govern the church,
when they are barred of the reward of their studies and defrauded of the
fruits of their labors? But you will (perhapps) say to me here, as you do
often in your Apology to your discontented brethren, that I find fault with
his Holl: actions and doings. for answer whereto, I say: I do so in deed and
wear I in Rome and worthy to be admitted to his presence, I would appeal in
this point from his Holl: ill informed, to his Hol: better informed.

The 4. fault I find with you, is, that you say: That the Cardinal Caietan and
the General of the Jesuits did hinder the promocion of D. Jews B. of Cassano,
butfalsly as you have credibly heard, Nay, that which you heard to the
contrary was credibly false. For, which of you have not heard that the said B.
and fa: Parsons stood for the redd cap, and that the report went, that one of
the two should wear it? so that every man as he affected the party wished
and desired it. yea, the report runs abroad that many hands and
subscriptions wear gathered in Ingland and Flannders in Fa: Parsons favor for
the redd hat. The suspicion that the 2. before named labored for him against
the B. was increased by this, that the ice beiug now broken to the Cardinal
shipp by the creation of Tolledo one of the Society, and Tolledo beiug dead,
that the general of the Jesuits and the Protector, (who was wholy the
Jesuits) wear more vvilling to have a man of their own and wholly addicted
to the society to be preferred, rather then a man, who^ for many years they
accounted of as one not at all addicted to the society, but joined to the
faction that was against them, as you insinuate before, and in this place
also. Besides, as theare was no man of our vvholle nation thought so hable for
that dignity as fa: Parsons, so no man was so fit to be opposed to the B: as
he, for by all licklyhood without any opposition, the B. might have carried it
away. An other presumption of fa persons preferment was, that having (as the
report runs) made a book of the succession of Ingland in favor of the
Infant of Spaigne, he had gotten thereby both favor and credit with the good
old king, who could do much in the obteyning of a Cardinals hate. And
besides all this at that present time, when these rumors rane abroad, fa.
Parsons came from Spaigne to Rome, in the company of two Spanish Cardinals.
All these ptesumptions put together made some proof he aspired to the redd
hate, and that the Protector and General would stand for him against the
Bishop. Yet to give you more certain satisfaction that Fa: persons and his
friends did all they could to hinder the B. (for what cause god knovveth) I
will (to imitate you) set down the Bishopps own words in his last
lettere that ever he vvrott to me, dated the 10. of march 1595. after some
fevve particular affairs thus he says.

We have lost our good Card: Allene, he made me executor of his vvil with 3.
Cardinals, and we ever have been friends though some evil disposed did seek
to seperat us for their own gain, and ill purposes. And now there is such a
stinck iug stir in Flanders, Spaigne and Rome, to make Fa Parsons Cardinal
and so by consequente to exclude me, that it is almost incredible. But yet it
is so though it be lick to have no other effect, but the discovering of
Ambition, the blotting of that blessed Religion and discord amongst our nation
and persecution against me, least I step before and stand between them and the
fire. The doers of this are but 2. or 3. of our Nation, which tumble all up
and down. All the rest, best and vvissest do love and honor me. And in this
Court it is merveiled at of strangers high and low. They say I am an
Italian, that I pass not for the Nation, that I am Brittannus and not verus
Anglus. That I vvil neucr return into Ingland, if it wear Catholic: false
impudent lies and sclanders, which I pray you confute as occasion shall serve.
By lies, they may hinder others, but never are like to help them selves. In
deed I am 61. years old, and am not therefore like to see Ingland, but if the
way were open, I would leave Bishopprick and all vvorldly states in this case,
and go to serve my natural conntrey and country men, whom in banishment I
have ever served and loved more then all these good fellows. I seek not to
be Cardinal, because I know not, An ille status expediat and saluti animae
meae conveniat. But let god do his devine providence, who knovveth what is
beast for us all. Thus I confidently tell you my mind, because I know you
love me and I will ever love you. Thus much the Bishop.

Now of these premises, conjecture I beseech you vvhither the scholars who
desired the preferment of him, whom they took to be founder as it wear of
that Colleage, and the fittest and worthiest of all secular Priests of our
nation to have that honor after Card: Allens death, had not just cause to
suspect the forenamed to be his adversaries, and hindrers from attayning that
high dignity? For my part, as I was no dealer either for the one nor
the other, so I wished one of the tvvoe to be advaunced, I cared not which.
For knovving that those tvvoe that stood for it, to be fittest and capablest
men of our whole nation, both at home or abroad, I stood indifferent, both in
respect of our contreis good, and of my own particular, both being able men
to serve our country and my especial friends. Mary, yet to tell you the truth,
I beleved as much then that Fa. Parsons should or would be Card. as I beleave
now the report of travaillers who advouch that M. Geffrey Poole or M. Tho.
Fitsherbert shall be Card. And although it might be true that Fa. Par. Hindered
the B. all he coold, (for some just causes best known to thim self) yet of
this I am assured, that Fa. Par: had no will nor intention to procure it for
him self. For I savve a lettre written from Rome by a dear and secret friend of
his, that Fa. Par. with much ado and traveill, and at the great suite of his
General had missed or refused the redd cape, vvishing that some fit man of our
nation had it. which is an invincible argument to prove, that if Fa. Par. had
had the will and intention to be Card. he should not have had neade to employ
all his friends to persuade the Pope to the Contrary.

A another fault is, The 5. fault fol. 6.
your impertinent discourse theare of the controversy of the English Gentlemen
against Fa. Holt. How does this prove that which you have taken in hand? They
wear but some of the laity in emulation against one religious man. It is a
great fault of you throughout your vvholle book, Impertinent matter.
to stuff it up with impertinent matter. For if a man would make a table of
your impertinent matters, tales, toies, and digressions, it would be bigger
then half your book. Well, these Gentlemen accused Fa. Holt and M. Own of
parcialitie. Surely they might say true, for any thiug you bring or prove to
the contrary. Why should not I or any other Reader (I pray you) rather beleave
vvorshippsull and Catho. Gentlemen affirmyng by words and vvrittinge that they
were partial, then to believe you (united brethren) talking without book
and by hear say, without any disproofe of that which they say? men must
believe all that comes from you without proof, who gave you that priveledge?

At leugth you are come from John of Ga^t to Wisbish castle, and from the year
1577. Fol. 64.
to the year 1595. when these sturres began there, having not (as you promise
in this chapt.) brought any sufficient proof for 200. and odd years space to
show what great hurt the emulation of secular Priests against Religious has
brought to our country. Both your books do testify, that at that prison
began all these unfortunate and scandalous prison contencions. And although you
attribute here, their living many years a religious life to have happened by
the instructions of a Religious Father of the Societye, Fol. 6. Contradiction
Fol. 65.
yet after wards (forgetting your selves) you attribute the cause of their so
quiett living, to M. Licentiat Metham, and that it continuvved so long as he
lived, and after this blessed man's death the sturres began. I ask you then if
it be true, that for diverse years they had been governed by Fa. Edmonds good
instructions, how felit our they continevved not to harken still thereto? You
answer. D. Bagshaw begane the division. Aetatem habet. Let him answer for
him self. But I rather esteem it to be that which you say alitle before the
good Card. was dead, Card. Allens death cause of the division.
whose auctoritye, as it keapt the Jesuits under, so the reverend respect that
all Priests bare him, as to their loving fostering Father, made them depend
wholy on him, and to refer all their doubts and controversies to him, and
not to Religious me^. But after his death, the Priests like Fatherless
childrene, did seek help and confort where they could find it. Some then
liked this, some liked that, and so of diverse humors and liking grevv
coffeehouse amongst them, the which drew after it, this miserable
contention.

The 6. The 6. fault is irreverence toward his holl. Fol. 7.
fault is, in speaking so vnreverently of his Holl. (of which irreuere^ce
toward their superiors you often accuse your disco^tented brethren) saying
that his holl. should be enforced afterward to confirm their officers and
Prelates. An undutiful speech. how could his holl. (I pray you) be compelled
by a company of discontented brethren, which do not amount (say you) above
the number of 30. to confirm the Prelates chosen by them? A strange case, to see
how great want of charity drives men hedlong to such uncomely speeches, and
to bring their brethren gods Priests into contempt and discredit. The
Priests in their book to his holl. make mention of this Association, of their
Rules and constitutions and lay down their intentions in these words: Sedi
Apostolicae confirmandas proponere decreveramus. we had decreed to present
them (our Rules) to the Sea Apostlicke to be confirmed. And afterward talking
of their Prelates or Bishopps they say: Si quando id (beatiss. Pater.) tibi
approbandum videretur. If at any time it should have seemed good to your
Hollines to approve it, would these men compel the Pope to confirm their
Prelates, who protest their association and Prelates to be of no value, nor
their election of any force without the Popes confirmation? Many other thiuges
they say there, which you let pass untouched, and being not to my purpose, I
omit also.

You add, that when his Hollines savv this mauer of proceading. What mauer of
proceading? Mary their new association, and that he should be enforced if they
choose officers and Prelates, afterward to confirm them, thought it was
time to look to the matter, and to prevent their force, by providing them of a
Prelate of his own making. Certes, your words must tend to this, or else
tonothing. But his Holl. being in Rome, how could he see this manner of
proceading in Ingland? Page 23.
Your discontended Brethren attribut it to the Jesuits and especially to Fa.
persons, which you your selves do grant here, but more modestly saying: Fol.
7.
The Pope caused the Protector to call to him Fa. persons and other Englishmen
in Rome. which other Englishmen as you say afterward were Fa. Baldvvine and
M. Fol. 98. b.
Standish. one a Jesuit and the other a secular Priest (being latly come ont of
Ingland) each of them urged the same (subordmation) in behalf both of the one
and the other order. Informs. Fol. 99.
So you see theare are 2. Jesuits and one secular priest to inform of the
manner of these proceadings. Besides these, th'oppinions of M. Haddock, M.
Martine Array, and M. Thomas Allene wear asked in Rome. So that his holl.
was informed by tvvoe Jesuits and 3. Priests most affectioned (as all the
world knovveth) to the Jesuits against the Association of the discontented
brethren. And as for M. Thomas Allene, as he is put last, so I deem he was
putt in to make up an nombre, as a Cipher in Algorisme. Let all men judge
vvhither your brethren have not cause to complain, that the church of Ingland
must be governed and ruled according to the judgment and information of
Jesuits, the cause touching them not at all, but the secular Priests only,
which are neither called nor heard.

Well it seamed good to these 6. Englishmen to give the Priests in Ingland a
Superior of their own order. Fol. 7. b.
Who should not be a Bishopp, whose dignity being Culmen dignitat is the
highest order in gods church, would have obscured and dymmed (as your
brethren say) the estimation of the Fathers in Ingland, Page 23.
but an Archpriest whose ordinary office and dignity is the lowest in gods
church.

The next conclusion in that Co^sultation of diverse months was, that it was
not thought expedient for his Holl. to writ him self. wherefore? Mary, for the
same cause and consideration. what was that cause and consideration? forsooth
for the avoiding suspitio^s and troubles of the state of England. For no other
cause or consideration but this, you allege before: for not having a Bishopp.
Where were your wits when you wrote this, wear they a woolgathering? or do
you not know, that all things that come from Rome are suspected in Ingland and
construed to be against the state? be he Archpriest, or be he Bishop? or
whither it come from Pope or Protector? either these were not the
considerations that moved the informers to inform, that it was not thought
expedient for his Holl: to writ him self, or else they wear of no force and
effect, or afterward rejected and neglected. For this notwith standing it was
thought afterward expedient for his Holl. to write, and to send his Bulls (as
he did). wear not those causes and considerations as forceable when his Holl.
wrote, as before he wrote? yes, yes, you know it full well. But theare lay a padd
in the straw, the which in time will be discouerd.

Toching M. Black well, Fol. 8.
whom you praise for quietness, learning and virtue, true it is, that for such a
one he was taken before these sturres began, and for such a one I have known
him many years together. And if the Bishop: or Archp. had been made by
election, I should have given my voice to him, so soon as to any man I know
in Ingland. honores mutant mores. if all be true that is set down in the
Priests appeal Qnantumque mutatus ab illo. M. Blackvvell faults.
it is not the same M. Blackvvel. I knevv him to be (I must tell the truth for
I love not to flatter.) in those his answers and doings he shows neither
quietness, modesty nor learning: but rather haughtines, severity and much
indiscretion, tossing the censures of the church like tennis baules, for every
defaulte, threatening the taking away of faculties, Suspention, interdictio^ or
excommunication. Worthily was he cheaked in his Holl. last bull for his over
much severity. In Prelates clemency is extolled more then Severitie, Plus erga
corrigendos agat beneuolentia qua^ seueritas: plus cohortatio quam comminatio,
plus charitas quam potestas. Can licet. did. 45
Benevolence (says Pope Leo) works more with those that are to be corrected
then severity: exhortation more then theatninges and charity more then
auctoritye. I leave to M. Blackwell to meditat that which follovveth in the
same Canon. If I had bine by him in Ingland I would have wished him to have
followed the example of S. Gregorye of Nazianzen. Who seeing a contention among
the Bishops about him, quitted rather the Archbishopps Sea of Constantinople,
then to be cause of such sturres and contentions. So when M. Blackvvell savve
what stir and contention began to arise about his extraordinarre office, a
man of his modesty in the time of persecution, the office being not profitable
but dangerous should have quitted it. But being well united in loove and
judgment with the Jesuits (as you say here) seeing they had procured him the
dignity, he would not leave it so easlye, but for the love of them hold it,
and for their sakes, to his no little discredit, subscribe to the book of
schism which the Jesuits wrote against the prests, which resisted him.

Next you talk of the 2. priests that were sent to Rome and there imprisoned.
I marvel how you can without blushing, twange so often as you do upon this
string, which sou^deth in every man's ear, and works in every man's heart (but
your) pity and compassion, as well for their undue and unjust imprisonement,
as that it should be thought that Fa. Parsons should procure it, as also for
his Hol. degenerating so far from his name of Clement and from all justice
and equity, as to imprison (unheard) such as came ab vltimo orb, as
appeallants to that Sea. But here parhaps you will cry out and say that I do not
respect his Hol. nor speak so reverently of him as I ought. Whereto I answer.
I bear as great a respect and reverence to his Holl. and his actions, as any
of you do or can do: But I cannot flatter as you do but am. Tom tell troth. Is
not his Hol. the supreme judge on earth? Is he not bound to do justice? To
observe his own and his predecessors Constitutions and Decrees? Has not god
and nature given him 2. ears, to hear each party? Is he not a man and may be
misinformed? has he not his passions as other men have to credit one man more
then a another? If all this be true, as you cannot deny but that it is, if you
be Christians, Why might he not unjustly imprison them, being preoccupied with
evil and false informations? Numquam est auditum a saeculo. specially in Rome
that men appealling to that Sea, wear imprisoned before they wear heard to
speak in their defense. In your next and larger Apolog. bring me one like
example and I will yield to you.

They wear there a fortnight (say you) before they wear imprisonned. what if
they had been there a whoil year, being no^ heard the time of their being there
does neither ag grauat their fault nor purge the injustice of the fact. If they
had been hard and found faulty? All the world would have liked of the justice
done to them, as now they mislike of the injustice showed to them. the matter
passing as it did, assure your selves, all the water in Tiber will never wash
or clea^se the Actors herein of injustice, nor stopp the mouths of the
posterity from speaking against it, if it should be committed to memory and
writing as you have done here. It followethe. That his Holl. Fol. 8. b.
took order that they should be retired to the English Colleage in Rome, but
in a another place you say: it was at Fa. Parsons Request. Retired (quoth you)
from such retyring Liberanos Domine. If close prison be but a retraict, I know
not what prisonme^t is? You do well to cover and mitigat so great injustice with
so mild and favorable a word as retired is. Certz, they were retired to the
English colleage, as M. Bishopp was retired in Ingland to the Marshall sea, and
there put in close prison by an heretical Justice of peace. But to tell you
more, this retyring of the^ to the English colleage, was as great an injustice
as their apprehension was before they wear heard. What law does permit men
to be imprisonned in the houses of their adversaries? It is well know and you
cannot deny, but that their coming to Rome was asvvell against the Jesuits as
the Archpr. and specially against Fa. Parsons, under whose custody they were
imprisonned. In what common wealth well governed are prisonners committed to
the keaping and custody of their adversaries? Why are common gailes built but
to keape offenders and malefactors? If you have any like example in your next,
for our satisfaction that do mislike of this dealing, bring us one.

Afterward you treat more at large of this imprisonment. From fol. 120.
dovvnevvards.
Cloak and disguize it so well as you can now, the posterity hereafter will
vvonder to hear or read that 2. cathol. priests coming as appellants to
Rome out of an heretical country, in the which they maintained constantly
with danger of their lives, the honor and preminence of that Sea, and one of
them had suffered sum years imprisonment with banishment afterward for the
article of S. Peter and his successors supremacy over all Princes and Prelates
whosoever, that these priests (I say) should before they wear heard, what
they had to say, be cast into prison, yea and imprisonned in the house and
under the custody of their adversaries. Never was theare hard of such
injustice since good S. Peter sat in that chair. Suerly, as strange, unusual
and never before hard of judgment, as the appointment and institution of the
Archp. was, the which they went to impugn. the manner and fashion also of
their imprisonment, to be keapt close prisoners and not to see or communicate
one with the other for sum months, does make the injustice much more
greater. Murderers, manquellers, and traitors are not every where, nor in
common gailes so handled. They came to plead against a new Prelacie instituted
without his Holl: bulls, and obtained (if not by evil) yet by the information
of some fevve parsons. Was this so heinous a crime, that it should deserve such
rigourous punishment? Are not his hol. bulls and breues every day almost in
every court impugned, and rejected upon such pretenses as surreption and ill
information? And yet such reiectors are quietly heard, and neither imprisonned
nor punished albeit they prove not their intention. These men came but to
impugn a Card. letters, and yet were haynously punished for it, before they
were hard, and as though they had committed Crime^lesae Maiestatis were
constrained to answer ex vinculis. Yea, Fol. 121.
but (say you) they persisted to vvrangle, and went about to misinforme diverse
principal men of the city of the affairs of Ingland and divisions. because
they informed otherwise then the 3. priests and 2. Jesuit, before named had
before informed it is misinformyng. In deed they were not called by the
Protector to counsel as the others were, but came to impugn the information
given to him, and his appointment of the Archp. and therefore they were but
vvra^glers and misinformers? seeing you will have it so, be it so. They paid
well for their vvra^gling.

After you have told the tale as cunningly and as smoothly as you can in
defense of the Agents and actors of this imprisonment, you fall a mockinge the
poor priests saying this then is the heinous fact which our discontented
brethren since that time have so much aggrauated through the world by
clamors, and do at this present both amplify and urge in these their books
against his Holl: the Card. and specially Fa: Parsons, etc. Come hither (I pray
you) Is it not a heinous fact to committ injustice and to imprison innocent
parsons unheard? that they were innocent the time of their imprisonement (how
soever they were found guilty afterward) is notorious to all men, for in
law, Quilibet praesumitur bonut vsque dum probetur malus. Every one is
presumed to be an honest and innocent man, until he be proved to be an
naughty fellow, but nothing was proved against them before their
imprisonment, ergo honest and innocent men wear imprisonned. If this be not a
heinous fact, I know not what is a heinous fact. Have so much aggrauated?
(quoth you) if men had not uttered it, the stones them selves would have cried
out against it, and (as I have said) all posterity hear after will no doubt
vvonder at it? Call you the setting down of the truth exaggeration? That 2.
priests coming out of Ingland to Rome with appellation, wear cast into
prison, before they wear heard, what they had to say, and that in such have,
as they must needs be caught and carried to prison on S. Thomas of Canterbury
his day, a day so highly solemnished troughout all Chrestiendome of all
English Catholics, where any company of them dvvell or Remain? then, to
be imprisonned in the house of those, against vvho^ they came to co^test? Next
to be keapt close prisoners some months, not to be permitted to speak one
with another, nor to company or have conference (what say I with any
Aduocat or Procureur for their instruction) no not with any English in the
town or scholar in the colleage, no not to be suffered to go to Church, to
say or hear Mass upon Sondaies, New yares day and tvvelf day? is this to
aggrauat the matter? Think they to dazell men's eyes by saying: They aggrauat
the matter? have they not just cause to cry out, and notify the injustice to
the whole world? yea, but they urge it against his Hol. the Card. and Fat.
Parsons as who should say his Holl. the Card. and Far. parsons wear Angels
ad not sinful men, or such as could do no injustice, that have not their
passions and affections a swell as other men? as who should say, his holl.
cannot err and miss in matters of fact, such as this is? by creditinge one
party too much, and by preiudicing the other party? By these great braggs you
would, terrify your reader, and dravve him from the due codsideration of the
fact it self. But all in vain, we know as well as you what is due to his
Holl. and Cardinals without flattering the^, as you do to your own and other
men's hurts.

Next your answer to their poor objections that, Fol. 123.
if they came to trouble that church of Ingland: his Hollines might well
determine to restrain them for their disobedience at their first arrival.
Which is a poor answer. For had they come to trouble 20. churches, yet they
ought to be heard before imprisonment. For how could his Holli know they came
to trouble the church of Ingland, before they wear heard to speak against
that church? you will answer: his holl: knevv it by hear say. And upon
hearsay innocent men be imprisonned. And might not these informatio^s he had
out of Ingland and Flaunders (especially being given by those of the contrary
faction) be false? Good God? my judge is informed against me by mine adversary
against vvho^ I plead, the judge gives ear and credit to his information and
vvil not hear me speak and defend my self, but condemns me to prison. Is
not this good justice thinck you? And yet this is the case of the tvvoe
priests. Information was made against them to his Hollines by the contrary
faction, upon which information, without hearing their defenses, they were
condemned and cast into prison in such order as you have heard.

And as for that which you add in defense of this fact, that this a is course
usually held in all Princes courts of the world at this day, viz to imprison a
man first and the^ hear him after: as they do in kendall, hang a man in the
forenoone, and sit in judgment of him in the afternoon, if it were true in
temperall princes courts, yet the Sea of Rome never used any such course
before in Church matters as these are, neither in any Princes court in the
world, are men prisoned in civil matters, such a one as this is, before they be
heard. Nay, I say more, that ordinarily in criminal causes there is made a
secret inquiry of the life and behauior of the accused by the Princes officers
before the delinquant be apprehended and imprisoned. Can. non ita. 2. q. 6.
And wear it true you say of Princes courts, I answer you: Non ita in
Ecclesiast. agendu^ est negotiis sicut in secularibus. Ecclesiastical affairs
(quoth the Pope Eutichianus) must not be handled as secular affairs are
handled.

The 7. fault, The 7. fault. The state of the question not set down as you
promis.
is that you promise in this first chap. to set down the state of the
present controversy in question. and yet you do nothing less but through out
this whole book you shu^ne it and fly from the points in question, as from a
snake or serpent.

Your discontented brethrene in the preface of their English book put it down
thus: The strief and dissension at this day, etc. is against those priests who
did forbear to subject them selves to the Archp. constituted in authority
over all the Seminary priests in England and Scottland by a Card. who was
Protector of the English colleage at Rome, and afterward honored with the
title of Protector of Ingland, for the which forbearing etc. the Priests were
accused of schism, sedition, faction and rebellion. etc.

Lo how plainly they go to work, where as you still roue abroad, and will not
come near the prick. You should have confuted this, and putt the case more
truer if you could They did putt it more largly down to the D. D. of Sorbonne
which you mislike and find 5. faults therewith. Therefore being parciall to
neither side, I will put it down truly and as it is in deed. Fol. 116.117.
Fol. 7. The true case of the first controversy in question


When his Holl. saw the proceadings of the priests in Ingland touching their
associatio^ and endeavors to make them selves officers and Prelates of their
own institution. He willed the Card. and Protector to call unto him fath.
parsons and other English men in Rome, to see what remedy was best for these
disorders. Where it was concluded that the priests should have a superior of
their own order, and for sum causes, it was not thought good that this
Superior should be a Bishopp but an Archp. with 12. assistants, and for some
considerations it was not thought expedient that he should be instituted or
constituted by his Hol. his bulls. Where upon his Holl. gave full and express
commission to Cardinal Caietane the Protector to appoint the same with
convenient instructions. The protector according to his commission appointed
and constituted M. Blackwell Archpriest with as great jurisdiction over Ingland,
and also Scotland as all the Bishopps of those 2. realms had before. The Card.
Fol. 116. b.
letters wherein he said he did this Ex expresso mandato Sanctissimi. by the
express commandment of his Hol: being received in Ingland and communicated to
the priests. The Archp, Fol. 7. b
was receued and obayed willingly and joyfully by the English clergy,
excepting only a fevve that misliked the fact, Fol. 8.
because it hindered their association. And for that the Archp. being a quiet
learned and virtuous man, and well united in love and judgment with the
Jesuits, they mistrusted ever to be able to dravve him to be indifferent and
for that cause devised many scrupulls and lets, partly of the faith and
credence of the said Card. letters, then vvhither his Hol. could (according to
the canons and constitutions of his Predecessors and according to the vvritte^
law and style of the court of Rome) institute a new office and dignity
never hard of before in Christ's church in respect of his large and a^ple
jurisdiction, by that mean, that is, by the letters of a Protector without
his Holl. bulls? This is the case set down plainly and truly Now the
question is.

First. First question.
whither a Card. Protector is to believed upon his word, saying: that he has
express commandment from his holl: to do this or that?









Lastly, Fol. ibid. b
Whither those few priests that misliked the fact, and would not admit such a
Superior thrust upon them by such letters, without his Holl. bulls, did sin,
or wear to be counted and proclaimed Schismatics and worse then sooth saiers
for the same.

These questions touch the quick of the first controversy in question by the
decision of the which, you and your reader shall see and perceive (if they be
not stark blinded) whither the fault Was in your discontented brethren that
refused to receive the Archp. and to acknowledge him their Superior upon the
Card. Protectors letters, written as he said ex expresso mandato Sanctiffimi,
or in the Archpr. that would accept and occupy such a dignity upon such
letters: or in you (united brethrene) that upon such letters did hazard so
willingly and joyfully to receive the Archp. and by this your Apology go
about to auerr and allow of the same.

Touching the first question. For the decisio^ of the first question. Fol. 108.
b
It seems that a Card. Protector is to be beleaued upon his word, by the
text, gloss and reason which you alledg for the saime. For the Canon
Nobilissimus did. 97. does report that the Pope received a Princes Ambassador
as Ambassador, and beleaued all he told him in his May. name that sent him,
For the Cardin. and Archp.
albeit he brought no letters of credence from the Prince that sent him. Ergo
if the Pope him self did beleaue an Ambassador without letters from his Prince,
why should not a few secular priests beleaue a Card. their Protect. affirming,
that what, soever he did, was done by his Hol. express eommandme^t, allthough
he showed no letters from his Hol. for confirmation thereof. Now if the Pope
believed a man of far less quality, dignity and credit then a Card. (yea a
Card. Protector of the wholl nation to whom he wrott) is, and that without
letters upon his bareworde: per argumentu^ a minore ad maius, certs, priests
ought to have believed a Card. Protector being of so eminent a dignity as
(under his Hol.) theare is no higher in gods church, and by consequence these
few secular priests did not well in not beleauing the Card. and in withstanding
and not acknowledging the Archp. constituted by him, by the express
commandment of his holl: as by his letters he affirmed and testified.

The gloss by you alleged reckenyng up many privileges that Card. Fol.
ibidem. Ad C. vnic. in extr. Joann. 22. de praebend. sn verb. sublimitatis.
have above other prelates in the 8. priuiledg says that a Card. saying him
self to be the Popes legate, is to be believed without any letters at all. But
Caietanus who instituted the Arch. was a Card. and which is more Protector of
the country in the which he instituted that dignity. Ergo he was to be believed
without letters, saying he did it by the express commandment of his holl. I
see no reason of diversity. For why is not this Card. as well to be beleaued
saying he did this by this holl commandment, as the other Card. saying he is
the Popes legate, till you discontented brethren bring me, some reason of
diversity, I must conclude the one to be as well believed as the other, and so
both to believed without letters, on their bare words, and by consequence, you
to have offended in not believing him, and in not admittinge the Archp. upon
his letters, attesting it to be done by his hol. express commandment.

This reason also, Fol. 108.
is against the discontented brethren who does not know what a Card.
testimony in any Chrestian Catho. court is worth? especially a Protector
testifying and professing in his letters to do it by the special commandment
of his Hol. as this man does in this letters? If then Card. be believed in
Christian Princes courts, upon their words, why do you poor priests call
his credit in question, why do you not obey him, thinck you that your
disobedience is of greater force to discredit him, then the obedience of all
Christian Princes is to give credit to his word and testimony, you are
far deceeued if you thinck so.

This is all (my united Brethren) that you have said or can say in the defense
of the institution of the Archp. by the Protectors letters ex mandato
Sanctissimi. I have urged your arguments syncerely, and as far (I thinck) as
you can do your selves, and yet for all that, your allegations do not prove
your intention nor disprove the fact and doing of your discontented brethren.
If you have no better stuff to bring in, in your next and larger Apology, I
must needs pronounce you to have an iniust cause in hand, and these fevv
priests against whom you writ, to gain the victory of you. and to have done
like good childrene of Gods Church, in observing her ordonance and
Constitutions by rejecting Superiority so unduly and vncanonically putt upon
them: and you to be (as it wear) bastards, so willingly and joyfully to
receive an intruded parson thrust in upon you against the Ordinanances,
Decrees, Constitutions and Canons of Gods Church, The text, gloss a^dreaso^
brought for the Cardin. doing make not for him.
as an one shall appear.

The Canon Nobilissimus is so far from making for you, that it utterly
ouetthrovveth the Constitution of the Archp. and does prove that a Card. be he
Protector of ten Realms is not to be believed except he show his holl.
letters. This says the Canon: Nobilissimus vir atque strenuus vestrae
sublimitatis Legatus licet nullam epistolam iuxta consuetudinem a vobis nostro
Pontificio detulisset, licet nnnquam Apostolicae Sedis modus fuit absque
signatis apicibus vndecumque legationem suscipere: nos tamen vos in illo
honorantes eiusque grauitatem and eloquiorum illius veridicas cognoscentes
assertiones, nihilominus eum and sicut decuit suscepimus, and ei sicut honestum
fuit oredidimus. Thus far Pope Nicholas, Which is to say. All though the most
noble and valiant man your highness Legate brought no letters from you unto us,
and albeit it was never the manner of the Apostolic Sea to receive any
Embassage from what place soever without signed or sealed letters, yet that
notvvith standing, as it became us we have received him, (without letters) and
as honesty required we have believed him. Honoring you in his person, and his
gravity acknowledging his assertions to be true. If this Canon prove any
thiuge, it is this: that the Sea Apostolic never used to receive Ambassadors
from Princes without letters of credence signed or sealed by the Prince thet
sends such Ambassador, and that the same Sea never sends Ambassador or
gives commission to any whosoever without letters from the same Sea. And
therefore the Card. Protector by this Canon was not to be believed Sine
signatis apicibus, that is without the Popes bull or breue. And by consequence
this Canon brought by you does discharge your discontented brethren from all
disobedience, and charg your own selves with over much lightness to admit a
Superior upon a Card. lettre without letters from the Sea Apostlick. which as
your Canon proves is not accoustomed to give Commission to any man without
letters signed. The truth is, this Canon neither makes for the one, nor against
the other, for it spaketh in a case far different from this that is in
question. For it treats of sending Ambassodors to the court of Rome, and our
question is of sending from Rome. And whereas Gratian a little before this Canon
by you alleged, said: That it was not the custom of the church of Rome
either to receeve Ambassadors from any place, or to send Ambassadors or Legates
to any place without letters signed or sealed: And for proof there of alleged
the words of Pope Nicholas: the Correctors of the decret appointed, and after
approved by Gregory the 13. Do takaway these words. (Or to send.) In vulgatis
sequebatur: Neque mittere, quae absunt a vetustis neque convenient cum his quae
sequenti Capite afferuntur. That is. In the vulgar copies it did follow,
Neither to send, which words are not in the ancient copies, neither do they
agree with those things that are treated in the chap. follovving. which
chapter is your Canon Nobilissimus. And why do not those words agree with
that which is treated in that chapter? Because that chapter treats of
sending Ambassadors to Rome and not of sending Legates or Ambassadors from Rome,
and so the case is altered (quoth Ploydon.) Your Canon says that the Pope of
courtisie extraordinarily and against the custom of that Sea received an
Ambassador that came without any letters of credence. This is all. How proverh
it that the Protector was to be believed without letters upon his own word
that he did it by express commandment from his Holl.? even as much as: How
far is it to london? A poake full of plumbes.

Now to your Gloss. You have throatled this gloss.
Who if it had not had the chyn coughe, and that it had not been (at it wear)
throatled by you, least it should have spoken out, would not have made much
for you.

The 8. privilege (says the Gloss) is, a Cardinal saying him self to be the
Popes Legate is to be believed upon his word. allthoughe some call this
priveleag in doubt. You are nippers.
which latter words you nipped quiteof, because they marred the markett. If
you had putt them down, your Reader would straight have seen, that that
priveledg was not so firm and stable, that you should build any solid or
firm Doctrine upon it, as in deed it is built upon a heap of sand, and not
upon a Rock, as you shall see anon, after the answer to your reason. No
upright dealing.


Why (my united brotherne) this is falsehood in fellowshipp to deceive your
selves voluntaryly, (for you could not but see these words if you saw the
other) and your unlearned Reader (that would not seek the gloss, but credit
you upon your word) willingly, I will not say malliciously. you must in your
next Apology confess here vvhither you will or no, either your ignorance or
your malice. Ignorance for alleging untruly an Author you never savve,
malice, if you savve him, and yet allege him corruptly, in cutting of that
which confuteth the thing, for the which you allege him. This is no nevves to
you for elswheare you do the like, as in place you shall hear of. This is to
immitate Jewel and Novvell and not Cath. Writters.

That your reason is not good and that it holds not in any Christian and
Catho. Your reason holds not.
Courts (as you would make men believe) is proved out of Robuffus a French
man, who was a great Practicioner in the court of Rome and France, Jn concord.
in rubr. de regia ad Prelaturas? verb. Certa.
and a Learned Canonist. He says thus: Secundum praxim in Francia non creditur
Legato a latere asserenti se viuae vocis oraculo dispensandi vel aliam
potestatem a Papa habe re, nisi eam ostendat, and in Parleamentis eius potestas
registretur, etc. According to the practice of France a Legate of Latere is not
to be believed affirming that by word of mouth he has power from the Pope to
dispense, or to have any other auctoritye, except he shenw it, and that his
auctoritye and power be registered in the parliaments.

This is taken out of a book dedicated to Fraunces the first king of France,
whom I trust you will grant to have been a good Christian and Catholic king.

So that your who does not know, Fol. 108.
provethe your intention nothing at all. for if a Legate of latere be not
believed, when he says he has some specially auctoritye given him by mouth
from his holl. how would a bare Card. or a Protector be believed in the like
case? And suer I am neither Legate nor Protector should be believed in Spaigne
or elsvvhere in our case, which is the Institution of a new office or dignity,
that never was seen in Christ his church before, without express letters
from his Hollines.

Now to return to your gloss which says: The gloss.
Licet aliqui hoc revocent in dubium although some call this in doubt. for
aliqui, some, he might have better said, omnes. All interpreters call it in
doubt.

First and foremost then, Against the Institution of the Archpriest.
the first gloss upon your Canon Nobilissimus says: here it is proved that
Legates are not to be credited without letters, and so condempneth the said 8.
priveleage.

The second gloss theare adds: A Legate then or Ambassador must show and
exhibit the letters of his Legation, if he will be believed. You see by this
that your gloss said well: Some do call this in doubt.

To this gloss I add the opinion of Bartolus the Prince of Ciuilian
Interpretors. L. Vnic. C. de superindicto lib. 1.
the Emper or forbidding all men to pay any tovvle or tax ad solas prefectura
lettras, upon the Captain of the Guard (who was the next person to the
Emperor in auctoritye) his letters, except they wear confirmed by the
Emperors letters, says thus: Canonista tamen dicunt quod Cardinalibus creditur
etiamsi literas non ostendant, etc. The Canonists do hold that credit ought to
be given to Cardinals, allthough they show no letters for it. which is flatt
against the text of this law, by which faith is not given to the Captain of
the guarde or Constable upon his own letters without he show also the
Emperors letters. ergo a Card. is not to be credited unless he show the Popes
letters, the which Cardinal Caietane did not. ergo.

The Lawier that makes notes or additions upon Bartolus in the same place,
Notes upon Bartolus.
notes full well, that the law cited is to be vndrestood of such things as
are due to the Prince only to do, or are reserved only to his auctoritye, as
the imposing of tax, tributes and gabells upon the subjects belong only to
the Prince, and no man else of what pre-eminence or dignity so ever he be, can
do it. And therefore (quoth he) Si quis dicebat se habere talem promissionem a
Principe, non est dubium, quod non creditur sine literis, and maxim quando
certatur de preiudicio alterius. if any man should say, he had permission of
the Prince (to tovvle or tax the subjects) without all doubt he is not to be
believed, without the Princes letters and chiefly when that which he says he
may do, is prejudicial to others. Mark how he says. Jf the thing belong to
the Prince only. C. 10. ext. de translat. Cpi.
But the instituting of new offices and dignities, belong to his Holl. only as
also do the collations of benefices depending of his gyste, and not to
Cardinals Protectors or Cardinals Legates, unless it be expressly set down
in the faculties of their legation. ergo there ought no credit to be given to
the Protectors letters, instituting a new dignity without shevving his Holl.
letters for discharge, and by consequent the discontented brethren in law and
conscience did well, not to admit the Archpriest as their Superior upon the
Cardinals letters: and you (united brethren) did against law and right to
admit him so lightly and willingly as you did.

Jason also a Learned Ciuilian after he had alleged (according to his
customet) the opinions of all that wrote before him at last concluded: Jason.
Jn repetit. Li. admonnendi ff. de iureiur. 11. 189.
Quod si etiam Cardinalis a latere diceret Papam sibi aliquid commisisse quod
respicit damnum and preiudicium tertij non creditur sibi, nisi Bullas
Apostolicas commissionis ostendat and ita procedit Glossa ad ca. Nohilissimus
did. 97. If a Card. yea a Card. Legate should say that the Pope (by mouth)
has committed some thing to him that is hurtful to a third person, he is not
to be believed, except he shevve the Popes Bulls of his Commission, and so
ought the gloss upon the Canon Nobilissimus to be understood, he means the
third gloss upon the same, which says thus: Credit ought to be given to a
Card. that is well known in any Province without any letters at all. Maxim
cum non contingat Cardinalem vnquam abesse nisi Legationis causa. Chiefly,
because it does not lightly happen a Card. to be absent (from the court of
Rome) but when he is seent in Legation. Besides Petrus Rauenatus a singular good
lawier, Petrus Raucnatus. In breuiario Juris Can. tit. ext. de foro competent.
is of the opinion of the gloss, that a Card. is to be believed affirming him
self to be the Popes Legate, because customably Cardinals do not depart from
the court of Rome, except he be made a Legate. But both are to be vndrestood as
Jason said before, except that which they say be prejudicial to others. And
besides, they talk of Cardinals which be out of Rome that are presumed to be
Legates. And our Card, was still in Rome, and so the case is altered.

Andreas Alciatus also says: Alciat ad C. cu^ contingat in 11.35. ext. de
Iureiurand.
Neque Cardinali creditur in alicuius preiudicium. Neither is a Card. to be
credited in an others prejudice. Note he speaks in general of all Cardinals
be they Legates, The Emperors. l. vnic. C. de mandat. princip.
Protectors or not. To conclude with Civilians. The Emperors their lords and
Masters say: Si quis asserat etc. If any affirm that he comes to you with
our secreat commandments, be it known to you all, that you give no credit
thereto, except he prove it by shevvinge our letters. And be you not terrified
with the dignity or peruissance of any man, but ask hardly for our letters.
This then you see is a rule in law, that none that say they have this
commandment from the Prince, or, the Prince has given me this office or
auctoritye to constitute such an office or officer are to be believed, except
they shevve the Princes letters for it. Card. Caietane did not shevve his Holl.
letters for the auctoritye he took upon him in constituting the Archp. ergo by
law he was not to be believed or credited, nor the Archp. upon his letters
only to be received or admitted. Let us now hear what the Canonistes say.

Petrus Rauenatus in the place before alleged says: Siautem diceret, etc.
Petr. Rauenatus. again.
But if he (the Card. Legate) should say that some thing were specially
committed to him, which is not contained in his faculties, Commission, or
general office of his Legation, he is not to be credited, except he shevve his
letters. This not vvhithstandinge some do say: That by custom credit is to
be given to him, yea in an other man's prejudice, when he affirms some thing
to be committed to him by word of mouth. a. In c. sicut extr. de sent. excom.
But the Abbot Panormitanus does not believe it, forvvhom is a notable a
gloss. and for my part I am of his opinion and do allege a singular text,
which is alleged ordinarily to prove, that the Pope cannot make a law: that
faith be given to one in the prejudice of an other. Thus he.

But let us hear Panor. Panormit ad. d. c. sicut.
the Prince of Canonists speak: Nota singulariter, etc. Note singularly, that
a Card. is not to be believed affirming any thing in the prejudice of an
other. And therefore if a Card: should say, that the Pope committed some thing
to him by word of mouth (which is all one with express commandment)
tending to an others prejudice, he is not to be believed, except he proves it
otherwise. keep in mind this Gloss, which does notably limitate the Canon
Nobilissimus. And allthough Navarre does seem to advouch and hold, Nauar. Jn
consil. 12. tit. de testatis.
that a Card. is to be believed even in an others man's prejudice, yet he says,
three thingh must concur. The first that he testify of things committed to
him by the Pope, or to be sent to others by him. The second. That they be
things accustomed, to be granted. The third. That it turn not directly to the
prejudice of an other. Now as the first point might help the Protector, so
the two others make directly against him. So that in effect Nauar, says as
much as the others do, that a Card. is not to be beleved in the prejudice of
another

The reasons why a Card. Reasons why a Card. nor any other is to be believed
on his word. C. Cum a nobis ext. de test.
is not to be believed on his only word is: because the law does forbidd Any
credit to be given to the word or saying of one Judge, of what soever
auctoritye he be. And that no Judge do easily suffree the tetestimonie of one
alone in what cause soever, to be admitted. And again. L. Jurisiur. C. de
testib. Ca. si testes Par. vnius 4. q. 3. L. Nullus ff. de testibus.
We will not that the deposition of one witness be heard at all although he
be of great honor in the court. For in such a case the Card. should bear
vvittnes in his own cause which cannot be, because, Nullus idoneus testis in
re sua intelligitur. No man is counted a lavvfull witness in his own cause.
For by the law of god and nature (which neither Pope nor Protector can
change) it is decreed: that in ore duorum aut trium stet omne verbum. Theare
must at the lest be two vvittnesses to prove the thing that is in
controversy. Alexander the 3. after he had alleged the foresaid words,
addethe: C. Licet. ext. de testib.
Quia licet quaedam sunt causae, quae plures quam duos exigant testes, nulla
tamen est causa quae vnius testimonio (quamvis legitimo) terminetur. For albeit
theare be some causes that require more then tvvoe vvittnesses, yet there is no
cause that ca^ be ended or decided by the wittnes of one alone, be such witness
never so lavvfull. And to end this controversy with Pope Bonifacius the 8.
saying: Nec simpliciter creditur se asserenti Legatum. C. Iniunctae par.
asserenti in ext. com. de elect.
Nor is he to be believed that says simply (without our letters) he is a
Legate. Mark how he speaks indefinitly, without adding whether it be in
the prejudice of an other or not, he is not at all to be credited without
letters from the Pope. By this that has been said you see, that your
disconte^ted brethren had just cause and good reason not to beleve the Card.
Protector without the Popes Bulls, and therefore might well say, that they
were not bound to believe him with the rest that follovveth in your 17. leaf
b. put down by you as not well spoken, when as it is the truth it self, as
you see has been hear proved.

But now when I have all done, you will say: the Priests in Ingland were not
prejudiced by the Card. letters, and therefore by the opinion of the Authors by
me alleged, they ought to have believed and obaied the Card. affirming to have
done that which he did by the express commandment of his Hollines. maxim
chiefly when he does thereby prejudice an other. which word maxim does not
include, that if he do not prejudice any he is then to be believed. And besides
Bonifacius says simply: He is not to be believed without letters. It
imports not then vvhither this action did prejudice the Priests or no. but
vvhither he was to be believed and obayed therein without the Popes letters?
But now, if all the Priests in Ingland wear preiudicied in this action, then
must you hold down your hedds for shame and grant you wear too hasty to
admitt' such a superior to be putt upon you to your own prejudice.

That you and your brethren were preiudicied by this subordinatio^ so
instituted by the Card. letters may easily be proved thus. That all Priest in
Ingland we re preiudicied by this Jnstitution.
Every Superior as Pope, Archbishop, Bishope, Deane, Provost, Abbott Abbess
and some sort of Priors De iure communi and ordinario, by the ordinary and
common course of law ought to be chosen by those, over whom they are
afterward to govern. Tit. de elect. ext. in 6. in clo. and in ext.
This is proved by the general title de electione of election which is put
asvvell in the Decretalls as in the Clementins and extrauagants. in which
title are set down many notable constitutions touching the manner, order and
direction of these elections. And that in Ingland elections have had place is
evident, by some constitutions directed to the Archb. of Canterbury, the B. of
worcester, and others, to end some Difficulties which arose upon elections
there. Besides this his Holl. asked M. Standish who was newly come out of
Ingland with Fa. Baldwine, whither the desiere to have a superior as he then
informed him, was by the consent of all the Priests in Ingland, or no? who
ansvvered that it was. And upon this information of Fa. Page 31.
persons and Fa. Baldwine (as you confess) it was resolved to give the
Priests for Superior an Archp. but not a Bishop. That question of his Holl.
was an evident sign and token that his Holl. meaned not to give them a
superior without their consents, nor to take away the right of election that
was due unto them by his predecessors decrees and Constitutions. C. Ecclesia
2. verse. neque enim ext. de elect.
For to use Gregorye the 9. his words, talking of this matter of election.
Neque enim credendu^ est Romanum Pontificem (qui iura tuetur) quod alias
excogitatum est multis vigilus and inuentum, vno verbo subuertere voluisse. It
is not credible that the B. of Rome (who does defend the laws) would with one
word over throvve, that which otherwise with much pain and care has been
excogitated and invented. Even so I say, the Popes holl, is not to be presumed
with one word said to the Protector, to take a way the right of election,
which by law belonged to the Priests in Ingland: specially being informed
(though falsely) that all the Priests consented thereto. Upon which
information, thinking they were contented that his holl. should appoint them a
Superior, he appointed then one. Besides you must learn, that all that which
his Holl. decrees or grants by his Bulls and commandments is all ways to
be vndrestood. Saluo ture alieno, and sine alterius detrimento, C. L^cet ext.
de officio iud. ordinand.
saving other men's right and without the hurt and hinderacem of others.
Nostrae (inquit) intentionis non est Episcopo preiudicium generare. It is not
our intention to prejudice the B. says Alexander the 3.) And Innocentius the
3. vvritting to the Archb. of Sens in France says. Quia tamen intentionis
nostrae nec fuit nec esse debuit Iurisdictioni tuae per mandatum huiusmodi
derogare. Because it neither was, nor ought to be our intention by this
commandment to derogat thy Jurisdiction. I think if Clement the 8. were
well informed how all matters do go, and in what sort he was deceived,
he would answer with his predecessors: that it was not his intention to
derogat the Jurisdiction of the Priests, by taking from them the election of
their Superior, which was due to them by the Ecclesiastical laws. By this
you see, that what soever the Protector vvrott, you wear to have an eye to
his Holl. intention that commanded him, as your brethren hadd. Certz for this
your fact of admitting the Archpriest. upon the Card. letters without Bull.
or breve from his holl. you rather deserve to be called Blind, then the others
for their lavvfull resisting him discontented brethren. This which I have said
may suffice for this present to advertise you that the Card. Protector was not
to be believed in the prejudice of all you Priests in Ingland both discontent
and united without letters from his Holl. nor his Archp. to be by you received
and by consequence your discontented brethren to have had just cause, of
coffeehouse for such unlawful intrusion, and to have duly and lavvfully
refused to accept and acknowledge the Archpriest to be their Superior, before he
showed them the Popes Bulls for his warrant.

The second Question is. C. 1. ext. de tra^st. epist.

Whither not only a new and extraordinary dignity as this is, (touching the
larg Jurisdiction over 2. Realms) but if any ordinarye Dignity or benefice
whatsoever, can be instituted and constituted by other means, then by the
Popes express Bulls or letters?

The negative is so evident and apparent true, that no instance can be given
against it. Besides that, the Pope affirms it him self. Search I pray you all
the court rooles in his Holl. chancerie, turn over all the books and records
that are in the office of the Datarie, if you find any one President (since the
Popes begane to institute and geive benefices) that a Card. Protector upon his
bare letters (with this clause in them: By the express commandment of his
Holl.) without the Popes Bulls joined to them, ever gave the least benefice of
the Popes gift, then call me Cut. Mary, if you can show me that a Protector
has Without bulls by the express comma^dment of his Holl. instituted a new
dignity Which was never in Ingland or in the church of Christ before, then
Will I burn my law books and quitt that profession, C. beneficium de regu.
iur. in 6
for it is against express law, against custom, and against the style of the
court of Rome. Be not offended if I term it a new dignity, never hard of
before in Christ's church since Christ's Assension. I mean for the amplenes
and extention of his jurisdiction. For, an Archpr. Archp. dignity is new, and
never hard before
to have as great and ample yea greater, jurisdiction over all the priests of
2. realms, as had all the Bishops of those realms when they wear Cathol.
is new and extraordinary. Fol. 99.
It is a mockery that you call it an ancient dignity in Christ's church. who
knows it not The question is not of the ancientnes of the dignity, but of
this new and never before heard of jurisdiction and authority. The ordinary di
gnitie of an Archp. is the lowest and basest in gods Church. Tot. tit. ext. de
offic. Archipres.
It is an ancient dignity in Christ's church you say. I confess, but with all
I say, it is the lowest and basest dignity in Christ's church. It is such a
one as follo Weth. His jurisdiction did not further extend then the church.
his office is to govern the Quire, to see that the service be decently said,
and in the Bishops absence he must sing mass upon holy and festival days.
It is his office to begine the service, What is the ordinary officie of an
Archpr.
or to appoint another to begine it. To his office it appartaineth to see that
sick parsons dye not without confession and receiving the blessed Sacrament.
This which I say I speak not in contempt of the man or his office, but to
give you to understand, wherefore your discontented brethren call it a new,
extraordinary, and never heard of dignity in Gods church viz: for this ample
auctoritye: and with all to advertise you, that you do very fondly and
childishlie control your discontented brethren very often in your book,
Uncharitable dealing.
for termyng the dignity thus. Your own conscience nov will accuse you,
either of ignorance, if you knew not before that an Archp. authority extended
no further then the church door: or of splen, (if you knew it) for so often
tvitting, vpbraidinge and cheaking your brethren for saying a truth, which
you your selves knew so to be. Which dealinghs of yours througheout your whole
book, makes your reader to see and beleve, that you have greater desire by
such taunts and toies to discredit your brethren, then to look into the truth
of the matter and controversy in question: which (as I have said) you fled
from as from a toade. This is the spirit of contention my brethren and not of
charity. I say then, that the first institution of the Archp. without bull or
breue from his Hol: is mirabile in oculis nostris. unto us Lawiers, and so
exhorbitant a case in law, as the like was never heard of before. I pray you
give me some instance for my learning. For hitherto I have learned and do
teach daily the contrary viz: that none but the Pope and that by his bulls can
institute or erect a new dignity or office in Gods church. C. 1. ext. ne sede
vacant: etc
I have learned that Innocentius the 3. a profoud lavier and divine did
reprehend a Card. Legate for meadling in such things as belonged to his Holl.
charge. C. quod tra^sla. ext. de offic. legati.
Licet in regno Siciliae generalis sit tibi commissa legatio, ad ea tamen sine
speciali mandato nostro non debuisti manus extendere, quae in signum priuilegii
singularis sunt tantum Summo Pontifici reseruata etc. All though we have made
the our general Legate in the kingdom of Sicill, thou ought not for all
that to meddle with such things as are reserved only to the high Bishop in
sign of his singular priuileage, without our special commandment. If you say
this makes not against the Protector, because he had the Popes special
commandment to institute an Archprieste? You say that vhich is in question.
For I say he had not, neither am I to belewe him saying so, as before is
sufficiently proved. Then I say more, that the Pope in the place alleged does
understand of his special commandment in writting, because a Cardinal is not
to be believed on his word without letters and writting. I meddle not here
with the Popes superame power, I know he may do great things, ex plenitudine
potestatis, C. 2. de praebe^d. in 6.
by the plenitude of power specially in matters of benesices (such is this) for
he is Dominus beneficiorum, the lord and M. of benefices, and may at his
pleasure dispose of them: nor of his right of prevention, for he may by
collation prevent all election and electors. But I speak of his ordinary
jurisdiction, by which he gives and conferreth benefice and dignities. And
therefore I say, that a Card. Protector can not by his letters containing the
express commandment of his Holl. confer or give the poorest benefice in
Ingland that were at the Popes disposition For not vvithstanding such letters,
the benefice stood still vacant and as vacant, might be asked and obtained over
his hedd, that should take possession thereof upon such letters. If this be
true, let the Archp. consider how justly, he possessed that dignity, till the
Popes bull came so confirm him. And let him further consider, vvhither such a
dignity could be justly obtained without the Popes bulls, and vvaigh that
which Bonifac. C. 29.1. de praebend. in 6.
8. decreed: we do (says he) ordain by the same authority, that neither
Churches (he means bishoprics) dignities, Parsonages or other benefices that
shall hap heareafter to be vacant in the Cour of Rome be not conferred, but
hy his Hollines only, and that no man of what authority soever he be vvhither
he have ordinary right to confer benefices, or vvhither he have general or
special leave to confer and give benefices vacant (except he have special
and express commandment given him by his holiness to confer those that be
vaca^t in the court of Rome) do presume to confer them. If a vacant benefice
that was extant before cannot be given by any but by the Pope him self, much
less a new dignity or benefice can be institutad by any but by the Pope
only, and by his Bulls. Page 6. C. Jniunctae Papraesenti. in ext. communibus de
electione.
To conclude this question the extrauagant iniu^ctae alleged by your brethren
(but by you not ansvvered) does evidently prove that none ought to take any
dignity or Ecclesiastical administration upon him, absque dictae sedis
litteris, without the letters of the Sea of Rome. which extrauagant iniunctae
If Father Lister had read, he would never have ansvvered so vnlernedly to his
own objection. Father Lister over seen.
At (says he) Bullam nullam aut breue Pontifex confecit. The Pope has sent no
bull or or breue to institute him. His answer is ineptissime, most foolishly
spoken, and why so good Father. Quis enim sacrorum canonu^ hoc vnquam
praecipit. What one of the holy canons has ever commanded it? I vvonder so
learned a man to be so blind and over shot: but a greater vvonder it is to me,
to see how the English air has changed his old svveete and good nature
(for the which especially he was honored and reverenced of all that knevv
him) as is seameth by his book. Well my good old friend and Father I do now
advertise you of the Canon Iniunctae alleged also by the discontented
brethren. Page 60.


Now where you object that they might have sent to Rome, Fol. 119. b.
Objection.
and have enquired of the Pope or his Nephew vvhither that Card. did it not by
his hol. express commandment, or no? The 3. question.


The third question, vvhither those upon whom a superior is thrust in such
sort ought not in law and conscience to vvithsta^d him and not to receive him?

This question is briefly decided in the foresaid extrauagant Iniunctae.
Wheare it is said: Nullique eos absque dictarum literarum ostentione recipiant
aut eis pareant. And that none do receive them or obey unto them, except they
shevve the foresaid letters or bulls. See you not how unjustly you accuse your
brethren throughout this book for not obeying their superiors. You mean the
Prote. and the Archprist. You accuse the Pope and not them, who forbids
the^ by express word not to obey any that comes without the Popes bulls,
as did both the Protector and the Archpriest.

The fourth question vvhither he that enters into a benefice or dignity (as
the Arch. The 4. question.
did) be not an intruded parson, that is, an unjust possessor of that benefice
or dignity?

Panormitanus is of the opinion that such a one is intruded. A^ c. 2. extr. de
restit. in inaegr. N. 4.
Intrusus appellatur qui obtinet dignitatem ab eo qui non habuit potestatem
illam conferendi. He is an intruded parson which has obtained a dignity of
him that had no authority to confer or give it. M. Blackvvell was an
intruded parson till the Breue came.
But the Protector (as has been proved) had no authority to make M.
Blackvvell an Archp. Ergo M. Blackvvell taking that dignity of him, was an
unjust possessor, till the Popes bulls came, and by consequent, the Priests
had reason to vvithstand him, and not to acknowledge him for their Superior.
Joan. 10.
You know how the holy scripture terms such as come in at the vvindovve and
not in at the door, that is, by lavvfull, usual and ordinary means. If you
ask me rhen, vvhither all that which M. And all he did was of no forcet
thill the breue came.
Blackvvell did until the Popes bulls cams, wear frustrat and void, as his
excommunications, suspentions, interdicts, taking away, or given faculties,
etc.

The same Panormitanus answers thus: Loco citato.
know thou, that all that the intruded does to be of no force howsoever or of
vvho^ soever he be tolerated, obeyed, or vpheld in that dignity: because
tolleration has no effect in one that is intruded, the reason is: because he
had not his entry by one that had authority to put him in that place or
room, If you united brethren reply and say, Reply.
that your receiving of him, obeyng and bearing reverence to him as to your
superior, is sufficient to install and confirm him in that authority: Sed tu
dic quod reuerentia exhibita intruso non facit illum Praelatum. But say thou,
that the honor and reverence that is borne or given to an intruded parson,
does not make him a Prelate. Can. 1. did. 62.
And the Pope Leo speaking of intruded parsons has these words. Quis ambigat
nequaquam istis esse tribuendum, quod nec docetur esse collatum? Who doubts
(quoth he) that is not at all to be attributed to those (intruded) which is
not taught or proved to be conferred or given unto them? upon which words
the Interpretors gather that an intruded Bishopp is no Bishop: neither has
he the execution of his Bishopric, office and dignity. Can. Si per. 63. did.
And Pope Nicholas the first. Recipi nullatenus meretur, quem indebite
ordinatum cognoscunt. He does in no wise deserve to be received, whom men
know to have been unduly ordained or constituted. By all which is refuted
that which Fa. Lister puttheth down 6. D. 3. for allbeit the Archp. had been
receued and admitted, by the greater, better and learnerder part: yet you see
by Panormitanus their admission makes him not a Prelate, because he Was not
lawfully instituted. Note.
Let all such of your united crewe as receued faculties of M. Blackwell to
hear confessio^s before the Bulls came, look to them selves, L. Nemo ff. de
regul. iuris.
whither they had authority to absolve or no? Quia nemo plus iuris ad alium
transfer potest quam ipse habet. his intrusion further proved.
Master Blackwell had no authority then to give faculties, as you see: ergo
you that received them of him had none at all. Further more, the unlawful and
unjust entrance of M. Blackwell is proved thus. C. beneficium de regaur. in 6.
Beneficium Ecclesiasticum non potest licite sine institutione canonica
obtineri. An Ecclesiastical benefice (as the Archprist is) cannot be laufully
obtained or gotten without canonical institution. But M. Blackwell obtained
not his benefice by canonical institution. Ergo he came not in by the door, but
by the window. I prove the Minor thus. Dinus the best and learnest Interpretor
on the rules of the Canon law, says the rule intends to say thus much.
That if any be instituted by him who has no right to institute, or if the
form be not observed that ought to be observed in institutions, that then the
Institution is not canonical, because it wants that which is of the
substance of the Institution: and therefore by such an Institution a benefice
cannot be lawfully obtained. But M. BlackWell was instituted by him that had no
right to institute as has bin proved sufficiently: ergo he got that benefice
unlawfully, and by consequent Was lawfully resisted by the discontentsd
brethene and unjustly admitted by your united brethren. In comment. de spoliis
clericoru^ pa. 7. no. 3.
Beside this, Nauarr teaches that Julius 3. by his decree did fo explicat and
exte^d the chapter Iniunctae, that if any one had obtained the Popes signature
for a benefice, and upon that signature should take possession before he had
his bulls, that he should loose that benefice for the same and be made
incapable thereof. Now M. Blackwell took possession Without either signature or
bull and therefore was made incapable of that dignity. If you Answer that this
dignity of Archpriest is not rekened up amongst the dignities that are rekened
in that chapt. Iniunctae, and so the extension made by Julius 3. not to
apperteine to him? Ad c. accepta extr. de restitut. spoliat. oppos. 8. N. 24. o.
The same Nauarr answers that Julius 3. does not only mean of these Prelates
named in the said chapter, but also of all such as be put in their place, or
are equal to them. But the Archp. is put in the place not of one, but of many
bishopps, and is equal to them in Jurisdiction: ergo the chapt. Iniunctae, is
extended to him by the rule: Pa. licet instit, de testatis.
Surrogatum sapit naturam eius in cuius locum surrogatur. And by consequence
May. Blackvv. was intruded taking the possession without bull or breue of his
hollines.

The fifthe question, The 5. question.
Whither those priests that received the Archp. as their Superior upon the
Card. letters without the Popes bulls, did not offend, and are punishable for
it?

This question is decided in few words by Bonifacius the 8. in the forenamed
extrauagant Iniunctoe, alleged by your brethren for their defense, but by you
drowned in the depth of silence. A sign you writ not with a mind to search
out the truth, but With intention to brable, and to continewe strief and
contention concealing and omitting the streingth and proof of your adversary,
and ru^ve aroving after by matters and childish toies nothing at all
apparteynig to the matter in question. All chapters of churches (says he) and
all couentes of religious howses, or any other whosoever that shall receive or
obey any of the above named, except they bring with them his holl. bulls,
shall be so long suspe^ded from receiving the fruit of their benefices, D.C.
Iniunctae pa. capitata. The united priests punishable for receiving the Archp.
upon the Card. letters.
till they have deserved to obtain again the grace and favor of the Sea
Apostolic. You perceive by this the^ if you had had benefices, for your
willing or rather light admitting of the Archpriester in the order you did, you
had lost all the commodities of them, till his Holl: had forgiven you that
offense. I and albeit you have escaped the punishment, yet can you not but see,
and confess, that you did not well, but directly against the Popes
institution, Can. consequens did. 11.
( Nam qui ab huius sedis Rectoribus plena auctoritate sancicitur, etc.
firmiter and inconcusse teneatur. For that which is ordained by full auctori.
of the gouerners of this Sea, and ought firmly and stably to be keapt) to
receive any Prelat whosoever or by what means or order soever he was sent
you. If he came not with his Holl: letters, beside the canon Nulli fas est
distinct. 19. alleged to no purpose by Father Lister in the 5. of his book
does flatlye condemn you, saying that it is not lavvfull for any man in will
or dead to transgress the commandment of the Sea Apostolic etc. but you by
receiving the Archp. without the Popes bulls did transgress the
commandments of Bonifacius the 8. Ergo you transgressed the commandment of
the Sea Apostolic: and by consequent fell into the penalties by Gregory the 4.
set down in the foresaid Canon. Look to it. Thus then you see your selves to
be charged with overmuch lightness, and your brethren to be discharged of
disobedience schism and sin and all. Nor can you excuse your selves by
saying you knevv not thus much before, because Ignorantia iuris neminem
excusat. C. Jgnorantia de regu. iur. in 6
to be ignonorant of the laws, is no just excuse or to be admitted. According
to these promises your discontented brethern if they say it, (for you note not
the page) do full well and truly say, that which you impute to the^, viz false
informacion, (why? was not his hollines informed only by 2. Jesuit and a
secular priest, that spoke against his knowledge) not hard of in the Church
before (this I have proved to be true) and that it is against all equity and
justice (This y have sufficiently proved also) and that his holl. could not
lavvfully appoint it without their consentes, which is full true meaning by
the ordinary manner of proceading, according to the Canons and Decrees of his
predecessors) and that the means by vvhic he appointed it is insufficient, (as
done by a Card. letters without the Popes bulls, which is as has been proved
insufficient to erect a new dtgnitie) binding no man to obey it, (because it
was done against the canons, decrees, and co^stitutio^s of the church and
contrary to the custom and style of the court of Rome. As lik wise that is
true they say. A new and extraordinary authority, etc. Which you very
absurdly have put down as absurdly spoken, as in place will beshewed.

The last question, Fol. 14. The 6. and last question.
Whither rhat those priests that withstand a superior put upon them in order a
forsaid, be schismatics or whether they do sin atall for thus withstandige
him? To begine with the last, sure it is they sined not at all. The priest did
not sine innot receiving the Archp. L. just ff. de acq. possessed.
For whosoever does that which the law or their Superior co^ma^d the^ to
do, does not sine at all. But these priests did nothing but that Which the
law and their Superior the Pope commanded them to do, as has been proved out
of the extrauagant Iniunctae, Ergo they did not sin in refusinge, to obey the
Archp. instituted by a Cardinals letters.

This question of Schism is the chiefest cause of this controversy, The chief
cause of all this controversy.
not only for that they wear counted, yea forsooth by a scandalous and
unlearned book proved to be schismatics, and that by the approbation of the
Provincial superior of the Jesuits, and the Archpriest, Whether the priests
that refused to receive the Archp. upon the Card. letters were schismatics or
no. They cold not possible be schismatics.
for that they did not receive the Archp. upon the Card. letters: but also for
that upon the sight of the bull they did not, acknowledge them selves
schismatics, and make recantation thereof, or else not to be admitted to
confession and absolution. Oh folly! o ignorance! o scandal! o want of
charity! how is it possible that men who still protested to be obedient
children to the Sea Apostolic and wear in prison (some of the^) many years
for the defense of the Sea Apostolik that promised all obedience upon the sight
of his hol. bulls, could be schismatics? Schisma (says Pope Pelagieus)
Scissuram sonat, C. Schisma 24. q. 1. What is schism.
Schism sounds or signifies a cutting of. But these me^ did not cut them
selves of not from the Sea Apostolic ergo no schismatickes. Again in vnitate
(says he) scissura esse non potest. In unity can be no cutting of. These men
remaineing still in unity with the sea Apostolic how could they be cut of?
Can. non vevo quisquis 23. q. 5.
The same Pope says elsewhere. Quisquis ergo ab Apostolicis diuisus est
sedibus, in schismate eum esse non dubium est. Who soever is then divided from
the Apostolical Sea it is not to be doubted, but that he is in schism. A
contrario sensu. he then that is not divided from the Apostolic Sea, is not in
schism. Your brethren wear not divided from that Sea, For Fa. Lister has
told you in his 6.
ergo they were not in schism. you know how grievous pains and penalties are
adjoined unto it. how great the^ was the fault of hi^ that made the book of
schism to prove those that communicated with the sea of rome to be
schismatics? how great was their fault that by their authority and
subscriptions auctorized that book? a folish book in deed grownded not upon a
rock, but upon the sand. For, for his foundation he put that for a certainty
which was and is in question viz: that the Cardin. letters wherein was made
mention of the Popes express commandment, wear sufficient to institute this
dignity, he erred in the law, and therefore gave us such poor divinity. But
let us suppose that the Card. had the Popes letters, to show in confirmation
of his authority, (as he had not) and that the priests, not Withstanding,
that did resist him yet in this case it was neither schism nor rebellion:
bieause they might allege the Popes letters were gotten by surreption and
false information. Ar all such as impugn the Popes bulls and breues upon
these 2. occasions, or any other just occasion (which are daily impugned in
Rome it self) accounted schismariks, rebellious factious or seditious? or
contemners of their Superiors for the same? nothing less. But of this matter
which is the chief hedd and cause of this contention, (as your disconte^ted
brethren do show to his hol. and the Inquisition) You say: You will not
talk of, and that you are very sorye that ever it was mentioned. or brought
in question, and why? because unquiet people has taken occasion thereby to
continue contention, and to make more brables then vvcare neadfull. Thank those
unquiet heds that would be meadling he in other men's matters. Thank those thar
auctorized it, and be not offended with those whom you call unquiet people,
for defending the truth yea for defending their honor good name and fame, for
co^plaininge of the injury done unto the^ by so scla^derous and scandalous a
book. you cry out on them, you hunt and chase them throughout your book for
having touched the name fame, and honor of sum particular men for lesser
faults (I do not find fault when you tell them their faults in deed) and yet
you are offended with them, for defending them selves from the blame of so
horrible a crime as schism is, which I dislik in you. Fol. 81. b.
If to show the great strief and dislick you have conceaved against Do. Nordone
for calling one grave Priest a knight son, arrant knave, not openly but in
his ear and at another time knave and Montebanck in the presence of 2.
Priests. (You do not spare his ashes, but by this count, do all that in you is,
to deface a dead man's memory): how great cause then have so many grave
Priests yet living to be offended. First with Fa. Lister with writing then
with the Provincial, Archpriest, and you united brethern for callumniating
them not in corners and in men's ears, but openly not before 2. Priests only,
but before the wholle world publicly, not for writting or calling them
knaves or Montebancks but to be infinitely vvorser, baser, and more abject in
all Christien men's ears, then arrant knaves or Montebancks can be, for no
Christian man can be more injured and infamed. then to be called accounted and
as it wear proved Schismatics, yea vvorser then southsaiers, wiches and
Idolaters? If you in reason may mislik with Do. Nordon for the one, far
greater reason have they to mislike with these terms, names and shameful
reproaches. Was it not high time for them to look about them, and to defend
their honor estimation, good name, fame and renown? But you will not talkeat
all of this schism: Why so? for they wear either justly or iniustly accused
thereof. If justly: What cause have you to hold your peace and to be sorry that
it was mentioned? seeing you lay so at them, with hands and heales for far
smaller matters. Example, For not putting the name of the printer, nor the
place wheare it was printed, with such other trifles. Very lick it is, if you
could justly have accused them of schism, you would not have spared them. If
they wear accused unjustly (as they wear by your own confession, and as
his Holl. since by a Breve has declared, by condemning that slandarous book
that was written against them) with what face and conscience can you extol
above the skies these persons that were the writters and approvers of that
book, wherein they were condemned for schismatics, yea to be seditious and
worse then sooth saiers and Idolators. And why? for sooth, for obeying, and
keapinge the decrees and Canons of the church, in not admitting an Archpriest
constituted and set over them without his Holl. Bulls.

This accusation of schism so heinous a crime, The second point in
controversy is for renewing the crime of schism after his Holl. breue was
come.
is the chief point also of controversy between your discontented brethren
and the Jesuits and Archpriest joined with them in affection and error. The
which being forgotten and forgiven on both parts after the coming of his Holl.
Bulls, and the union made: the Archpriest begane again to set a broach the
unsavory licor of schism, calling and holding them for schismatics, because
they denied him obedience upon the Card. letters. The cause why the Priests
wrote in Latin and English.
This is the occasion of writting their books in their defense, this is the
cause of their complaining to his Holl. and this was also the chief cause of
their appeal from the Archpriest. The 2. chief points you touch not, neither
come you near to them in your Apology: The united never come near the point
in controversy.
But fill up your book with old dissentiones and practices against D. Alleine
with impertinent letters, with Fishers examinations, with praises of
particular men, with disgraces of your own coat and profession, and to be
btief with words talk, tatle, and babbell, all quite from the purpose, and
nothing to the controversy in question.

To omit that the Jesuits had not to do or meddle in these points and
contention between the Archpriest and the Priests: I say, The fault of our
English Jesuits at home.
it apperteined to their coat and profession rather to have used all charitable
means to have united them together, then to have used such strange means to
disloyne and seperat them more then before by exasperating the Priests one
against another. I know the society was at first founded and grovvnded upon
love and charity toward his neighbor, upon teaching and making concord and
unity: But alas? some in this point do stagger and have fare svvarued from
the first foundation, and seame to begine to build and work upon other men's
discordes and dissentions, the which as I fear me in the end will work
discredit on both sids, so am I sure in the mean time it is the cause of the
loss of many a Soul. God amend all that is amiss and give you grace either
to abstain from setting out your larger Apology, or else to set it out with
better stuff then is in this your first, with more truth in handlinge of
matters, with more charity to wards your disconte^ted brethren and with
more respect to your own order and vocation, vvhither the Author be an united
Priest or a Religious Parson.

Theare you talk of appeals, Fol. 9. Of time appealing.
as though they did Injury to the Archpriest to appeal from him. The Judge a
quo from whom a man appealeth, is never injured by appealing from him. Because
by appealing a man is constrained to do it, rather in his own defense then
to dishonor or iniure the Judge. But they appealed for others asvvell as for
them selves. Neither is this so absurd as you would make men beleave for as
in some cases, if one gain the victory by appellation, it does help all his
companions, so lickvvise one may appeal for an other or in the name of a
another. Sisit eadem causa defensionis, C. Penult. ext. de appellat. and 161. D.
D.
if it be the same cause of defense. As our Interpretors note. and so it
apperteineth not to sedition, as you say, but to defension. But none has as
yet appeared in Rome to present the appeal. Good cause why. their brethren
were so well handled there with their appeal. It is periculosum for the^ to
come theare, and therefore are excusable. Besides de iure comuni the appella^t
has a whole year to prosecute his appeal, Argument. c. ex part 1. de
appellat. Auth. Si qui c. de temp. appellat. and clem. sicut de appell. c. ex
ratione ext. de appell.
and if he has let that year, for that cause, the second year is granted him
to pursue his appeal. and if he be so let, that he cannot the second year
pursue it, for a just cause and let the third year may be granted to him to
pursue his appeal. And what iuster cause of let can theare be to your
brethern, then the might of their adversaries at Rome, their imprisonment at
home, and their want of money and means to go or send to Rome? And as for M.
M. Charnokes appeal was lavvfull.
Charmocks appeal made in Lorraine it was lawful and to be admitted, as he
well proves in his letter to Card. Burgesius and Nauar. says. Page 91. Ad c.
cum coutingat de rescript. 14. cum nullitatis. no. 7.
Hoc verum enim, etc. This is true ( that a man cannot appeal from the
excommunication after he is excommunicated) when the exco^municatio^ is pure
and not condicionall: But when it is under condition, except you do this or
that, (viz you are excommicated) then it is otherwise. for a man may appeal
from a conditional excommication, yea after the 10. Days (allowed to appeal
in) before the condition fall out. Which is M. Charnoks case, who was willed
not to go into Ingland without leave under the pain of excommunication.
Before the condition fill out, that is, before hewent into Ingland, he appealed
from that sentence, and that justly, as you see out of Nauarr. Fol. 9. b. C.
Romana Pa. cum vero de appella. in 6.
You object as a great fault, That in the mean space no obedience or regard is
had to the Superior During the dependence of the appeal. Why? are you ignorant
of this that appellation does ligare manus Iudicis a quo? bind the Iudgs hands
from whom one appealeth. that is, that all Jurisdiction is taken from that
Judge in the matters wherein it is appealed from him. But their appeal is in
general and in all matters from the Archpriest ergo in no matter has he
jurisdiction over them. Mary if they appeal but in some matters only, and
disobey him in the rest, they offend hey nouslye by that disobedience. And as
for the appeal it self (if all be true they lay down theare, as I deame it
to be, because you do not co^trovle or refute any part theroof) I thinck never
men had iuster cause to appeal then they had. Read then who list, and if he
have any judgment he will confess as much. As you accuse them here very
unjustly for appealing. so they do full justly (because you do not correct nor
cheeck them for it) complain of the Archpriest iniquity, Page 54.70.
for suspending, interdicting them and taking away their faculties, after their
appellation, and after that his hands were bound. Page 53. The Archpriest does
against law.
The lettre with which he suspended them is set down verbatim in their book
to the Inquisitors. I think he is not so ignorant as not to know, that
nihil debet innouari a iudice a quo, post appellatione^. If he knew not so
much, yet for the respect and reverence he ought to have borne to his Holl. to
whom they appealled, he should have abstained from those rigorous and severe
actions. If I had been one of them, I beleave I should have said. according to
the Proverb. Hold your hand M. Blakvv. for god sends a shrevvde covve short
horns. You push at us with the horns of your suspensions and interdicts, but
you hurt us not, as he did not hurt tha^ indeed, and therefore they did
lavvfully and justly exercise all the functions of Priesthood notwith standing
those censures quia latae fuerunt a non suo iudice they having taken all
jurisdiction from him by their appeal. Besides M. Blackw. C. De priore ext. de
appell. l. quoniam iudices c. eod.
is punishable by law, because he did not, admit their appeal. by this and
diverse other of his actions, men may see how unfit divines be to govern the
church, without the aid of Canonistes.

The 8. fault is, The 8. fault. Fol. 9. b.
for finding fault with the^ for printing their books without particular
name of Author, without license of Superior and other circumstances of
modesty, etc. When you your selves do committ the same fault. what particular
name of Author has this your Apol. forsooth, The united Priests. and theirs
has By Priests that wear accused of Schism. You say: Permissu superiorum,
by the permission of our Superior. And they say: Printed at Roan by Jacob
Molens. they name the place and printer, and you putt neither place nor printer
in yours. For their want of modesty, course them hardly, I do not find fault
therewith, so that you your selves had not fell into the same fault. for in
many places you pass also the bands of modesty. Remember who says. Turpe
eisim Doctori, etc. In this leaf and the next you lay load on them, whether
justly or no, I will not judge, but do leave it to their own defense. If
they have deserved it, I am full gladd they are told of it so rovvndly, to
teach them and others that writ heareafter to be more modest, and to keape
the^ selves with in the compass of their matter.

In the same leaf it is a world to see, how you lay about you to persuade
the Readers, that for the causes by you theare alleged, your brethren fell
again to contention (after the receipt of the Bull) against the Archpriest.
The cause of the last contention since the Bull. came.
But they tell another tale, and put down other causes of their contention,
which, as it was the chiefest moriue of their appeal and of their vvritting
to his holl. Page 61.
you have quietly omitted theare with silence. Thus they say in effect to his
Holl. As soon as they savve his Bull, they submitted them selves to the
Archpriest and being desirous of peace, they forgate and forgave all injuries
passed and specially by which they were proclaimed through out Ingland for
Schismatics, by a book written against them. Then in the next page, they
tell their tale thus. Not long after the common joy, that ensued of this
unity, which proceeded of the receipt of his Holl. Bull, the Archpriest of
his own accord, or set on (as they rather thinck) by the Jesuits, begane
again to renew the ovld war in charging them with the ovvld calumny of
schism, vvritting letters thereof and dispersing the copies abroad every
vvheare (the letter is put down in the 63. page of their latin book) vvherin
he reports he had received a resolution from Rome, that all they which did
not admit him for their Superior before the Popes Bull came, wear
Schismatics and that they should satisfy therefore (that is: recant their
schism) before they be absolved of any Priest that was not noated with the
mark of that schism. Page 120.
And for proof hereof they set down in the end of their appeal, the form of
abiuring this schism, that every Priest that withstood him, must make before
he be absolved in confession. For these injuries they appealed and wrote to his
Holl. to have his judgment, whether they wear schismatics for this fact, The
Pope reprehendeth the Archpriest for his severity. And quitteth the Priests
from Schism.
or no? His Holl. since in a Bull of Pacification sent down before Christmas
(the which I saw and read) does not only exhort both sids to peace and unity:
But also reprehendeth the Archpriest for his over severe and austere government,
and quitteth your brethren from the crime of schism, in condemninge the book
that was written by Fa. Lister against them, and approved by his Provincial
and the Archpriest. The state of the question.
This is then the question. Whether the Archpriest did call and count them
Schismatics after their obedience made to him upon the coming down of his
Holl. Bull, for not obeying him upon the Card. Protectors letters? This is the
treble, upon which they play, and the which they sound against the
Archpriest. For either this is true, which they say, or false. If true? (as I
have already proved) they could not be schismatics therefore, the Pope
affirms them to be none, and you your selves confess so much, as being sorye
that ever mention was made thereof) then do you writ against your own
conscience, by writing against a known truth, defending a falsehood, or
disguisinge a verity. If it be false, then had it been your part to prove it,
and to shevve that the Archpriest never wrote such a lettre, nor prescribed
such a form of abiuration as before, The united are bound to ask the other
Priests forgeivennes.
If you cannot prove this in your next larger Apology. then are you bound in
conscience and of charity to ask them forgivenes, for the injury you do
them in this your book, in making the world believe with words without
proof, that they, and not the Archpriest were the Authors and beginners of
these trobles and contentions, since the receipt of his holl: bulls. Look well
to your selves in this point, least the threats and comminatio^s you mention
elsvvhere fall not upon your own heads, for concealing and adultering the
truth and the causes of this contention, and for putting them upon other men's
shoulders. Is this to devise new Injuries offered by the vnquiett, when they
are indeed ovvld Injuries renewed to make and increase disquietnes and
dissension?

In the tenth leaf, Jmpertinent.
you apply again the last contention of the Roman colleage to this quarrel
now between the Priests and the Archp. and the Jesuits: but how unaptly
has been noated before, and every reader that is not stark blind may easly
see, and it is flatt against the rule in law that says: a diuersis no^ fit
illatio, theare can be made no good illancio^ or consequence from things that
be diverse or opposite.

Your 9. fault is in calling Card. The 9. fault. Fol. 12. Fol. 103 104.
Caietaine the Protector your higher Superior and again Our highest Superior
under his Hollines and from so high a Superior. which in deed is a foul
ignorant fault in you. Why? is the Protector of Ingland, The Protector of
Jngland is not superior to any Englisman.
in that he is Protector your Superior? Nay, has he any auctoritye or
Jurisdiction upon the poorest Englishman that is, either at home in Ingland or
in Rome? Dare you be so dull as to affirm it? He is called Protector a
protegendo, that is: he is honored with that title, to help, aid and assist
the country, or any of the nation in their suits and affairs they have in the
court of Rome. But as for auctoritye or jurisdiction he has none over any
whereof he is Protector, as Card. or protector. You are vvillfully blind, and
so would make your Readers also in making them believe that the Protector of
the nation is not only a superior but also the highest Superior our nation has
under his Holl. for I tell you, he has no more auctoritye over an Englishman
as Protector, then I have which is none at all. upon this error or ignorance
Fa. Lister founded and built his ruinons book of schism, upon these words.
Qui vos spernit, etc. as though they had despised the Protector their
Superior. Now you see how the good Fa. was deceaved. In your next Apology
recall this gross and palpable error, or shevve us your reasons, Why he is our
Superior as he is Protector. And hereby is made void all your speeches, of
gods judgment. king Saules example, Fol. 12. b.
disobedience so often iterated, etc. Because the Protector was not their
superior, and next he did not prove, neither can you prove for him, Fischers
memorial.
that he was the Popes Delegat to institute an Archpriest over the^.

In the 11. Fol. 7.13.26. b. 68.80. b. 81.82.95. What was this Fissher.
leaf you repeat again the association and make mention of Fischers
memorialls as you do in many places of your book, stuffing and farcing the
same, with one and the self same thing often repeated. But what was this
Fisher of whose examination you make such account as of a Ievvel? In your
own conceit he was a lewd Fellow, a Rogge and of no credit and by your
own report one of the most exorbitant disorderly fellows in the Romans
sturres. And yet forsoothe you will have all the world beleaue his
examination. Fol. 93.
But your Reader must vndrestand, that this miserable fellow coming to Rome,
after that the sturres in the colleage wear happily finished, he was caught
by the back in Rome by those against whom he had written and dispersed the
often named memorial written in D. Fol. 97.
Griffith his house in Cambray. and so was putt into the hands of the officers
of his Holl. The miserable fellow being apprehended and fearing the Galleys
or the gallovves, to save his life and limbs, was ready to swear and
forsvveare, yea and to writ and speak Placentia. that is to say, such thingb
as he knevv would best please the offended persons, and by which he might
obtain for him self perdon and liberty. And albeit the Author of this book
counts him a naughty fellow, yet would he have his reader believe, that all
that he spoke or vvrott was gospel. Fol. 82.
And why so? Mary because he subscribed his examination: Ego R. Fish. it a
dico. iuro, and ratifico. IR. Fish. do say so, swear and ratefie. And because
Fisher deposed much more, then you have laid down here tactis Euangelijs
putting his hand upon the gospel. Fol. 97. b.
The 3. reason why we ought to beleave all was true, Fol. 82.
was because. All this is consirmed again by the subscription of his Holl.
officer. Ego Acharitius Sqorsionius, etc. which you ad for more credit of the
matter forsooth as though the Popes officers do not subscribe to many a lie,
that false fellows make in their examination. He did not subscribe to give
more credit to the matter thereby, as you ignorantly say, but to give faith
and credit that that was it which he deposed or said in his examination, be
it true or false.

But why should I or any other give credit to Fishers depositions, Fisher was
pariured by you own Confessio.
when your own conscience make you to tell us that all he spoke in a manner
was but lies. For thus you say: Fol. 95.
And albeit we will not affirm all to be true which he said, ye many
things are such a^ coold not be well feigned, and are confirmed othervvize, and
the speaking voluntarily upon his each must be presumed to have had sum care
also of his conscience, etc. why do you not beleeueall he said to be true,
but Many things seeing he spoke voluntariely upon his oath, and must be
presumed, to have hadd sum care also of his conscience? If you believe not
all he said upon his voluntary oath, why should you or your Readers believe
Many things he spoke and uttered upon his voluntary oath, and constrained for
fear of his life? I see no reason why I should not deem him perjured in all
he said, and to have said all against his conscience, to please them in whose
hands his life lay, as well as you Deem him to have been perjured in some
things, and in some things to have spoken against his conscience. For if you
thinck not all to be true he said, upon his oath? I thinek nothing at all he
said upon his oath to be true, for the reasones a soresaid. For Qui semel
presumitur malus, semper presumitur malus in eodem genere mali. If he be
perjured in saying some things, he is presumed to be a perjured person in all
he uttered upon his oath. Consider Fisher standing quaking before his judge.
Your reader must considerer Fisher to have been one of the chiefest Doers in
the Roman sturres against the Fathers, and after to have gone into England
there to defame them, then to have commen into the Low countries and there to
have written against them a slanderous libell or memorial (all this you
report in your book, Fol. 94. b.
in the places before quoted) at last to have common again to Rome (more then
half converted as you say) and there to have been apprehended and pursued by
such as he had before defamed standing before the Popes Attorney, quaking and
quivering through fear of his life, and then to depose or say what he knevv
would please and like those in whose hands the thread of his lief lay either
to be lenghtned or shortened. Now conjecture you, if this wear a voluntary
oath or no if he had any remorce of conscience or respected what he said save
only that which might procure his liberty? Add this, that the Authors of this
Apology do not believe them selves, that all was true, which he said upon
his oathe. All these circunstannces laid together, what have you gotten by
namyng Fishe^ and his examination so often as you do? Truly with wise and
prudent Readers nothing at all: but it does reather make against you, and so
you might well have leaft it out.

The fault you lay upon them, Fol. 14. No fault to call the Protectors power
in question.
for calling into controversy the Protectors actions and povver^ no fault at
all, because he had no authority o^ power to institute an Archp. nor was he
their Superior as has been shevved before: but the fault was in the Archp. in
accepting of that dignity in such sort and yours in consenting unto him and
taking him for your Superior, who was then no more your Superior the^ the man
in the moon. And in that you add. They bring in contempt what so ever has
been d^^e in Rome hitherto, about the institution and continuation of this
Hierarchy: You may well put hitherto and continuation in your purses, for it
is well known both by their confessions and yours that they impugned the
institution made by the Card. only and obeid, so soon as they savve the Popes
bull. A fitten.
And therefore thit is one of your accustomed figures called a fitton: to bring
them unduly into discredit. This Archp. authority is new
And to prove they speak contemptuously you add, they call it a new and
extraordinary authority. Ergo they speak contemptuously. If to speak truth be
to speak contemptuously. I grant your conclusion: but if that be new and
extraordinary, that never was in Christ's church before (as this officie with
so large a Jurisdiction, of which they mean, and you your selves know it
well but that you list to wrangle) full sure it is, that this Archp. office was
never in Christ's church before, and never in Christ's church before.
and so is it nevve and extraordinary, and you have she Wed your vanity in
correcting Magnificat. They knew so well as you that it is an Ancient dignity
in Christ's church, and have read so well as you the title de Officio
Archypresbyteri, of the Archp. office, but withal they knew more then you (as
it seems) that an Archpr. had never the same jurisdiction, or greater then
all the Bishops of 2. realms had, Never Archpr. had such Jurisdiction.
when they wear in possession of their Bishoprics. This is in deed a new
and extraordinary dignity, is it not my brethren, what say you? tell m^, (I
pray you) in your larger Apolog. what you judge of it, and why you complain of
your brethren here for calling it, a new authority. Mary if they had said or
written that his holl. could not give him so large and ample jurisdiction and
authority, then might you have justly reprehended the^ for so foul an error.
But for attributing contempt to them for saying truth, and that your conscience
do tell you to be truth, surely you have committed a soul fault, and take
heed that it proceeds not of Splen: assured I am that you task them
unjustly for it.

Besides, a foul fault.
your fault is in taking your adversaries words by piece meal only, as
heretics are accustomed to do, and leaving out his discourse. If you had
meant well you should have ansvvered the foundation and ground of their
discourse, Page 9.
the which you pass over in silence, because in truth you are not able to
answer it. I egg you let us see what you can do in your larger Apolog. for
this was set out in have, as it seems by the substance thereof.

It follovveth: Fol. 14. Your brethren
unpleasing and obtruded authority. which are both true: unpleasing to them
to have an Archp. (the very inferior dignity in Gods church) in stead of a
Bishopp which they desired. Obtruded, by Fath. Parsons and other englishmens
advice in Rome given to his hol. as you confess your selves. Fol. 7.
disorderly procured. because it was procured not by the vsvall and accustomed
order of procuring dignitiesa^d offices in Gods church and by such men as it
touched not, neither by right or law (being dead to the world) had they to
deal or meddle at all in that. Fol. ibid.
for 2. Jesuits (as you confess before) did mittere falcem in messem alienam,
meddle with other men's matters. Secularia secularibus, regularia regularibus,
says the law. Let secular priests meddle in matters apparteining to secular
priests, and religious men in matters belonging to religious men. Exorbitant
from the office of an Archp as has been shevved before: for by reason of his
large jurisdiction it may well be called Exhorbitant, without offense to his
holl. or any man else: so long as it is not denied but that his hol: may
institute such an Archp. Disonant from reason, Fol. 14.
that is to say: that one man should have the Jurisdiction of all the
Archbishops and Bishops of Ingland, and Scotland. For if they had much a do,
each one to govern his own diocese, by what reason cane one man with his
12. assistants govern them all? C. de multa ext. de praebend.
Besides the holy Canons and reason it self will not that one man should have
2. benefices, much less 2. bishoppricks. Ergo it is much more dissonant from
reason, that one man supply the place and room of so many Bishops. Beside, all
this was spoken by your brethren before the Popes bull came down. for so
soon as they savve the bull, they subjected their reason, to his hol. will
and authority, without asking a reason either why or wherefore. because
his will in matters of benefices, Vain reprehe^sion.
is reason. and therefore you did ill to tax your brethren, for that they said
both truly and duly before the coming of the breue, and vndulie to impute it
to the^ as spoken since the coming of the said breue. the which is a foul
fault in you, if to discredit men undeservedly, be a fault with you. your
wits a vvoll gathering.
And to the accustomed practice of Gods Church. I meruell where your vvittes
wear (if you have any at all) when you laid this down as spoken
Contemptuoufly of the dignity and office of the Arch. how can a most assured
and known truth be contempt? you are very ignorant of the practice of Gods
Church if you knovye not this: for, wither it be to be understood of the
instituting of the Archp. by the Card, letters, or of his ample jurisdiction:
it is most true they say, as has been evidently proved before, and you shall
never be able to give one instance to the contrary. Give one instance. Fol.
14. b.
If you can, bring it in your larger Apol. and I will say as you say, they
sp^ke ^o^temptuously of the dignity.

The speeches which follow are not allowed or liked either of me, or of any
such impartial priests as I am* and I leave to them either to explicat their
meaning or to recall that which they have unduly uttered. The which I would
advise both them and you to do, wherein you are both faulty. the which wear
an evident sign of sincerity an charity in both. God grannt you so to do,
this is all the hurt I wish you.

It is a foul fault also to call their pretended association a popular
regiment. Fol. 15. Another foul fault.
But the desire you have to discredit your brethren, make you to forgett what
you said before, and so to contradict your selves, as commonly al do that
flow in words without matter, and say what they list without proof, as you do
ordinarily throughout your book. For before, you tell the tale, Fol. 7.
that they resolved to begin again by devising a certain new association
amongst themselves with officers and prelacies of their own institucion,
etc. and that his Holl. should be forced afterward to confirm them. Now by
these Prelates they meaned Bishops, as they them selves say, and you confess
so much your selves, that Bishopps wear demanded. and afterward you object to
M. D. Bishopp and M. Charnock, that they wear appointed to be Bishops. If
this be true, how dare you call that a popular regiment, wherein are
Ecclesiastical officers, under a Bishopp their hedd and conductor?

That Which ensues: Fol. 16. Contradiction.
And thus much about their contempt of impugnation of the authority instituted
by his Holl. and confirmed afterward by an express Breue, sauoreth of
co^tradiction. to be first instituted by his hol. and afterward to be
confirmed by his Hol. because the Popes institution or collation of a benefice
al Ways contains in it express confirmation. and therefore if he had been
instituted by his Holl. there had been no need of confirmation. But because
he was not lawfully instituted by the Card, as your brethren said, and is
abooue proved, therefore he hadd need in deed of a bull called, perinde
valere to coroborat and give force to the first inualiditie and imperfect
institution. and so whether you will or no, your brethren are delivered from
Contempt and impugnation of the authority instituted by his hol. seeing theare
was no such institution made by his Hol. but by the Card only.

The 10. The 10. fault is an enormious fault.
Fault I find with you, is a foul and enormous fault. and I am ashamed for
your sakes, that ever united priest should be so far over shoes as to impute
that for a fault, which is a solid and certain article of our faith: Yea,
that which they say, is the foundation of the Cath. faith. and yet you that
fight daily for that faith, find fault with it. Fol. 16. b
They ask: who upon earth is warranted from erring, but one? and not he in
all things neither, You vvonder at this doctrine and yet you confess it to be
true in some senses and interpretations: and afterward you say: it is
dangerous and scandalous to teach the people in this general manner, that
authority is not an infaillable rule of truth, in all that have authority,
and by consequence, that no man is bound in all things to believe what every
man in authority shall teach him, because theare is no man upon earth
warranted from erring but one, and not he in all things. Is not this true and
cath. doctrine? is not this our faith? that every Archbishop, bishop, and
Archpriest may err, and that but one in the vvhill world, has the privilege
not to err how can true and cath. How can cath. doctrine be sca^dalous to
cath. men.
doctrine be either dangerous to be taught or scandalous You have done both
dangerously and scandalously, to mislyke it in your text, and to note it in
your mergent: dangerous and offensive doctrine, but to whom? mary, to men
blinded with malice, as you seem in this place to be. what? Priests that
suffer for cath. Religion to find fault with this proposition: None upon
earth is warranted from erring but one? Why! look better about you. is it not
for this only article that you endure prisons, chains, and most cruel death?
viz: that all men in the world may err in religion except the Pope? is not
this the article that makes us to believe the Gospel to be the word of God?
because the Pope that cannot err teaches us, that it is the word of God.
Have not all those that have succeeded the other XI. Apostles in their Seas,
most dangerously erred? and why? because they had not this privilege which
was given to S. Peter and to his successors only. My belief, for the which I
live in banishment, is: that all the Prelates and superiors in the world may
err except his holl. who is Christ's vicare and S. Peter's successor. And what
else do they say? If I have an erroneous faith, I pray you teach me an other
in your expected Apol. In this faith I was baptized, in this faith norished,
and for this faith (by Gods grace) I shall be reddy to shedd my blood. For this
faith, our blessed brethren have most consta^tly suffered martyrdoome, and for
this faith here you check your discontented brethren.

Our poor country may sing vvelladay, The priests checked for laying down a
cath. proposition.
vvelladay, to see here Cath. priests and confessors to be so blinded in
contention and desire of revenge, and discredit of their brethren priests, and
that in defense of other men, that to their own dishonor and everlasting
discredit they check and find fault with them for speaking catholickly and
christianly, to call the teachinge of the chiefest point and article of our
Religion, dangerous, scandalous, and offensive doctrine. vvhither will malice
lead you in the end, if you go on as you have begune? A strange vnio^.
Are you so united against your brethren to discredit them what soever it cost
you, that you disvnite your selves from the cath. doctrine, from his Holl. and
the cath. church? Fie upon it. I am both ashamed and sorry that you have so
ouerlashed your selves. They say: All the prelates and superiors in the world
may err, his Holl. only excepted. You say: The Pope cannot err in deciding
controversies of faith or religion.
It is scandalous and offensive doctrine. They say. Authority is not an
infaillable rule of truth but in one only. viz the Pope (who by reason of his
authority cannot err) You say: That it is a dangerous doctrine. They say:
that Archpriests, Archdiacons, yea Archbishops have done amiss and svvarued
from the truth. You say: it may prove dangerous and scandalous to teach the
people in this manner against their superiors. Why? (my masters) must truth be
lest untaught for fear of scandal? where have you learned that? and if there
were any scandal in teaching this doctrine, as it is impossible there should
yet is it Sca^dalu^ acceptu^ no^ datu^. they gave no scandal in saying the
truth, but you have taken sca^dall thereby, and do by your writing scandalize
others. Vaevobis, What? do you not teach the people thus much? that all may
err except the Pope. If you do not, you must answer for it, because you
teach them not the truth. if you do so teach, (as I am sure you do) what a
shame is it then for you to tax and cheek your brethren for the same, The
priests unduly checked.
as so Wers of dangerous, offensive, and sea^dalous doctrine? I conclude th^^
with them (yea with the Cath. church) that the Pope is the only prelat that
cannot err in deciding a controversy or doubt in faith and religion, all the
world else may err in deciding of such doubts.

But (say they) and not he in all things. That is: The Pope may err in matters
of fact.
the Pope him self who has so singular and eminent a privilege not to err in
matters of faith, may yet and often does err in some thinghs. I conjure and
charge your conscience, as you shall answer for it at the day of judgment,
first, whither you did not know when you wrote this, that they meant of matters
of fact: that is, that the Pope in matters of fact may err so well as an other
man. if you did know it? why do you reprehend it? Is it not a true and cath.
assertion and proposition? Do you make the Pope a God, or a man? Is not this
good, true, and cathol. doctrine? The Pope is a man, and as a man may err and
sin, The Pope is a sinful man as others are.
for he has his passions of love and dislike, of affection, and not affection
to a man, as other men have? he may be ill informed, and by that information
do wrong and injustice to another. yea there is no sin except heresy but he
may commit it by his frailty, if the bridle of Gods grace do not keep him in
order. Is he better then S. Peter, to whom he succeeds? does the Prophet
lie him self that says omnis homo mendax. if he or you for him should say he
wear no sinner, you wear both liars by S. John's verdict. if we respect his
spiritual and supernatural authority in forgiving and retayning of sins,
in not erring in question of faith? We may well say, The Pope for his power,
is as it were a God on earth.
he is a God on earth. but if we respect him as a man? he is a mere sinner as
others are, and may err and be deceived by affection or information as an
other man. do you hold it for an Article of faith, that all Popes be saved?
all in heaven and none in hell? albeit I do piously think them all to be in
heaven, yet am I not bound to believe it. Ans if all this which I have said, be
as true as the gospel, VVhereein the Pope may err.
why may not the Pope err in sum of his commandments in his instituting of
Bishops and Archb. by false information? as well as the Archp. may err in his
decrees and comau^dements? which yet with great absurdity, you think to be
absurd, teach me (I pray you) in your larger Apology, who has given the Pope
that priuilegie that he cannot err in matter of fact, so Well as his
inferiors, or that he has not his passions so well as other men, or thar he
cannot be deceived and abused by falsehood and flattery and by fraudulent
informacion, so well as inferior prelates may beteach me this, Et eris mihi
magnus Apollo. this is not to flatter the Pope (as you do) nor to maintain
false doctrine, as you seem here to do, by disalowing of the true and
sincere doctrine. But this is the Christian and Cath. faith that a lawyer has
learned and is bound to teach it you (you united divines) Which seem to be
ignorant of it. The Pope him self permits every man (that has interest
therein) to scann and examyne his letters and bulls, and likes well of it,
because they may be gotten by surreption and ill informatio^: and so confesses
him self he may be deceived and err in matters of fact and information. but
the just examen of the Arch. institution by the Card. letters, have so nettled
him, and you his united brethren, that to disgrace the doings, and the just
fact of your discontented brethren, you fall hedlong by forgetfulness, Gross
absurdities.
into these gross and intolerable absurdities in such men as you are, as to
call the Christien and Cath. doctrine, dangerous, scandalous, and offensive,
and to compte it absurdity to say, his holl: may err in some of his
ordonances and comma^dements. Fol. 16. b
In your next I pray you tell me, why a man may not argue against his Holl:
(touching erring in matters fact) by the same arguments which they use against
the Archp. and others. For matters of fact, is he not a man, and a sinful (as
has been said) as they are? Ergo vbi est eadem ratio, ibi erit eadem Iuris
dispositio. But you use your common fraud here to deceive your necligent
reader. they do not, Fraud.
argue agvinst his Hol. by the same argument which they use against the Archp.
but do say the quite contrary. They say: All Archpri. in the world can err
both in matter of faith and matter of fact also. but his Hol. of all me^ in the
World has only that privilege, that he cannot err in matter of faith, albeit
he be not priuileged more then others, from erring in matters of fact. how say
you? is this to argue against his Holl. by the same argument used against the
Archp. truly these your doings are to argue against all conscience, (I will not
say) all honestye.

You ask: What othervvaie heresy took at the beginning against Ecclesiast.
Gouuernors, Fol. 17 Which way came hersy into the world?
what other gate did some open to heresy? surely, not this common gate, but
another back gate, quite opposite to this. For these me^ teach that the Pope
cannot err in matters of faith. and those that opened the gate to heresy
taught and do still teach (which is the foundation stone of their heresy)
that the Pope and all do and can err, that the wholl Church (whereof we
believe the Pope is hedd) do and may err, not only in fact (as your brethren
truly teach) but also in faith, and religion. how say you, is not this true?
did not heresy begin with this doctrine, and does it not continue in the same
still? And thus your questions are briefly answered. You go on to show how
they passed onto diminishe the credit and estimacion of their Superiors, Fol.
ibid. VVranglers.
a^dparticularly of the Arch. I see right well, that you are but wranglers. The
Archp, in those days you talk of, was not their Superior as has been before
proved that is, before the Popes bull came to confirm him Of which time, you
talk here quite out of time. Nay, they went about to diminish the credit of
their immediate and higher superiors in Rome, to vvytt, the Card. protector and
his Hol. you might have putt his Hol. in your purse. for they honor and
reverence him in word and deed, as much as you do, and as they are bound to
do, as by Reading their books may appear. but you will needs dra We his Hol.
into the quarrel with the Protector and the Archp. as in the first chapt. you
draw your brethren by force into all the quarrels of Paris, The Card. was not
the superior
Rome, and Flanders. Touching the Card. he was no more their Superior then you
are mine, as I have showed before and therefore it is but a roy of yours to
deceive your reader and: to seem to say something, when in deed you say
nothing to the matter or purpose.

Let us hear their vndulifull speeches against a dead Cardinal,
^erueillousvudutiful speeches
but yet a good Cardinal as you say, That was protector of the English college
at Rome, and afterward honored by the title of Protector of Ingland. what
undutiful speech is here against him? dare you for shame deny that he was
Protector of the college, before he was Protector of the Realm? I my self and
many yet living can reprove you. but suppose he was not: what un dutiful
speech is it to say, he was protector of the College? or is the undutiful
speech in saying, he was honored with the title of Protector of Ingland? Why:
was is not an honor for him to be Protector? Is not Cardinal Farnesius honored
this day with the same title? think you any Car. Would take it, if he wear
not honored by it? what a vain toy is it, for you to find fault with this
wherein theare is no fault at all? you reply: Fol. 17.
they do not grant he was so in deed, nor they did not acknovvlege him for
such how prove you this? Mum.

That which follows, The pratector no Superior.
seems to be a high matter in a low house, as to say, they wear not bound
to believe him in a matter of such co^seque^ce. That they said true herein, is
proved already, that they hild him not for their superior, and therefore wear
not bound to obey his Ordinance. That he was not, nor that the present
Protector as Protector now is not their Super. has al ready been showed,
which being true, they wear not then bound to obey him.

And where you add, that they are not to give creditt to the Card. bare words
etc. it is the same you repeated before, and is before like wise answered. The
protector affected to one party.
For their accusing him of too much affection to the one part, you can find
noe fault with them for the same. for as you report your selves, he was
informed and instructed by the one party only, and follovved the same parties
counsel, to reject the request of the Priests, that would have hadd a Bishop
or two, and to make an Archpr. and such a man Archp. as that party advised
him. If this be not, to be too much affected to the one party, and to be over
partial, I know not what partiallitie and affection is.

To leave to other men to judge how dear a Patro^ and father, Fol. 17. b A
super fluous complaint.
Card. Caretane was to our nation, I cannot omit your accusation of your
brethren For unkindly and irreverently speaking of him specially in the English
book. if you could have found any unkind or vnreuerent speech, you would not
have passed it over so slightly with out setting it down, seeing you have
set down many things of lesser importance: note the page and then I will
believe you, no nor then neither, till I see it with mine eyes, you have so
often deceived me. you mean perhaps that which follovveth: for that they do so
contemn the institution of the Arch. made by hi^. they are so far from, to
be counted unkind and irreuerent for that fact, that they are to be highly
praised for it. He did against the decrees of the church therein, and they did
as the Canons and constitutions of the church commanded them, as has been
sufficiently proved before. You set this matter of resisting the Protector
often a broche, to fill up your book, and with poor silly Readers to bring
your disconte^ted brethren into discredit. but the discreditt turns upon your
own heds that, are so ignorant to believe and think, a Cardinals bare
letters containing in them (by the expresst commandment of his Holl.)
Ignorance.
can confer a dignity or benefice to any man. I am ashamed of your Ignorance
being so many heads as you pretend to be, and having so many eyes amongst you,
that not one could discover this fault and gross ignorance, but still beat
upon it, as upon your chiefest defense and refuge.

But alas for woe? Fol. ibidem.
(my united brethren) what is this that follows? They go about in one place
of their book to ^hevve (the institution of the Archpriest made by the Card.
Protetector) to be void and vain and of no force by 21. fo^d Reasons. what is
this I hear? have they 21. Reasons for them against the institution of the
Archpriest? what? Not one of 21. Reasons ansvve red.
have you answered them? No forsooth. what! not one of 21? no, not one. why
so? (pray you)? because they be fond and devised by them selves, Fol. ibidem.
whereof no one has any force at all. Is it possible? you might easily then
have answered one or two of the^ at the least, if your leisure, or have
offe^^ing forth your book had not permitted you to have ansvveared all.
what! mean you to leave the victory to your adversaries, or will you
answer these reasons in your larger Apol. that is coming? I blush for your
sakes that so many united Priests, that your Superior, and the Jesuits whose
cause you defend, did not answer one fond reason of 21. whereof not one has
any force at all. here your Reader be he never so much affected unto you, must
needs stay and admyre your silence, he must needs stagger also to see you let
your adversaries run away with the victory. The Priests have gotten the
victory.
I pray you, who is most likely to have the truth on his side, he that
aleageth Reasons for him self, or he that says only: your Reasons (...) fond,
The united fly from the matter in question.
and of no force at all, and yet prodeth no one of them to be such? This is it
which I have ^ould you always, that you fly from the matter in question. The
question is this whither the Archpriest was not truly and duly instituted by
the Card. letters? your Aduersurie says no. and for proof of his assertion, he
lays down 21, reasons. You comme and say: he was rightly and duly
instituted by the Card. but you prove it not by any Reason, neither do you
confute any one of their Reasons, but only by saying. They are fond all of no
force at all. the poorest and simplest Cobbler in a town, cann after this sort
answer the learneest man in a vvholl country. A false conclusion.
You conclude as untruly that a Card. letters bear credit vncontrovvleable in
any Catholic Court Christian as has been showed before out of Rebuffus. Let
the Protector of Spaigne or Fra^nce send his letters to these courts saying he
has express commandment from his Hol. to institute and constitute an
Ecclesiastical office that was never theare before, or to co^ferre any
benefice: his letters should not be esteemed, nor take their effects, without
his Hol. express commission in writing.

You charge them with not sparing his Holl. him self, Fol. 18. The Priests are
unjustly charged which contempt.
but yet according to your custom you prove it not. Their words nippingly by
you aleaged, as they may be well spoken in their sense, so prove they not
their contempt or irreuerence against his Holl. which you should prove. For
your brethren in the page by you alleged, do make a comparison between them
selves and their adversaries. that as their adversaries think them selves more
stronger to vex them, so they, the more injuries they suffer, the more bold
and coragious they will be, in freely repelling of them. this is the sense of
the sentence. Nippers.
from which you have nipped these words. what immodestie (I pray you) is
here against his Hol. or what profession of liberty of speeches, is here
against all things and all men, as you (like spiders) do gather? the
comparison there made, is betvveene the^ selves oppressed, and their
oppressers, which touches not at all his Hol. much less all men. Amend
amend, I am weary with repeating your faults and follies. Indignum quippe
nimis gloria nostra (say they) net amplius ferendum du^^imus, Fol. 18. b.
etc. We esteem it to be vnvvoorthy of our glory, and no further to be
tolerated, etc. As you do imitate here M. Jewel in your and cateras, so
must I say to you, as one said to him: Th'vnited have the chyncoughe.
Coughe out my united Brethren, what have you the Chyncoughe? add that which
follovveth in their book, and see if any Christien man will find fault
which their words. Every honest man I am sure, will mislyke of your false
play, in taking that which serves your turn (as you think) to discredit
them, and leave out the substance of the matter. you have learned this trick
of nipping their words with an etc. of Jewel, and such enemies of Gods
church. this then they said: we esteem it to be unworthy of our glory and
no further to be tolerated, that we, A vvorthie Speech.
which are sent by the Sea Apostolic (in to Ingland) to dravve other men out
of Shisme, and to bring them into Christ's fold, should be falsely defamed
throughout the vvholl world to be Schism^ticks our selves, and to have given
such horrible scandals and to be coumpted and judged such. your, etc. being
thus discovered and enlarged, what fault cann you find with this speech? a
speech worthy men of their profession. they were haynously slaundered by Fa.
Listers sca^dalous book of schism, wherein he affirmed (without proof) that
they were schismatics and vvorst then sooth sayers. what contempt of his Hol.
is theare in these words? and yet forsooth to prove they contemned him, this
place is brought and alleged. surely your wit wear over whelmed with over
much malice or passion, when you vvrott this your Book, the which so blinded
you, that you thought every thing they vvrott, was in contempt of his Hol. else
would you never have cited this place for an example.

As foolishlie you set down their words out of the English book against
the^, Fol. 18. b. well spoken.
which are spoken very prudently and Iudiciously. For if the Pope does not use
to give the simpliest benefice that is, but by the ordinary way, with his
Bulls: who cann presume, that he would so basely esteem of the English
Clergy, which is in contynuall fight with the enemies of that Sea, and
specially for the preemine^ce of that Sea, as to gieue them a Superior by
thaduise of 2. Jesuits and one secular Priest, extraordinaryly and without his
bulls. You should have answered this vehement presumption, which stands on
your disco^tented brethrens side, against the Card. letters, and not to have
drawn their words (uncharitably) as spoken in contempt of his Hol. which are
nothing so.

Then they tell you plainly that there is greet reason why his Hol. Fol. 18. b.
A reasonable Speech.
should not appoint a Superior over them without their advise and allowance:
and that in doing contrary he should d^e against the Canons of the Church,
and against the decrees of Popes and Emperors, etc. how say you (my
Masters)? Tot. tit. Ext. de Elect.
is it not great Reason the Clergy should chose their Superior? have Popes
against Reason made so many notable decrees touching Elections? have they
occupied their vvitts and auctoritye in a matter unreasonable? if Election be
reasonable in others, why is it not reasonable in Ingland? if it be reasonable
that the Clergy of other Contryes chose their Bishops, Deanes, and Prouosts,
why is it not reasonable in Ingland, that the Clergy should chose their
superior^ I see no reason of diversity, touching the Reasonablenes of the fact
or act. You think it is a sufficient confutatio^ to allege their words
only, and you think all men so blinded as you your selves are that cann see
no Reason in them. when they are most reasonable you answer neither their
Reasons, their examples, Th'vnited never answer Reason nor authority.
nor auctorityes, and yet you will have men of Reason to believe you without
reason at all you quoate their auctorities in your margent, and yet you will
make us believe they have no Reason, and by consequent the Canons which they
aleage, to be against Reason, because they are against you, and that you cannot
answer them.

The Canons (say they) do allow, that the Clergy may and should (if they
find them selves vvronged by having a Bishopp put on them against their
consent and liking) resist and with stand the intruded. But they have an
Archp. set over them without their consent and liking, ergo according to the
Canons, they may resist and vvithstand him. and so by consequence, this their
resisting him is reasonable because they are warranted by the Canons. what say
you to this argument? you are as Domb as Fishes. here you should have shevved
your conning, learning, and Rhetoric, and have answered this argument or
Canons, Th'vnited triumph before the victory.
and so have triumphed after the victory, and not before, as often you do.
but being by the Truth struck stark domb, you leave, will you or nill you,
the victory to your adversary, and give thereby your Readers to understand,
that they had reason to withstand, and not to accept the Archpriest at his
first coming in so desorderly, and against the Canons as he did, your Brethren
in all their books and discourses, The corner stone of the question untouched.
putt this down as an infaillable ground, and as it wear the corner stone
of all their vvritings and sayings: that the Archpriest was put on them at the
first, against th'orderly course of appointing and constituting Superiors
either by the Canons, or of the Pope. This is in dispute, and this ground you
should have undermined, and showed the contrary, either by law or by
practice. but as I have always told you, you fly from it, and show your
selves cowards. This is not the question which you seem to insinuat, and
would make your Readers to believe it, that they should say and hold: Not the
question.
that the Pope could not give them such a Prelat with so large and ample
Jurisdiction, or without their consents and election. Note well, they never
said or thought this, neither can you of this justly accuse them. if you cann
show me that they teach or have written this, then will I cry out on them
as yon do, and call them Schismatics justly, as they have been called
wrongfully. For this were to abridge in deed the eminent power his Hol. The
Popes eminent but not ordinary power
has Ex plenitudine potestatis, to give Jurisdiction to whom he list, and as
largely and amply as he list. Mark these points well. for it is one thing to
say: A superior is putt upon us against Reason and the orderly manner and
practice that ever hitherto has been observed in Christ's church, and a
another thing to say: his Hol. cannot appoint us such a superior with such
auctoritye over us against our wills: for the former, is a lavvfull and just
complaint, and the seccond is a schismatic Pride.

But what if they do not speak as you make them to speak? what if you use
M. False play.
Ievvells tricks, to foyst in words that are not theirs, as if they had spoken
them, so to discredit them with your partial or negligent Reader? what if
you have put down your own words in a small and distinct lettre, as though
they wear their words? if you have done all this, cann you abstain from
blushing? are you not ashamed of it, The Readers are fraudulently deceived, and
the Priests falsely accused.
pretending to defend truth, and to committ so great an untruth? how cann
your Reader believe you in other points you say against them, when he shall
see you so fraudulently both to accuse them, and deceine him? who would have
thought united Priests to be so much over seen? I pray God you be not united
as Sampsons foxes wear, to destroy by your contentious spirits the good corn
of gods church, and by this occasion of over much affecting one party, be not
the loss of many a Soul. If you be united Priests that speak, and not an
other under your name, I will set down their words, as you have set them
down in your book, and afterward the same words according as I find the^
in their book, in the page by you noted, and leave the judgment hereof even
to the partiallest Reader that is, if he have any wit, Judgment or honesty
in him. Thus you say: And a little after they tell us plainly that theare is
great Reason why his Hol. should not appoint a superior in Ingland without
their advice and allowance, and that in doing contrary, he should do
against the Canons of the church and against the decrees not only of Popes,
Distinct. bb. ca. 12. and did. 61. cap. 3.
but also of Emperors (as though this wear more) which appoint that the
Clergy may resist and vvithstand any Bishopp put upon them against their
consent and liking. All this you have putt down in a small and distinct
letter as their words. Now let us hear them speak.

For, Page 14.
whose advice, consent, and allowance are required to the chosing of a
Superior, if not theirs that are to obey and live under the said superior when
he is chosen? do not the fellows of every house in oxford (and according to
the statuts and foundation) chose and elect their hedd and Rector? Do not
likewise all the Religious companies chose their superior? Nay, do not the
Canons of holy church decree, Did. 63. c. 12. did. 61. c. 13.
that Priests should have the election of theirs Bishopp? and this late
auctoritye is for amplenes in punishing more then Bishoplike. yea the Canons
alovve further, that the Clergy may and should (if they find them selves
vvronged, by having a Bishopp put on them against their consent and liking)
refuse and vvithstand the intrusion and injury. and not only Popes have
decreed that their Clergy should chose their Bishopps, but Emperors have
constituted the same, as appears by the ordinary Gloss upon 63. did. cap.
34. all which makes our friends refusal much more justifiable. Where do they
tell us plainly, that there is great Reason why his Hol. should not appoint a
superior in Ingland without their advice and allowance? False addition.
have you not foysted in these words advice and Allowance? and that in doing
contrary, he should do against the Canons? where is there any one word of
his Hol. or of his power in the former words? they show both by example and
by auctoritye that the ordinary coming to superiority over others, is by the
election of such as are to live under that superior: and that the Clergy may
refuse a Bishopp set over them against their consent and liking. and there
upon conclude, that the Priests which withstood the Archpriest set over them
without their consent and liking, to be justified by the same examples and
auctoritye. Falsehood.
you put your own words down for theirs, as though they spoke
contemptuously of his holiness (for that you go about to prove in the same
leaf before, and bring this for example) whereas it is you your selves and
not they, they not once mentioning his Hol. but laying down a true and solid
Doctrine proved by example and auctoritye to the which you answer not one
word here. And you are not content to corrupt their words only, but their
allegation also, Corruption of words and allegation.
as the Reader may perceive here in the margent, set down both at your
words and at theirs And when you have framed them such a speech as pleases
you, A false conclusion.
then you conclude thus: By all which, is not hard to Judge of these men's
haughty spirits. But I conclude: By all which, your unjust dealing with your
brethren, it is not hard to Judge of your naughty spirits. for you have
corrupted both their sense and their text. Fie upon Contention which
ingendreth mallicie, and Mallicie is the mother of wilful blyndenes. For
where as they say: Not only Popes but Emperors have constituted, etc.
thereby to show how the laws consent with the Canons, as the Emperor him
self often says: Auth. de monach.. huic autem.
Sancimus, sacras per omnia sequentes regulas. we do ordain, follovving
altogether the sacred Canons. and the Pope says: C. 1. Ext. de novi operis.
Quia vero sicut leges non dedignantur sacros Canones imitari, ita and sacrorum
statuta Canonum, principum constitutionibus adiuuantur. Now as the laws do
not disdain to imitat or follow the sacred Canons: so the statuts of the
sacred Canons are aided by the laws and Constitutions of Princs. False
Jnterpretation.
You interpret their words, that they allege the Emperors auctoritye after
the Pope, as a greater auctoritye then the Popes, for so your words in the text
(and for more surety, set down in the margent also) do notify. (as though
this wear more.) as if you would say: these men allege the Emperors
auctoritye, after they have aleaged the Canons, as thougs it wear more, that
is, greater then the auctoritye of the Canons. you may as well accuse the Pope
for saying, that the Canons are helped by the laws of Princs. what blindenes
is this against your own conscience and skyll, to misinterpret men's words,
Blind and misinterpretarum.
and to make your Reader to note a false sense, which your brethren never
intended, neither cann it by any spider be sucked out of them. this is not a
haughty, but a co^tentious and seditious spirit. A haughty answer.
To conclude for answer to their Canons and ordinary gloss, you say, they
are of a haughty spirit. why so? forsooth because they allege the Canons and
theordinary Gloss. I pity your ignorance, and bewail the weakness of your
cause. For in stead of solid answers, you corrupt both the sense and the
text of your Adversary. you make him say what you list, and when all is
done, that which you make him say, remains still firm and stable, untouched
and vnanswerred by you. Suerly you are like to get great honor and creditt by
this kind of writing and dealing: even as much as Jewel (whom you imitat) did
get, which was shame enough.

Now you accuse them of disorder for that they did call into suspicion of
forgerie the Popes breue it self, Fol. 19.
that came to confirm the Protectors letters. They say the contrary.
Contrariety. Page 1. in the preface.
that a Peace was made to the great comfort of all Catholics, when his Hol.
breue was presented unto them, and that all was forgiven by the Priests so
grievously iniuried. and you your selves confess, Fol. 109.
that in words they acknowledged his auctoritye aleaging their words which
are these: Page 4. in the preface.
if they mean thereby that the Priests do not acknovvlege M. Blackvvell for
their Archpriest and superior (since his Hol. breue came) they may if it please
them correct this their understanding, Fol. 109.
etc. You reply yet for all this, that they seek by all possible means to
discredit his auctoritye. Fol. 19.
and why? because they say: the breue was procured, God knovveth out of what
office. you note not the place where they say it, and therefore I will not
believe you, nor your, etc. But suppose they did suspect the breue of forgerie,
yea and went about to prove it also, One may lavvfully suspect a breue or bull
of forgerie.
what then? Is this a fault, or a sin? is this contempt of his holiness?
nothing less. for so much as it is lavvfull for all men against whom any
Breue or bull is obtained, to impugn it, yea and to prove it false and forged
too, if they can: and good Reason. for it may be obtained by false information,
and so his Hol. may be deceived, who intends not to grant any thing in the
prejudice of an other, or against an other man's right. this is no contempt of
his Hol. or of his bulls, but law and Reason. you do very ill therefore to
accuse your Brethren falsely in saying: False accusation.
they called into suspicion of forgerie the bulls. whereas so soon as they
savve it, they yielded without further enquierie, vvhither it wear obtained
just or unjust, or vvhither it was forged or no.

That which you aleage out of the English book, Fol. 19. b. Page 29. and 103.
might be more charitably interpreted, and not to the rigor you do,
Uncharitable interpretation.
and as I believe, contrary to their sense and meaning. which I leave (with
many other things) for them selves to answer. for as I have often said, I do
only advertise you of such faults as you committ in this Apol. not intending
to defend them in their faults and errors, but am full gladd when you take
then: up justly, and correct them wherein they are faulty. for as I mean not
to defend them, wherein they are reprehensible, A disorderly conclusion.
so do I not mean to flatter you when you are faulty. As for example, in
your uncharitable and disorderly conclusion of this your second Chapt. which
proceeds not of that spirit, which should be in men of your calling and
quality, toward your brethren running the same course, and peril of
persecution that you do: but rather of the spirit you make mention of there,
pride, wrath, Envy, Emulation, and worse passions if worse may be. God send
the one and the other of you his holy spirit of unity and charity, for
suerly it is high time.

CHAP. III.
THE Fathers of the society are worthy of greater praise then you give them,
Fol. 20. b.
and wear worthy of more, if they had not meddled in this controversy, which
nothing perteyned to them, One il herb marreth a whole pott of pottage.
and had suffered the secular Priests to follow their affairs, being 2.
distinct bodies and common wealths as they are. But this meddling so far in a
matter not apperteyning to them, does give me^ suspicion, they tend to sum
other end, and make their friends full sorry to see contemplative men plonged so
deeply in vvorldly affairs, and so up to the ears in strif and contention.

But that which follows as it should seem greatly to please you, so it much
disliketh me, Disgrace of secular Priests.
and all of my humor, as spoken in disgrace and discredit of secular Priests,
but especially of such as have and do travel in Ingland, for the gayning of
Souls. I will set it down to see if it can make you blush, so to discredit
your own coat and vocation.

Yea diverse, Fol. 20. b.
that be hedds now of faction against them (the Jesuits) are so far
beholdinge to them, as probably they had never been men of learuing and
account, if these Religious men, and their charity had not been. What an
impudent ly is this? why? D. Bagsbavv, an impudently.
whom they account the chief, D. Bishop M. Champeney, and others the heds of
the faction against the^, Would they (think you) never have been men of
account, if they hadd not gone to Rome? what if they had staid in Rhemes, or
Douay? is theare no learning but in the Romans college at Rome? be they all Asses
and unlearned not able to write books that wear brought up in the seminaries
of Rhemes and Doway? All you united priests (the gratest part never being
brought up under the fathers) are you not men of learing and account? and able
to write books how then wrote you this your Apology? paraduenture it was
written by a Romist and not by a Rhemist. but what? are all the learned men
of our country beholdinge to these Religious for it? God forbid. yea but Why
are men so much beholden to these religious: Mary, Fol. ibidem. Jmpudencie.
sum of the^ (the secular priests) going over poor serving men, other
soldiers, others vvanderers in the world, and none lightly but more or less,
one way or other, in need of their help and favor, etc. Far othevvise does
their great friend And. Philopatris (page 199.) write of them: that those who
come to the Seminaries, are for the most part descended of vvourshipfull
families, and borne of rich parente. What! diverse of these that be heds now of
the faction against the Jesuits, wear they such men as you mention here? name
one of them to save your honesty. For heds, in all your book, you reckon D.
Bagsh. D. Bish. M. Mush. M. Bluet, M. Cha^peney, M. Colllington, M. Charnock
(put in also M. Watson if you will:) wear these poor serving men, soldiers,
or vvanderers, when they came over? what impudency is this? what calumniation
both of the vocation and of the persons? you tell the reader here, that the
heds wear such companions as you have named, but name no man here. yet
afterward, you reckon these whom I have named for the heds of the faction,
by consequence then, you would have your ignorant Reader, (that neither
knovveth the men, nor their education) to think, that those wear these poor
serving men, soldiers, and vvanderers up and down, which if the Jesuits of
charity (forsooth) had not taken in, they would never have come to this
learni^g to be able to write books against them. Believe them who list, this
I am assured of, that if it wear true, and that a Jesuit wrote this book, An
unhappy Covve.
he then does like an unhappy covve, that after she has given a good meals
milk, strikes the payle down which her heel. Euensoe, if the Jesuits had
done so much for these kind of men as your pretend, you should not by
vpbraiding them therevvith blemish and deface all the good deeds you say they
did them. And yet this not vvithsta^ding which you say here can scarcely be
true. for these Soldiers, serving men, and vvanderers, did very rarely go to
Rome to be helped by the Jesuits, and very fevve or none of the^ were made
priests there, but were still received in Douay and Rhemes, there brought up,
and priested. Besides, wear it true, that all these Soldiers, and Vvanderers
had gotten this learning to write books of the Jesuits, yet the opposition of
these priests against that unorderly and exorbitant superiority obtained by
the Jesuits, is so far from ingratitude against them, that it is, a notable
fact of conscience and Justice both.

And your Probably they had never been me^ of learning or account, nor able to
write books, if they had not been brought up under the Jesuits: is very
fondly said on your part, A speech dishonorable to the Jesuits.
and to the Jesuits them selves also dishonorable, and cause of just envy. As
who should say: that either there was no learning in the vworld before the
Jesuits appeered, or no learned man now, if he has not been brought up
under the Jesuits, which is both folly to believe: and shame to utter and
write.

But let us examine these 4. whom you set down as chief hedds: viz. D.
Bagsh M. Bluet, M. Collingt. and M. Mush. Fol. 29. b
(who to you seem the chiefest broachers of all these suspicious reports. Fol.
68. b
) The first, to whom you attribut the penning of the Latins book, was a
Graduat and of accomptin Oxford before he came over. If he had cont ynued
theare, and never comme over, or if he had staid at Rhemes and not gone to
Rome, is it not probable he might have proved a man of learning, and able to
write such a book? why: did he learn his latin tongue in Rome? as for M.
Bluet and M. Collingt. they wear never under the Jesuits, but brought up in
the seminary of Douay, and wear both gone home to serve their country,
before any Jesuit had any government in our seminaries, and so for the
learning and ability they have, not bound to the Jesuits, and consequently
cannot be ingratfull: In deed M. Mush (who yet by your own judgment is the
auctor, but of 2. letters, and of no one book) he was brought up in Rome for
sum years. but hadd he not gone thither, but remained and spent so many
years in Douay or Rhemes, should not he probably have gotten learning enough to
write 2. letters and a book too, if need were? three of these heds
therefore at least are not endebted to the Jesuits for their learning and
hability to write books and therefore cannot commit any ingratitude, The beds
not ingrat to the Jesuits.
in vvriting in so just and equitable a cause as they have to write against
sum of the^, especially those that vvrott and confirmed the book of schism,
which Was written and penned against them. Besides the style and manner of
writing, this place aiso does discover the penner of this Apol. The author of
the Apology discovered.
who omitteth noe occasion (as before I have noted) to abase and bring into
contempt the vocation, of secular priests. For how can it be probable rhat you
united priests should object to your brethren as a great disgrace to them, of a
serving man to be made a priest, of a soldier to be priested? Tot. tit. ext.
de seruis non ordinandis.
The canons of the church do not repel from priesthood the very slaves, so
they be made priests after they have been set free by their May. yea he
whose Father was a slave, C. fin. d. tit.
so his mother be a free woman, may be made a priest. and was not I pray your
the founder of the Jesuits order a Soldier, and is the society to be
vpbraided therewith? God forbid. Bought slaves I say are admitted, and you
object to free men, as a wrinckle and foul blott to priesthood: because of
serving men and soldiers, they became good and virtuous priests, and for that
they forsook the world to serve God in his church, and for that they let the
killing of bodies, to help to save Souls. You do injury not only to many
of your selves (my united brethren) amongst whom yet I know sum that wear
serving men: The united do injury them selves.
but also to many a holy martyr, that of serving men yea and of mean
quality, by their zeal and constancy have come to the height of perfection
which is Martyrdoome, to the with I fear me, the Author of this Apol.
whosoever he be Will never attain, so long as he has his hedd so full of
these contentio^s and uncharitable dealings, augmenting them by such fond
books, as have neither rythme nor reason in them. how say you to one (whom
since I have heard to be martyred) that was first a Cobbler. then a Porter,
after that vndercooke in the seminary, Cobblers and smythes, priests and
martyrs.
and at last by his extreme diligence got as much learning as was sufficient
for a priest, and finally such favor at Gods hands to be a Martyr: Whereas you
by Gods secreat judgments hane been as it wear for saken, and left to be
dealers and sticklers in this uncharitable dissension. what say you to M. M.
Joannes Cleyton.
James Cleyton Who being a smith in Ingland came to Rhemes, and theare
trauailled so much and profited so Well in his study, that D. Allen (a man of
an other judgment and spirit then this author Whosoever he be) adjudged him
worthy of priesthood. D. Allen of an other judgment.
he was not deceived in his judgment, for this man after long imprisonement,
was at length condemned for his faith, but died in prison before the day of
execution. Go now and object to that worthy Prelat of pious and famous
memory Card. Allen, that he made not only serving me^ and soldiers priests,
but also Cobblers and smithes. I referue the names of many serving men that
after they came to Douay and Rhemes wear made priests, Many serving men
priests and Martyrs.
and have done much good in their country, and many of them have died for the
cath. faith most constantly. If you know them not, their names are written in
Libro vitae. You may asvvell and justly reproach to S. Peter, S. Andrew, S.
John, that they wear fischers and so unfit to be Apostles.

Soldiers (quot you?) how many I pray you? tell their names. I know
serving men that became Soldiers, and afterward coming to the seminary were
made priests: but any that was a mere Soldier, I know none especially of the
heds, as you term the^, nor any of the 30. which subscribed to the appeal,
except the two Bennets, whereof the one in deed was a Soldier, and after
made Priest in Rome, vvhither the other was or no I know not, but for the
rest, I can anssvvere negatiuely.

Well? these Serving men, Soldiers, and vva^derers, one way or other, stood
in need of the Jesuits help. What! to make them priests? and to have the
ability to write books? or else in that they gave them bread at their gates,
a meals meat, or a nights lod ging. For the first, they gained it in the
Seminaries. For the seccond, I know heretofore our contreymen have found
charity and friendship at their hands, but for some years since, if all be
true that Passingers, trauaillers and vvanderers (be they serving men,
soldiers, scholars, or others) report. they may as soon break their necks as
their fasts, The Jesuits old charity toward Euglishme^ changed.
at a Jesuits college. And might starve if they found not more charity and
better releife at other men's hands then theirs. So Much is the old help of the
Iefuits changed, that they will have no Inglishman stand in need of them. For
if he do, he may be deceived. I am sorry our contreymen have given such
occasion: but more sorry to see the fathers for sum respects, so to change
their charitable natures. For howsoever these Soldiers and vvanderers. show
them selves forgetful and vngrat full, yet should not the Fathers for that
becomen nigrads and uncharitable.

But to close with you. I pray you what help and favor have these serving
men, soldiers, and vvanderers, specially the heds of them, found at the
Jesuits hands. I would feign know for my learning. I am sure of this, that
the greatest part (if not all) have found help and favor and not of the
Jesuits as you insinuat, but in the Semin. to be norished in learning. More
charity used in the Seminary of Douay and Rhemes then in those governed by the
Jesuits.
if in our semin. of douay and Rhemes, theare had not been used more charity
to comers and vvanderers then is or has been in the Seminaries governed by
the Jesuits, or that now is in the seminary of Douay governed by their will
and direction, you had lost this good argument of Serving men, soldiers and
vvanderers, our country had lost many a good priests and holy martyr that have
been received, entretayned and norished in those seminaries, which now may
go a vvandring in deed, if they have neither money in their purse, nor
commendations from certain men in Ingland! The seminary of Douay merueylously
changed.
O good Cardinal! thou see the great change that is happened since thy death,
and no doubt thou do lament it. thou receyuest all that came, Serving men,
sonldier, heretic, and all: thou refusest none, and thy charitable dealing
brought forth the fruit that followed. Not only Serving meu, and soldiers,
under thy happy, wise, and discreat government wear made priests, but many an
heretic also Was converted, priested and sent back, and afterward became a
blessed martyr, so God blessed they zeal and charity. But now alas! both
charity and zesle are vvaxen so cold, that few comme over, and many of them
return, not only frustrated of their zealous hope, but malcontented and
keycold.

To conclude, if these serving men, soldiers and vvanderers, now priests have
not received such help and favor of thelesuits as you pretend, then you taxing
them with ingratitude is undue. and if all be true you say, then you conclude
against your selves (If you wear the Authors of this Apol.) in that the are
are amongst you, mo of these serving me^, soldiers; and vvanderers, now
priests, then amongst your discontented brethren, and so have you made a fair
spoke, The united prove themselves ingrat.
by proouing your selves ingratfull fellows, as you are in deed to your
own coat and vocation, in abasing and bringing it into contempt to, please
and praise others.

That which you say in the same leaf and elsewhere, Fol. 22. What is to be
disliked in the priests?
touching their disordinat writing against the fathers in general and against
fat. Parsons in particular, I dissalowe with you, and for that kind of
writing, I have alvvaies found fault with their books, and am as sorry that
ever they vvrott so as you are for the book of schism. if they had kept them
selves with in the compass of the question, and not spoken so against the
parsons they do: their book would have passed without controvvlement. but
seeing they have been so bold, touch them hardly, and lay load on them, I
will not mislike with you. so that still you call to memory, that the biting,
passionat, and sclanderous book which fa. Lister wrott against them, might have
pusshed the^ into the like disordered heat, and liberty of speech. For We
have a rule in our law, that Compensatio habet locum in delictis, thar is: one
injury may be compensed with an other, The Jesuit called them schismatics,
and worse then sootsayers and idolaters, and for recompense they call the
Jesuits ambitious etc. one is as true as the other, both are false and so an
end.

To putt down my verdict touching your discontented brethrens censure of these
so many seminaries that now are in respect of the two we had only before,
true it is. The authors iud gment of the no^ bers of nevve seminaries.
The fathers and especially fa. Parson. (by whose special trauaill and
industry they have been erected, D. Cicil. in his spectacles yet attributes
the beginning of the seminaries in in spain in to his industry, and that fa.
Pars. did build upon his foundation.
and as yet are maynete yned) are highly to be thanked, and greatly to be
esteemed for the same. and no doubt but in time our country shall reap great
good and profitt thereby: so is it true also, that the 2. elder Seminaries did
fend into Inglant mo priests, and norished in them greater nombers of scholars
at one time (I think) then these new seminaries, with the old now decayed
vvlll furnishe to send into Ingland in diverse years. and for the number of
stude^ts, priests and proper yonthes, theare wear more for many years
together (so long as D. Allen governed) in those seminaries at one time, then
are now, or here after like to be in all the seminaries put them all
together. I have seen 50. The 2. Sem inaries flovved more in number, then all
do together now. And why?
priests in one year sent out of Rhemes, and yet 50. other priests remain in
the college still. have all the Seminaries so many in them now? No no, the
reasons why the seminaries flovved then in number, are: first because all rhat
came to Douay or Rhemes wear received and vvellcomme nonevveare rejected, All
were vvelcomen.
had they money or had they none, brought they commendations or brought they
none. After they had been tried theare a while, such as wear not found fit
(which god knovvth wear but fevve) wear graciously and courtuously
dismissed with money in their purses. But nov if they have no money, no meat:
if they have no commendations from special parsons in Ingl., Nescio vos, and
so return as they came When it was known in our universities, how all
wear received and full vvelcome that came, a number of the chiefest and best
scholars and vvytts of both universities came flocking over. but no Wit being
known that none are Welcome Without money and particular commendatio^s, The
government more svveete.
none or verife We dare adventure. Next, they lived then very quietly Without
rigourous rules and penau^ces or dicitur culpa, governed and ruled by the
countenance and look of one man, Whom all from highest to the lowest did
love, and highly reverence. But no Wne We la Was have altered the state of
the seminary, and make men un Willing to come theare. if you Will ans Were
here (as you do elsvvhere) that the Seminary is now poor, Fol. 25.
Objection. Answer.
and therefore must diminish the number to pay their debts? I mervell it
having so fevve, it can be so poore-the Popes exhibition contynueth, and so
does the kings of Spaigne. Who as you report. has ever since the year 1583.
given the seminary 2000. Fol. 24.
Crowns a year, the payment whereof has ever since been procured by Fa.
Parsons labor and trauaill. But for all your saying, I think the king of
Spaignes exhibition has been the slower paid, because his liberality Was
withdrawn from thence, to be bestowed on the seminaries that wear in Spaigne.
I think also the poor seminary gets little out of England, because since
Card. Allens death, theare have been new collectors that bestow it
elswheare, as time the daughter of Truth will discover. Fol. 25. b
But why do I call your seminary poor, that has but few moonethes since
received 2000 crowns. And expect daily 2000. more? I may then very well
conclude with your discontented brethren, that the new seminaries have almost
destroyed the old? as reason and experience it self does teach. For every man
by nature is more addicted, and more careful of that which he has him self
begonn and set up, and to e^crease it, rather the^ to mainteyne that. Which
was begoone by another. For that which one likes, another disliketh. That of
Douay Was founded by Card. Allen now dead and out of mind: the others, by fa.
Par. that has credit to maintain them. Another may comme after that will care
for none of all these, but set up another elsewhere, Estenim vicissitudo rerum,
I doubt not but fa Par. does endeavor to maintain the old Seminaries, if not
in their ancient splendor, yet at the least to see that they do not utterly
fall down and decay. Which wear great pity, Fall. 27.29. The author of the
Apol. discovers him self to be a Jesuit. The Jesuits attribut to hem selves
the conversion that is made in Ingl.
and a Wonderful loss to our contey

In the end of the 3. Chapt. the auctor of this book discovers him self to
be a Jesuit (as I my self always gessed and as all men that read it
diligently, must needs guess also For, the conversion of all in Ingland is
attributed to them, and you united brethren, are but lookers on, and made but
Ciphers in Algorisme. Mary, yet least he should take all the praise from you, in
recompense of borrowing your names, he will content you with this short
parenthesis (which labor vvella^d zealoufly also) Truly, if so few Jesuits as
are in Ingland, in respect of sum hundreds of priests that be theare, have
(as this fellove braggeth) converted infinitely more then you all: and have
helped to save more souls then you all, it must needs be a great shame for you
all. The united confess them selves to be lazy.
For, you confess your selves here to be very idle and lazy priests. Why
what do you theare? If you be but lookers on, and do no good? I do not
mervell that so eg^^ly you discover your brethrens priuitids, when you lay your
own shame so willingly open to all the world. If you have written this Apol.
blott it out in the next impression for shame, and endeavor to employ your
selves better in the vocation and mission you wear sent for? or else cast of
your gowns, and get you a spade and mattock in your hands, for you are not
worthy of the vocation you have. For, is it possible that priests brought up
in learning, order, and discipline, and sent to labor in such a harvest, should
be so idle, that a few Jesuits should surpass them in pains and trauaill of
gayning Souls, and that by their own confession? or that they cann without
blushing discover their own drowzie necligence to the world? If you have not
written this Apolog. nor discovered your ydlenes in action, or ignorance in
want of ability to gain and wynn souls, then ask reason of this good
fellow that has borrowed your names, not only to declaime against your
brethren, but to calumniat, disgrace and dishonor your own selves. Or else I
will (as you do theare) request all godly and pious mynds to ponder and
consider how far Malice has blinded you in pursuing your Brethren, in defense
of Religious men, that rather then you would hold your peace and say nothing,
you are content to disgrace, and dishonor your own selves.

CHAP. IV.
IN this chapt. Fol. 29. Ama^ of strave
You have putt up a Man of straw to fight against, repeating with great
teadyousnes, the faction of M. Morgan against D. Allen, which appartayneth
nothing to this question, but serves only to fill up your book, and to make
it bigger. as also that of G. G. and Priour Arnold. If a man should urge you
how you came by their letters that wear sent secreatly between friend and
friend, Intercepting of letters.
I believe it would fall out, they wear intercepted, as many a letter is, by
such as should have conscience to open other men's letters. At least wise it is
taught to be a case of conscience to do it. And the world must needs deem
that the parson that has furnished you with all the letters in this your
Apology, and who has yet I warrant you a heap for you in store for your
larger Apol. has hadd more care to assemble and keep them, then to say over
his beads.

CHAP. V.
FOR their charging the Rector, Dislike with the Priests and with the united.
I dislike all such undue digressions from the Question in controversy, as I
do you your selves also for reporting the diverse seditions ad nauseam vsque
that were in the Romans College, because it is nothing to the purpose and
question between you and your brethren, which is: whither the Card. The
questions in controversy.
Protector without the Popes breue could or might constitute a new dignity
in Ingland? and next: vvhither the Priests (that hild and taught he coold not
do it) wear schismatics, seditious, and rebellious for the same or no?
what appertains this to the faction of M. Morgan and M. Paget against D.
Allen, or to the discontentement of our Gentlemen in Flanders against fa. Holt?
The question (I say) is: vvhither the Jesuits, Arhp. and you united Brethren,
have justly or unjustly by writing published them disobedient and vvoorse then
footh sayers for not receyving the Archp. upon the Card. letters? and vvhither
the Archpriest (with whom you are united in this scandalous action) after
their submission unto him, upon the coming of the Popes bulls, did well and
charitably to renevve the old wound (which was before by their submission
healed) again or no, in not admitting them to be absolved, except they did
first confess and recant the foresaid schism this is the chief ground of
this later contention with the Archpriest and the occasion of their writing to
the Pope, Why the Priests wrote to the Pope.
and to the inquisition to have their Judgments (seeing the Archpriest rejected
the Judgment of Sorbonne) whither they are Schismatics or no? Th'vnited do
never comme near the point.
this point you touch not, but make extrauagant discourses upon factions which
were in the world, many a fair year before these Contentions grew amongst
you. but sum thing you must say to make your book the bigger, and to bleare
the eyes of your Reader and content his affection. Because then this chapt.
with the 2. follovving pertain nothing to the hedd question in controversy,
but contain only the repeating and ripping up of the begyning of the troubles
between the Priests and the Jesuits, together with Fishers examinations, I
pass them over.

Where you accuse them to be the first that appealed from his Hol. Fol 68. b.
breue, for you say: The Priests vvronged.
They wear the first that appealed from it* you do them wrong, for they
appealed no^ from the Breue, but from the strange severity and government of
the Archpriest who as it seems by the Articles of their appeal, and by his
strange answers made unto them, could not well tell how to behave himself in
this nevve and unusual dignity, and Jurisdiction laid upon him. All this
appears by their appeal.

You add: Fol. ibidem.
that sum of them are presumed to beprincipall dooers in these late printed
libels. a great fault I assure you. for defending them selves and their honor
in print. If they had kept them selves with in the compass of the
controversy, neither had they offended, neither coold their writings have
been called libels. But what justice and equity is therein you my united
brethren? Iniquity.
you are contented that the Jesuits write scandalous books against them (which
in deed deserve the name of libels) and that by your approbation: and yet you
think it not lawful for your brethren to defend them selves in print against
such infamous accusations as are Schism, sedition and Rebellion. why! Blind
affection.
how are you so blinded with affection, that you dissalovve that in secular
Paiests, which yet you well alovve in Religious men? and are you so drowned
with passion that you can like of the Jesuits calling your brethren
Schismatics, and worse then soothsayers, and I cannot tell what: and yet
mislike of them for purging the selves from those haynons accusations, and
complaining of this uncharitable dealing.

You might (my Brethren) for Modesties Fol. 82.
sake, have passed over in silence the 6. or 7. Butteries for 13. Priests (if
it wear true, as all is not gospel you write in your book) for respect of
their vocation, and not to give Heretics occasion of laughture and mocking.
surely in the Judgment of your own faction, it is much unworthy the Modesty
and Christian sincerity and honest dealing that ought to be in the co^fessors
of Christ toward their brethren of the same profession and confession you your
selves be. but the order of writing, Fol. 83.
the phrase of the book it self, with the store of leters, and other
particularities do shevve to the ey, that it was written by a Jesuit and not
a secular Priest. I coold lay down the first letter of his name if I listed,
but it is very easy for every man to conjecture it only this I say: The united
vvrouged by the author of the Apology.
he has done you (my united brethren) great vvrong, under you name, to defame
your order and vocation.

CHAP. VIII.
THE whole discourse of the begymming of this chapt. By vvqose information, the
subordination was made?
tends to shevve, that this subordinatio^ that is now in Ingland was, made
by the information of Fa. Par. Fa. Baldw. and 2. or 3. other Priests, wholy
affectioned and ledd by Fa. Fol. 99.
Par. and as you say, of diverse principal men (naming none) from Spaigne and
Fla^ders. All which principal men are vvcll known to be the dear friends and
creatures of the Jesuits. The so^me is: that this subordinatio^ was procured
by the Jesuits, and that the Jesuits wear the chief medlers in this
subordinatio^, Subornation.
which might be better termed A subornation of his Hol. making him believe,
that all was iump as they told him. If I might ask you this Question? A
lavvfull question.
what had those principal men in Spaigne and Flanders more to do with the
affairs and government of the Clergy of Ingland, then the Priests that
reside and travel theare? what reason is theare, that these unquiet wear not
demanded dwelling in Ingland, and yet the others dwelling in Spaigne and
Fla^ders must be demanded? you answer: because they be so small a part of
the English Clergy. wear 13. Fol. 67. b.
in number, and wear to live under that subordination: by right then their
voices and consents was rather to be asked, then the voices of 2. Jesuits and
2. Priests out of Ingland, and not subject to that subordination. how soever
the matter was handled, The Fathers in excusable.
the Fathers cannot be excused for meddling in a matter not appertayning to
them, Deuteronomy. 16.
and so to have putt their falcem in messem alienam, which both in the
scripture and in the law is accompred a great fault. what hadd the Jesuits to
do to procure the secular Priests a superior? nothing at all, except (as your
brethren say) they would play sure, and have such a one appointed, as should
alvvaies rely upon them, and govern by their appointement and prescription.
Presumption against the Fathers.
Theare is in deed great presumption of this against them, their actions and
endeavors in this behalf considered. You find fault with your brethren Priests
for meddling in the troubles of the Romans College against the Fathers: and yet
the Fathers committ the same fault (or a greater) here, as being the chief
medlers and dealers in the contentions that wear amongst the secular Priests.
Here a man may justly turn the catt in the pann, and say as you do in the
first chap. of you Apology. That the meddling and dealing of the Fathers in the
secular Priests matters and contentions, has brought great hurt to Ingland,
and is like to bring much more, if this writing of Apologies by them or for
them do still conntynue: as also sum disgrace to the united brethren, and no
less blemish to the Fathers: seeing they be compted and esteemed rather for
spiritual and moatified men, then for contentious or seditious persons. and
for my part I have always thought them to be such, and have against their
detractors for such defended them. But yet for all that, we lawyers say: that
there is noe rule so general but it has his exception. so no doubt sum
theare are in that holy company. Mark.
that are too too much given to pollitick matters, and are as it wear
overwhelmed with the affairs of the world, and more intentive to them, then
appertains to Religions me^, or aggreeth with their profession. And albeit
men vvynck now, and will not see them, yet in the day of Judgment they
will be made known to all the world.

Where you say: Fol. 104. b.
that the Popes breue did not satisfy them, but they begann to stagger and
doubt, and to discuss their Superiors commandment, The united abuse their
Readers and them selves.
you abuse your Readers and your selves. your Readers, in saying they staggered
at the Popes breue, doubted and discussed their superiors commandment. for
they did nothing of all this you aleage, but by your own confession yielded,
and obeyed the Popes Breue. you conceal the cause why they vvrott to his Hol.
and the Inquisition in Latin, and to the English Catholics in English. which
was not as you say, for refusing to obey the breue, but for that the
Archpriest vndiscreatly renewed the old vvound of schism (the which you vvil
not talk of, and are sorry that ever it was mentioned, as you and all
peaceable men may well be) in forbidding Fol. 115.
them to be absolved except they confessed and recanted the said schism. the
which as it is the cause of all these contentions books, so do you still rove
at randame, and will not comme near the mark to answer thereto. you abuse
your selves, for that you confess their voluntary submission to the Breue.
Fol. 146.147.
and there you set down the Congratulations of Fa, Garnet, the Archpriest
and others for the same submission. The testimony of the 6. assistants not
vvoorth a ruth.
For proof of yourformer saying and their staggering, etc. you bring the
testimony of the reverend brethren forsooth the 6. assistaunts nominated by the
Fathers as the Archpriest was, and as unorderly installed as their superior the
Archpriest was, whose letters and testimony you do use oftentimes in your
book, which is not worth a rush in any indifferent man's Judgment. nor would
be received in any Tribunal in the world, they being the parties, and known
adversaries to those against whom they bear witness. you may please your
selves therevvith and beco^tented to enlarge your book with them as you do
with many letters of diverse men, that are known to be wholy affectioned to
the Fathers, and to be of their faction (if these contentious sides and part
takings may be called factions) the which men un passionat, and such as stand
indifferent to both parties make little account of, and give less credit unto.

You thrust the sin and scandal that has ensued and fallen out by this
contention upon your Brethren, Fol. 105. b. upon whose back the scandal of
this contention lies.
but I pray you give him his part, that vvrott the scandalous book
(condemned by his Hol. and all the Jesuits that are out of Ingland) of
schism, and part also to those that aucthorized it, and subscribed to it. Take
part your selves also not only for contynunig the scandal by your Apologies,
but by your ignorant accepting the Archpriest upon the Protectors letters. for
hadd you stood to your Brethren in the just refusal thereof, these sins and
scandal had not happened. this vvriting and libelling one against an other,
had never been heard of, as now it has to the vvonderfull and unspeakable
grief of all your friends and well willers.

I vvonder how you dare say: Fol. 107. b.
that in both their books they have set down their Reasons confusedly and
tumultuously, Th'vnited give them selves the ly.
and in no one place distinctly and in order: for in saying so, you give your
selves the lie. For, a little before you say, that in one place of their book,
they would shevve the constitution of the Archpriest by the Cardinals letters
to be void and of no force by 21. Reasons. If I cann prove, that they have
laid 21. Reasons together in one place of the English book, and that by
distinct nombers, then are they not set down confusedly in both their books,
Fol. ibidem.
and by consequent you say not true in saying: and in no one place distinctly
and in order. yet you say: we do let pass the 21. Reasons which this
Censurer layth together by distinct nombers. Fol. 176. b. ergo you give your
selves the ly by saying: they have not set them down in any one place
distinctly and in order. And in their latin book written to the inquisition
(whereof you make no mention in this Apol. because it touches the point and
roveth not at any parson, and because it has in it Fa. Listers book, which
you are sorry to think of) they have laid down many Reasons (not confusedly
but orderly,) vvh^ they did not receive the Archpriest upon the Card. letters
without the Popes bulls. you answer neither to those 21. nor yet to these
set down in the latin book before mentioned. But to these Reasons confusedly
set down you say you will answer. In Gods name. I pray God you answer
them not so confusedly and tumultuously, as you say they are laid down in
their books.

It was gotten say they by the instance of the aduers party. Fol. ibidem.
Do they not say true? who is their aduers party? The Priests say true.
By your own confession, the Jesuits and specially Fathers Pars. was it not
gotten at the instannce of Fa. Par. Fa. Baldvv. and 3. other Priests the
Jesuits creatures? you confess so much your selves. This benig true, Fol. 99.
Fol. 7. b.
have they not just cause to presume that it was gotten by vvrong and false
Information? for what hadd the Jesuits to deal therein, more then the
Capuchins, Dominicans, or any other Religious order? It follovveth: against all
equity and Justice. which they prove by the 21. reasons, by you mentioned,
but not ansvveared, and as I have proved before, against the laws and Canons,
ergo against equity and Justice. And yet they do not put down this their
saying as a Reason, but as a Consideration. But why did you not go on, and say
as they do: that this superiority was so established by their adverse
party, that the superior so by them appointed, must needs remain a punie and
inferior to them, etc. which words make a vehement presumption against the
Fathers of stickling and meddling so far in these matters nothing at all
apertaynenig to them.

But what do you answer to this Reason (if you will needs have it one?)
For sooth, this has been evidently proved to be false. viz: that it was not
gotten, at the instaunce of the adverse party only. but I say, it was
proved by your selves a little before to be true, Fol. 99.
as is to be seen in the place alleged in the margent. Next, you give a
probable answer touching their will and knowledge, but to that they say: it
was contrary to all equity and Justice, you are Mumm, and not a word;
because your conscience tell you, they said true. so that to the chiefest part
of their Reason you have yielded no answer, although you would make your
Reader believe, you will answer all their Reasons.

You do as it wear controwle their second Reason, both at the beginning and
at the end. Page 5.
for they say thus: Furthermore of their interest (the Jesuits) wear not
great in this auctoritye why should they be so unwilling to procure, or
suffer to be procured sum bull or breue for the confirmation thereof, that it
might be an absolute and independent auctoritye? Fol. 108.
To pardon your nipping of the essential words of their reason both in the
begynninng and in the end, Nipping and adding.
and your adding thereto the words which they say not, viz if it came from
his Hol. how answer you the Reason? Forsooth, the question and reason is
now ansvvered, for that a breue is procured. they talk of cheese, and you
answer chaulke. They ask, why the Jesuits wear so unwilling to procure or
suffer to be procured a bull for so many months as the Card. letters wear in
controversy and doubt? and you answer: now a bull is procured. they ask
of the time past, and you answer of the time present. They knevve so well as
you that a bull was procured, and sent before they vvrott this book. I
marvel how you dare put down their Reasons, and answer them (I will not
say so confusedly, but,) so childishly.

That which you add: Fol. ibidem. Th'vnited speak without book.
that the Bull is not much more esteemed of them the^ Card. letters, you say
without proof, contrary to your selves, and contrary also to their
protestation. that which you add also, Fol. ibidem. Page 2.
to prove their little esteem of the breue (viz: god knovveth out of what
office) as it is but the words of one, so are they not to be drawn in general
to all, and yet that one may have spoken them in a good sense. because theare
be diverse offices out of the which the Popes Bulls are procured. but be it that
it was ill spoken of him, yet do you not for all that answer his Reason,
but set his words down falsely, thereby to make them sound more adiouslie.
words set down falslye.
thus you set them down in a distinct lettre: That they do not know out
of what office it was procured by Fa. parsons means, whereas the paraphraze
upon Fa. parsons letters, says, until the 3. or 4. day after that Fa. pa.
Page 82.
had procured (god knovveth out of what office) an Apostolical breue, etc.
you have set the words down as spoken of all the discontented brethren
(saying they do not know) when they are spoken but of one. besides you set
them down as spoken simply and absolutely, whereas, they are putt within a
parenthesis as spoken in passing.

Thirdly, Of many Reasons put together not one ansvvered.
you put many Reasons together, because you faime would be at your letters
again, and at Fishers examination. and for have, you cote not the place where
you found them. but we must believe you on your word, that have so often
deceived us in aleaging their words. but in Gods name we will believe you
this once. The first. Fol. 108.
that the Card. letters patents are not sufficient to give the matter credit,
your easy answer: who does not know, etc. has been ansvvered before,
and shevved, that a Card. Protectors words and letters for the constituting of
a nevve dignity, or conferring of an old, has no credit in any Christian
court in the world, albeit they comme a hundred times, with Ex speciali
mandato Sanctissimi. your Cano^, law, and Glosses, have been turned against
you before, and make still against you till you do bring us better. Secondly
that he has been found partial toward the Jesuits. this may be true,
because he was a man as others are, and allied to the General of the Jesuits
as you say. The 3. Reason. that he (the Protector) is not their lavvfull
superior, as he is not in deed. neither lavvfull nor vulawfull, for he has no
superiortie at all over any English man by that office, as has been showed
before. The 4. Reason. And the like. A wise reason
what (I pray you) do you answer to these 3. last reasons? even thus. But
not to stand upon these matters, Fol. 108. b.
it is a foul thing, when for covering our own wills of not obaying, we
seek holes in the coat and auctoritye of our superiors as these men do, etc.
You have well shot and killed a busard. Th'vnited cannot stand, but must be
rouing.
you will not stand, because indeed you cannot stand against Reason, then
sit a while and count how many mo of their Reasons (left vnrehersed and
vnansvvered) are contained under your last words, And the like? that we may
see them answered, with your ansvveares to them, in your larger Apology, in
the which as you promys us more abonndannce of letters, and a larger discourse
of Fisher and his examination, Fol. 95.
so I fear me we shall find as little reason and matter as we have found
in this.

Well, these discontented brethren do not only seek hoales in the coat of
their Superiors the Card. and the Archpriest (the first being never their
superior, no nor yet, Mark the hoales found in his hol. coat.
the next until his Hol. bull came) but also in this Holiness (coat) but in
covert words. But let us see the hoales made in his Hol. coat and auctoritye?
for sooth, they persuade the people, that he has believed false information.
A sore matter. but where have they persuaded the people thus much? For sooth,
in both books, and especially the English, (you say in the margent) and almost
in every page but you note no one page Well! they make the people believe, His
Hol. may believe false information, benig falsely informed.
that his Hol. has believed false information. Why may not his Hol. believe
false information? is he not a man as others are? and is he not subject to
passions, as before has been noted? if he has believed false Information, it
is not a hole in his cote, but a foul hoale in their coats and consciences
that gave such false information. It follovveth: Page 35.
and thereby appointed a subordination most inconvenient. they give a good
reason thereof in the English book. For by this subordination gotten by false
information the Jesuits have the Archpriest as their punie, and inferior to
them, and by consequence all priests must be their apprentizes, The reason why
the subordinatio^ is inco^uenient.
and stand at their command, and thereby may keep the Archp. in awe, that he
shall dare do nothing that may displease them, for fear they should thrust
him out etc. and these be hoales, Hoales in the fathers coat.
not in the Popes, but in the Fathers coats, and sufficient causes of
inconuenie^ce Next, And not heard of in the church before. Tell us (I pray you)
in your larger Apol. if ever it was heard of in Christ's church before, that an
Archp. should be superior to all the priests in 2. Realms, and that his
jurisdiction. should extend so largely out of the quire and church, over these
Realms. When you can show this, Jgnorance.
then vpbraid them for such speeches: for until then, you show but your own
ignorance, in imputing this to them, as an undue and vnreuerent speech. The^
they say: It is against all equity and justice. that this was well and truly
spoken, has been sufficiently proved before, and you your selves could not
answer it. It follows, Truthies. Fol. 107. b
And that his Holl. could not lavvfully appoint it without their consents. The
word laufully being taken for that which is done by law. And vnlavvfully. for
that which is done against law, they say full true His Holl. coold not do it
lavvfully: that is, observing and following the laws, constitutions, canons,
and decrees of his predecessors, as has been showed before, Lastly, And that
the means by which he had appointed it, is insufficient, bynding no man no
obey it. All this is true, if there be any truth at all. For as it has been
proved before at large, a Card. letters are not sufficient to constitute a new
dignity, or to confirm an old. and the means wear so far from bynding any
man to obey it, that all such as obayed it, are punishable by the canons, as
has been before declared. Of all these truths conclude you what you list,
but I conclude, that you are by these words so far from finding many hoales
in his Hol. coat, as you cannot thereby find one hoale at all, the same being
truly and lawfully spoken. And I cannot a little marvel, that you are not
ashamed to rehearse them, Without making answer thereto, being so evident
against you in the question that is in controversy. Fol. 109.
It follows They acknovvledge the Archp. and his authority in words, yet
do they seek by all means possible to discredit his authority. They
ackowlege the Archpr. Page 4. in the preface. Page 3.
authority in more ample manner and words then you do set down here. That
is: they acknowledge him since his Hol. bull came. before, they forbear to
acknovvlege him, as in the same preface they franckly confess. But their deeds
are contrary to their words. In word they confess him, in deeds, they
discredit his authority. how prove you this? because M. Collington and M.
Charnock reported, the Archpnest dubbled with them. VViselie.
But when dubbled he with them? before the Popes breue came, the^ when they
did not acknovvledge him either in word or deed to be their superior, as they
confess in the preface of their English book. Page 3.
How does this prove they seek to discredit his authority since the Popes
breue came? Your proffes hang by Gimboles, and had need to be knitt together
with points. Besides, A deceiptfull objection.
you would deceive your reader by obiecting that to them now since the breue
came, which was lavvfully do on by them before the breue came. If then you
will prove any thing, you must prove that in deeds and facts they have gone
about to discredit his authority since the breue came and your parenthesis
(For of their two relations only all the matters are raised against him)
seems to in far, that 2. vvitnesses although they be priests, are not
sufficient testimony to prove any thing in question. you ought to know, that
the testimony of 2. parsons is sufficient by the law of God and man, but you
think it an absurd thing to admit the testimony of 2. priests, and yet you
are offended with the^ (throughout your book) for that they will not credit
one parson, viz, the Card. through whose relation and letters, all these
troubles are raised, betvveene the said priests, the Jesuits and your selves.

You cannnot comprehend how these things should be spoken, that the Archprie.
should at the first say? His Instructions came from Rome. and yet afterward
say: they wear made in Ingland. you cannot comprehend then how a man may be
contrary to him self: or that he may upon better deliberation, correct that
which he had said before. Suerly, your comprehension then is very feeble, if
you cannot comprehend thus much. I do comprehend it well, and believe it
also, because theare are 2. vvitnesses as you report that affirm it: which
are asvvell to be believed in this cause, as your reverend brethren the 6.
assistants are to be believed in their own cause.

The next proof is that they give out he had spoken an heretical proposition.
this touches the discredit of his parson, and not of his authority a sore
matter. who knovveth not, that not only an Archp. An Archpriest may err.
(which is the lowest dignity in Gods Church) but an Archbishop also (being
so eminent a dignity) is not priuileged, but that he may err, and that this
gift is not annexed to his office or dignity, but that he may somtymes utter
an heretical proposition vvhither this wear said or no, makes nothing to
that which you have taken in hand to prove. viz: that since the breue came,
and since they acknovvleged him in word. They have sought all means to
discredit his authority and parson in deed. For these words wear spoken
before the breue came, and before they acknovvleged him to be their superior.
Ergo not spoken to discredit him as their superior, as you would make your
simple reader believe.

That which you object to them of foreign authority and of the praemunire,
Fol. 110. The priests vn^rdelie speech.
was (in truth) foolishlie and vnorderlye spoken, and therefore they are justly
reprehended of you for the same. But the words annexed, viz. that his Hol.
cannot do it lawfully without their consents etc. as they are not in the 14.
pagin. by you noted, and have been often times by you repeated, so are they
true and irreprehensible, as in diverse other places, has before been showed.

And althought it seems strange to you, Fol. ibidem.
Why (their books) wear no vv printed after the breue is comme forth, and
has not wrought that effect for quieting them, which theare they promise, to
me, or to any vnpassionat and indifferent reader, The reaso^ivvhy they printed
their book after the coming of the bull.
it seems not strange at all. Because the calumnious crime of Schism, being
renewed against them since the coming of the bull, for that they did not obey
the Archp. upon the Card. letters, they wear driven to yield their reasons, why
they did not receive him upon the said Card. letters, and so to clear them
selves from that calumnious accusation of schism, and to show to the World,
See their reasons in the 2. and 3. Aphorism, to the Popes Nuncio in Paris
that they are much less to be counted schismatics, since that they yielded to
his Hol. bull. The vndiscteat dealing of the Archp. and his counselors gave
the occasion of writing and publishing these books, the which they wear bound
in conscience to do, to conserve their good name and fame.

Well, seeing you have omitted abooue 30. The united have omitted aboo ne 30.
reasons, and let them vnansvvered.
reasons Which they have laid down in their 3. books, and have chosen certain
speeches only (naming them reasons) to answer, and yet have not satisfied to
any one of them, I meruell not that you let pass (as you say) the 21. Fol.
176. b
reasons v^hich this censurer lays together by distinct nousbers to discredit
the Protectors letters: seeing you cannot answer their simple speeches.

But you Will not let M. Champeyneyes, Epistle escape so good cheap, you
will answer all his reasons. The first is taken out of S. Thomas who as you
confess, Fol. 110. b Fol. 111. M. Champeneys first reason.
says: That The subject must know the will of his Superior, otherwise he
cannot be said truly to disobay him. But these priests did not know the will
of their superior the Pope, Ergo M. Champeny says true, that they wear not
disobedient to his Hol. in not admitting the Archp. Reply.
upon the Card. letters. But you reply out of S. Thomas that theare is a
secreat and a manifest commandment. but it was a secreet commandment of the
Pope contained in the Card. letters. Ex expresso mandato Sanctissimi, No man is
to believe him on his word as has been sufficiently proved before, and by
consequence, not to believe that it was the secreat commandment of his Hol.
Again his Hol. in the extrauagant Iniunctae does expreslie command no man to
believe or accept of those that come without his bull: ergo in such a case no
secreat commandme^t can be presumed. and if it wear, yet not to be credited,
against an express commandment. Our law says: Expressa nocent, non
expressa non nocent. As it binds under sin to obey, when the Superiors
will does by any means appear, as you say out of S. Thomas: so it is no
sin or disobedyence, when the superiors will does by no means or ways
appear, as it does not in the case of this question, and so let any man
consider vvhither S. Thomas his speech of obedience touch your brethren or no,
as it does not in deed.

You have been told before that you may be ashamed to call that A perilous
and scandalous doctrine about obedience, as you note in your mergent, and more
ashamed to putt a patche or a peace of their sentence in your text, when it
has been proved before that it is a true, Christian and Catholic Doctrine.

From M. Champeney you leap backward to your fare you well, Fol. 112. b
and are not ashamed to putt his words down for absurd, perilous, and
scandalous doctrine, which is a most just and lavvfull doctrine, not at the
first sight to admit any authority but such as is orderly procured and
lavvfully promulgated. A piece of a setence.
They are warranted to say so, by the fore alleged Extrauagant Iniunctae,
Have at, fare you well.
and diverse other places of the Canon and civil law. Their reason annexed you
cut of with your accustomed etc. your answer is: etc. Helps much the
vuited.
But who shall judge of this? I answer. his Hol. their superior, to whom in
this case they are to retire: but not every subject as you guilefully would
make your reader to believe they think and say: All that you can allege out
of the fathers of ready prompt and simple obedience, is to be understood of a
true Superior, or when (as S. Thomas says) they know the will of their
Superior.

Your first rule out of Fa. Your first rule nothing vvorth.
Gregoire has no place in this controversy, because the manner of
constituting the Archp. by the Cardin. bare letters, was contrary to the
commandment of a higher superior the Pope, who in the foresaid chap.
Iniunctae forbids any prelat to be received without he bring the Popes Bulls
with him, for proof that he is constituted in that dignity. And besides, the
Protector did exceed the limits and power of a Protector, who has no power
or Jurisdiction to constitut any new or old dignity in Ingland as Protector
of the nation. And so might you have put up this rule in your purse, because it
makes quite against you. But let us see the mark you shoot at. Mark (quoth
you) that a man is boond to obey in all wherein he has not evident knowledge
to the contrary. Mark (my May.) that this mark is a false mark. Mark a
false mark.
For Fa. Gregory says no such thing. take your spectacles and read him over
once again, and so it is not quite opposite to your men's doctrine.

The first corollarie of fa. The first corollarie is not for you. Fol. 113.
Gregory makes as much for you as the rule before aleaged: It is sufficient to
bynd the subject (under obedience) that he does not know evidently to the
contra rye, to wit: that it is either evil, or without the limits of his
superiorsauctoritie. Ergo if that which is commanded be evil, or without the
limits of the authority of him that commands, those that refuse to obey,
are not disobedient to their superiors. Now the thing it self, as the priests
have often said and proved also, is evil of it self, next, the Protector that
commanded exceeded the limits of his authority, for he had none at all. by
consequence then your brethen wear not disobedient, and you have brought this
corollarie to curry your selves. By euide^cs here (quoth he) I understand that
which shall be so judged not by the passionat subject, but by other good and
learned men. But it has heene judged by the good and learned men of Sorbonne
that they did not so much as sin in refusing the Archpr. upon the Card.
letters, ergo here is no disobedience. Yea it is judged by the Pope him self,
as has often been said, D. C. Jniunctae
that no man can be installed in any Ecclesiastical dignity, without his
bulls, Ergo it was evident to the priests that the Card. commandment (if he had
been their superior) exceeded the limite of his power and authority, and so
by the former rule and corollarie: committed no disobedience against their
superiors.

The second and third corollarie, Fol. 113. b The 2. and 3. corollaries make
nothing for the united.
brought out of the same father, make as little against them as the former. for
he talks in them of a subject, and so presupposes a man that is subject to
an other. But no Englishman is subject to the Protector of Ingland, and
therefore it appartayneth not to your brethren, nor proves them disobedient
for not obaying the Card. protectors commandment.

That which you add: that the priests rune upon passion may be well applied to
your selves, whom passion has so blinded, that you will not or do not
understand the Author you aleage, when they are so far from being against
your brethren, that they confirm and prove their lawful endeavors and actions.

At last you come to material disobedience, which consists in omitting that
which was commanded, Material disoobedience.
or doing any thing contrary thereunto. viz to the commaundment of his
Superior. But the Protector as you must still be told (for you willingly
forgett it, and yet harp still upon yt) was not their superior, neither was it
evident that it was commanded by his Hol. and therefore they have not
committed this material disobedience. I grant with you that both kinds of
disobedience are damnable in such as commit them, but you neither have nor can
prove, that your brethren have committed either of them, and therefore are not
culpable of that damnation.

At length you comme to judge of their intentions, of their thoughts and
cogitations, you judge of men's thoughth and cogitations falsely. Fol. 113. b
seeing you can prove no disobedience in their words and outwardactions. You
vvish it wear not openly seen in this fact of theirs, and their
perseverance therein. What (I pray you) wear not seen? forsooth, their
intention not to obey. if men may express their inwards thoughts and
intentions by words (for words Wear invented to express men's inward
inte^tions) I will show you their intentions, and then let the reader judge
whither you utter these words with a good intention or no, thus they say in
English. Page 2.
We have and do vow all obedience unto Gods church, and do acknovvlege
and embrace all authority lavvfully proceeding from the Sea Apostolic, Page
7.
and are most ready to shevve all obedience thereunto, etc. and elsewhere: we
protest and vow all obedience due to Gods church, and to all her lavvfull
authority, and therefore can be no schismatics. If they say: we do not
obey this authority (of the Protectors) let them shevve us that it is a
lavvfull act of the church, and we obey, how dare you in conscience reflect
so upon their intentions (having read these words) as to indge quite against
their intentions^. you should in your book have showed that the institution of
the Archp. by the Card. what the united should have done.
Protectors letters was a lawful act of the church, and then had you gained
the victory: the^ might you in some sort have compted them (if not
schismatics) yet seditious and rebellious for withstanding a lawful act of
the church. But this rock of theirs is so strong and immouable, that you dare
not thrust at it, but you scatter the sands of discourses, not apparteyning to
the matter and question in your readers eyes, to hinder him from seeing the
force and strength of their cause, and the barenes and weakness of your
pretended defense.

From reasoning, Fol. 114. b 115.
you turn to charging the consciences of your discontented brethren, at the
day of judgment, to tell you in sincerity and without passion, the Card.
morally wear not to be believed, or vvhither he would dare presume to do or
to attempt so public an act under letters patentes: and that expressly in the
Popes name without sure commission? and thither I refer you.

The fine faults you find in their informacion sent to the DD. of Sorbonne,
Fol. 116. Of the vfaults found in the information sent to the DD. of Sorbonne.
are suplied and put in the case proposed by me in the be gynning of this
pa^phlet. but to say something to the^ as they ly in your book. The first faut
you say is: because they added not, that he was protector of the nation. the
first is of no importance.
Which is in deed a fault in you to think, that that would have changed the
case, and made the DD. not to have pronounced as they did. As who should say:
he being the Protector had more power and authority over our nation, the^
being a bare Car. and not Protector. Every Card. in Rome has as much
authority and jurisdiction over us as has the Protector. For as I have often
told you, he has none at all. The second is no fault.
The second they said he did it according to the will and good liking of the
Pope. And you would have them have said it was Expresso mandato, by express
commandment. Is not his will and good liking contained in this express
commandment? or is not his express commandment his will and good liking? The
3. fault is of as small weight, because no such subordination could be made
without his Hol. The 3. of small weight.
breue (which is the thing in them for saying Many. why may not 13. The 4. is
foolish. Fol. 67. b
persons be called Many parsons? if they might say in latin mnlti, why not in
Engl. many? The 5. is without fault.
Fifthly they say: that they refused only to subscribe till he had obtained
letters from the Sea Apostolic. and this was true. how say you was it not?
did they not still petsist in their refusal till the breue came: what fault
find you with this information? when you your selves in many places of your
book affirm it to be true? and for their so resisting wear accounted
fchismaticks and so are still for the same resistau^ce. you add: as who would
say, that this being doo^ they mea^t to be quiet. theare being quiet or not
quiet afterward does not change the case proposed to the Sorbonnists. and as
though (you say) in the mean speace they had behaved them selves obediently.
To whom (I pray you) should they have behaved the^ selves obedie^tly? to the
Archp. whom they justly and lawfulli denied to be their superior, and rightly
rejected him as an intruded parson? as one that came in at thewin dowe? no man
was the are present of the superiors side to inform the good Doctors. Fol.
118. The united deal not syncerely. Why the priests did break from the
Archp. after the coming of the Breue?
You accuse them for breaking out again after the sight of the Popes breue,
but you tell not why, neither put you down the cause as they do, and Why?
because you defend an unjust and sca^dalous cause. They say it was, for that
the Arch. after their reconciliation to him, did renew the old tear of
schism, and hild them for schismatics for not admitting and receiving him
upon the Car. letters. Page 63.
thus they say in many places of their Engl. book, and in their latin book
writtsn to his Holl. they set down M. Blackvv. letter forbidding any priest to
ad-mitt them to confession, or give them absolution except they acknowledge them
selves for schismatickes: Page 59.60.
in their latin book to the inquisitio^ after they had mentioned the peace
that ensued upon the coming of his Hol. breue, and of the congratulation of the
Archp. and Jesuit, and specially of fa. Pars. they add: that one Rob. Jones a
Jesuit did raise up again fa. Fa. Jones.
listers opinion that thny wear schismat. which Jones taught and preached
that all that did not hold then for schismat, The Arehp. indiscretion.
did encurre the Censures of the church. Now the Arch. quoth they did not only
approve Jones his teaching but did also publish euerywhere the resolution
before specified viz: that they were schismatickes, and wear not to be
absolved except they recanted. thus they lay down to the wholl world the
cause of their writing and appealing from the Arc. you find fault which the^
for it, The united do not refute this cause, nor give any other.
but yet you neither refute that with they say, nor give any other probable
cause of this revolt and contention. To what end vvrott you this book? not to
refute your adversaries reasons not to reprehend them for laying down a false
cause of these contentions? no truly, The substance of their Apol.
for you do neither the one nor the other. but rarather to discourse of old
dissentio^sin Rome Paris and Flanders, in laying down loades of letters to no
end or purpose. and this is the very substance of this your brief Apol. that
which you add: they bring against the new breue, has been ansvveared before.
Fol. 118.


Lastly, you charge your brethren being not scarce 10. against 300, how they
durst make so dangerous a division? they may answer that this dangerous
division proceeded from those 3. or 4. at Rome, that gave the informatio^ and
counsel to have an Arch. without asking the consent of the priests in Ingl.
and their procuring him to be so disorderly and vnlavvfully constituted: and
not from those priests, that according to the decrees of the church, yea by the
express commandment of the holy Canons refused a prelat so disorderly and
vncanonically thrust and put upon the^ as it wear by violence, against the
express law and approved custom of Christ's church. The united may be
ashameth, to put the cause of this division upon the priests.
For my part I much marvel how you can in conscience an how you dare for
shame put the cause of this division upon them: when as they in all their
book give solid and lavvfull reasons of their doings, lay the occasions upon
the Jesuits and Arch. and yet you neither answer their reasons, nor defend
the others from the blame put upon them: neither do you object any reasonable
cause against the^ whereby a man may see or conjecture that they were the
authors and begynners of this diuifio^ and co^te^sion. And yet forsooth they
are the authors they made this division, I talk not of those dissentions that
fell out at Wisbith, but of those nevve controversies, the cause of all these
sca^dalous co^te^tio^s, and uncharitable vvriting one against an other. viz:
the subordination and the renewing of the quarrel of schism. whereof they
show and prove the Jesuits and Archpriest to have been the Authors. what
the united shoold have done in their Apology.
and you do not clear and deliver them from these accusations. this you
should have done, and this should have been the scope of your book, if you
meaned to have done any thing that Good is. the fault (so far as I cann
parceiue) lies yet upon their shoulders, for any thing that you cann say in
this your Apol. to the contrary. I know not how you will handle the matter
in your promised larger Apology.

If little releif comes to your brethren (as you say) by this definition of
Paris: Fol. 118. b.
Page 110.
what needed the Archpriest to make this severe edict against it, as it is put
down in your brethrens appeal: The edict of Paris makes for the Priests.
that neither directly nor indirectly they maintain or defend in word or in
vvriting the censure of the university of Paris, etc. belike it made for them,
Fol. 116. b. and 117.
as in deed it does still not with standing your 5. additions that you would
should have been added unto it. For these circunsta^ces and considerations
neither do aggrauat as you would make men believe, nor at all change the state
of the case or question proposed. and so th'Academicall sentence stands firm
still and makes substantially for M. Champeney without flourish or ostentation.

We have shevved (quoth you) in the former chapt. Fol. 119.
with how little reason our discontented brethren being so fevve and such as
they were (Serving men, Soldiers, and wanderers) opposed themselves at the
beginning to the first Institution of this Hierarchy, Fol 29. b.
etc. believe you who list. this is a flourish in deed with ostentation of an
united fitton. And united fitton.
where have you shevved it? note the place leaf, and line sure I am you have
reported, that they have laid down 21. Reasons against that Institution, but
that you have ansvvered any one of them, as yet I find not. you have here and
there picked certain speeches out of their books, but how poorly you have
answered them, I leave to the Readers Judgment, that will but cast his eyes
upon the same places, and yet we must believe you because you are a number,
that you have shevved with how little reason your brethren opposed them
selves to the institution of the Archpriest. The united play with men's noses.
You may well play which the noses of boys, women, and your own creatures,
but in different men pity your case and laugh at your so vain affirming that
which you never did. Shevve how little Reason (quoth you) mary he that has
read the former chapt. and will believe you, has in deed but little Reason.
These be gugawes and toys to mock at or to please foles, and not worthy such
grave men as you are or ought to be, and such constant Confessors. What! make
you no conscience (saving your reverence) to fitton and that in print? how
do you abuse and detract them behind their backs, that dare in print say: you
have shevved how little reason they had? having not ansvvered to any one of
their Reasons as yet. What the united should prove.
You add, ordained by his Hol. this you should prove. This is the Question.
vvhither at the beginning he was ordained by his Hol. or no? they say no. and
bring abooue 30. Reasons to prove their assertion. But you say often yea, and
for prooffes and reasons, you give us naught but bare words. who is then
bound to believe you?

As they asked you before, Fol. 108. Fol. 119. b. Question.
why in so many Months space the bull was not procured? so you ask them
here: why they sent not a lettre to Rome either to his Hol. him self or to
his Nephew, or to any other acquaintannce of theirs there? And as you answered
them (but how Iump judge you) because it is now ansvvered for that the breue
was procured, so say I: to know vvhither this matter came from his Hol. or
no: or vvhither the Protector had abused the Popes name or no? because it was
ansvvered by the Pope long since that none under pain of deprivation of the
frui D.c. Jniunctae.
tes of their benefice should receive any man to any office benefice or
dignity without he brought the Popes bulls. L. 1.. fin. in fin. ff. de act.
empt.
Now we hauea rule that says (Qui certus est amplius certiorarinon debet.
he that is alreadly acertyned of a thingh ought not to be certisied again.
They wear certified by Pope Boniface, not to admit any such: to what purpose
then should they send to his Hol. to be certified again? And if they had sent
and that his Hol. had certified them that it was his will, yet could they not
in conscience have received and obeyed him as their superior, because he was
not canonically instituted, being instituted without his Hol. bulls, and by him
that had no auctoritye to do it, albeit he had had a hundred express
commandementes from his Hol. quia sublata forma, tollitur res. it is of the
form and essence of a canonical institution to be instituted by his Hol.
bulls, if the Collation (as in this case) partaine to him. but this form was
not observed, ergo the institution was not canonical, and by consequence if
they had received a hundred letters from Rome, that all was done by his Hol.
Good will liking and consent they had never been the better for it, neither
yet discharged in conscience, for acknovvleging and admitting an intruded
person that entered in by the vvyndovve and not by the door, A fend objection
often repeated often ansvvered.
but unorderly. that is, without his Hol. Bulls.

How often comes in this fond objection affirming that the Pope could not do
it without them except he violated the church Canons. since it is an
infaillable truth, and yet this you lay still down as an absurd saying, so
blinded you are in affection. how say you? th'ordinary means that heave
always been in Gods church to appoiot Ecclesiastical superiors, was it not
by election? Run over the titles De Electione. and therefore the Pope
follovving the ordinary means and ways of the church Canons, could not give
them a superior without their consents. C. Bonae memoriae 2. in fin. Ext. de
elect.
For in matter of election this is the rule: Plus obest contemptus vnius quam
contradictio multorum. the contempt of one that has a voice in election does
more hurt, then the contradiction of many. Wherefore, if these fevve 10.
Priests had been contemned and all the 300. Priests had consented, the
election had been of no valor. how then cann it be said, that he was
ordinaryly instituted, and according to the Canons of the Church? when both
the 300. and these 10. also wear contempned, and their voices neclected? I
speak of the ordinary way, and so do they understand (else would they not
have made mention of the Canons) not of the Popes plenitude of power and
auctoritye, by which he may take away all Election, and alter and change all
the churches canons, and constitutions, and make new in their places. but by
the ordinary way of Canon law, as they say well, the Pope cannot appoint a
superior without the consent of the subjects, Folly and ignorance.
which are to live under that superior. I muse at your folly or ignorannce to
object to them this, and that so often as a great oversight fault and contempt:
the which (as I said) is truth it self, sound and canonical doctrine.

CHAP. IX.
TOuching the imprisonneme^t of the 2. Priests in Rome, of the which all the
9. chapt. almost does treat, I have put down my Judgment before. only this
I add: that all the principal men whom you notify to have written against
them, wear such men as all the world knows to be in this cause too too
much affected to the Fathers, Affection of blinds men.
and by affection utterly blinded in the state and question of the
Controversy, that is betvveene the Priests now, and the Archpriest and
Jesuits. I know them all both by face and affection, and therefore may be the
bolder to say it.

The first man you name is M.D. D. Stapleton proves not your intention.
Stapleton whom his Hol. purposed to prefer to higher dignity. if he were
now alive he would tell another tale against those that hindered him from that
higher dignity, and that told him a tale in his ear, when he was ready to
put his foot into his litter and made him stay at home, and loose that higher
dignity. He was bereeued of his higher dignity.
the story (of like) if you continue your Apologies will comme out one day.
Well! but what says D. Stapleton to the matter? does he exhort or defire his
Hol. to chastise by imprisonnement These two Priests? Nihil minus. A dead man
fore man of the quest. Fol. 173. b.
He never dreamed of it, and yet is he made the foreman af the quest to
condemn them, being dead himself by your own confession before the Priests
came to Rome. What kind of writing is this to say that a dead man gave his
verdite after he was buried? And why? because (when he was senceles) he
agreed in sense and Judgment with other principal men that vvret (after his
death) to Rome.

Next to the fore man of the quest that gave his verdite after his death there
march seventeene hands of the principal of ovvr Nation in Flanders, When wrote
they? some months before they (the Priests) came out of England. But to whom
vvrote they? I pray you? forsouth to the general of the Jesuits, the head of
those, against whom the Priests were in contention. But what do they
desire? Imprisonement? Nothing less. only to do Justice, The 17.
principal men of ovvr Nation did not require their imprisonement.
and so to make peace. A Just and reasonable request. I see not to what end you
put down a piece of their lettre here. Who would not request Iustite to be
done? Why? did not the Priests them selves go to Rome to ask Justice? that
is: If they were found faultye: to be punished: If innocent? to have their
Just requests granted. Do these 17. principal men request the general to
get them Imprisoned before they were heard? No. Neither if they had requested
it (I deem) should they have been heard. Howsoever he was afterward brought
by one man's persuasion to consent thereto. for I think Fa. Parsons durst not
have gone with the Popes Officer to appre hended them, and to imprisone them in
the College without the General his knowledge and Consent. And so by this
means the General has his part also in this unjust and vnaequitable action
of their imprisonement, before they were heard, For besides his consentinge to
their apprehension by permitting one of his order to be present and chief
actor in it, this memorial of these 17. sent to him, was also by him to be
presented to the Pope as you insinuate.

After this, Fol. 12. b.
follow the letters of the Zealous men, the former were principal men,
these are but zealous, although it be the president and the Doctors of the
seminarye. In my time, such men were counted amongst the principal of owr
Nation but it was then, when they were their own masters, not subject and
pinned to others, and directed by others, as they are now, The president and
his three Doctors desire not their imprisonement.
the more is the pitye, and it is the great hinderance of doing good in owr
Country. But to whom vvrote these zealous men? forsooth to the protector. and
not to his holiness? And what do they request? to have them imprisoned before
they were heard? (for therein consists the iniurye and the Indignitye of the
fact.) not a word thereof. only they think it good, Fol. 125.
that some example of severe correction should he used upon them, to hold
others in duty. Now if these three Doctors which are yet livinge and
subscribed to that lettere were examined on their Consciences, whether they
meant these Priests should be imprisoned before they were heard, or that they
meant to have the^ punished, being found factious, and coming with no matter
of importance, but only to trouble his holiness: I am assured they would
answer, they meant not the first, for two of them being Doctors of law
should otherwise speak against their own knowledge skyll and practyse. And
some of the^ I believe have bitten their singers since, for subscribinge
against their will, to please and Content others. Well then these four zealous
Doctors though not before, yet now counted amongst the principal men of ovvr
Clergy prove but little your Intention. Fol. ibidem b.


In the fourth place is set down a letter, (M. D. VVorthington now president
desired not their imprisonement.
President) wherein he judges them to be repressed with some severitye? ergo
say these men, he vvrote to have them imprisoned, before they were heard
what they had to say, or to impart and utter what they came for, coming as
appellannts to the sea Apostolic, this they say, or else they say nothing.
and for proof thereof they have printed the letter. I am assured that that was
not his meaning, what soever else he meant by severitye. But by these my notes
he may see, hovvmuch he and others were deceived that thought them Culpable
and seditious, because they vvithstoode the Archpriest, so vnlavvfullye and
disorderlye set up, by the Protectors letters. as also his predecessor with his
3. Doctors that Confessed this subordination to be most vviselye and
vvholsomelye instituted. I speak not against the subordination, neither do I
mislyke of it, but of the manner of instituting of it at the first, which was
against all law and reason, as those zealous Doctors might have seen, if
they had but turned over their Common law.

After your letter, The names of 3. Doctors abused or borrowed.
there are 3. Doctors brought in, and albeit they say nothing, yet we must
believe, that they wrote most earneslye and gravely to the same effect.
although (as I have said) they said never a word to the sane effect. What! to
be imprisoned before they were heard what they had to said, to iustifye their
coming to Rome? Lansweare, if I wear with some of the^, they would say,
that you abuse their names and credit, to make men believe they were so
unjust, eruell, and uncharitable men, as to vvyshe the imprisonement of
innocent men. For until they be Iudiciallye convinced of some crime or fault,
they are presumed innocent, as before I have proved.

In the end you set down M. No word at all in M. Licentiat VVrights letter
of the two Priests.
Licentiat VVrigts (my old and dear friends) letter. Who albeit he speaks as
a zealous friend of the Fathers, as he ever has been since I have known him,
yet not a word in the lettere of the two Priests at all, nor of punishing
them, much less of requesting them tobe imprisoned before the were heard.
Fol. 127.
By all these letters I see no just cause, why the Protector should incite the
Pope, or his holiness be moved iustlye to resolve to restrain the^ (as you
say) or to imprison them (as they say) at their arrival or some 20. days
after, being as yet neither heard nor examined what they brought or had to
say. These letters do not discharge Fa. Par.
Surely whether Fa. Parsons procured these letters or no, these letters do
not discharge him from their accusation, that he was the chief procurer of
their imprisonement (I do not say he was) but I say these letters which
speak never avvord of their imprisonment is not a sufficient argument (as the
think) to discharge Fa. Par. of the suspicion they have of him.

At lenghe after your long travail in setting down letters that make nothing
to your purpose, Fol. 136.
in wrangling with your adversaries, and not ansvvearing their reasons: in
talking of factions in Paris and Flannders and of the last troubles in the
Roman College, after all these great travailes (I say) you begin to make
your self merrye, and to enriche your Apology with M. Watsons common
wealth. and haning first disgraced him for not being a scholar of the
College for a god while, ^f. Watson disgraced for being a poor scholar.
but a servant to make M. Boasts bed and dress up his chamber. If this be a
disgrace unto him to have been a poor scholar in the Seminary, then is it
not only a disgrace to some of the subfcribers of the former letters, which
yet you say to have been the principallest men of our Nation, Many of you
united Priests, some Jesuits, and some of them whom you call the princip
allest men, were poor scholars in the seminary.
but to a great number of your selves (my united brethren) and to some of the
Fathers also in England, that have been also poor scholars and servants
before they were scholars of the College. If you urge me in your next I will
name the^ noman knowing the^ better then I, as having lived many a year in
the seminary, yea even from the first setting up of it. A poor scholar is a
principal man when you list if he hold with the Jesuits: but if he be against
them, then it shall be laid in his dishe I vvarrant you. What man having any
Judgment cann think, Want of honesty and conscience.
that united Priests wrote this Apology? How can they with honeslye and
conscience object to another as a disgrace and in contempt the state wherein
diverse of them also lived. If it were abject, and M. Watson to be counted
abject therefore, yet the same Judgment is to be given of a great number of you
your selves, that lived also in that estate, except by holding with the Fathers
you are restituti in integru^, vvashed clean from that spot, the others still
remaining all to be smyred therewith. A question to be ansvveared.
But why (I pray you) might not M. Watson a secular Priest, make a common
wealth for Ecclesiastical government, so well as a Religious man (as it is
reported) make a common wealth how England shall be governed both in
Ecclesiastical and temperal matters. what privilege has this man mote then
the other? the which (if it were put in print) perhapps would make the
reader as merrye as this does. But you have set it down at large in recompense
of the setting down af Fa. Listers book, A comparison betvveene Fa. L. Book
and M. VVatsons common wealth if that be his which the auctor of the Apologye
Fathereth upon him.
ad longu^ sine require. I would to god his book had done no more hurt then M.
Watsons common wealth. For this makes men merrye, that makes men groan, this
stirs up laughter, that breeds melancholy this rejoices the readers heart
after the reading of so many tedious and vndeacent letters and matters that
makes many a man bleed at the veriehart through grief and sorrow. this
derogateth but a little the credit of a ordinarye Priest but that does blemish
not only the name and fame of the writer, hertofore held for a very pious,
modest and a great learned man: but somvvhat also of the society it self. I
know many a Father in these coasts, that byte the lipp, so soon as they
hear any mention made thereof. And you yourselues that will not talk of it,
but are soerye that ever it was mentioned, for the grief you have conceived
of it, cann yet make your selves merry with M. Watsons common wealth. Cettes
your vocation and grauitye might have advertised you to have spent your time
better then in these follyes, and to have studied to answer your adversaries
Reasons and arguments and to have filled up your book with sound Reasons,
rather then with these flymflams. But why do I speak to you, when I know you
are not the Authors, he has discovered himself (as wise as he thinks
himself to be) as in place you may understand Bonus quandoque dormitat
Homerus, even so in this book he has ouershot himself, and discharged you of
all blame, but only of lending your names vvillinglye to the disgrace,
contempt and abasement of your order ad vocation, as I have often warned you.
If this vain of writing goforvvard as it has begun, Many merrye tales are
kept in store.
credit me there are tales and stories in store, that will make some men blush
(if they have any blood in their body) when they shall be set out in print.
May I not for these your follyes better cry out then you do. Good lord, to
what vanitye are these owr united brethren grown by contention that they
cann lose their time in filling their book up with these toys! Fol. 138.
wheere is the spirit of charity? where is the virtue of modesty become? is
this fit for designed Martyrs, or for good Confessors? to disgrace and deface a
man of their own coat and vocation, to make him a mocking stock to the
readers without just occation: his words and vvritings nothing at all
appertayning to the matter inquestion? But drawn as it were with a cart
rope to make your selves merry? one day you will answer for this Idle
time so scandalou slye spent. Do you designed Martyrs give your sheep such
edification? Do you good confessors instruct your flock with such stuff and
exhortations? has contention and malice so blinded you, that you forget the
honorable state and vocatiou you are in? Yes truly, else would you never
commit the absurdityes you do, and espetiallye about the co^tempte of men of
your own coat and vocation, Amend, amend it is high time. Fol. 139.
Who I pray you sent the common wealth unto Rome to be Communicated to the
Cardinals that laughed so heartily at it? who translated it into Italien or
Latin, or who did explicat it to the Cardinals to make them so mertye? (for I
suppose it was written in English for any thing I can perceive in this
Apology to the Contrary.) who but the Author and writer of this Apology,
to vvho^ it was sent from England to Rome. Me thinks I see how he laughed
when first he did read it. And then how he hasted to Communicate the same to
the said Cardinals to make them merrye, and then what discourses there were
of the insufficientie, vnlearnednes, and ambition of these Priests that stood
against the Archp. because this common wealth maker was one of them. vanitas
vanitatum that Religious men who should spend their time in study and
contemplation, do take their greatest pleasure, delight, and contentement in
vvriting and receiving packets of nevves from all coasts and cuntreyes, making
that their whole study and travail. Would to god they would content
themselves with such packets as are directed to the^, and not forestalle, and
take up, other men's that appertain not unto them.

We are come at last to the Question that stands in this which part has
broken the peace, Which side broke the peace after the coming of the bull.
that was made by the coming and sigth of his Holiness bull. You say they did
by a new devise they shortly after cast out, that satisfaction must be made
to them for some former hard speeches used and vvrytten against them in the
time of contention, etc. this you say but do not tell who began, which
way, in what place and at what time and this you prove only by cui bono.
They say the breach began on the Archp. his side when they had forgiven and
forgotten all the foresaid hard speeches and injuries done unto them (so far
were they from requiring satisfaction for the^) and this they prove in both
their Latin book, Page 65. in the one and 60. in the other.
by putting down the Arch. letters, vherein he says he had received from the
mother city a resolution that the detractors of the protectors authority were
schismatickes, and that he would not absolve any that made not a conscience of
it. Beside they put down a form of recantacion or satisfaction which is to be
made by such as held against his institution before they could be absolved.
Page 120.
This breach credibly begone the Archpr, side.
These are better and more substantialle proofs then, cui bono, that this
pitious breach began on the Archpriests side, and not on your discontented
brethrens side. the which I believe to be true, because you answer not one
word thereto in this Apology, neither go you about to clear the Archp. of it.
For this being the chief cause they pretend of this contention, and affirminge
so often as they do that the Archp. renewed the old quarrel of schism, in all
wise men's judgment you should have spent your labor in proouing the contrary
and in discharging the Archp. from this foul fault. the time, (I say) ink,
and paper spent in setting down M. Watsons common wealth, had been much better
employed in controling your adversaries of an untruth, by laying the breach of
the peace unjustly upon the Archp. and his cou^sellours but fortis est
veritas, the truth carries such a majesty with it, that the very adversaries
them selves dare not approach it, much less impugn it. And to prove they
broke the peace made after the coming of the breue you allege an Appeal made
by 3. of those priests from the Archpriest before the coming of the said
breue. Wiselye, but yet according to your custom throughout your book, The
united put still quid pro quo
where you put still quid pro quo, and the cart before the horse. The question
is, Who brake the peace after the coming of the breue? And you prove they
brake it, because some of them appealed before the breue came down. Fol. 154.


Where you object the one was made a doctor of Divinity, and the other a
Bacheler in Paris, against an express Breue that forbad the same in all
Englishmen. I marvel that this Author the procurer of that Breue is so
forgetful, as to say, it is forbidden to all Englismen to take the degree of
a Bacheler, where as Doctorship is only forbidden. You may correct the fault
in your next, Fol. ibi. in mar. Page 91.
as that also, in calling the Appeal made by M. Charnocke very ridiculous,
for he proved in his letter to the Cardinal Burghesius which is put down in
their book to the inquisition and that authority of the learned Canonists,
that it was a lavvfull and not a ridiculous appeal. you should have
ansvveared his auctorityes, and them have termed it ridiculous. But leaving his
authors untouched you shevve your selves to be very ridiculous people, that
would have men believe you upon your bare words, and not believe those that
bring good stuff and authorities for them.

Touching the special point (you say) to be noted that they have not procured
any one of their Appeals to be presented or prosecuted in Rome. the note is
easily to be ansvveared, Fol. 159. b Why the priest did not prosecute their
apeales.
because the place is not tutus sure for them, having experimented it first in
there messengers, Fol. 137.
and next having Fat. Parsons in the town, whom you confess they take to be
their cheifest adversary, and who for his creditt (you say) in the Roman
court does great lie let and hinder their designemens. and this their saying
was not many months since confirmed by one of his own coat passing by
this way, who said: fa. Parsons could do what he would with the Pope.
Judge if such a place be sure for your brethren to persecute their appeal. And
where you add, that they ought to have prosecuted it with in certain
months, under pain that all is void if it be not done: you talk like
diuynes and not like lavviers, as I have shevved else where before.

And where you say that the Archpri himself presented their appellation to
his Hollines. Fol. 160.
If he have presente^d that appeal which they have put in the end of their
Latin books Certes, either the appellants are egregious. liars and shamels
men, or else the Atchp. had a brazen face: they shameless to exhibit to his
Holiness, and to all the world such faulsityes and untruths against their
lavvfull superior: but if they be truths and not forged, then had the Archp. a
brazen face to exhibit or cause to be presented to his Holiness such true, but
yet vnvvorthye stuff against him self.

If they had kept themselves with in the compass of their matter, Fol.
ibidem. The cause why the priests printed their books.
the book written after the appeal, had neither been libelles (as you
term them) neither yet vnduelye printed. Why should they not inform his
Holiness, and give notice to all all the world how unjustly and
vnchristianlye they were dealt with all before the coming of the breue, to be
called, counted, and by written books proved Schismatics, for not admitting
an exorbitant dignity upon a Card. bare letters. And again after the coming
of the bull. and their acceptatio^ of that dignity, the same crvme to be
renewed, and so horrible a crime to be imputed to them again. If you iustlye
accuse them for imputing far lister faults to Fa. Pars. and others, and take
them up egerlye for the same? how can you find fault with them for defending
and clearing them selves from so horrible a sin, next cosyn to Heresy? and
worse then soothsaying and Idolatry it self they wrote then both for the
defense of their good name and fame, which is just and natural, and to
aduertyse his Holiness of their usage, requesting him either to quit, or
condemn them by his sentence. To this end they published their book, as they
affirm, and you selves cannot well deny. the which sentence of his Hol. which
(you say) you expect, is come out already (as I have heard) and if I be not
deceived I have read it also. In the which he condemns expressly fat.
Listers book of schism, and theirs also commanding silence and forbidding
any more writing. the which yet you (that so often object contempt of his
Holiness and his doings to others) do neither observe nor obey. Fol. 162. Of
the 6. abuses you find in the title of their latin beoke.


The first of the 5. or 6. abuses which you fin de with the title of the latin
book is. Becauthey make the strife to be between them and the Jesuits and
the Archp. favoring them. this to be false and that their strife is cheiflye
with M. Blackwell, whom they make in their title but an Appendix, you prove,
because the Appellation is made against M. The cheise strife is with the
Jesuits.
Blackewell But they show, and your selves elsewhere confess that their
chiefest strife is with far. Pars. for giving false informatio^s for this
subordination, and With Fath. Lister for writing his book of schism, and fa.
Garnet for the approving thereof. Yet was their first falling out with fat.
Weston and the others before named, many a day, yea some years before they
appealed and therefore it is plain truth and not falsehod, that they put the
Jesuits in the first place and M. Blackw. in these cond. For much strife and
contention had they with the Jesuits long before M. Blackw. was made
Archepriest.

Your second fault also is faultles in them. The second fault is faults.
for had they said: and all the Seminary priests, the^ had they lied in deed.
but saying only and the Seminary priests, they said true, for they are
Seminary priests, but you say this was but a poor fault and therefore
passed it over lightlye.

Thirdlye they say from the death of Card. Allen. you add that this stir
against the fathers was begone in England in his days. If in his days? then
might it be continued from his death. you look very narrovvlye to sinde
hoales, where none are, they do not say the troubles began but from his
death, but that have risen from his death. that is, have been increased. And
here by your own words is proved that which I said before: your own
words against you. Fol. 162.
that these priests were in trouble and conce^tion with the Jesuits some
years before the Instituting of the Archpr. for your say: That the
contentions against the Jesuits were begone in England even in Card. Allens
days. by consequence then, they committed noe abuse to put the Jesuits before
M. Blackvvell and much less is it then a plain falsehood. The fourth is no
abuse.


Fourthly, they say: Ad S. D. N. Clemente^ octauum exhibita ab ipsis
sacerdotibus, that this declaration was exhibited by the Priests them selves
to our most holy father Pope Clement the 8. I see not to what purpose you put
this down, you do not acknovvledge it your selves to be an abuse. What matter
is it I pray you (so it be exhibited to his Holiness) whether it be exhibited
by them selves or sum other therir friend or foe? as it was exhibited by the
Archp. as you say before. For the appeal and the book being printed and
bound together, I cannot see how the one could be presented without the
other. except the Arch. did cut of the book, and send the appeal only. What
matter (I say) makes it, so it come at le^gh to the Popes knowledge (which is
the scope of their vvriting) as it did come indeed, the which may appear by
the breue he sent down, to condemn both theirs, and Fa. Listers book also.

Neither is this word exhibit, to be taken so strittly, as you seem to take
it, that is: to deliver up into the Popes hands, but in his usual and common
signification: which is to set abroad for every man to behold, or to offer
and she we a thing to another. But why did you not put down all their words
at lenght without nipping of the latter words were you afraid of sum
buggs? Nippers.
or did your consciences accuse you for the former injury of schism laid
against them? of the which you talk not willingly: and are sorry to hear of
it. Why did you not speak out and say as they do: ab ipsis sacerdotibus qui
schismatis aliorumque criminum sunt insimulati. exhibited by those priests that
were unduly accused and appeached of schism and others crimes. The united
do iustlye abhor the word schism.
I cannot blame you if you abhor the word schism. because the unjust,
uncharitable, and unlearned accusation of your brethren of this schism was
ihe spring and fountain of this trouble, your consciences do testify as
much, and therefore you nipped of these words which declare the cause of
their vvriting and exhibiting their latin book to his Holiness. And besides in
this whole book you never enter into speech of this matter, albeit the same
be the ground of all this contention but with other to yes and flymflamms, you
turn your readers eyes and intention from marking this point.

As for the 5. Fol. 162. b
abuse which you gather by the application of the verse of the Psalm to their
book: I pass over being no divine and therefore cannot judge whether they or
you explicate it most aptlye.

You 6. reprehension is very foolish: the which as for saying: The 6. is a
foolysch reprehe^sion 163.
their book was printed at Roan in the house of James Molens, and you
confess you know not whether there be aine such sign or man dwelling in
Roan or no. If you cannot precisely say their is no such man, why do you
find fault with the^ for saying there is such a man. You should have doo^ well
if you had followed the same counsel which you gave them a little before, to
send a letter to Rome to his Hol. his nephewe or some other friend to know
whether the Car. instituted the Archp. by his Hol. consent or no. So might you
with less cost and charges, have sent from Flaundres (where this book was
printed) to Roan, to know whether their be such a printer so named or no, If
not? then you might have precisely said, there is none such, and as precisely
tax them: but if you had found such a printer there. Then might you have saved
this labor. but you are like to such as can give good connsell to others, but
will follow, none them selves.

Well then, seeing that all yours. Fol. 163. and 164
absurdities, be neither absurdities, shifts, nor falsehoods, but that you have
committed a manifest falsehood in nipping of these words. Their 6. faults if
they were such not comparable to your own fault.
ab ipsis sacerdotibus qui schismatis aliorumque criminum sunt insimulati, to
which one shift etc. falsehood, all their 6. are not comparable, albeit they
were shifts and falsehoods now your readers may imagine what stuff the
Remnant will be. And if we may presume (as the law says a praeteritis de
futuris) by that which you have already said, of that which you are like
hereafter to say: then sure I am, that you will not say much to the matter,
nor come near the question. nor yet answer there reasons, for as yet you
have done neither of the three.

To their 2. Page 5.
reasons that caused them to print their books. Fol. 164. The first reason for
printing their book is good.
The first: They could not have copies enough in written hand: You answer
is: That many copies was not needful, if they were only for his Holiness
information as they pretend. Indeed if they were only for his Holiness
information so many copies needed not: but where do they pretend that they
wrote for his Holiness only information? their intention was not only to
inform his Holiness, but also to defend their innoce^cie, fame, and good name,
that was blotted and blemished, both at home, and in foreign co^treyes by Fa.
Listers book, the copies where of flewe over into strange countries, sent
and dispersed every where by the Fathers. And this is the third reason, which
they give in that place in the margent, which you willinglye omit.

The second reason. Pog. 5. The seca^d rea^e. Fol. 164,
To get their good names again in foreign nations taken away by the Jesuits
whereto you answer, that in your opinion it will fall out quite contrary: to
wit where before they were not infamous nor yet known: now they shall be
both by their infamatorie writing. Take heed this prophecy fall not upon
your selves.
This is perchance but your own opinion. Howsoever it will fall out with
them, my opinion is, yea I am full sure of it, that sum others that have
been medlers herein, especially the writer and the consirmer of the book of
schism against them, have lost much of their credit already by the
devulgating of these books, and that their best friends hold down their heads
for shame when it comes in talk. And as little credit I believe, you will get
(by these your Apologies) both at home and abroad, as you deem may hap to
them for their books.

From the 164. you repre^end them justly.
lease of your book to the 168. you rune over their latin book and do duly
reprehend them for their writting against certain reverend and virtuous
parso^s. VVilling omission.
But yet I mark, you willingly omit and neglecte their quarrel against some
Jesuits and specially Father Lister, for writting against them and Father
Garnet for approuinge the same. This is, as I have often repeted the grownde of
these troubles and contentions. Hinc fundi nostricalamitas. Here you should
either have defended Father Lister or have condemned him (as in your conscience
you do) but you are of that vein, that if you should condemn or dislike of
any thing in one Jesuit, you think it would denigrat the praises you
attribute to thothers. Speak truth.
But for all this, you being priests and confefessors should speak the truth
and shame the devil and lay the fault, where it is. You know who said:
Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. But with you, the
Fathers and their praise are more respected, then the truth it self.

They go about (say you) to shevve that the Archpriest hard proceeding with
them, Vneue^ dealing.
was cause of their nevve contentions and sturres. This you prove by 2.
Marginall notes of theirs. But why did you not put down the text also? Why
did you not set down the Arcpriest his epistle renewing the wound of
schism and cou^ting them schismatics? Why? because you love not to talk of
the matter. albeit the same be the chiefist point in the controversy.
Markstill the question in contrsuersie.
That is: Whither they be Schismatickes for vvistanding the Card. letter? But
because you will not talk of it, and that you are loath to hear of it, and
especially for that I would inculcate into the memory of the reader the true
cause of these contentions, and call to his mind, What you should have
handled, I do so much the oftener and vvillinger repete it. But is not this a
pretty trik? You allege the page where the epist. is, you know that the
Arch. over shot him self in it, and yet you come in with, But suppose he
ouershott himself, and then, Foolish supposalls.
was this a sufficient cause for priests, etc. Yea forsooth, and for monks
toe, to defend their good name and same, and especially to acquitt them selves
of so heinous a crime as schi sme is in that country, The pestes were bound to
defend their good name.
in time of persecution for the satisfaction of their spiritual children, and
contentment of all that knevve them. for had they held their peace, they should
have been judged and holden for such in deed, and that worthily our Savior
him selfs gave them example to defend their fame. By the example of our Savior.
For when the Jews had said to him. Samaritanus es tu and Daemonium habes. He
ansvvered: ego Demonium non habeo. And so defended his good name. What man of
reason or religion will not allow of this? Who will say (With you) that these
me^ are out of the right or true path of priestly proceeding, who do but that
which god and nature permit the^ to do: that is to defend their good name
against slanderous and exorbitant calumnies. Fol. 167. b
Let every indifferent reader consider well what you do in this place, and
they shall find, a man of clovvtes
that you make your selves a man of clovvtes to fight against, and then you
rune furiously at him with hedd hand and feet, but for all that, you hurt him
not. What the united people should have done.
No more do you any thing at all here touching the matter your take in hand,
which is to confute your adversaries book. For if you would have confuted
it, you should have shevved and proved that, that the epistle of the Archp.
was not his, or that that epistle did not give the first cause of this breach,
after the coming of the Popes breue. But what (I pray you) do you herein?
Nothing, but Suppose it was his Epistle, and then you rage at their two
notes in the margent. They say: the beginning of nevve contentions was a
violent Epistle of the Archpristes and that the Archpriest renewed the
vvarres. And this they proved by producing of this Epistle. But you What? Mary
But suppose he ouershott himself. Well, Suppose he fovvly ouershott him self in
calling them Schismatics, yet say you Priests that profess modesty,
obedience, and mortificacion etc. Can. Non sunt. 11. q. 3. S. August. bjddeth
them to defend their fame.
should suffer it. Are they more modest obedient and mortified then Saint
Augustine? Saying: Proinde quisquis a criminibus flagitiorum atque facinorum
vitam suam custodit, sibi been facit: quisquis autem famam: and in alios
misericors est. Nobis enim necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra.
Therefore who soever keapeth him self from synning and offending grievously, he
does good to him self, but who soever does keap his good name is merciful to
others. Can. Nolo 12. q. 1.
For our life is necessary to us, our same to others. And the same Doctor
again. Conscientia necessaria est tibi, fama proximo tuo. Qui fidens
conscientiae sua negligit famam, crudelis est, Thy conscience (that thou live
well) is necessary to thee thy self: but they fame (that thou live well) is
necessary in respect of thy neighbor. He therefore that trusts to his
conscience and neglects his fame, is cruel. Are they more modest and
mortified then our Savior? Who (as I have said) ansvvered his calumniators,
Solomon wills them to do the same. Eccl. 41. S. Paul defended his fame. 2.
Cor. 12.
that he had not the devil? And Solomon commands us, Curam habere de bono
nomine. To have care of our good name. And S. Paul defends his good name.
Good and just cause then had these Priests by reasons and examples alleged,
to defend them selves, from so heinous a crime, put upon them by the Arehpriest
in his letter or Epistle. Which you will not see, but only suppose at it. To
conclud this point notvvithstanding your bigg and lofty words of Scandalous
tumults, Fol. 168.
exorbitant passions, and furious rages (very unfit terms for such Priests,
as you are that profess modesty and mortification, and that are in Ingland,
not only to suffer, but also to dye for Christian Religion) with which you
would make babies afraid. The Priests had just cause to appeal.
They had very just cause to appeal from so unjust a judge charging them both
falslye and uncharitably, with so heinous a crime as schism is. And that men
iustlye defending their honor and fame, do nothing at all dyminishe, eitherof
their modesty, mortificatio^ or obedience, neither have they stepped for that,
out of the path of Christian Religion, or priestly proceading, as you would
make not your wise but passionate and affected reader here believe. Fol. 169.
And thus much you have said of the Latin book. A short horse is soon
curried. A whole book briefly ansvvered
If you can answer whole books so briefly, you nead no more large Apol. you
are men of dispatch, I see well, but no marwell: many hands make light work, you
are many united priests together, and therefore you have the soener done. And
yet as brief as you are, you have spoken more then, at the beginning you
thought to say in this place, Truly if at the beginning you thought not to say
so much, you thought to say very little o^ nothing. Thouchinge the pridcipall
you have as yet said nothing.
For touching the principal points of the book, and the matters the reof in
controversy, you have yet said nothing at all in this chapt. I know not what
you will do here after. Now to the English book for as for the third book
written to the Inquisition, You touch not nor mention their book to the
Inquisitors.
you touch it not, because they keapt close to the matter, and did not fling
out at the Jesuits and specially at Fa. Persons as in the other they do, and
so doing gave you no occation of vvritting. Fol. 172.
If the thad been as modest in their book to his Holl. we had lost the notable
piece of work of this Apology. Dixit Piger, leo est in via. Proverb. 26.
The sloth full excuse them selves saying, there is a lion in thewaie. What
soever they mean by it, or how soever you interpret it of over throvving all
that stand in their way, Superiority, Reason, Religion, and S. Peter's koies,
etc. This peec of scripture interpreted against the united.
I may well apply it to this Apology of yours. For you are so slothful or
so fearful of the lion that lies in the way, that is, to come near the
points in question or to handle any one of them, as you ought to have done,
that for fear of that lion or of the justice of their cause you dare not put
out your head so much as once to look them in the face. You went veryneare in
deed, Fol. 167. b.
yea so near as the margent, but you durst not look over into the text, for
there lay the lion. that is, the Archpriests epistle, which was the original
and foundamentall cause of these last controversies, and writting of these
books. If you had not been sloth full covvards you should have caught that
lion by the ears, and plucked him out of his denme. Such as writ with
conscience should have done this.
and if you had found him to have had venyme and no honey in his mouth, you
should have torn him in sonder as Sampson did: that is, have freely confessed
the truth, and blamed your Archp. for such an uncharitable act. otherwise if
you had found him a wolf in a lious skine, you should have plucked the skin
over his ears: that is if you had found that it was not M. Blackvvels letter,
then you should have discovered their falsehood and imposture by fathering that
upon him that was none of his. But it was in deed a lion and neither wolf, fox
or bear, and therefore you let him alone, and durst not come near him. So
that this sentence man well be applied to the fashion of your writting. how
you dare not come near the lion, Fol. 172. An uncharitable wrong.
that is, examine the true question of this controversy.

Why do you vvrong your brethren by saying, That they taking upon them in the
place (of their English book) to the Reader to set down the true state of
the question, putt it down wholy to the contrary. Let us see, The first
controversy.
if you be true men of your word, There are handled in their books 2.
controversies (the which being lions, you shonne and fear so much that you
dare not come near unto them) The first is: that the Archpriest was not
orderly instituted, by the Card. letters and them selves unjustly called
schismatics for not receiving him upon those letters. The second controversy.
The second. That after the Bull came and all had submitted them selves
thereto, the Archpriest set abroch the old matter of schism, and as
schismatics forbad (by his letters) them to be absolved of any Priest except
they acknowleged their Schism and disobedience. The first they set down in
the said preface thus. The striefe and dissension at this day too great and
scandalous in Ingland is maynteined by the Archpriest the Jesuits and their
adherents against those Priests who did forbear to subject them selves unto
the Archpriest constituted in authority over all the Seminary Priests in
England and Scotland by a Cardinal who was Protector of the English colleag at
Rome and afterward honored with the title of Protector of Ingland, for the
which forbearing to subject the^ selves at the first making known of this
auctoritye, the Priests were accused of schism, sedition, faction, rebellion,
etc. Do you putt down the question in controversy so simply and plainly in
your first chapt. as you make your Readers believe by your title you would do?
Nothing less. Let any man read over that chapt. and he shall find no case or
state of the question proposed. You fly it, as it were from a lion. From fol.
2. to b.
There you shall find a ragmans roole of all the contentions and factions that
has been in France, Fol. 6. b. and 7. Fol. 7. b.
Italy and Flanders for many years. Fa. Parsons return from Spaigne to Rome,
mention of a new association, of Fishers confession, of Fa. Parsons
information, and of the conclusion taken to make an Archpriest rather the^ a
Bishopp, and that he should rather be instituted by the Card. letters then by
the Popes bulls: Fol. 8. b. Fol. 9. Fol. 10.
of a great nombre of letters, of D. Bishopp, and M. Charnoks examination, of
the new Breue, of Fa. Parsons letters to M. Collington and to M. Mushe, of
appeals without prosecution, of M. Charn. letter to Card, Burghesius, of the
Archpriest being made Prothonotarius Apostolicus, and so the end.

Wheare is the state of the present controversy in question, You promise much,
but parforme nothing.
that you theare promised. Let the world judge, who are rather to be
beleaved, they that go plainly and simply to work, and that set down the
question truly and nakedly without pomp or flourish of words? or you that
promise mountains, and do not give us so much as mowlehills? that make men
believe by the title of your chapter, you will go plainly to work, but in the
end serve them with title tatle and nothing else. What appertain all these
things recovvnted up before, to the controversy in question? and yet you say
nothing else. If I have least out any substantial point of your first chapter
chardg me hardly in your next, if it be rightfully, I will ask forgiuennes, if
unjustly, I will have my right. The first cause the^ of all these troubles, is,
for that the Jesuits wrott, taught and auovved that the Priests that refused to
obey the Archp. and to take him for their Superior, being only instituted by a
Card. letters without the Popes Bulls, wear Schismatics seditious,
factious and rebellious, etc. but of this you will not hear. Leo est in via.
You dare not come near it.

This you confess also your selves in saying. you will not talk of it: You
will not meadle with the point in controversy.
that is as much to say, you will not meadle with the point in controversy,
but vvil rune at Random, and discourse and talk of what matter you list,
though it come not noe nearer the question then Barwick comes to London.

The second controversy they put down in the same preface in these words:
Page 3.
A peace was made to the great confort of all Catholics, when his Holl. breue
was presented to them. But this peace was soon after broken by the means of
the Jesuits, who revived the same calumniation against the Priests and by the
Archpriest who did not only aver the assertions of the Jesuits, but
published also that he had receved a resollution from the mother City (to use
his terms) which avowed that the refusers of the auctoritye were schismatics.

The cause then of this division is not for any resistaunce of the Priests
against the Archpriest but for that the Priests will not acknowledge that in
the time of their forbearance to subscribe to the auctoritye they were
factious, seditious rebellious schismatics, enormously disobedient, in
continual mortal sin, practicing their functions in irrigularitye, etc. Lo
how plainly simply and truly (for any thing you say to the contrary) they putt
down the case. You say it is set down wholy to the contrary, you prove
it not. United you are never ^otouch the question.
We must beleaue you, because you are united steadfastly in this, never to touch
the question, but to evacuate the saying and disgrace the persons of your
brethren all you may. You say in putting these cases, they debase the
Archpriest and the Protector: but you tell us not wherein. You are men of
vvonder full authority that you must be beleaved upon your word. Mark.
I have proved to you before, that a Card. is not to be beleaued upon his bare
word in an other man's prejudice: and why shall we beleaue you in sclaunderi^g
your brethren without cause? Show me in your next by vvh'atwords in these 2.
cases by the^ proposed, they have debazed the persons by you named. for until
then, you have lost your credit with me. They have set it down (you say)
wholly to the contrary. Why are you in such have, that you cannot stay to tell
us wherein? What Ass will give credit to your books, vvritting so
negligently and so fondly, that you are not able to shevve one reason of your
negative doctrine. You add that in the end they lay a foundation to all
disobede^ice. But you tell us not in which end, either of the preface or of the
book: for in the 2. cases proposed, there is not the least surmise thereof. But
peradventure you mean these ends you lay down, in the which, Fol. 172. b.
th^one Thirsts the good of his Reader and the other bids you Fare well. A
foolish toye.
In deed these be your impertinent discourses, as you note well in the
margent, and I add to the text foolish also. No no, S. You send us to a chapt.
that has no such thing in it.
(say you) you may see more noted before in the second chapter. Well in Gods
name. Let us go back againce thither. What shall I see theare? That they have
put down the state of the question wholy to the contrary. Is it true? that
would I feign see. Fiat voluntas tua. Fol. 10. b.
for so you begine, and the Sermon contineweth until Card. Allens letters sent
to M. Fol. 11.
Mushe interrupted the prechear and Card. Sega his visitation. Fol. 12.
You thirst (by all liklihood) the good of your Readers that begine so
devoutly, and go on so honorably with 2. Cardinals in the fore fro^t. But
bevvaire (Masters) of your geese when the tox precheth. Then after the
Cardinals march the Popes speeches sent into Ingland Exhorting and chardging
men to live in unity. Next to his Hol. marches Fishers memorial against the
Jesuits, being one of the most exorbitant disorderly fellows in the Roman
sturrs, and yet thought a fit man by you to be put in your book. Next to his
Hol. after Fisher in stead of a Trumpettor marcheeh. No alas, Fol. 13.
is this the virtue of obedience? is this humility? is this, etc. Next
follovveth that which I have before confuted, so that I cann see nothing in
that chapter, that proves They have putt the state of the question wholly to
the contrary, and yet I promise you I did read it over with my Spectacles
wherefore I beseech some of you, that have a cleerer sight then I have, and
that can see more with tvvoe eyes them I can do with four, to note me the
leaf where I may see more noted in that chapter. A subtle sending.
You did well to send your Readers from the 11. chapt. to the second, to seek
for that, which they shall never find there, and that which you should have
shovvne them in this place, if you could. The force of truth.
But Leo est in via. Truth lay in your way, which is more impregnable the^ a
lion, and more immovable then a Rock. If you had had a desire to instruct your
Reader in good sooth, and not to have him deceived: you would not, or at least
should not, have sent him to rune over a long chapter to search that which
was not to be found, but for his more ease to have quoted the leaf of your
book vvherin he might have found it. And indecent shiefte for united people.
But your intention was if not to deceive him, yet to deliurer your self by
that shifte from shevving and proving that they put the question wholy to the
contrary. These foul shiefts may for a time hold some fools in suspense,
Fol. 168. Fol. 172.
but in the end it will turn to the shame of the Authors.

You answered the Latin book bricflie, Tvvoe discourses ansvverd with tvvo^
words.
as before, but here you answer two whole disconrses Maruaillous
Lacoanically and very merrely. The one, with, he thirsts the good of the
Readers, the other with Fare you well. This in sooth is to play with your
Readers nose and show your selves to be more like Scorners then grave Priests.
Fare you well, and why did you not add, and I ack shall have Gill. You are
counning men that can answer twoe treatisses with tvvoe words. You should
have much a do to answer M. Watsons common wealth, (which yet is not so
long as these 2. treatisses) with such Scholasticall or rather sophistical
brevitie. It should seame, that either you have great confidence in your cause,
when you may be admitted to answer your adversaries reasons with a fare
well, or else that you do not greatly thirst the good of your Readers and much
less care for their satisfaction, You should have esnfuted the Reasons that ba
in those discourses.
that expected from grave united Priests the confutatio^ of Reasons laid
down in those discourses, and not a Jest of vvil Sommars budgett. Who is so
blinded, that does not see their Reasons to stand firm and solid, which are
set down both in the letter, that thirsts the good of the Reader, as also
in the other that bids you Fare well: for all that you have said either
here, or in the second chapter noted in your margent. For of 5. considerations
putt down in the letter that thirsts the good of the Reader, you seem in
your 2. chapt. to answer one which is of the Praemunire as for the other 4.
Fol. 15.
your bidd them fare well. And so great is the thirst you have of the Readers
good, A notable custom.
that it is your custom through out your Apology, to answer some one
argument or reason, and then make him believe you have ansvvered them all, and
so he must content him self with a piece, either that, or none at all.

And albeit you answer nothing here to the Reasons of your namelesse friend
Fare you well, yet afterward leaping (according to your custom) disorderly
from one thing to another: and after a flinge at M. Cha^peneis letter, Fol. 174.
you leap back to Fare you well again to answer to the ostentation of
their Canon so often cited. Did 63. can. 12. Did. 61. can. 13.
I know not how often they cited it, but suer I am, you cited, it once before,
and their words falsely, as I have there noated. You answer not the Canon
there. Fol. 18 b.
But now after you have taken your breath and bethought your self better, you
will answer it (I trovve) very sufficiently: because any man of mean
learning way discover how little this makes for them. If this be true then no
doubt but me^ of your learning will discover to us, how little this makes for
their purpose. which if you perform, then will I bidd them and you both Fare
well and meadle no further in this matter, but thirst my own rest and
quietness. Well on then Masters mine.

After you have shevved your skill in autiquitie and of diverse means of
constituting and appointing Bishopps, at last. Fol. 174.
You thinck your brethren will not deny the preeminent auctoritye of the Sea
Apostolic in all these elections, and above all that he might, and has
lawfully changed the same. I answer for them, they will not deny this. But
what then? Mary If his Holl. can alter election in ordinary Bishopps, much
more he may appoint an extraordinary Prelat as the Archpriest is, with what
Jurisdiction he thimketh expedient. Transeat, and therefore so much to urge
this, is great presumption to call it no worse. have you said? Then say I, A
foolish answer.
your answer is but a mere folly to call it no worse. for they talk of
chease and you give them chalk. They talk, speak and mean of the ordinary
and accustomable means of election, Distingo.
constituted and appointed by the Canons and decrees of the Sea Apostolic, C.
2. de prebend. in 6. and Clem. 1. vt lite pendens, etc.
and you talk of the supereminent power or plenitudine potestatis that his
Holl. has over all benefices and Jurisdictions to give them to whom he will
and by what means and order it pleases him. If you thinck your brethern are
not ignorant of this, you might have leaft it out, The Canon is not ansvered.
for it answers not their Canon that talks of the ordinary means by
election. And so their Canon stands still for them. Note hear that you your
selves call this auctoritye of the Archpriest extraordinary and that he is an
extraordinary Prelate. Fol. 14. Rash reprehension.
Why then are you so rash I will not say impudent to make your reader beleaue,
your brethren speak very contemptuously of the dignity, and Archpriest,
because they call it a new and extraordinary auctoritye well either you speak
contemptuously here in calling his dignity extraordinary, and so fall into the
same fault your brethren did, or else if you do not, The united are bound to
ask their brethern forgivennes.
you must ask them forgiveness for slaundering them unjustly with contempt for
saying that the Archpriest dignity and Jurisdiction is extraordinary. This is
a rule of nature quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine facias. You would be loath
to be counted to speak this in contempt, so then must you judge of them, that
they did not speak it in contempt, as in deed they did not, and therefore be
unjustly taunted and noted of contempt by you for it. Gloss. 1. ad can. 13.
did. 61. The gloss is against you also.
The gloss you alleadg theare is against you. for it vndrestandeth of ordinary
election wherein the number of voices carries it away, and so if the greater
part choose one to be a Bishop and the lesser part or fewer in number
choose him not, he shall be their Bishopp against their wills, because he was
canonically elected viz by the greter number of those that had right to choose
him. So that your contradicting brethern nor none else coming to the election
are not condemned, neither are they the lesser part, where was no part at
all. Mary, if it had come to the election and 200. Priests had choosen M.
Blackvvell, and your contradicting brethren with an hundred more on their side
had chosen an other: M. Blackwell had bine their superior against their wills,
as chosen by the greater number. Your error.
And yet this lesser nombre had not been condemned by the Canon as you say,
but by the gloss, neither yet absolutely by the gloss. For if the lesser part
(says he) has iustam causam contradicendi. just cause to vvithsta^d the
election. A Bishopp cannot beginen to them against their wills. Your gloss
then talks of the ordinary way of election, and you of the extraordinary
power, and Jurisdiction of his Holl. you have always good luck to allege
law against your selves, as those accustomedly do, Ignorance. Fol. 174. b.
that impugn a truth as you do. But here by the way I must a little note
your ignorance in that you say that his Holl. Legates and Nuncios often be
neither Bishopps nor Archbishopps: I am suer the eldest of you all never savve
or hard of any of the Popes Nuncios, but they were Bishops. Neither does his
Hol. make any, at least Nuncios, but such as are Bishopps. And as for Legates,
for some hundredth years, theare has been neither Bishopp nor Archbishopp but
always Cardinals which are called Legati a Latere, per excellentiam quia
semper mittuntur a latere Pontificis. The siege Apostolic sends no other
Legates but Cardinals, nor none other there is, but such as we call
Legatinati, C. 1. de offi. Legati in 6. C. pen. ext. de offic. Legati.
such as is the Archbishopp of Canturbury in Ingland, And as his Holl. gives
more ample or more strickt authority and Jurisdiction to his Nuncios, so does
he always restrain the Jurisdiction of his Legates: for if he did not, they
had de iure almost as great as he him self has. I once saw an indult given to
a Legate a latere vvherin were but 4. things reserved from his power and
Jurisdiction. The first that he had no auctoritye to alienat the patrimony of
S. Peter. The second he had no power to alienat the goods of the churches
under his Legation. The 3. he had no Jurisdiction to confer Bishopprickes.
The 4. I do not remenbre. You may then see by this that so lardg is the
Jurisdiction of a Legate a Latere, that the Pope does dyminish his Jurisdiction,
rather then amplyfie or extend it. And so good reader fare well for we must
back again to M. Champ letter, to see what he can say for him self.

If he be as fond and childish, Fol. 172. b. 173.
as the former discourses, the which you neither have nor can answer, but by
a farewell. the^ were you childish to putt them down, and by your not
answering him, utter your childishnes to the world.

First and foremost you exagitat his example of a noble man, Fol. 173.
which you say is no more like the case in controversy then London is to
Lincoln. And why so? because the Protector vvrott by the express
commandment of his Holl. How shall we know, that? Mary he says so in his
letters. But I have proved to you before that a Cardinal be he a hundred times
Protector, is not to be beleaued absolutely upon his word, and letters: A
false dissimilitud.
the dissimilitude (you say) consists in this that the Cardinal is of the
Popes Counsel, and to him is committed all the affairs of Ingland, and so
was not the Gentleman M. You answer was prevented Page 24.
Champeney talks of. Be it so, yet M. Champeney prevented this your answer,
the which you will not see, you are so vvillfully blind. For these be his
words: Tvvoe disparites paraduenture they will allege in the case. First,
that I putt the case in civil gouerme^t whereas it ought to be in
Ecclesiastical. The second, that I putt the case in one that is not known to
have any ordinary authority in these affairs, vvheras it is contrary in our
affairs, the Cardinal being Protector of our Nation. Lo here your answer
set down for you in this chisdish lettere the which he a^svvereth thus. I
omit the answer to the first (as impertinent to this place) the second is as
frivolous. For albeit Card. Caietane was our Protector and also Chamberlain
of the church of Rome: yet it is evident that by neither of these offices had
he any ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (he might also very well have
added nor extraordinarye Jurisdiction) by these offices) over our clergy
especially to erect any new government. And therefore if he had any auctoritye
in this matter it must needs be delegat and extraordinary and consequently,
was as well to notify to us the same (his extraordinary auctoritye) as the
Chaunceler of Ingland is to shevve his vvarrant, The young scholar puts
you all to schole.
if he intend to take upon him an other office, not appertayning to the
Chauncellorshipp. Thus far this young man come latly from schole who by
that he has here said, puts you all in sooth, so to school, that he makes
you all as do^be as Fishes, not saying hereunto so much as Baff: and why?
because Leo est in via. The truth which he alleges is so strong, that it
stops your mouths, so that you cannot open your lips against it. Fol. 173.
If he not the best learned amongst his fellows be able to stopp your
mowthes, so that you cannot answer him, and to make you so blind, that you
will not see this reason. What would his learneder fellows do, especially
if they were united to writ, as you are. How say you? Has he not clearly
shevved, that there is no disparitye betvveene the case putt in the Cardinal,
and the case he putt, etc. in the Gentleman. All those that are clear of sight
can see and will confess it. And here by the way (you my brethren) having
read this, and seeing he flattly and truly denies the Protector to have any
ordinary jurisdiction over the English clergy, why are you so impudent in all
this your book, yea in every leaf almost, to object to them disobedience to
the Protector as their superior? how are you so impudent as to term the
Protector their and your superior? yea your highest superior next his Holl. I
say impudent, for if he were, and they deny it so flattly and apparently, it
was your part to control them for it, and to prove the contrary, that he
was both theirs and your ordinary superior, in that he is protector. But the
thing being denied by them, and the contrary not proved by you, it is extreme
impudency so often to affirm it, Note.
and to put it down in your book, as a thing vndoubtable and a know truth,
when it is kovven to all that have but a cromme of wit and experience, Tit.
ext. de off. Iud. ordinar. and tit. ext de offie. delegat.
that it is stark false to say. That the Protector of Ingland is Superior to
any Englishmen in the world, Be he clark or lay, be he in Rome or in Ingland.
Note beside reader, his learned distinction of Iudgs. That every judge is either
an ordinary judge, or a judge delegat, that is extraordinary. An ordinary judge
has jurisdiction ordinary over all such as are subject to him: but a delegat
judge has no jurisdiction of his own, he has only the use of an other man's
jurisdiction, that is to say, the jurisdiction of him that does delegat him,
and has no more the^ the other does give him the use of, neither must he pass
the limits of his delegation, but observe it diligently. But the Protector
was not our ordinary judge. Ergo if he be at all, he must be our delegat
judge. But a judge delegat (says M. Champeney) must shevve his warrant, and the
letters of his commission. But the Protector shevved no such letters. Ergo they
were not bound to beleaue that he was a judge delegated to institute a new
dignity. In your larger Apology, I pray you shevve your learning, Fol. 174.
and answer to this youngmans argument.

Where you ask with what modesty can he say that this government of the
Archp. Impudency.
was never hard of before. I ask you with what brazen face you dare reprehend
him for it, and with what front you dare say, that this government Was ever
hard of before? Fol. 174. b
Nay, where is your modesty and honesty to find fault with him, for saying
that which your selves say afterward? Desirr of contradiction blinds men.
Where you affirm his Holl. May appoint an extraordinary Prelate as the Archp.
is. If it be extraordinary where was it ever hard of it before? A desiere you
have of contradicio^ has so blinded you that you vttet infinite absurdiries,
and seem to say you care not what. Yes we say some what, for we say. That
it is well known to be an ancient dignity in gods church. In deed the
office of an Archp. is an ancient (albeit a very low) office in Christ's
church. But o blindness. Is this government, I say. this, Leo in via, has put
you in such a fright) government which the Archprist has now in Ingland, an
ancient dignity in Gods church? I know the name is ancient, you must recant
or be counted liars.
but this government he has is new, and therefore in your next, recant these
words or give your selves the lie, for saying it is an extraordinary Prelacy
in the place noted in the margent. Fol. 174. b
And here also you confess as much. That his ordinary jurisdiction did not
commounly extend so far and over so many as this does. An Archpriest ordinary
jurisdiction goes not out of the church doors.


Commonly (quoth you) no never since Christ's Ascension, did it extend out of
the church doors. For saving of your honesties, and for my learning, in your
next promised larger Apology, bring one example I pray you. you fighr still
with your own shadovve, who I pray you does not know so well as you what the
Pope may do? How great jurisdiction he may give, and that to whom he
pleases? These are fond and childish matters in deed to treat of, and not
now in question.

We are at last comme again to M. Champeney who in effect adds notinge to
the 2. former discourses but certain bold assertio^s. What need he? when you
have ansvvered no one of all the assertions contained in these twoe discourses,
But the thristing the readers good and the farevvell? Has he added nothing?
What is that he talks of ordinary and extraordinary jurisdiction, showing
the Protector to have neither, M. Champeney reasones vnansvverable.
as you have seen before. Sure he adds enoughe for all you united priests
and take to help you all the Jesuits in Rome and Ingland, to answer to,
whiles you live. except the Pope do change the canon and Civil laws to
help you out of the mire. His argument is this, His argument.
all superiors have either ordinary or extraordinary jurisdiction. But
protect. of nations have neither ordinary or extraordinary jurisdiction, as
they be Protectors. Ergo Card. Caietane as Protector was not the Superior to
the clergy or laytie of Ingland.

But let us see these bold assertions, Four true J says, ansvvered with
you say.
Which are 4. I says, and all true for any thing you bring to the contrary.
For asweare thereunto, you say, He is a young man come latly from te schole,
and not the best learned amongst his fellows. And again, all this you say
(not, because such grave men as you that has been so long from school, do
say it:) cannot but import great presumption of Spirit, and so discrete men
(upon your words and credit no doubt) will judge of him and his, and their
cause accordingly. you have so sufficiently an fvveared his I say with your you
say, that discret me^ cannot but wonder at the order and manner of your
vvritting. That is, to put down your adversaries words, which contain
naught but truth it self in them, and then to make such foolish discourses as
afterward you do, without touching or answearing them. you united low to
maintain contencion.
Surely every man of any discretion in the world must needs judge of you and
your cause, that love with words to maintain contencion and quitt your cause
and abando^ it utterly, as bringing nothing either to uphold it, or to
undermine and overthrow the cause of your adversaries. But is not this a bold
or rather a false assertion of yours to say: A false assertion.
Which (I say) so often repeted against the authority of his Superiors, When
as the Protector (as he told your before) was not his Superior nor the Archp.
at that time when he spoke this, I mean before the bull came for he was no
just possessor of that dignity, but an intruded parson, and so had no
superiority as I have already proved. You had nead to go to school again
to learn to leave falsifying, and to forget slandering and unjust imputing of
words and senses to your adversaries, or else to the nouiciat house to purge
you of theyse foul faults.

We have (say you) answered such reasons as he brought sufficiently before. you
have not ansvvered his reasons at all. Ergo not sufficiently.
and shevved his ignorance in divinity and considered of the decree of the
Doctors of Paris. Where hare you done this doughtie deed? Mary, in the 10. chapter
of this book, you would say the 8. chaptre. I have over vewed your 10. chapt.
Fol. 107. b
Where first and foremost I find your iumbling at certain reasons brought out
of the discourse that Thristeth the good of the reader, as you term it, Fol.
108. you iumble a^ these reasons only.
the^ at other words of theirs (as you say) for you have not quoted the place)
Iumbling (I say) as I have proved there. Thirdly you heap up many things out
of both books but especially the English. You note not the places, because you
say they are almost in every page. Other reasons you allege out of the
discourse, which you call fare you well. At last in the same leaf you come to
M. Fol. 110. A fitton. Fol. 174.
Champeneys epistle out of the which you allege but one reason, and so you
Fitton in saying. Such reasons as he brought when you brought but one of his
reasons to answer. Where I have showed his reason to stand firm and his
divinity not to have been spilt by ignorance as you say here. Where also is
considered, how well you considered, Fol. 118. b Why did you differr to
answer him theare.
of the decree of the Doctors of Paris. In the end of the 8. chapt. you say:
The rest which he has in this epistle shall be considered of afterward again
in a dew and convenient place. Why? when you were in hand with him there,
why did you not dispatch him and crush him in the head, and so deliver him at
once from the pain and fear he had how you would trovvnce him afterward? or
why do you not answer the rest of his reasons here, seeing the young man is
under your ferule, and stands quaking at the consideration he has of your
number and gravity, and that you are old scholars. But be of good cheer M.
Champeney pluck up your heart, they have no more to say to you here, all is
remitted to the 8. chap where they considered but one of your reasons, and that
to their own loss and discredit.

I noted this foul shist of yours before, A foul shift.
that when you cannot answer, you send your reader to an other place to seek
that which he shall never find. So do you here, you se^d him to seek your
answer to M. Champeneis reasons in the plural, where they shall find but one
of his reasons laid down in the singular number.

Thou must know reader, Fol. 110.
that beside his first reason laid down by them, there follovveth a second
reason handled by me before, vvherby he proves the Card. Page 25.
had no authority to institute the Archpr. because he was neither their
ordinary nor their extraordinary judge. the force of the which reason, I have
laid down before.

Thirdly, This young man more resolute being come latly from the school, urges
you yet further, you might objection is ansvvered fourtsouldly.
and presupposes the might objection you have against your discontented
brethren (the which in deed you have, if not in every page, yet in every
leaf almost of your book, which he also answers fourefoldly) and the
which he terms your Achilles viz: that to deem or doubt of that which the
Card affirms is to call his credit in question whose authority ought to be
sufficient testimony for whatsoever he says. and shows that it
concludes not. If these united people had any desiere to open the truth to the
world and not to deceive their readers, and still vvallovve in contencion they
should in steed of this (I say) have taken his answers made to the chief
pillar of their cause, and have confuted them, and so by learning and
authority have rebarred this youge scholar that gauleth the^ so much, and
shevved to the world that he was not the best learned of his fellows. But
alas? they durst not, for Leo est in via. the roaring lion of truth made them
take their heels and rune away. Fol. 173.
Truth is so terrible to those that maintain a false cause (as these united
brethren do) that they dare not behold it.

After this, this young man more resolut and more peremptory goes forwards
with secondly, Page 26.
thirdly, and fourthly. you let him go, for he being young is toe quick of
foot for you elder fellows: pursuing his matter he puts down 3. other
reasones, of his not accepting the Archpriest. Page 29. The united broken their
periuis and deceived their reder?
And albeit you promised to consider of the rest of his reasons, as before you
have touched but one and so have broken your promise and deceived your reader
that expected a greater matter at your hands, because omnis promissio honesta
est obseruanda. and we Canonists do hold that nudum pactum producat aectionem,
so that I, and other your readers may take an action against you, and call you
into law to make you pro form that which you have promised us, your reader
shall be constrained to bidd you ffare well.
that is: to consider of the rest of this young scholars reasons, or else we
shall be driven to believe him, and bid you fare well, as the second disconrser
said to his friend.

This young scholar is so resolute and peremptory, that he does that, Page 34.
35.
which you dare not talk of, and for the which you are sorry, that ever any
mention was made of it. What is that? Mary, to set down simply, M. Champeney
seteth down simply the cause of this last contencion.
plainly and without shifte or fiction, the cause of this last contention, and
the occasion of his and others vvritting. What is that? forsooth that the
Jesuits or Archp. renewed as it should seem the slander of schism in more
intolerable manner then before: for now they said, that we were not only
schismatiks but that who soever should dogmatizando say the contrary: should
incur the ce^sures of the holy church, etc. and a little after when therefore
we perceived our late composed peace contrary to all expectation to be thus
quickly broken, and that our good names be gane to bleed a freash, the old
gauls being not yet firmly cured, we requested the Archp. etc. How say you
(my united brethren) is this true or false he says? If true? how can you in
conscience defend so unjust and ruynous a cause? If false? you must confute or
else confess.
Why do you not confute it? Why is then not one word at all of this in your
book? No. And why? because your conscience does prick you Conscientia mill
testes, You confess it you selves, for you say, you will not talk of it, you
are sorry it was ever mentioned. How say you, had not your pen papier and
inck been better bestowed in co^futing this, if it be false, then in setting
down his. I say it is no sin, etc. you should have been better occupied
also in confuting, as false the six conditions and articles (he says) wear
on their side offered and proposed to make peace and unity, Page 33.
and by your side rejected: Then in setting down either M. VVatsons common
wealth Fishers memorial and examinations, or the trouble of the Roman
colleage with the factions in Paris and Flanders, which come as near to this
controversy as London to Lincoln.

You quitt M. Champeney for troublinge him or his reasons any more, because by
all liklyhood you found his first to be hard of disgestion: and you will visitr
M. I. B. his censures upon Fa. Parsons letter to M. D. Bishopp. Course him
lustely, I will not let you. But where you talk according to your custom of
this controversy vndevvly, I will be bold to rencountre you. As I must neades
ask one question of you. Fol. 176. b Falsehood.
Why you do so willingly and Franckly let pass the 21. reasons which the
Censurer has laid together by distinct no^bers to discredit the Protectors
letters which his Hol. confirmed. You answer. We have spoken of it before.
I ask you where? here you have forgotten your old custom, which was to send
your reader to an other chapter. For you have noted nothing in the margent but
page 48. for what cause or end, god knovveth, neither can I, or any man else
judge? but yet in the end with much searching I have found this before in the
2. chapt. and 18. leaf where thus you say: Fol. 18.
as in one place of their book, they go about to shevve it to be void and of
no force by 21. fond reasons devised by the^ selves vvherof no one has any
force at all. This is your spoke, and thereto you add, that you are ashamed here
to lay open the vanity by more particulars. then you have by like done
already. A short answer to 21. reasons.
this then is your answer to 21 reasons which you in your margent call
Cauillations in stead of reasons. you are well come to the butts, how came
this qualme over your stomach, as to take so great pity of your adversaries
as to be ashamed to lay open the vanity (of their reasons) by more
particulars. you mey be ashamed if you have any shame in you, A sharmfull
answer.
of so shameful an answer: and these tvvoe ansvveares are, the one here,
the other in the 18. leaf. And why? what, did you thinck that none but beasts
and dizards should read your books. I thinck so, or else you would never have
handled the matter so shamefullye. Truly (my united brethren) the Protector
and the Archp. The Protector and Archp. do con you little thanckes.
are to give you but little thanckes, that taking in hand to defend them, their
causea^d doings, are not able to answer one reason of 21. being as you say
your selves, but fond, And that not one has any force at all: truly then the
more easy to he answered. The broctors and the matter are a lock that is
nothing vvorth
But like matter like Procters. The matter you have to defend is nothing vvorth
and you defend it accordingly I am sure that the simplest man or woman that
shall read these places, Will stay here and vvonder at your necligence or
ignorance, that will not or cannot answer one of 21. fond reasons of no
Force at all, being laid together by order and distinction. yea they are laid
together to discredit the Protectors letters, and yet you will not do so much
for the Protectors credit, as to answer one of them. O folly, to thinck any
man so madd as to imagine you to have a good cause in hand that cannot or dare
not answer one of so many reasons that are brought against you. None but madd
men can think you to have a good cause.
Here in dead Leo est in via. But who says so? Dicit piger. if ever there was
any slothful and necligent writter. you may therein bear the bell.

Well? you prove hear that the Pro^ectors letters are of ^^force.
his Holl. afterward (say you) confirmed the Protectors letters, and
therefore you let pass the said reasons. you have reason. If his Holl.
confirmed them, then they wear of no force before, and so you plead for your
discontented brethern, For regularly that which is confirmed, was bebore of
no force or valewe. For if it had, it should not have neaded any confirmacion.
You conclude very substantially that one only reason of humility modesty and
obedience, Fol. 167. b
would have gotten them more credit then all these 21. reasons of disobedience
against their Superiors. I willingly yield unto you, An humble conclucion lost.
if the Protector had been their Superior? Or that you could have proved him
so. He then not being their Superior, you have lost an humble and modest
conclusion and their 21. reasons remain still firm and stable.

These cockish, scholars have me thincks so troubled your united heads and
brains that you writ neither rithme nor reason: Their reasons have troubled
your wit.
and they have so affrighted you with their reasons, that you know not well
on which side to turn you. Here you should have labored and sweat to have
overthrown not one, but all all their fond reasons, and to have proved the
Cardinal to have had sufficient authority to institute the Archp. Here you
should hauc employed all your eloquence and powered out your skill, learning and
knowledge, in divinity, law, histories, and what else, to have proved them if
not schismatics, yet disobedient and rebellious to god and their superiors.
you proffes are but title tatle.
Proved (I say) not by a bold and badd^^tatle, as you endeavor, but by good and
solid arguments and reasons. But alas? and welladay? you yield up your arms,
and having taken the foil, you give them the victory. For (as I have said)
seeing you are not able to confute any one of their reasons, all reasonable
readers will judge them to have had good reason to withstand the Institucion of
the Archp. by the Card. letters: and you your selves against all reason (not
being able to answer to one of their 21. Reasons) to fill their ears and feed
their eyes with bare words only without any reason. I have often warned you and
put you in mind that this is the chief and principal point of this
controversy, and if you touch not this stringe, you labor in vain, to
persuade men that your discontented brethren do defend an evell cause, and
that they be the beginners of this division and co^tencio^. What a shame is it
for you, to fill your book with so much impertinent matter as you do? and
when you come, where you hold close Witth your adversary, then you turn
your back and fly, Fie, fie upon it.

I am also ashamed (and so may all your friends and well willers be) to see an
number of virtuous priests (if you be the Authors of this Apology) daily
fighting against the ennemies of God and his espouse for the defense of the
infallible truth, so much to forgett them selves and their vocation, and to be
either so blinded with malice against their brethren, or to be carried away
with inordinat affection to their part and faction, as to committ here such an
exorbitant falsehood as you do in this place saying: Fol. 177. An exorbitant
falsehood.
vvherin for that there is nothing singular from those reasones which his
fellows have alleged before, and by us in diverse parts of this Apology
have been examined and shevved to be either false or feeble, we pass them
over in this place. The united have gained the vvheatstone.
You will gain the wheatstone I see well. and truly I will leave it with
you, till you show me where, in this Apology, you have examined his fellows
reasons, and where you have shevved them to be either false or feeble. This is
your third pass over or retyring when you should stand firm and stable. But
as often as you mention their reasons, you pass away in such post have, as in
the 18. leaf, then in the 176. and lastly here in the 177. leaf, as that with
in the compass of one leaf, you make 2. pass ouers. Such have you make to
the 12. chapt. there to defend F. Parsons from the injury done unto him by
your brethren. I am content you go, and if you had need of mine aid also, I
would willingly help you. For I protest I do as much mislike that kind of
writting as any man can do: And in truth am glade and rejoice, when you pay
them home for it.

And as for these faults of yours which I have here noted: That Authors
intencion.
I take god to wittnes, I have not done it either of Spleen or malice, nor for
that I am more on their side then on your or more their friend then yours, but
being indifferent betvveene both I thought friendly to admonish you thus much,
that hereby you may amend the faults. or give me and other you friends
satisfaction in showing the to be no saults. If you take it in evil parre, I
would be full sorry for it, mine intention being by this aduertisment to
deturne you rather from the old troubles and contencio^s, the^ to give any
occasion of new sturres. Consider your states and qualities. remenbre where you
are, wherefore you are there, and amongst whom your are, and for gods sake,
and the sake of the honorrble quarrel you fight for, and for his sake under
whose banner you fight, and at whose hands you look for reward and
recompense: for these considerations (I say) to forgive and forgett all that is
past, join in unity with your brethren, live in love and peace with them,
gain them by lenity and charitable conversation: and then god almighty will
bless all your actions. To the which I pray God bring you, your brethren, all
our friends and me my self also, Amen.

FINIS.
AN ANSVVEAR OF M. DOCTOR BAGSHAW to certain points of a libell called.
An Apology of the subordination in England.
A Libell lately has been set out in English, called, A brief Apology or
defense of the Catholic Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and subordination in
England, etc. Wherein I find the creditts of many, and of my self above others
most injuriously impeached. Howsoever it be diuulged under the name of united
Priests, it is nothing else, but a certain narration of English matters, told
over and over, by one Parsons a Jesuit, in Rome, to the English students
there, and by some of them rightly termed his mother Hubberds tale, as
containing not any one thing of worth, but a fardel of Idle and boyish
surmises, untruths, and detractions.

That he should use other men's names to this Apology, (which has been a
former practice of his, and that somtymes perniciously, as in setting out his
titles under the name of Dolema^,) me^ of modesty do not so mutch vvonder, as
that a man professing himself religious, being publikly charged with eight
imprinted libells, of most evil and scandalous success, already, should
persist in the same infamous manner of vvriting. My silence almost twenty
years now, may testify my vnvvillingnes to handle such matters, more then for
the necessary defense of my Good name: which, besides the former English
libell, I see impugned in an other set out in Latin, to the view of the whole
world, something resembling the English, but so altered and perverted, as by
the conference of the one and the other, a man may se the vanity of both.
Three or four general imputations, which the libeller uses, I leave to
other men and better opportunity to ansvvear: as his pretended zeal for
superiors, his magnificall talk against passion, his cloaking himself under the
whole Society of Jesuits, and his vaunting of a body of Catholics (as he
terms them) united unto him.

His talk against disobedience and passion, as it only beats the air, and
is objected but of color and course, so to be imputed to others, by a most
exorbitant and discomposed man, does show as much excess of a proud and
hipocriticall humor, as defect of a good conscience to reflect duty upon
himself. Of the Society of the Jesuits, (the liking whereof because it is an
order allowed in the Church has been and is professed by us, etc.) I doubt
not but there are many, which know not, and many, which utterly dislike of
the practices of the libeller and his accomplices: and therefore he does them no
small injury and disgrace, which makes the credit of his order a mask for his
own disorder: since those be castra rebellium, vbi esse est mereri. What a
goodly body of Catholics the libeller has had to ioyn with him (by bragging
whereof he endaungereth all whom he inuolueth.) For his seditious practices
from time to time, for the procuring of M. Blak wells authority, for the
stirs in Flaunders, for the oppression of the Roman College, for the
defaming of the secular Clergy of England with schysme, and other strat
agemes, when judicious men consider, they will see (according to our
proverb,) great boast and small roast, and the ranking of him self with
Cardinals and principal men of our nation, does show the man's humors,
co^ceipts, and meditations: whereas in the end he will mar the play, for
that he sees not how evil his acts become the stage.

The first particular thing against me which he obiecteth, is close dealing
with the Counsel, in his marginall note of the English but not of the Latin
Epistle to his Hollines. And it is the last thing fol. 207. wherehe says. As
soon as they understood their tvvoe messengers were restrained at Rome, and
not like to prevail, then Doctor Bagshaw was sent for from Wisbich to London
to treat with the Council. And what follovved? Forsoothe the remove of twoe
or three Jesuits to the Tower with danger of their lives. A great matter I
warrant you. And how does all this appear? by a letter of N.N. 15. of Apr.
1599. who may not be named for fear. The letter is cyted fol. 150. containing
four coniecturall surmises, all foolish, and the twoe first grounded upon
plain untruths.

For the first. The day (says he) after D. Bagshavv was gone, the Minister of
the town coming into the Castle, said, that D. Bagshavv told him, that he
looked to be removed ere it were long: and therefore it is thought he was
cause of his own remove. First, I will not except against the testimony of
a Minister whom this letter-maker would make to utter a secret, if not an
untruth, because I know him, and diners others of that town, to be of such
moral honesty and sincerity as in that respect they would have nothing to do
with the Jesuitical faction, as having often by others and themselves
experienced their perverting and deprauing men's speeches. Then if I had told
him I expected my Remove, (as I never did for I did not once think of it) he
and the whole town knew, that I might have doubted my Remove, because it
was threatened from one of the Justices, fourteen days before, falling out
with me upon matter of disputation in Religion. Again, I had Received a letter,
(which is well known, and was a great means to declare mine innocence to the
LL. of the Council,) that I should look to my self, for that there was a plott
laid to over throvv me, by the English Spaniolized practisers. So that the
first is but a false grovvnd, and a malicious inference. And so is the second,
that I should send M. Bluet word, my sending for was, concerning certain
matters, which we had talked of, etc. For clean contrary, I being debarred to
write at all, or speak but in the hearing of the Pursuiuant, sent M. Blu.
word, that he should not grieve himself, with devising, what the cause of our
trooble is: for that he could never perfectly know it, until I, or some which
were privy to it, did utter it unto hi^. For the third, M. Archers words are
not worth the speaking of, nor his Remove a matter vvorth three stravves one
way or other. for the last, if there were a false brother in Wisbich it might
be as soon the writer of this letter as any other and perhapps sooner. Are not
here accusatio^s, proofs, and witnesses passing suitable? Are not these goodly
authe^ticalls whereof the libeller so much braggeth? But to omit these bibble
babbles.

My first dealing (as the libeller scoffingly terms it) with the Council
was to defend the honor of our Religion, and even with suffering torments, to
declare mine innocence which was brought into great doubt, specially by one
Anfield, servant to F. Parsons and after a Pursuiuant. My second dealing with
the Council was, to show myself guiltles of an horrible treason, laid to
Squire and his fellows: who auerred the contriuer, moouer, and vrger thereof
to be one Walpool a Jesuit, subordinate (as the other English Jesuits are, if
F. Parsons say true,) to the said Parsons. How far he is to be charged with
suborning or concurring with the one, his servant, or the other his subject, I
leave to the due place of discussion. It is well known to many, and some of
great honor (men without exception) can testifye in my troble about Squire,
that the Earl of Essex was sent from the Queen, to take order for my
committing to the Tower. And M. Wade, whom now the Jesuits make so favorable
to me and others, upon the first information given against me, wrote to the
Earl of Essex and M. Secretary, that there was no way to deal with me but
with extremity: although afterward he changed his mind when the matter
disguised probably at first, was afterward better opened. Now what a
pregnant coniectural head has this libeller, who writes, that I procured
mine own sending for to London, to treat with the Council? And wherefore
forsooth? For that we understood, the tvvoe messengers sent to Rome were
imprisoned, etc. That year with the libeller went backwards, as the sunn did
in Achabs Dyall, or else he folyshlye professed the art of lyinge, having so
vveake a memory. My apprehension was in the beginning of October, and theirs
in Rome was in December after. Whereof the libeller should have had good cause
to have some Remembrance for he knovveth that among a number of tales of the
like qualitye and truth he told the tvvoe Priests, that I had a pe^sio^ of
the Queen of England: which was but the ordinary allowance to close
prisonners, but that it pleases his loose tongue, to use such insultations and
indignityes. Therefore by putting such a foul, gross, and palpable untruth
for the first accusation, (the first in every order of things being the measure
of others,) a man may guess of the rest. And I vvishe the libeller in due fear
may way, how abominable to God pondus and pondus is, (as the wise man
says) a vvayght and a vvayght. My Remove from Wisbich was (says he) a
preferment to the Queens pension: and yet the remove of Jesuits from Wisbich,
having the same allowance, was no preferment but a detriment. If the libeller
had had any true zeal of the honor of God and Religion, he should have wished
the remove of the Iesuited from Wisbich. Their separation there had made the
greatest scandal, that was given in this time: whereof no cause could be
imputed to the united Priests, which continued as before, without the least
innovation. The Catholics had written thither that they had rather have
sustained death of their bodies, then such an offense to souls. Some of them
had com thither, and upon their knees requested F. Weston, for the honor of
God, to desist from so scandalouse an enterprise, and being discontented with
his inso le^t ansvvear, went away detesting pride and faction. Some of the
temporal Magistrates had told them to their faces, that Iesuitisme from a
serpigo was become a gangrena, and therefore to be cut of: and the keeper had
long before my trooble sovvght to remove some for their seditiousnesse.
Their Agency and consistoriall common wealth was often handled by Ministers in
pulpets, to the great disgrace of Catholic Religion. Their seditious and
disorderly behavior was such that not only the Justices in commission
disliked them but even some youths of the town of Wisbich, scattered abroad,
and offered to justify most disgraceful vvritings against them: Grievous
accusations had been uttered against some of them, by three women their
proselites, whereof ensevved examinations, Rumors of indightments, expectation
of arraygnments terrors to them selves, troobles to the quiet, and discontent
of all iuditious Catholics. In which case some of the Iesuited offering with
money to procure their own Remove, (whether upon shame or Remorse God he
knovveth,) Gods justice may appear, in that the book of titles made for the
advancement of the English Iesuited, and turned in their Remove to their
disgrace and danger, some of them being principally called into question for
those titles, and the cunning plott of suborning Squire and others, served to
bring to pass, that the tovver which was intended for me and others was
assigned otherwise, and the politik canuasers fell into the pit, which
themselves had dug for others. Another cause of close dealing with the
Counsel, the libeller imagines to have bin, to inform them that the
subordination was not for Religion, but for state practice: and by likelihood
some promise to them that it should not stand. For M. Blackvvels titles
whether they were begone for God, or for God shall be ended, God in his
judgment and fit time will descrye. I know one much Iesuited signified to
the Counsel his likinge of M. Blackvvills authority the rather because it
should not be displeasing to the Council for that it tended only to the
taking away of facultyes and so conseque^tlye to the hinderinge of
reconciliation, which in time might be the overthrow of religion. For other
dealing with the Council about him, I am ashamed of the unworthiness of the
libeller which himself discovers. What want of modesty is it to blase such
false and foolish narration? What indiscretion to abuse the name of the Council
about such toys? It is well known if it pleased God so to move their
honorable wisdoms, they could rid England of all the Iesuited with less
labor, then the libeller bestowed in this his paltry Rapsody, and with less
ado then was my Remove from Wisbich to London. But what fear does a wicked
conscience carry with it? Allane late Cardinal of worthy memory in his
Apology of the Seminaryes, fol. 71. vvriteth. We protest, that neither the Re.
Fathers of the Society of the holy name of Jesus, whom the people call
Jesuits, (an express clause being in the instructions of their mission into
England, that they deal not in matters of state, which is to be shevved,
signed with their late generals hand of worthy memory,) neither the Priests
either of the Seminaryes, or others, have any commission, instruction, or
insinuation from his Holiness, or any other their superior either in Religion,
or of the Colleges, to move sedition, or to deal against the state or
temporal government. Fa. Parsons himself also vvriteth in his ansvvear to S.
Fran. Hastings fol. 71. in the third person: So then Fa. Parsons protests,
(as I am credibly informed,) that he was never consenting, vvitting, vvilling,
inducing, yelding, or privy to any (such) personal attempt against her Majesty
in his life. Parsons In the supplication to the Queen made by one Jesuit for
all the rest and they all subject to Fa. Parsons, is not she termed mose
mighty, most merciful, most feared, best beloved Princess, the shot anchor
of all their just hopes, perfect in all princely duty, sacred Majesty and what
not? Is not protestation made unto her that they will yield and persuade in
conscience all te^porall obedience, and take her part even against the Popes
army? In this libell, is not Fa Parsons made a most free and innocent man from
treasons, never touched, never named in the arraygnment of any? And does nor M.
Blakvvell himself in one of his decretalls forbid books made against the
state? Nay goes he not further and charge M. Mushe and his consortes that
they be medlers in state matters? Is it not a common objection against the
secular Clergy that they go about to bring the king of Scotland to the
crown of England being an Heretik? Does not Fa. Parsons say that M. Doctor
Bishop. and M. Charnock with their associats were found to be Scottish in
faction? And in this libell is not M. Watson said to be sent by the secular
Priests to the king of Scotland? And are not we charged that we are to deal
with the king of France to subject England unto him? After such protestation,
such zeal for the state, such charging of others, did any fear remain in the
libeller that he should not be believed? Would any man think that the opinion
of tvvoe or three Priests could sway with the Council or move any thing, and
that against the libeller and his body of Catholics? No no the libeller knows
well enough the great vigilance, experience, and iudiciousnes of the Council
in state matters. It is well known that Fa. Parsons in England after contrary
Protestation first made, and that under his obedience to far and foolishly
dealt in state matters, that some principal Catholics sent him word to
depart the realm for otherwise they would deliver him to the temporal
magistrate. And this is the true cause of his departure which the libel would
ridiculously color that he might be freed from being thought to be a renegado.
His carriage since (which particulerly has been proposed before competent
judges) has been suitable to that worshipful persuasion which he used at Rome
to the students there, that they should have at state and all: for with state
meddling they could but die, and die they should if they were taken without state
meddling.

Now after all his turmoyles, browilleryes, libells, attempts, and invasions
ended with shame and confusion, to retayn still his body of Catholics in good
opinion of him (a fevv God knows, whereof some are sincere with scrupulous
ignorance, and others very factious with partial prejudice) he tells the^
an old stale tale of close dealing with the Council which in very truth being
told in plain terms is this, he must strike and we may not ward: he must
accuse, and we may not defend: he must irritate against religion, and we may
not pacify: he must falsely pretend and by pretending disgrace the Catholic
faith, and we may not syncerely clear it: he must expose as much as in him
lies our prince to destruction, our country to inuasio^, our friends and our
selves to slaughter, our profession to contempt and malediction, and we may
not refuse to receive his wounds in our whole body. But since his ouerweening
of him self is so great, let him assure him self that what loyaltly he
deceiptfully protests, we will dutifully perform against all traiterous
practizers whatsoever. It is so far from us to be afraid of dealing with the
Council wherein we have and will always use syncerity that we think he had
little wit which did object it, himself being charged to have dealt most
dishonestly underhand in that kind and we would count it the greatest earthly
benefit which could happen to us, if the LL. of the most honorable Council
would deal with us for the building up of that which this libeller has to his
power ruined.

And in this point, not only our better warrant, but the infinite leuity of the
libeller may appear, who always makes Cardinal Allen his copesmate, and in
his table of men abused by us has put him in the rank. Now let any
indifferent man of common sense judge whether he be abused by those which seek
to credit his protestation before mentioned, to follovv his direction, and to
imitate his quiet and Apostolical course, or by those that by their seditious
shufflings have made his protestation to be thought perfidious, and by thinking
them selves somebody, upon emulatio^ have run another clea^ contrary course
to that which he did. And for further mark of the same ridiculous vanity in
his Catalogue, the most reverend Bishop of Tricanica now Nuncius in the Lovv
countries is put in as disobeyed by us and refused to be judge of our
co^trouersyes. This is not only a notorious ly, but the clean contrary is true.
He having his instructions and commission for England from the Pope himself, in
his letters to the secular clergy wills them so to comport them selves as
they do not irritate the temporal state. Do we or the Jesuits disobey in
this point? And the like might be said of every other point if opportunity
served and patience in men to hear such illimited and audacious boldenes in
uttering untruths as this libeller uses. One point further I would not
omit. The same Bishop told me and others and willed us to intimate it to our
countrymen, that in the Spanish inuasio^ in the year 1588. when all English
asvvell Catholics as others were designed to slaughter, the Pope had no
interest, no he was not so much as priuvco the particular circumstances of
that design. If any man compare this spoken of his credit with the book
published that year in the name (usurped as may be thought) of the Cardinal
and other semblable pamphlets since wherein the libeller has been a special
stickler he shall see in a principal point of our difference, who be the
abusers of the Pope and his Nuncius, Cardinal Allen, and others?

That is pleases therefore this goodly libeller to term our actions
treacherous, he shows what be his own, by which he would measure other
men's. And whereas he likeneth M. Bluet and others to Alcimus and Simon in the
books of the Machabees, we hope in God the just judge of all men, that in
time we shall have satisfaction, and in the mean while we make not our
selves better then the whole army of the living God, which by his permission
was exprobrated by an uncircumcised and bastardly Philistim.

An appendix of state matters is the incurring of the law of praemunire
wherein unnecessarily, unprofitably, and most daungerously the libellers
faction inuolued them selves and their abettors, and are discontented that we
avoided it our selves and warned others. And in this point the libeller
pleases himself in retorting a dilemm^ against our associacion. For answer
may it please him to know that the Agency of F. West^n in Wisbich inuolded him
and all his abett^rs within the praemunire, according to the judgment of many
and namely of M. Doctor Windham, a most excellent and renowned lawyer. And it
is admirable, that any men should so far be given over to their own sense,
as for pride without any shadovv af the least good under heaven, they should
infolde them selves and their friends in such dangerous statutes, and there is
no doubt but wise men will look to the causer of these inconveniences. The
association as it was wholly to have bin referred to the good liking of his
Holiness, and was grounded upon such sincere indifferency as the Jesuits
above hand were fayn to comme^d it, so it should have bin without any cause of
exasperating or dislike of the temporal state, and so the often repeated
satyricall and false surmises against it, are grownded upon emulation and
passion, without reason and judgment. And it was well provided in the rules
of the association, that we in prison should have no authority: that it might
be seen we sought the common good and not of our selves. And whereas he
cyteth a letter of mine Fol. 64. to say the Agency in Wisbich was without
title, place, and superiority, it is a fitton.

The thing it self shows that upon ambition and emulation (for they said
they were not honored enough) they overthrew the credit of one of the most
famous places in Europe. The introduction and grownd of the rest was an Epistle
which 18. of the^ vvrote to Fa. Gar. beginning, Co^tulimus ab heri and nudius
tertius etc. In the English Apol. it is maimed, and in the latin in the first
Catalogue of frauds Number. 14. that part which is left out is said to be an
imposture of others ascribed untruly to the 18. I did vvonder, at the lightness
and folly of the libeller when I savv the tvvoe Catalogues, the one of
frauds, the other of men abused, set before the Libell. Scarce a true word
is in either of them, and many notorious untruths, but this denying of part
of their epistle, is to bear the bell. The letter in the first true edition is
turned into English (as I hear) with a commentary, and is entitled Epistola
prima obscurorum virorum. And I know some who at the sight of it at the
beginning said, they would never consort with the Agenists for the absurdity
of that letter. It may be now they see they spoke truer then they would when
they affirmed Fat. Weston to be a paralytik in his bed not able to walk, in
via Iustorum, in the way of the Just. And they must needs perceive that the
remedy for him was as ridiculous and puppish as their conceit, that they
vnriled the house and let him down in a couch before his Superior. And if
he had bin a whole man, yet he vvalked another way then his superior
prescribed since. His letter to me is avouched wherein he says he was
neither author, nor counsaylor, not approuer of the separation. And it may be
they see when men perceive by their own confession, they pulled of the tyles
of the house, they may doubt whether they intended not to pull down all the
rest. When I savv so egregious an untruth and denial of a thing most
notorious in the beginning, and all the rest suitable (a very bundle of lies) I
determined to refer men to the English narration of wisbich matters, which
has upon necessity sparingly set out some things, though it has passed many
other worthy the knowing. Tvvoe untruths may not be untouched proceeding of
spleen and malice, to obfuscate the estimation of tvvoe Priests, the one dead
the other alive. The dead is M. Doctor Norden who with me is made to have
drawn M. Bluett to opposition against Fath. Weston, and so to have caused the
dissension. Besides that M. Bluett is of that worthiness, virtue and
judgment, that he would be drawn to nothing but that which is right: it is
notoriously known that the separation was made before D. Norden came. His
dislike of it proceeded from many causes, whereof one was: the night before
he came to the castle, remaining in Wisbych town with his keeper of London
from whence he was removed, one of the separators (whose name I spare)
vvrote him a letter containing the names and praises of the separators, and
sundry detractions against those which kept their former unity, and a
persuasion to him therefore to be one of the separation. The next day for fear
he should be searched, he burnt the letter before he came to be prisoner in the
Castle. In process of time seeing many the like vnpriestly tricks of the
separators, he grevv to great dislike and open plain reprehension of them,
especially for that they spoke and vvrote evil of others, alleging among
other proofs the letter Written to himself. The party who vvrote it knovving
it to be burnt, denied it in such sort that D. Norden affirming it upon his
Priesthood, charged the other to be a flatt Atheist. Many such things he
charged the Iesuited with, as F. Weston himself and Archer, with auerring and
defending the stevves to be as lavvfull as the Pope himself, the denial of
which propositions in this Apology is so without the compass of humane
modesty, as it seems a very league with hell against truth and honesty, for
saluing the credit of F. Weston and his accomplices: a strange and marueillous
kind of death must be ascribed to D. Norden, who yet as he had ever lived
honest and sincere, so he dyed in prison for the confession of his faith of an
Appoplexy, in quiet and Christian manner, referring his cause to be discerned
by God betwixt him and his factious detractors, who are not content only to
rake in all the cannels of the living, but needs must be ransaking the graves
of the departed, who if they cannot discommend, yet will conceal, or as much
as they can dissemble due commendations. In the book to his Holiness in
discribing the stirs of Wisbich it is said: There came a certain priest to
bring alms to the imprisoned, etc. In the first Catalogue of the latin book.
Number. 18. These praises are said to be given to M. Mush. If it were a mistaking
to putt M. Mush for M. Doleman, it were a strange boldness of him that would
write any thing out of the authenticalls (as he calls them) so much to err
in the narration of one of the chiefest points of the matter: and by this one
may see what wise information the author of the Apology had, and what creditt
is to be given to all the rest of his tale. If it were of purpose (as
otherwise it was a dull oversight) it could not be less then envy against M.
Dolman, a man as it is well known of singular solicitude toward afflicted
Catholics, and of long time a special prouider for prisoners, in which
respect he was and is a great moate in the Jesuits way, which are said to
seeck themselves and not Christ or his. The mention of M. Dolman is made in
the book to the Pope, to show Gods providence in sending him to Wisbich so
opportunely, to be an Arbiter of the separation, who was a man besides his
rare charity of such experience judgment and syncerity as none fitter could
have been chosen, whereby the peruicacity of the separated may more be
convinced, who would not desist at the compassionate perpersuasion persuasion
and tears of so worthy a man, nor for the advice of other excellent men whom
he had conferred vvithall, nor at the last as they had promised (at his
undertaking the arbitrament at their requests) before and undertaken and were
in conscience bound upon his sentence given that they could not go forvvard
without sin. And therefore no maruayle though the libeller would have that
seem to be spoken of M. Mushe, which could be meant of none but M. Dolman. The
whole narration no less foolish then maliciouse, I leave to any indifferent
and Christian judgment. At the close I am charged with a contradiction for
vvriting to Father Garnet in commendation of Father Weston, whom elsvvhere I
reprehend. The truth was, Father Garnet commanded Fa. Weston (who had been
cause of much troobles and sca^dalls) so that there might be a formed peace to
desist from his Agency in his letters to me, my self M. Mush and M. Dudley
dealt with him, he urged the making of some rules which he thought could never
have been procured, yet they were contented unto. That way being deceived he
pretended a great desire of reconciliation which he knevv to be difficult,
considering the iniuryes and detractions proceeding from him and his, to the
prejudice of the others, yet with great difficulty we obtained consent of
remission of private iniuryes: being thus also frustrated he assembled his
party and told them he hoped they would not leave him, for he would not leave
them: some of the vviser answered, the scandal of their separation was so
great, as they would return to their former unity, and without him of he would
not. Being thus driven from all hope of retayning his dominion, he desired that
he might have the credit of persuading his party to reunite them selves by
making to them an exhortation, in pronouncing where of he fell down amongst
them, and at the first was thought to be dead: howsoever the libeller would
have it thought to be a fiction, which is a manifest sign of want of honesty
and grace in the libeller. At length after many tergiuersations, a time and
place, was appointed for the reuniting of all again. In which assembly F.
Weston to give example came first to M. Bluet and upon his knees desired the
forgiving and forgetting of things past. After he came to me and others, which
example the rest mutually followed. Upon this occasion I wrote in his
commendation, thinking then that he had desired this reconciliation unfeignedly
as others I know did, from which he was so far that his party had dealt
before hand and underhand with M. Mush and M. Dudley for the ground of a new
breach. If I upon just occasion misliked F. Weston, yet upon belief of his
humility and charity was content to commed him to his superior and others,
with desire of abolishing the memory of all unkindness, what shallovv wit
has the libeller to make me contradict my self? At the making of the
separation they did make great protestations that they did not make the least
exceptions against any man's behavior. We knevv the^ to be false and urged
separation from men for pretended faults to savor of Donatisme: and now the
libeller utters the contrary to their protestations. Which party is guitly
we refer to every christian to judge by this that to counteruayle their
vnpriestly pasquils we sent to the Pope for a visi^atio^ of Wisbich. F. Parsons
intercepted our letters and so hindered it, which was not only an injury to
us laboring to declare our innocencyes, but one of the great abuses and
indignityes which he has offered to the Sea Apostolik, we for forming our
consciences and satisfying the world, sought to the Pope for discussion and
reformation, they audaciously impeached it, And further to trooble the water
diuulge to the world one Fishers confession. I would fayn know what thing
were so absurd which the libeller would not take hold of when he cyteth
him whom vvithall he discrediteth? When Fisher came into England he
voluntarily set down in vvriting the affairs in Rome as they had passed
betwixt the Jesuits and the students. Notvvithstanding it imported that the
students should have bin cleared of those detestable infamyes which Harvvood
and other such bad fellows had raised, it being written and bruyted that for
extreme evil behavior they were disciplined in the open streets. And this
was it fol. 81. For which he says one was derided and miscalled, giving
good and spiritual Council, which was indeed a persuasion to one to believe
the most horrible slanders raised against the English students in Rome. yett
were Fishers vvritings co^cealed, until unexpectedly a search caused by a
wicked servant and occasioned by some indiscretion of one Iesuited they were
brought to knowledge. A memorial (they say) he caused to be exhibited to the
Pope, and fol. 97. He had letters written by me, entitled. Copia literarum
Catholicorum in Anglia degentium. Why was it not given up, and the authors
conuented if they could not have justified their complaints. If it was given
to the Pope as the Jesuits vvrote in England, why did they procure letters of
commendatio^s from men (some virtuous indeed as S. Fr. Inglefield and others,
but vninformed, credulous, and many times for private interest partialized) to
stop the course of Justice? Why did they by evil means extort letters from
some who now repent their writing? in what place of the world was it
ever held for a lavvfull manner of proceeding to elude sufficient testimony
against one in a criminal cause, by procuring hands in commendation of the
accused, and from such many times, as do not know him, and yet must testify
general negatiues, against law, and the light of reason? The libeller
confesses, my letters among others were intercepted, and thereby discovers
himself who he is, for that he auerreth them to be forth coming, which,
(with Gods grace) before a due tribunal will be discussed, whether letters
sent to the Pope, and inquisition, may be intercepted. That is a stale shift,
which he brings, for my letters written to the students, that they were
delivered to some in Millane, and the libeller most dishonestly and falsely
affirms, that they were seditiouse: whereas indeed they were contrarily,
to persuade the students to peace and patience, and to leave revenge to God, to
whom it did belong. For that I ever neglected private wrongs, in respect of
publik scandalls: although in his sense every thing is seditious, which is not
fitted to his humor: which is no less then to call good evil, and evil
good, which as virtuous and moderate men condemn, so has it anexed from God
a malediction.

This Fisher at his coming to Rome was brought to the College, and imprisoned
under the custody of the common iaylor, for that office he executes, and as it
seems affects. Being in close keeping (as I of certain knowledge, do know
he himself relates it and promises to justify before his Hollinesse) Once for
a show Acarisius came to examine him, but ordinarily his keeper Fa. Parsons
offering to put hott Irons to his arms, if he would not confess what he would
have him. These times God has reserved us into, wherein our English College
founded by our kings for the good of our country, should be possessed by those
who make it a place of imprisonment and torture. A number of sheets of paper
were written of tales, surmises, and incoherent lies, which is one of the
most principal authenticalls of the libeller. And if there were nothing else,
that is a sufficient discovery of the packing of Fishers confession, and of
much malice else, that he makes him, fol. 96. to say, he was principally
commended to M. Christ. Bagshaw, M. Robert Dolman, and M. John Collington. And
yett must needs this worthy work be printed in disgrace of those, who are
tovvched with Fishers confession. If Fishers reports be of any credit, the
libeller and his Rovvte be arrand honest men. If they be of no credit the
publishing of them deserves a furred capp. Among other narrations of Fishers,
a number of incoherent fooleryes, collected under his name, one is of some
great familiarity which he saw betwixt some of us in Wisbich, and the keeper,
and also the keepers wife. A detractio^ according to their custom general,
sovvnding bigg, and a toy in particular discussion. The libeller has very bad
luck in his Chronology, for M. Medley our keeper his wife was a very old
woman, and dead some years before Fisher came to Wisbich, yet his cunning is
to hurt by a confused suspicion if he can, and no man in particular shall be able
to urge satisfaction. I could have wished for the honor of Religion, the
libeller had not with so much untruth and improbability, corraded such base
show of matter against men of known integrity, for that it discovers very
bad dispositions in himself (and many things daily begin to be imputed to his
accomplices, I hear more and more) the displaying whereof if hereafter it grieve
him and them, they must thank themselves, and have the amends in their hands. I
have heard (and truly dissvvaded) some threatening such publication, and I could
vvish that the libeller with Harwood and all the rest of the pack of
detractors, were with their accusations remitted to Gods judgment, if it
were not prejudicial to their souls which is much to be feared. One devise
with Fisher is not to be omitted. After Fa. Parsons had made him say and unsay
what he would have him, he caused him (being still guarded by some of his
creatures) to come before some of the students, and tell them in solemn
earnest, of his knowledge, that the stirs in the Roman College against the
Fathers were caused by the Council of England, and therefore to be abhorred.
Whereby may be seen what wise opinions he would imprint in our virtuous
youths, what auersion he bears and bewrays to the state of England,
vwhich others sought to have concealed, and upon what grounds he charge men
with dealing with the Council. And yet this served him for a principal
grownd to write into Spayn, that the English students were alienated from the
king of Spayn until he came to Rome and altered them. By which and a number of
like shifts and surquedryes, he has abused both England and Spayn, which in
due time here after may come to the light and laughter of the world. And
because in the Latin libell he makes the Council, or I know not what enemies,
beginners of the discontents and garboyles in Rome, and would dravv a certain
cohaerence of the late stirs with things which fell out in my time, and
makes me expelled thence by the Cardinals own hands whereof I never heard
before. I redd the libell nor know not now what it means. I must say
something of my departure out of Rome. Although to be expelled thence, or from
any place for that which he calls sedition, be to be counted I doubt not
reputation and merit, (which if he had or durst have explicated in particular
what he means by sedition,) would more easily appear. For any act or word
of mine in Rome or else where let him object what he can, I give him leave,
and in just defense of mine honor, I defy all such contemptible companions, as
shall any way oppose themselves against it. But to clear the mysts which he
casts. Being made Priest in France, with that freedom and resolution for
England, with which many excellent and innocent Priests had bin made before, I
went to Rome, to visit that holy and renowned place, with leave and advice of
the late Cardinal Allen of happy memory, to stay or return according to mine
own liking, for which and many other favors I was singulerly beholding to
that man. At my first coming to Rome, seeing the state of the College, the
number of the discontented, and that for notoriouse iniuryes, I determined to
return again with the first opportunity. Which resolution I would never after
alter, among many other causes, for that I had gotten the Italian pain in the
breast in taking the spiritual exercise in the Roman College for which I
was driven for a time to live in our vinyeard, and use other means of
recovery, but all in vayn, for which and other causes, Cardinal Allen wrote
unto me to come into France. Whilst I was expecting opportunity of returning,
D. Lewis Bishop of Cassana came to Rome, and lay in the College, using often
conference with me about English matters. Fa. Agazarius knovving most of the
students to dislike his proceedings, and doubting that he should be driven out
of the house (which fell out immediately after in Sixtus Quintus his time
upon a visitation which was procured after my departure, vvherin M. D. Ely
has bin misinformed, as though I had bin one of the procurers of that visit)
dealt with me very earnestly, that I would resolve to stay and be entirely
united with the Fathers. My answer to him and others was still resolute for
departure. The fashion of the Jesuits is to have one whose name they may use
for their disignes, to the end things laudible may be attributed to themselves,
and things discommendable to him. So was Cardinal Caietane for their matters
of England, and so was at that time Cardinal Boncompagno, whom with no
credit to himself (to say the least) the libeller names, nor with honor to
the Cardinal, but that he would play small game rather then sit out. The
Cardinal asked me whether I would stay, and I told him no, the Cardinal
said then I should resolve to depart, I ansvvered rather that day present then
the next. After this when I came to the Pope himself of blessed memory Gregory
the 13. he moved my stay unto me, I ansvvered his Holiness, I had a firm
resolution to go to my country, where upon he dismissed me with the rest,
with most fatherly words and affection, and granted all the requests we
proposed unto him. And F. Agazarius gave such testimony to me and others then
departing under his hand and the College seal, which is yet extant to be
seen, as if the libeller had vievved it, call he sedition what he list (his
calling not being vvorth a blevv point) he would confess our expulsion (if
any had bin) to be most iniuriouse, and with no advantage to the libeller
remembered. The records of the College be nothing but foolish partial wresting
and reporting of things according to private humors, which is at length
grown to that narration of mother Hubberd, which I remembered in the
beginning. Within the compass of which since, he will needs dravv his
departure out of Oxon, the conference of one part with another will discover
the whole. For. Parsons his departure out of Oxon he tells a tale without
head or feet that because he would have punished on M. James Hauley his own
scholar for going to a play, I joined with the Protestant party, who would
needs throw him and all his out of the College the same night, except he would
yeald to depart. If he had not a marvelous conceypt of his own wit, he
would not utter such narrations, not only void of substance but of all
probability or color of truth. Long time he has bin suffered to report,
that he was putt out of Oxon for his Religion, with some touch of credit to me
and others, until at length his exorbitant grating upon every one who stood
in his way, gave some occasion by some insinuatio^ of the truth to give him a
caveat, not to be so saucy in meddling with other men's matters, and so far so
forget his own imperfections.

True it is that M. Squier did not like M. Parsons, but that he did object any
particular matter against him is so far from truth, that he made
protestation to the contrary. For Religion M. Parsons then did profess himself
a Protestant and that with such affectation, as he dealt with M. Squire for
direction in the study of divinity, and co^ferred ordinarily in the reading of
Calvin with M. Hyde, a fellow in the house, a known Caluinist, but otherwise
learned and a very moral Gentleman. Yea being bursar he had disfurnished the
College library of many ancient books, and rare manusscripts (and of some of
them as is thought dishonestly) and in their steed brought in a number of
Heretical books the first that ever were there which yet remayn for an
argument of his want of Religion, and for a corraziue to his conscience
vvhylest he lives. The resolutenesse of some of the fellows to be ridd of
him was such, that they had provided the tolling of a bell for him as the
manner is for one which is to depart the world, which as it might proceed
from some discomposednesse, so I protest before God I did not know of until I
heard the bell toll, and there upon asked the cause. He had indeed the favor
granted him to resign (being first lavvfully expelled) his submission with
many tears and promise to us all who vvear there that he would ever after
carry himself in good sort. That he has borne malice tovvarde me, I am sorry he
has given such cause to think, as in the libell is uttered, and I could have
wished that his virtue had obliterated all those things which then passed, and
that he had not by his comporteme^t since, lost those good motions which his
humiliation caused him to utter then. For being charged in Oxon amongst very
many things (which I would be loath to utter) with forgery by one
Sta^ckliffe his fellovv bursar, it seems strange to me that in this libell
mention is made of so many things, which must needs be foysted (as Fishers
memorial Fishers confession, for a great part, my letters delivered in
Millan) and amongst many other one fol. 135. And which is further (says the
libeller) it was discovered by tht same papers and other letters out of
England that they had particular designements to make themselves Bishops and
Archbishops (speaking of D. Bishop and M. Charnok) whereupon in some letters
it was written to your LL.

And not unlike is the narration of M. James Hauley his going to a play, and
keeping in my chamber for fear of correction, as he is now a Gentleman of
great vvorth and commendation, so was he in his young years of rare expectation
and composed behavior. I doubt not but M. Parsons remembers well he was one
of the twenty nine or thirty which to his face came before the Masters and
fellows of the College, to demand justice, yet with that modesty which for
the time (others being eager enough to speak and urge) made him sylent, which
since I have often recounted with and commended him. And therefore I marvel
at his boldenes in mentioning him but much more in remembering the matter of
eating flesh, except he would register his own perpetual infamy. For going
about beyond all extremity of law, to dravv diverse (seven or eight as I
remember) of good reputation in danger of their lives for taking after the
fashion of scholars certain puddings from a pupil of his called hims, dealt
with the youths Fa. and would needs have him enter into ba^ds unto him, that he
should not release the prosecution of felony, which M. Parsons would have
the matter brought unto. The indignity was so great as the matter was
signified unto the privy Council and by their order ended, the parties accused
being made secure and Parsons notorious for giving occasion of a common by
word, Parsons puddings. Wherein he should have given me thanks for saying (if
it had bin true) that in Oxon we were wont to draw all matters to felony,
in transfiguring that to my self which was true of him. Whereas for mine own
private, I thank almighty God, I never in all my life accused any man of
felony, or any other thing, nor ever commenced any action either criminal or
Civil against any man, nor was ever conuented before any Magistrate when I
was at liberty, but for matter of Catholic faith and Religion.

Concerning which the libeller makes an objection about a place of Scripture
of the day of judgment not known to the son of man, alleged for defense
of equiuo^ations. For my defense of the Scriptures and every title of them I
trust I have given sufficient proof. This place is absurdly alleged for
equivocations as out of the word s^re, with which the libeller is little
acquaynted, So to does learnedly prove in his book De tegendo and retegendo
secretum. And some of the Jesuits confess, that this place were alleadgeable
for equivocation in matters of faith if it were in any, for that Christ his
knowledge of the day of doom is a matter of faith, neither will this letter
discharge F. Wallpoole, (for which purpose it seems framed) of whom
concerning Squires matter it is well known what the said party confessed if I
do not mistake him. But his latter letter and manner of his taking is so
impudent a forgery, as I see not how any man can give credit to the former, if
the libeller say true, that the same man wrote both. I might take occasion
here to speak of the propositions which the libeller makes dangerous, and I
know not what, which he obiecteth in his own name concerning obedience and
confirmation, etc. and in the name of one Bensted against me concerning
equivocations. But to deal with him out of the sphere of his actiuity were no
victory, and yet might increase a swelling humor in him which redoundeth
already. Neither need I to defend the letters sent from Wisbich and Framingham
signed by my self and others, they be extant, let him urge them to the
uttermost. Those particulars which he rehearses in the Apology, come out of
his own forge. He says certain peremptory demaundes were set down to the
Pope fol. 134. and there upon calls me a resolute lavvmaker: I must call him
a resolutely-maker. The title prefixed to those demands was. The points for
which most humble supplication is to be made to his Holiness. He says we have
abused M. Blakvvell. We vvish M. Blakwell had not abused himself and the vvole
world. Before the brief he was an usurper and since his pretended decretalls
and censures he is holden to be excommunicate with all his co^plices, of
which as he has written to the Nuncio in Flaunders, so may he to the
Inquisition or his Holiness. Since tvvoe or three lavvfull appeals made to the
sea Apostolik (which are acknowledged in the Apology) his authority (if ever
he had any) being suspended, it was a plain rebellion against Gods Church in
him to meddle further to hinder as much and as dispightfully as he could all
appellation, to oppose himself against the University of Paris, to contemn the
learning, practice, and canons of the whole Church (a fevv co^plices of his
own excepted) and to make himself in his own cause a supreme, peremptory,
infallible and inappellable judge. The most Reverend Bishop of Tricarica
Viceprotector of England vvrote unto him to see all things restored in
integrum. His despicable answer shows what indeed his regard of the Popes
deputyes is, and consequently of the Pope himself. We vvrote unto him from
Framingham of diverse falsifications which he used in cyting our letters,
whereof one was, which is recyted again in the Apology fol. 82. that he
should send 2200 pounds to Flanders. Is not this an admirable world when an
untruth shall be auerred, noted, iterated, corrected, and yet again and again
repeated? specially in a matter of such iniquity as is the indeuoring to starve
the confessors of Christ in prison. Which injustice (whereunto besides a
number of like intolerable grieuances to the Saints of God M. Blakvvell has
concurred) cannot be counteruayled in Gods judgment or an vncauteriated
conscience with a vayn, unprofitable, dangerous, and surrepted title.

F. Parsons who stands so much in the Apology upon his book of resolution,
I vvish not the diminution of commendations due to his labor (although it be
nothing so much as he would have the world believe) but his continuance in
handeling that object. As to some private friends of his, some years ago
talking with me about the myseryes of the Church of England, and sygnifying
they heard some were about to set out Parsons life I then told, that I
understood many were exasperated with him for diverse and just causes, and
know no reason why they should spare him, and therefore wished he would
leave of with detractio^s and practizings to irritate men: so in one common
letter which in the Apol. he says was to be showed to the Pope, we gave a
sufficient caveat Cito indignabitur libertas si opprimitur. or as he eyteth it
(if truly) fol. 18. si prematur. That which he should have taken for a warning
to him self he makes a matter of exclamation against us (says he) these good
liber tines. etc. And I know not whether some of them from whom it proceeded
will say, see this calumniator, see this ignorant censurer, see this unlearned
Atheist. They be the words of S. Hier. in his Epistle to Theophilus Patriarch
of Alexandria, against John Bishop of Jerusalem, and now Aristippus will make
S. Hierome a libertine, I know not how far in rigor his reprehension may be
drawn in speaking against defense of liberty, specially Ecclesiastical.

Is not such a man's talk of peace like the speech of friar Rush after he had
set all by the ears. He wrote I know letters to M. Collington and both the
Bennetts pretending a desire of peace. And I am witness that all three most
sincerely and charitably indeauored to procure peace, offering all reasonable
conditions, and more then was fit. M. Collington at the first coming of the
brief came to Wisbich and upon his conscience protested, that he thought M.
Blackvvells authority would do good to England (a great inducement for
quieting things then) upon fair words and promises made to him and M. Mush by
M. Blakvvell, wherein of M. Blak. meant truly as is thought then and of him
self he did, he has bin egregiously abused and transported since. If he meant
fraudulently (which the event might persuade) he is as faythles a man as
lives upon the earth. Among other things he promised the return of D. Bishop
and M. Charnok the restoring of facultyes to M. Benson, M. Hill, and M.
Tempest, and diverse other things in particular which he knovveth, besides a
general and inviolable atonement for all matters passed.

Nothing was performed but new picking of old quarrels (which the Pope in
his last brief says he sorrovvfully repeateth) Heervppon a new and worse
trooble arising besides the requests, letters, and caueats of many to M.
Blakvvell and the Jesuits. M. Clerk and M. Mountford (tvvoe worthy priests)
came to conferr with us at Wisbich, wrote to M. Blak. delivered their letters
to M. Hues, who with M. Wright and others witnessed M. Blakvv. promis made to
them in London, that all old quarrels should be buried, M. John Bennet and his
brother came to London at the same time to procure pacification, M. John Bennet
in his answer to F. Parsons (which I think before this he has seen)
recounteth with what trauayles, expenses, and demisse offers, they sought for
quietness. with inconstancy disdayn and intolerable haughtines all their
endeavors were requited.

Herevppon the Appeal was forced and the want of conscience in the libeller
discovered, which pretends I know not what compact with the Council to
make the Appeal, and yet not intent to prosecute it, one being as true as the
other, and both shameless and vvitlesse surmises, which kind of dealing if he
continue in, he shall deserve in steed of a redd capp a blevv whetstone. The
giving and debarring of orders and facultyes, partially and almost
sacrilegiously, the hindering and excluding of graduated and mature men from
our Seminaryes, the factious admitting of them which come thither the alluring
of some there with the oppression of others, the contempt of the secular
priests being the body of the Clergy, the infaming so many Saints of God with
horrible and continual slanders, the manifold irritations of the temporal
state, the indaungering of Catholics, the variouse fraud in getting money
within the realm and transporting it without, the superfluous and scandalous
expenses of many, the supporte of many unworthy men, unlawful assertions and
enormous iniuryes, the indeauoring to starve many Worthy Catholics at liberty
and confessors of Christ in prison, the contempt of all laws, all canons all
appeals, and all Christian proceeding with us do convince the libeller of the
necessity and intended pursuit of the Appeal. Three reconciliations the
seculer Priests with yielding of their right, have condiscended unto, which
all have bin broken by their adversaries, for the fourth nothing was omitted
which was requisite, and more tendered then just hope and desert occasioned.

The persons of our adversaries we pray for, their iniuryes we have referred
to God and our lavvfull Magistrate, not only affirming but also vvishing, and
not vvishing also but indeuoring to effect that which the Prophet says,
Iustitia and pax osculataesunt.

By Christopher Bagshavv Priest and Doctor of Divinity.

FINIS.

