A TREATISE OF TREASONS AGAINST Q. ELIZABETH, and the Croune of England,
divided into two Parts: whereof,

The first Part answers certain Treasons pretended, that never were
intended:

And the second, discovers greater Treasons committed, that are by few
perceived: as more largely appears in the Page following.

Imprinted in the Month of January, and in the Year of our Lord. M.D.LXXII.

The Argument of this Treatise divided into two Parts.
The first Part confut^th the false accusations, and sclan^erous Infamies,
printed in certain namelesse and infamous Libelles against the Q. Majesty of
Scotland, Heir apparent to the Crown of England: and against Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshall of the same Realm: and defends the Honor and
Loialtie of the said Princes.

The second Part (which begins Fol. 83.) detect^th sundry deep and hidden
Treasons, of long time practiced and daily contrived, against the Honor,
Dignity, safety, and state of Queen Elizabeth, her Roialtie, her Crown, and
all the Blood Roial of England, by a few base and ingrate persons, that have
been called to credit by her: and remoueth the plausible vi^ards, wherewith
they cover their Coniurations. It lays open also, the dangerous state, that
the said Q. and Realm does stand in, if those Co^federates, and their
Conspiracies^ be not preuent^d in time.

The Preface to the Englissh Reader.
IN the sundry namelesse libels, Two purposes intended by the libels presently.
of late put forth in print, every man of mean capacity may see two things
principally labored and intended. The one, The one open and malicious.
soeth and easy for every man to perceive, that he that will not see it, shall
yet feel and find it, whether he will or no. That is to say, how they labor
to defame and discredit that virtuous Lady y^ Queens Majesty of Scotland,
being Heir apparent to the Croune of England: to slander and deface that
Noble Prince, the Duke of Northfolke, the chief Peer of that Realm: to
blemmish and abase the reast of the Nobility, presently apprehended: to
confirm and increase the Princes di^fauour toward them al: to bring them al
in hatred and obloquie of the people: to make their frindes a^eard to favor
them: to kendle the coals of their enemies malice against them: to frame the
indifferent sort, to becomme their fo^s: and so finally to bring the chiefest
(with as many of them as they may) to conf^sion: the rest in trouble to
disgrace and bring low, with all others bysides, that either for honor, duty,
or conscience sake, do acknowledge those Princes to be, as they are, or that do
lament their distress, that do favor the justice of their cause, that do
ough^ speak in defense of their Right, or that do appear, to have any
compassion of their calamity.

The other s^crete, crafty and ambitious.
The other, though it be not altogether so plain to every weak sight, yet shall
it, I trust, be as easily see^e anon by every wise and indifferent man, that
shall vouchsafe to consider this Treatise to the end. That is to wit, how
craftily and cunningly some do labor, to bleare and blind the eyes of the
ignorant, like Craftes-maisters, I warrant you, seeking with many wrong
pretenses, and with numbers of false shows, to hide and cover those truths,
that do break ^ut sooner, then the Captain Iugglers would have them. By
obi^cting, I mean, to your eyes and first sight, so great a show of Seditio^s
and Treasons, supposed to have been conspired and attempted by those two Noble
Princes (which by them, nor any other, were never thought on) to withdraw
thereby the eyes, and to divert the minds of the multitude, from beholding and
falling into the reckening of those greater Treasons, that are in deed mo in
number, more odious in quality, and nearer at hand, yea already a working, and
contrived by them chiefly that send these Libels amongst you.

Which kind of Coosoning, or rather coniuration, is passing necessary to be
discovered, and more then high time, that it had been done ere this: as well for
the peril of the practice finally meant, as for the mischievous means used to
bring it to pass. The final practice, A third finally intended is, to wrest
the succession of the Croune from his du^ course.
I call, the alteration of the succession of the Croune of that Realm, by
untimely extincting both those Lines, in which it presently rests, and should
first fall unto, by all laws of Nature, Nations, and your own Country: and
withal to confirm and establish unto certain base persons (under the Title of
a third Family, unto which them selves are lately united) the perpetual
Regiment of ye same, the possession whereof they have already obtained. Whose
ambitious minds are so limed with the pleasant gain of present gouerna^ce,
that they count both your Prince and Realm, and all the rest well adventured,
if them selves thereby may win that, which they aspire unto.

This, do I call, the final purpose of the practice in hand. And therein shall
I for this time rest, how so ever both wisdom, reason and experience would,
that no man should look for an end thereof, when it were come to that: nor
expec^ any less, but that when these two first Families shall be weeded out for
that third, that also shall be weeded out for an other, and so that fourth, for a
fyfth, till none be leaft of the blood Royal, but the Realm come to be
governed, either by a Foreiner, or by a Popular State.

And of the many mischievous means used to bring this purpose to pass, The
means to altre the succession are these.
who can be ignorant, no man almost being found of that Nation, that has not
tasted bitterly of them, by him self or his frind in more or in less? For who
remembers not, that to set up a lawless Faction of Machiauellian Libertines,
that should not (by conscience or fear of sin) be restrained from any manner
mischief, a new Religion was pretended, Heresy.
that with help of Authority, shouldred out the old: of purpose chiefly, to
leave none at all in the hearts of the people, to the end, Atheism.
that a Rabble of unbridled persons might always be readily found, which by no
Religion, nor zeal of soul, should fear, with force and face impudent, to
execute, what so ever should be committed unto them, by those that have created
and set up the Faction.

And upon this foundation, who is so blind, as has not seen, what seditions
Sedition.
have been sown between Prince and Prince, what rebellio^s Rebellion.
have been raised by Subjects against their Superiors, what murders Murder.
have been committed upon whom so ever was thought to lie in their way: what
Sacrilege, Sacrilege.
what incest, Incest.
what rapes of Nonnes and viole^ces done to other women, Rape.
what unnatural torments and sudden slaughters of me^, how many forcible
inuasio^s into other Princes territories, Invasion.
what open robberies, Public robbery.
what public Piracies, what breach of faith between frinds, Unfaithfulnes.
what violation of al leagues and laws both of Nature and Nations, Breach of
leagues.
Uiolation of law^.
what corruptions with money and favor of Authority to suborne false
accusations, Corruption.
Subornatio^.
False accusation.
what deprivations and imprisonme^ts of Princes, D^priuation o^ Princes.
what depositio^s of Prelates, Unjust imprisonments.
what impudenci^ of lying without limite or measure both in writing and word,
Impudent l^ing.
what forging and saining of frindship by fairest words, Forging and ^aining.
when woorst was meant, and finally what wastes of Princes Treasures, waste of
treasure.
what pillage of the people, Pillage of the poor.
and what co^sumption of the A^ncient Nobility, D^struc^^on (...) Nobil^ti^.
and of principal Personags every where?

Of this practice therefore and final p^rpose, that has been compassed by
such mischievous means, and without the^ could not thus long have been
vpholden, nor maintained, can any man be found so grac^lesse, and so void of
honesty, as to think it not necessary, and more than high time, both to
detect ye one, and detest ye other? And if thou thinke^ yt I enforce this
matter over vehemently, I remit the judgment thereof to every man's experience,
that (not resting upon sweet and deceaueable words) shall vouchesafe but to
examine his own memory, Not w^ords but deeds do try truth.
of the facts and doings put in ure, by the setters up of that Faction, within
these twelve or fourtene years last past, for the confirmation and e^tablishing
of the same party erected of new, chiefly to serve the turns of sum private
men now in authority. And thereafter let him deem, what manner of governance
your present State susteineth, and whether any Religion at al appear to rule
in the hearts of your Rulers, or be m^ant to be leaft in the hearts of your
people. And that is it, that I call a Machiauellian State and Regiment: A
Machiauellian denned.
where Religion is put behind in the second and la^t place: where ye civil
Policy, I mean, is preferred before it, and not limited by any rules of
Religion, but ye Religion framed to ser^e ye time and policy: where both by word
and example of ye Rulers, y^ ruled are t^ught with every change of Prince to
change also the face of their faith and Religion: where, in appearance and show
only, a Religion is pretended, now one, now an other, they force not greatly
which, so that at heart there be none at al: where neither by hope nor fear of
ought after this life, men are restrained from any manner vice, nor moved to any
virtue what so ever: but where it is free to slander, to belie, to forswear,
to accuse, to corrupt, to oppress, to rob, to invade, to depose, to
imprison, to murder, and to commit every other outrage, never so barbarous
(that promises to advance the present Policy in hand) without scruple,
fear, or conscience of hell or heaven, of God, or Devil: and where no
restraint, nor allurement is l^ft in the heart of man, to bridle him from evil,
nor to inuit him to good: but for vain fame only and fear of lay laws, that
reach no further then to this body and lif^: that call I properly a
Machiauellian State and Governance.

The order of this ^reatise
Now for the order of this Treatise, before I come to lay open the foul and
final fraud of this practice, I have, as reason required, first answered the
accusations^ and cleared the crimes of the accused, each after other, in such
order, as that Libel lays them forth, that seems to contain more weight
and pith, then all the rest: namely that, which is dated the 13th. of October
1571. and subscribed, with the letters of ^. and G. unto which I have made
choice chiefly to address mine Answ^re, as w^l for that I find no material
point in any of the others, omitted out of this, and in this some effectual
points a little opened, that in the others are but obscurely glaunced at: as
also, for that the chief substance of all the others consists in scoffs,
taunts, and Railers Rhetorike, more lively representing the sprite, from whence
they proceed, then likely to seduce any wise or honest man.

And that done, I gi^e thee in a second part by it self but a taste (as it
were) of the Treasons in deed intended, yea rather in hand, in hammering, and
well set forward already. Not so largely yet, as with Gods help I purpose in an
other tu^g to publish them, if cause hereafter shall so require, but yet so
sensibly and plainly (I trust) as shall suffice for them of your Nation that are
of judgment, reading or experience: which sort being satisfied, and coming to
the clear sight of this mischievous mystery, my purpose is performed, and
there shall be (I hope) no further need of enlarging the odious practices of men
in Authority, unto the vulgar multitude.

The A^thors meaning is not ^o impugn ^uthoritie.
And in the detection of this pestiferous practice, considering that I am to
impugn that proceeding, that carries a cou^tena^ce of Authority to maintain
it: it behooves (least I be mistaken and surmised to mean otherwise then I
do) that I admonish the Reader, and declare, how I am to be understood, when
I come to encounter with any thing, that Authority sets forth, or do use
any terms of improo^ing ought, y^ Authority commends.

The Author, a Stranger.
Understand thou me therefore, good Reader, as a Stranger, that has lived in
thy Country for y^ most part about thirty years, and thereby to have conceived
that re^erent opinion and affection to your Nation, y^ the good nature of the
people generally, and the fertility of the soil do well deserve, and is justly
commended for: and to have observed (as my small capacity would reach) the
se^^ral shap^s of your Go^ernement v^der King Henry (for a f^w years before his
death) king Edward, Q. Marie and Q. Elizabeth. And as my years have grown
riper, and my judgment by experience has been enlarged, with the help of
some reading of your histories, I have principally noted, and most advisedly
entered into the consideration of the present state and ^orme of Regiment used
under your Q. y^ now is. At whose entry into her Croune, I was present, and a
witness of her quiet beginning and conti^uance of reign for twel^e years time,
and beheld the first attempt of mutation: Mutation.
to wit, whom she cast out, that had place and credit, and whom of new she
called in, that had neither of both, as the Authors and inst^^ments of the
innovation ensuing. I enioied my part of the common and qui^t s^steinyng of
al, above expectation.

Among y^ instruments of innouatio^ newly called in, I specially c^^d and noted
those, to whom above others your Q. committed ^^e^ from ye beginning, ye chief
cure and charge of her affairs: Two persons only are charg^d in this Treatise.
and whose managing of y^ same unto this day, I account a rare testimony of
your Q. constancy, The Constan^y of Q. Elizab.
respecting y^ variable affections, that other Princes her Predeces^sors have been noted of in y^ change of the^, by whom they would rule. And unto these two
persons specially) concurring with the judgment of most men) I attribuce and
impute, what so ^uer of importance comes forth under he^, or has been seen
in her time. And toward them chiefly (yea only in effect) is my process and
speech therefore meant and directed. Only two persons rule and do al.
Not al only as the chief instruments of al her mutations at home^ and
Garboiles abroad, but also as the special Sprites and Familiars, that ^ollow
her, in tempting, enticing, alluring, and procuring her, by all arts and
de^ises, to suffer her self, her Realm, her Authority, her Treasure and
forces to be missapplied and abused, both to the one, and to the other.

Of these two persons therefore, as of the efficient and effectual causes of all the perilous practices and dangerous Treasons, that I labor to lay open: of
the present change, from the quiet security your Q. was long in, to the
vnsurety and danger she is in (if these Libels say true) and of the trouble and
tormoile the whole Realm is like to taste, if those attempts go on against
your Nobility and the Blood Roial: of these two men, I say, and of no^^ other,
am I to be understood in this Treatise, when I use any term, that may seem
to touch Authority: because I mean none other Authority, then of them two
only: who (by craft and circumuention) have obt^ined that Authority, that what
so ever impugneth their pestilent pri^ate purpose (the end whereof I verily
bele^e your Q. sees not) must be taken and published for traitorous, To
impug^^ their purpos^ is termed treason.
seditious, sclaunderous, rebellious, and what so ever else can be thought more
odious: be it never so well meant, and tend it never so evidently to the
security of your Q. to the benefit of your Realm, and to the honor of ^ur
Nobility.

And albeit, there are choice enough to be found of your own Nation, A
Stranger writes, because the Inglish may not.
that for their wisdom and intelligence, do far ^urmount me in ability,
to have treated this matter, to the better satisfaction of the Readers, and
that have no less good will thereunto then my self: yet considering the thral,
^^ate and serui^ude, A lame^tabl^ servitude.
that presently they sustain, having (by severe searches, by suborn^d
accusations, by sudden arrests, by sharp impriso^ments, by fraudulent
examinations, and pe^alties) their hands bound from writing, sending, or
receiving: their eyes closed from reading or b^holding: their ears stopped,
from hearing: their mouths and tunges tied up, from speaking: yea their very
hearts and minds restrained from thinking (if it break out once) of any least
sentence or syllable sounding toward the Detection of this detestable
enterprise, or of any other truth, that the Capitains of this Coniuration would
have covered and concealed: whiles your own, I say, remain in that thraldom,
where no man almost speaks with other, without rendering an account wh^^of they
^alke: yea, whiles your Queen, whom cheifely it imports to know it, is by
art and ab^sion deprived of al means, that might bring her to understand it:
whiles al books are forbidden, that would tell it: al letters kept from her,
that would show it: and al access of those that would intimate it unto her, is
by one craft or other restrained, and prohibited from her: it shall not, I
trust, be taken for presumption in me, that I^ upon these considerations, have
yielded and relented to the requests of such, as for their honor and credit
might have commanded me.

Who (for mine own private knowledge of the vanity and untruth of sundry
principal points in these Libells objected) have moved and persuaded me, Not
by hea^ say, but by knowledge the Autho^ speaks mo^^^
by putting forth of somewhat, to break the yse, as it were, and to lead the
way to others of your own, that in time con^e^ient will more at large set
down the truth of this story, whereof I do here but succinctly speak. And my
self having been not altogether a stranger to the first treaty of the
marriage, between the Q. Majesty of Scotland, and the Duke of Norf. nor to
some of the principal personages, now imp^ached for the same, and thereby
knowing, how falsely in these Libells they are belyed, in every material point
laid to their charge: and beholding them selves withal, to be so restrained,
that either they can not come to say and show the truth, or that they are not
believed, when they say truth: or that the truth is murdered and falsified,
though they be heard and believed: in this case now, if I should not by saying
somewhat, give the adventure, to tie this bell about the Cattes neck, I see ^ot
how to excuse my self of some part^c^pation with the accusers of these
in^ocent^s, and of communicating (in a sort) with the Contriuers of their
confusion.

The weight (...) necessity o^ this work
And i^ any man shall think, that upon so lewd a Libel of so light credit, as
coming out without approbation of Authority, without name of Author or
writer, and without probable matter, less labor might have served, for the
discrediting and disprouing of that, which no wise nor honest men believed: let
it be remembered, good Reader, that in a matter of this weight, as wherein go^th
indaungered the Li^es of Princes and pearelesse Personages, the transposing of
Cro^nes, the mutations of commonweals, and the hazard of turning one of the
most principal and Ancient Monarchi^s of Christendom, from a most Christian
Gouernem^nt, unto a Machiauellian State, it shall not be wisdom, to measure
the credit of the multitude, by the conscience and discretion of those few that
be wise and good. The number are light, the wise and good, ^low in believing.


Again, considering how far this matter is proceeded onward toward the said
end and fine, that this Libel shoots at (which, by the present state, Close
imprisonment of a Prince thre^net^ death.
that the Q. of Scotl. and the rest do stand in, is ^asy to perceive) and
regarding, that this matter stands not now in equal terms between mine
Adversary and me, but that he shadowing him self under some in Authority,
speaks nothing but that, that is plausible to the present Rulers: yea when
the writer is rather but the Cane and Trunk, Rulers speak by Canes and Trunks.
thorough which, some in Authority do speak, with whom the creditte of the
multitude commonly runs: The multitu^e runs with Authority.
respecting also, that mine Adversary has begone, has told his tale first,
al wholly and at length, has been quietly heard without interruption, what
soever he listed to say: remembering, how much those advantages, for the most
part, do preuail (for few are they in number, that are so wise and good, Foles
believe the first tale, wisemen tarry the answer.
as to reserve their credit in suspe^se, til the Answer and second tale come
forth) waying further, that his whole process consists in brief and bare
affirmatio^s, without reason or proof: in which manner of writing much matter
goes contained in small room (for a lie of a line, is not easily answered in
a leaf or two some times) and lastly considering, A lie is sooner told, then
answered.
that what so ever I am to say (coming to impugn a Process, that has before
hand obtained credit with many, as vpholde^ by some of the Rulers) is already
so prejudiced, y^ before it come forth, it may be foresene to be termed
slanderous, seditio^s, traitorous, te^ding to Rebellion, and to move troubles
in ye Realm: upon these considerations, if thou vouchesafe, good Reader, to
way them depely, albeit I have in no subst^^^ial matter leaft the ^ndifferent
man unsatisfied, yet shall thou, I suppose, find me rather more compendious in
many points, then thou would have wisshed me, for one, wherein thou shall
think me tedious, or more abundant then needed.

The Authors metaphor of the destruction of Tro^
And although in this Treatise, I refuse not altogether mine Adversaries
Metaphors, of their Brood-hen and Tree of treasons, but do now and then as
truly apply them, to display their devises, as they do fals^ly abuse them,
to give show to surmises: yet, for as much as the fained Goddess, the famous
City, and Noble king of old Troy never tasted more detestable Treason by the
huge Horse, which the Grecians forged, and the crafty Greek Sinon by art
conneied into that City (as a solemn Sacrifice to Pallas the Goddess there)
th^n your Qu^ene, Country, and City of (...) Troy, with her next Posterity
of the blood Royal of England, are l^ke to taste by the deep and subtle
practices of an English Greek or two now among you, under the plausible shadow
of your Q. security: and finding no Story, that does more aptly resemble ye
false sleights, that are now in the forge among you, and the mischieuo^s marks
prefixed for their end, then does that old deep devise and cruel conclusion:
and finding likewise, no man more lively, nor more nearly expressing (by name,
nature, qualities, An English Si^on.
and form of proceeding) a subtle Sym now among you (of whom I have occasion
often to speak, as the Captain contriner of your calamity) then does that
old Sinon the crafty Gre^ke: I have for these causes sometimes used, as by a
Metaphor, to resemble this Tragedy present, to that Story past: and have now
and then alluded this crafty practice, to that subtle shift, and baptized your
sly Sym, that now is, with that old Sinons name.

Which, that I do not al unaptly, and that the Reader may the better understand
those places, as they shall in this Treatise present themselves before him: and
to the end, that by comparing that old and this new practice together, he may
t^ke the morality of the first (if it were but a Fable) and make benefit
thereof in cases present, as wisemen have been wont to do: or, if it were a
true Story, that then, by the experience of that Tragedi^ past, he may ta^e
warning and admo^ition for this Treason now in hand: I have for these
resp^ctes, thought it necessary in this place, briefly to remember y^ effect
of that old Story, for their help, that perhaps never read it: and by
comparing of a few parts thereof, with some parts of this, to induce the
common Reader, to the better discerning, how aptly, how properly, and in how
many sundry parts, the subtle proceedings to these Treasons present, do
answer the crafty practice of that old Tragedy past.

When the Grecians by ten years besieging the City of Troie, The Story ^f
Troie.
perceiu^d themselves unable by force to atchieue to the end of their desires,
which was, to sack that City, and to bring the Troianes under their yoke and
Dominion: they shifted to su^tlety, and famed (by sounding a false retraite)
that as persons discomfited, they would retire their Army into Greece again.
And pretending a religious devotion to Pallas the Goddess who had a Temple in
Troie, they forged a Horse of such hugenes, as the like in no age has been
s^ene since nor before. Which at their dissembled departure and fained
imbarking they left about the place of their Camp, as a consecrated Sacrifice
^owed to that Goddes^e.

Bu^ now see the Woolf, that was hidden under this Lambs skin. Into the
belly and bulk of this huge beast the Grecians had cunningly conveyed a great
number of their most valiant armed soldiers, who being once entered into that
City, under that Horses hide, should (by Sinon) be let out of the beasts
belie, and at an hour in the night agreed upon before, should make themselves
masters of the Town Gates, and let in the reast of the Grecian Army, that
would by that constituted time, be returned thither again^.

Now had the crafty Greek^s a bird among them of their own brood named Sinon,
whom they made privy, and a principal worker of all the Treason, as one, that
had a deep wit, a smooth tongue, an aspiring mind, a shameless face, no
honor, little honesty, and less conscience, and was a sly and subtle shifter
to compass whatsoever he would: and him they suborned, to take upon him, not
only to persuade King Priamus and the Troianes, to take in this Sacrifice, but
to adventure himself also to get into the City, to open the Engine of that
beast, and to let out those Soldiars, when the time should be.

To be short: he accorded. And being of base birth, and vile courage, thought
it no pain, to suffer shame and danger for a time, to lead the reast of his
life out of y^ low condition (in which he was borne) in perpetual honor and
wealth afterward, which were promised him for his enterprise. And to win
creditte with King Priamus, he feined to have been cruelly handled, and
threatened with torments and present death by his own Nation: and that at
their imbarking he should have been soorthwith offered in Sacrifice.

And in this manner, putting himself where he might be taken by the Trojans, and
pretending great devotion to the Goddess Pallas, he tempered his tale in ^uch
wise, and covered his hypocrisy with so lively colors, as denied every goo^
nature to suspect him of fraud, and so obtained such credit with King Priamus
and the Trojans, that against the opinion and dissuasions of sundry of their
grauest and Nobles^ Councillors (who feared and suspected y^ treason that
insued) they brake ^oune the walls of their own Citi^, to let in the Monster
that was their destruction.

For, after the Horse was once in the City, Sinon, and his Mates so performed
their parts, and perfited their practice, that in the night, they let in the
whole troop of the Grecian Army: who with great slaughter and cruelty, slew
Priamus the King, murdered his Children, extincted his seed and Posterity for
ever, defaced and burned the Temple of the Goddess, to whom they pretended
the honor of that Sacrifice, ^nriched the base Greeks with the spoil of the
Noble Trojans, rased old Troi^ to the hard ground, and brought the whole
Country to final confusion.

Resemblances between that Story and the present government.
This being in brief the effect of that Fable, as the Poets do fame it, or of
that true History, as some others do think: behold, I beseech you, in reading
this Treatise, by these few examples following, how aptly and fully the same
does resemble y^ Tragedy, that we are now to treat of.

naughty nature, the false, cruel and crafty conditions of that insole^t and
licencious Brotherhood, that, under pretense of a new Religion, do call
themselves a Party Protestant, dispersed every where, does answer and may be
compared to the suttletie, falsehood, and lewed property of the Greekish
Nation, testified by a Proverb, usual in your Language, that reprehendeth men's
insolency and outrage, with these terms: Ab Sir, you are a Greek in deed.

The modesty and conscience of the Catholic party, that for fear of God,

The violent assaults, and forcible invasions, made by the Protestants upon
the Catholic Faith, for many years together by sundry cruel and penal Laws,
enacted by King Henry, King Edward, and Q. Elizabeth: and by sundry
rebellions, and conspiracies against Q. Marie, to bring the old Catholic
regiment of that Croune, to a Protestant government: do aptly answer, the ten
years war, and forcible siege made by the Grecians, against the City and
Kingdom of Troie, to bring the Trojan Dominion to the Grecian subjection.



and confederacies, made by the Protestants against Q. Marie, and their assault
now, by suttletie and art to win that, which their force was to weak for:
is justly resembled to the Grecians shifting unto suttletie and craft, when
they had found their forces to feeble for their purpose.

The fained retrait, and cou^terfeit departing

The old Greeks, by hypocrisy, feined rather, but superficially fained by the
Protestants for a time, and sincerely meant by the Catholics alone: under
which is covered the odious practice, that no man would endure, if he might see
it at first, as it will show it self at last.



for the Spiritual (now taken upon her) as the temporal Regiment, that she now
in England, and they than in Troy did hold and maintain.

The pretense of that old Sacrifice was

The Greeks charged the Troianes

The chi^f covered meaning of the old of old Troie, from King Priamus and his
Posterity: and one of the chief hidden meanings of this new practice, is, to
win y^ Dominion of new Troie, from your Queen, and her next lauful
Succession.





That false sacrifice was at first suspected,

Their old Sinon, was a Greek borne by nature, and so an enemy from the
beginning, unto the old Trojan blood, and posterity of Priamus: And your new
Sinon, A new Sinon, the perfect Image of the old.
beginning to be a Protestant, even from his childehood, has ever been an
enemy unto the old Catholic Regiment, and to that Posterity of your old
blood Roial, that affected to govern in the ancient form of the Catholic
faith.



of some truth, he did not let sundry ways to shame himself with forging lies
etc. to bring his false purpose to perfection: and is it obscure, to find one
out now among you, that lively answers him in these parts? Is it not easy
to see, who carries your Queen in his hand (as it were) in matters specially of
importance? Who sees not, how many ways your shifting Sim has laid al shame
aside? Can that man be said, to have any longer the face of a man, that has
neither car^, nor remorse, what God, or the world sees or says of him? For
does not every man see, that with an impudent, and brazen face, he abuses, and
outfaceth, both his own Prince at home, and all the world ^isides almost,
with lies upon lies, thick and threefolde, one in an others neck, and every
one louder and lewder then other, to f^ede and uphold the fi^r and flame of
Robbery, Rebellion, and of al other mischief, wherewith he has infested al
Co^ntries adioining? What spark of shame or grace can any man defend to be
least in him, that with so bold a visage, so little abassheth at the public
discovery of so many false accusatio^s, so many subtle subornations, and so
many wrong condemnatio^s, of so noble and notable Personages, of such
depositio^s of Princes, of such transpositions of States, such usurpations of
Kingdoms, such hired murders, and other infinite villainies, more vile, then
may be expressed by any modest pen, as are daily detected, to have been
contrined by him, for satisfaction of his own thirst to Heresy and ambition?
Yea what child can show a more base, abject, and contemptible courage^ then he,
whose insolency is intolerable, whiles Authority fawneth on him: and for every
one least thwart of his Superior, faineth either to be sick for sorrow, or
^ame of the gout: and falls to sighing and sobbing, crouching and kneeling,
weeping and whining, like a boy and a babe, til his head be stroked, and he
comforted and called a good son again.

The old Tragedy did end, as you have heard, in the ruin of the Temple of
Pallas, whom those Greeks pretended to adore, in depriving King Priamus and
his Posterity, when by Sino^s persuasion, he thought him self surest, and in
the irrecouerable confusion of the City and Country, when the people thought
them selves farthest from danger, and to have had no enemy nigh them, whiles
their fatal foes slept amidst among them, etc. and of this Tragedy present
though the end be not yet come and past, yet who so beholds indifferently so
many stepps and degrees already laid toward it (as ^art you come to the end
of this Treatise, you shall see, I trust, plainly showed you) if he have any
wit or judgment, he can look for no less, then a semblable end, of so
like preparations.

Infinite other particulars might be remembered, in which these two Tragedies
may very aptly be compared together. But my purpose in this place having been
by a few only to give you a president and sample (as it were) in what manner
your own wisdoms and better understanding of your domestical affairs, may
(for the likeness of both the works, and workmen) by comparing the proc^edings
of this your own time, with the examples of times past, inform your selves
the better, what conclusion is to be looked for, to ens^w such actions
present: I have for that purpose, tarried long enough in opening of this
Metaphor, and will now return to show you my further intention in this Treatise.

The Au^^ors whole purpose in ^his Trea^ise.
In which, what speech or term so ever has passed, or shall fortune to pass
me: I here protest, that I mean not in any wise, to prejudice any act,
sentence, or other thing done or declared by the holy Sea Apostolic: nor to
derogate from your Q. what so ever may laufully be given her: neither to charge
or burden her with other men's faults, acknowledging her good nature to have
been always inclined to clemency, and her self a conformable Prince to them
whom she credited: nor that I mean to blame or accuse any of your Nobility,
other then those two persons of mean parentage, that for her time have, above
their desert, occupied the places of the Noblest: nor them another any further,
nor with other mind, then as to show them their error, to wish their
amendment, To re^orme the faulty without their d^mmage.
and withal, all the honor and advancement that they can wish to them selves:
confessing them (for gifts of nature, and benefit of education) to have been
instruments of rare ability: and ha^ been very notable ministers in that
common Weal, if (for want of appliyng their own choice to Gods ordinary
grace) they had not preferred their own private before the common profit of
the Prince and people.

But that my principal and whole purpose is (for preservation of your Prince
and Country in their ancient Honor and Christian liberty) to lay op^n
before your Q. specially, To defend and preserve o^ sorts in their just states.
and to your selves in general, the frauds and arts used to seduce and
circumuent her (with her own passing detriment and great danger of the Realm)
to permit her Name, her Credit and Authority to be used and applied to serve
other men's turns and private purposes: And for that, to hazard and adventure
her own State present: to purchase to her self continual unquietness,
I^daungered ^or pri^uat ambition.
and vnsuretie in her Seat, reign she never so long: Wilfully to ^xtirpe both
the Succession of her own Line, and of the Family next her own in blood. And
therewi^h to induce the tearing and renting of the Realm in pieces (as all the
world bysides your selves, judges and expects) if it be not prevented in
time: al, I say, to serve the private turns of some particular men, and to
advance the Ambition of a few.

Imminent ^^n^^rs: by France and ^cot^.
For he that sees not your foreine and ancient enemies lyeng in a wait (as it
were) and abiding but the opportunity of their own ability, and of some
advantage of time to revenge both their old gri^^^s, and their new injuries:
and By Fla^ders and Spain^.
passingly provoked, and for their own indemnitie constrained, to B^ your own
at home.
he that f^eleth not such a pike and suspicion put between your Prince and
people at home, that it may be doubted, which of these miseries will sonest fall
on you, that is to say, whether by continuing to make your selves mutual pr^ies
one to an other (as for some years you have done) you will open the way, to
make the whole a pray to Strangers: or whether your Q. for her assurance
against her own Subjects (of whom she is falsely put in fear^) or her
Subjects, for the intolerable ^eruit^de that they sustain under the Tyranny
of those two that reign by her name, shall call in Foreine forces in greater
numbers, then both shall be hable to put forth again: and thereby in short time
to lay on your own necks the yoke and thraldom, that Barbary, Greece, and
Hu^gary (whose steps you follow) do bear before you: First to her^sy, then to
Atheism, and so to slau^ry are those C^^tr^is fallen.
he that sees not, I say, these dangerous miseries imminently depending over
your h^addes, is plainly so senseless, that he is unworthy to be talked unto.

And, now good Reader, if in this disputation between mine Adversary and me,
and between his libel and mine Answer, thou shall find these differences
^ns^wing evident and plain: that is to say, Notable differen^s between the
libel and the Answer.
that he gives thee words only, and I deed^s: that he lays forth known
lies, unlikely surmises, and headless reports, and I show thee known truths,
open fac^es, and probable consequences: and that his end and final purpose is
(for pleasing of Authoriti^) to violate the honors and fames, and to destroy
the persons of public Princes, to waste your blood Roial, to shake your Q.
seat, and with the overthrow of your Nobility, to hazard the whole Realm:
and mine (with hazard of danger and displeasure) to save and defend both the
one and the other: to preserve your Realm in his ancient honor, and Christian
freedom: to reduce your Prince into the paths and steps of her renoumed
Proge^itors: to establish her state and continuance of Reign, in that
security and quiet that she began it: to reconcile your Nobility to your
Princes favor: and to unite her and her Blood in unfeigned amity: if thy self,
I say, upon the advised reading o^ this Treatise to the end, shall see these
odds and differences between us, and shall find withal, that this Answer
shall not yet obtain that indifferency, that the Libel has found: What is
implied in sup^r^ssing of ^^is ^retise.
^reely to pass among you, I mean, nor suffered to be seen and sold as the
other has been: then have thou one clear proof and testimony more, to add
unto the rest, to witness with me, that under those Rulers impudent falsehood,
fatal malice and desperate de^ises of destruction, may freely walk open-faced
among you, and without in^erruption reast in every man's hand: whiles truth
reverently v^tered, just defense d^tifully laid forth, and a grate^ul
affection borne to your Prince and Country, shall be oppressed, condemned, Where
vic^ ^s ^rer, ver^u^ is thr^l^
forced to hide it self, and find no man that dare auow to see it, or have it.

And that point alone may likewise
abundantly suffice, to discover to your Queen (if she vouch^safe to consider
it) the fraudulent meaning of those paint^d pretenses put upon their practices
from time to time. Whereby she may manifestly discern, whether her turn, or
theirs: whether her self, or them selves: Not for your Q. but for them selves
is in deed their care and travel.
whether her honor, or their ambition: whether her security, or their own:
her posterity, or theirs: her kindred, or their families, have been best
served, most ei^d, chiefly cared for, best provided for, most prepared for,
principally advanced and allied: whether her Croune and Realm be more
enriched, or their own possessions more increased: answerably, I mean, to the
di^^erence in quality between her, and them. And so consequently whether she
in deed have reigned, or they: whether she in effect have been Queen, or
they: not in name and show, but in essence, and substance of Rule and Dominion.
And thereafter let Gods grace and her own wisdom direct her to provide, and
to put such remedy, as shall be most to the glory of God, that gave her both
her being, and her Croune: to the comfort of her people committed to her
charge: to her own true honor and most security, while she li^eth here: to
the benefit of her Posterity ordained by God to succeed her: and to the
discharge of her last account in the World to come.

Allusio ad praesentem Angliae conditionem, ex Aeneid. Lib. 2.
O Socij: fuimus Britones, fuit Anglia, and ingens
Angligenum splendour: dirum Schisma omni^ pessum
Iam dedit, infesti Haeretici dominantur in Aula.
Impia frugiferos late diffusa per agros
Hearesis, Indigenas Animas and Corpora passim
Fudit humi ferro multos and carcere longo
Abstuli^, in latebras multos and in extera regna
Impellens, alterque Sinon incendia miscet
Rumores spargens varios, and semina belli.
Obsedere alij maria, atque angusta viarum
Oppositi, patulis alij iam portubus adsunt
Vangiones, Bataui profugi, Belgaeque propinqui,
Vascones, Axones, Morinique, and Lingones, atque
Tota ea Collu^io, faex and sentina malorum,
Millia quo^ magnis nunque venere Myceni^.
A TREATISE OF TREASONS against Q. Elizabeth and the Crown of England: partly
answering certain Treasons pretended, that never were intended: and partly
discovering greater Treasons committed, that are by few perceived.
THe Author seeming to write to a brother in law of his, to avoid superfluity
of unnecessary speeches, begins with a short and sweet salutation of,
Salutem in Christo, but what salutem he brings, or to whom he means either
health or wealth, let his own words be judge. I will not by way of prevention
prejudice him so much, as out of his good words, to suck his evil sense, til
himself shall show it: only here I will warn thee, not to be hastily enamoured
with the rest, B^leue deed^s, but not words.
for his soft and sugared entry, that pretends a m^morie of Christ's name:
unless tho^ see the matter ensewing to savor and breath of a Christian spirit
and charitable mind. Thus he begins.

1. GOod men and evil delight in contraries. The good in seking for truth, and
maintenance thereof: evil, in hiding of truth and oppressing thereof. And so
consequently to publissh truth, is to please the good, and to displease the
evil.
THis beginning, good Reader, will serve as well my pur^ose, as mine Adversaries:
and so much the better, in how much to the truer sense and meaning I hope to
apply it, saying thus: Evil men and good delight in con^raries: The evil in
hiding of truth, in uttering untruth, and in shameless maintenance thereof.
The good in revealing their malice, in discovering their falsehod, and in
bringing truth to light. And so consequently, to devise untruth, to publish
lies, and by new and fresh lies to maintain old lies, is the property of the
evil, pleases the wicked, and offends the good.

And therefore let not this glorious entry and gay lines at first withdraw
thee from the memory of the wisemans counsel, that shows, that the suttelest
kind of lying and likest to deceive men, has commonly an honest show at
beginning, and a face of truth: under which the malice and falsehood for the
most part, hides it self, and lies covertly unspied. But when it comes
nakedly forth without visard or guile, that men may see it in the own likeness:
then are errors and lies ever maintained by lying, Lies by lying: and on^
mischief by many must be maint^ined.
and can never be vpholden by plain nor true dealing, and unjust attempts are
wrought by wretched steps and degrees, and can never be compassed by lauful
means. Which two points I wish thee, Reader, to keep in memory, and I doubt
not, but to lay the proof thereof so plain before thee, ere this Treatise be
ended, by the words and deeds of those that have set him a work, that for
thy satisfaction thou shall desire no better trial nor proof of the honor and
innocence of these Noble Princes, whom this Libel purposely is published to
defame.

2. Wherefore, hearing, that amongst the common sorts of men at this time it
is not certainly known, what is the cause, that the Duke of Northfolke is
newly committed to the Tower, and sundry others: and knowing that good men ^il
be well satisfied to understand the truth, which evil men would cover and
oppress: I could not but in conscience, to satisfy the good, and bridle or
stop the lying and open slanderous mouths of the evil and seditious,
notify thus much unto you, whereby you may also communicate the same to
others: for that it is likely, that false and slanderous reports will be
readily made hereof, to serve the appetites of the evil disposed.
In this Paragraffe, good Reader, he pretends to show the cause, that moved
him to write, which was for conscience sake forsooth: The false pretense of
conscience.
even for conscience pardie, and for nothing else, but to satisfy good folk
and to stop the mouths of the evil. Thus in any wise thou must understand him,
and take his meaning to be.

By which words of his thou may perceive two things: the one, that either
the writers vocation and function is such, that he has some special cure and
charge above others, not to permit the people to misconstrue and missetake
the causes and occasions of the Duke of Norfolkes new imprisonment and the
reast: or else, that his conscience is more tender and scrupulous, then other
men's are of his calling, syns none pretend those causes, nor will be acknowe^
to intrude them selves thereunto, but himself. And the other is, that if this
Author had not taken this pain in hand, and disclosed these secrets to
satisfy good folk: yt good sort else (you see) had been like enough to have
thought and said better of the Duke and the others, then this man would they
should.

For likely it is (says he) that false and slanderous reports vvil be made
of their impris^nment by seditious mouths, to serve the appetites of the evil
disposed.

And by this he would lead thee to wene, that himself is no seruer of
appetites, nor flatterer of authority: but has taken this pain for
conscience sake, chiefly to satisfy the good^ and to stop the mouths of the
evil, that else wo^ld have thought and spoken to well of the Duke and the rest
that be in prison: of whom to speak well, thou see, how heinous and grievous
a crime it is accounted, by the severe punishment of an honest Citizen among
you, that lately on the pillorie lost one of his ears, only for saying, that
he thought, the Duke to be of more honor, and to bear to good an heart to his
Country, to go about those foul practices, that M. Recorder in the Yield Hall
had charged him with.

Now regarding, good Reader, that whosoever shall take this matter otherwise,
then this Author would have him, must be accounted by him, and by all that
party yt does favor and set him a work, one of the evil sort, one of the
evil disposed, a hider and oppressor of truth, a lying, open, and slanderous
and seditious mouth, and a ready reporter of slanders to serve appetites: thou will grant (I hope) that it behooves, and is principally necessary, that we
understand, this Writer, that must be our Author and warrant, to be a man of
such credit and honesty, as upon whom we may boldly change our opinion of
those Noble persons, and build now a new conceit of them, and take them for
such, as he defameth them for, and from henceforth no more to think of them,
as hitherto we have done.

For if it be much, upon the oaths or words of any few to condemn and think
ill of any known honest man never so mean, whose life has given testimony
of his integrity against their affirmations: can any man think, the
slanderous and malicious pen of an unknown namelesse person (that spireth and
breaths out the spite and poison of the Writers heart) to be a good warrant
for any wise man, The Libel is no warrant to think ill of, etc.
to think ill of so many principal persons, that so long have deserved to be
well thought of, til now, and to condemn them of so many gross errors, as
this lewd Libell lays to their charge?

Seeking therefore to find out and to know what this man is that tells us
these secret hidden crimes not known to the multitude, that contain the
disgrace and defacement of so many persons of importance, that I might somewhat
way his credit and authority, ^re I believe him so far and ground my self
upon him: we find (you see) none other name nor description of him, but two
bare consonantes of the Crosserow, scilicet, R. and G. which is a signification
somewhat to general, so to commend unto us the credit or honesty of any
known manne, as to make him our ground and warrant in such a case, as this
is, that touches our conscience and honesty before God and man.

For when I study to conjecture, whom those letters might signify, I find
that ^he letter R. represents as well Robert, as Richard, Roger, Rafe, and
many other: and the l^tter G. to represent as well, Goodfellow, as Grafton,
Goodman, Goose, or many other. And having occasion in this Treatise, to make
often mention of this Author, with whom I deal, that indureth not (you see)
to walk in the light, nor to be seen in the day: I wot not of which name to
make choice before other. But for the resemblance of his property and quality
with that spirit or pooke that we call Robin Goodfellow, or Hobgoblin The auth^^
of the Libel plaieth Robin Goodfelow, and Hobgoblin.
(by hiding his name and person still in darkness, by framing his speech so
obscurely as shall abide no light of answer or trial, and by telling us lies
still and nothing else, as such foul sprites are wont to do, and for that the
letters of R. G. serve aptly therefore) I have made choice to use that name
sometimes, as least offensive to any particular man, whom I might else fortune
to mistake.

And if any man shall thereupon contend and think, that I press him to much for
his name to the Accusation, The parts of the Accuser and Answerer be far
unlike.
syns my self adds not mine own to this Answer: I require, that the matter
be but indifferently considered, and the difference between our persons and
parts wayed in equal balance, and than I doubt not, bu^ the reason shall sone
appear to every man of any judgment, to be far different and unlike between
him and me, and between his part and mine. For he comes (you see) to
discredit and accuse by name, persons pearlesse in your common Weal, such as
whose disgrace with the people implies a division in time between the Prince
and the Subject, between the Nobility and Commons: with the present personal
confusion of the parties accused, that have generally well deserved of al men,
that have been il thought of by no honest, nor good man, that are pitied and
lamented by every man of any good nature, as persons eminent in dignity,
unspotted of life (where truth may be heard) and that have given rare
testimony of their honor, virtue, wisdom and modest demeanor for many
years together in all Countries where they have lived, and in all actions and
affairs fallen under their rule.

Which good opinion once won and obt^ined universally would require (thou will grant, I suppose^ more then the railing terms of a nameless Libel, to
derogate, to prejudice, to bleminish and spot it: and does so necessarily
require the name of the Author, that if he be not of credit and authority of
known conscience and integrity, yea of mo such also then of one or two, and
if it have not bysides good proof and testimony: without al these, I say, To
say il of any, requires good authority.
such infamous Libels, that come to destroy, and not to edify the honor and
good name of any person of account before due and orderly conviction, ought
with no honest man to have any credit at al: but ought to be taken as a
railing report of a rascal Parasite, a soother of affections, and a seruer of
appetites for flattery or gain.

On the other side, The Answerers general intention.
I come (as thou see) not to destroy, but to uphold the fame I find the
persons in possession of: not to alter or diminish any good opinion conceived,
but with continuance and increase of al mutual well liking each of other, to
prevent the change and decay thereof, til ordinary mean and judicial
proceeding shall give warrant therefore. I come to say somewhat for them, that
are not permitted to say ought for themselves. I take not on me to answer in all parts for them, nor would not be taken, as to say al for them, that they
can say for themselves (for so should I, I know, rather hinder, then help
them) but I only lay a part of that before you, that every Christian
conscience and good natured man, that any wit has, ought and is bound to
suppose and believe of them, til they see other matter and better proved, then
this pield Pamphlet brings forth any.

I come not to accuse any person by name that is in disgrace, as this Author
does: I tell you no strange nor hidden things, as he professes. That, which I
lay and allege, rests not in devises, in intentions and meanings only, as
all the accusations of this Author does: but I lay forth open known factes,
and manifest deeds known to al men, without the blame of any person by name
now in estate to take harm thereby. Neither speak I in the person of any one
or few, Why the Author is not named.
and therefore by putting a private name to the public speech and opinion of
al good men, I should prejudice both the parties and the cause.

Finally, I speak without name unto you now, because with name you may not now
be spoken unto: and I forbear my name at this time, to the end I may by name
speak again an other time (as if cause so require, I mean to do
historically) knowing by experience long syns, lately, and often proved: that
if by name I should encounter with this namelesse man, neither should I be
permitted to speak, nor you suffered to hear me.

And now let us turn to examine a ^itle, in what manner this man takes in ^and
to satisfy the good, and to stop the ^outhes of the evil: which he alleges
^o be the whole cause of his writing.

First, he grants, that the better The Libel confesseth^ that good men be
not satisfied with these doings
And how does this commend the cause, that honest men generally do mislike
therewith by his own confession?



The absurdity of the Libel.
the tale is told, neither of them both wotteth by whom, and the matter is
strange and unknown, as himself alleges it, and yet comes out to move
them (as you see) to change their opinion, and to alter their affections: to
hate whom they loved, and to condemn whom they honored.

in general terms, and al without those particularities and circumstances,
that are necessarily requisite, to induce any credit. And this is the way
that this man has taken, to open truth, to satisfy the good, and to stop
the mouths of the evil disposed. And what place or effect can this take (trow
you) with any of both?

If therefore any plain man of mean understanding may evidently see, that this
way he walks, is so farte from the purpose that he pretends to bend it
unto, that it shall confirm, and not confute the lewd sort in their lewd
opinions, and leave the good less satisfied, then they were before: then must
it needs be, that this lewd Author either wittingly deceives us, or sottishly
is deceived by others: in taking (I mean) good for evil, and evil for good: in
calling truth, falsehood: and falsehood, truth: and in accounting the good sort
for slanderous and seditions, and the seditious in deed, for honest and
virtuous.

Now where he tells you, that it is likely, that false and slanderous
reports will be made of this matter, to serve the appetites of the ^uil
disposed: you must be wary, that you missetake not his meaning, The ho^estest
sort worst spoken of.
but that you understand him aright, what manner reports they be, that he
reckons false and slanderous, and what manner persons they be, that he
account^th evil disposed.

Whosoever therefore will not rai^e on, nor revile the Duke and the reast, nor
account them for Traitors, til they see just cause, but will pity their case,
and lament their ^states, and say, that they yet see no cause, why to think^
them so wicked, as to intend so many heinous crimes against your Q. and their
Country, as this Libel charge them with, nor yet so unwise, as to have done
nothing toward it, if they had meant it: those be they, whom this Author
calls the ^uil disposed, the hiders of truth, the ready reporters of
slanders, the lying, slanderous and seditious mouths, whom he now se^keth
to stop, and al report^s of that sense and ^ffect, be those that he calls
false, slaund^rous and seditious. And on the other side, who so will call them
Traitors and Rebels, and bid hang them, headde them, draw them, and quarter
them, and say, that they were conspired with the Pope and Duke of Alua, The
woor^t sort best spoken of.
to d^stroy the Q. to sack the City, to bring in strangers, and such like
lies, every one louder and less like then other: these be the good and well
dispos^d sort, that delight in truth, and for whole satisfaction this Author
for conscience sake, has written this work.

Now what cause he has to fear, least these Prisoners thus disgraced and
defamed should be better reported of, than their deserts require: let thine
own memory and experience (Reader) if thou be of mature years, be judge, and
tell thee. Remember, what thou have known to hau^ passed in that Realm for
these thirty or forty years, in like cases occurring: on which side (I
mean) the wrong rumors and false report^s have been made: whether in the favor
of the imprisoned, or to their further disgrace and discredit.

Thou may remember (I doubt not) in the time above limited, an over great
number of great Personages fallen into the depth of al worldly disgrace, under
sundry Princes in thine own Country: and tho^ may by means call unto mind
the brutes and fames, that forthwith ran abroad of them upon their first
apprehensions, and their crim^s to be rumored far mo in number, and gr^at^r
in quality, then truth would bear, or they could be charged with: The
Count^ss^ of Sa^^^n.

M^rques o^ ^^on. L. Cromwell.


yea and the most part of them upon such causes condemned, as in ye next
Princes times (when truth might be talked) have been found erron^o^s,
insufficient, and wrongly laid to their charge.

Earl^ of ^^r^^y.

D. of Nor^. D. o^ Somerset.


And this having ben the common ex^erience of like cas^s occurring before this
time, what fear s^est thou now of that, that this man pretend^th to doubt, who
seems to fear, l^ast these Prison^rs should be better thought and spoken of,
th^n they deserve? Whereof the common experience teaching the contrary, it must
needs be, that this Author h^re dubbleth and dissembleth with you, and would
bear you in hand, that thing to be likely, that was lightly never seen: and
under that pretense to becomme the same man that he charge others to be: that
is to say, a false, lying, slanderous mouthed man, The Author of the Libel
defined.
a hider and oppressor of al tr^th, a ready reporter of false accusations, a
flatterer of Authority, and a seditious seruer of the appetites of the evil
disposed.

And if this Author yet, or any man for him will wrangle with me, and to
extenuate his fault, will plead the reverend opinion that men ought to have of
the doings of Authority, and excuse him for thinking and speaking ill of them,
whom Authority apprehends and commits: and would likewise accuse me as
an impugner of the Magistrates, and a defender of the faulty against common
Authority: I answer, that for so far forth as common order and public
Authority have autentikely notified to the vulgar sort, the inferiors ought
to have a reverend opinion thereof, and to deem the best that known matter will
permit.

But being often and commonly seen, that sometimes upon suspicion, sometimes
upon false accusation, common Authority has been moved by restraint of
personal liberty, to call sundry persons to answer matters supposed against
them, whom they have after with honor to both, dismissed and set free again:
shall it not now be lauful for me to preserve, as I can, the honor and same of
those Noble Princes, not yet blemmished by any common, order or Law, against a
namelesse baggage fellow, that for flattery or briberie runs before the
Magistrates, accusing, belying, and defaming them, whom no orderly sentence
has touched nor condemned? Of this I remitte the judgment to the indifferent^
Reader, and shall proceed to see how this Author comes to his matter.

Against the D. of Norf.
3. First, it is not unknown, the Duke of Northfolke did of late years
secretly practice to have married with the Scottish Q. without the knowledge of
the Q. etc.
Mark well, good Reader, the manner and form of this Authors proceeding, and
how well he perfourmeth that which by his former speech, he has made thee to
look for. He has told thee pardie, that to close the mouths of the evil
disposed, that with false reports would hide truth, and to satisfy the good
that delight in truth, even for very conscience sake, he could do no less, but
notify this that he does, etc. An impudent bloody lie in the ^orefront
And the first thing he tells thee, is so known a lie, and so malicious a
lie, that thou shall plainly see, yt there is another truth, shame, nor
conscience in him, that no good nor honest man can possibly bel^eue him, nor
that there is any mouth to be stopped so impudent as his own.

For beholding what this lie implies, being joined to the next, that calls
the Q. of Scotland, your Q. most dangerous ^nemie: Who sees not, y^ this li^
is meant to the Dukes final confusion, coming out in this time sp^cially (when
he had been two years unjustly imprisoned upon the same pretense, and when the
first false surmise thereof was by time, that tries truth, well worn away, and
in effect confuted) to rub and renew afresh this mortal wound again, to bring
him thereby past hope of al recovery.

What the Duke is by Parentage and Blood, what rare virtues he has joined
thereto, what his person imports in your commonwealth, and in what hands and
hold it reasteth, when this commes forth against him: you may more easily
remember, then I can dilate. And so much (I hope) every man sees in it, that
he will think it reason, to see the accusation more profoundly proved, ere he
ouerlightly believe it: the malice thereof r^aching to the danger of the person
and life of him, that bysides his Dignity, is for virtue and wisdom a
peerless Prince in your Nobility. Thus much for the malice.

Now for the untruth: Who sees not, that the affirmation of this is mer^ly
opposite and repugnant to the common knowledge not only of the Council and
Nobility, but of infinite numbers bysides of al states and degrees, and the
plain contrary most notoriously known: that is to say, that the Duke did not
only (before any least attempt thereof) make all that were of the
Priuie-Councel acqueinted with h^s intention, All the Priui^ Council al^ow^d the
intent, the L^ ^eper ^^ce^t.
namely the Earls of Arundel, Penbrooke, Leicester, and the Secre^arie,
bysides many others of the Nobility: ^ut was rather by them moved and invited
to attempt the same, before he sought it by any least mean: in so far
forth, that being promised by two of the chief of them (for credit with your
Q.) that her good will should undoubtedly be obtained unto it, Of this there are
sundry letters to be shewed^ and witnesses also to testify it.
with pretense of no doubt or scruple to be had thereof, he had relation made
unto him by them, that your Q. being by them moved thereof at Otelands (if I
remember it well) in the Month of Iulie, 1569. did not disalow the motion, but
seemed to like well of it, and would at a convenient leisure give care to the
Duke himself in that behalf.

For which audi^nce promised (once at Guylford, than at Farnham, than at
Basing, another time at Titchfild, bysides other places) the Duke attended all that Progress, The cause of y^ Dukes d^parting from the Court to his own
house in August. 1569.
until by being often differred from dai^ to day, by sundry ill looks and
thwarting speeches let fall by your Q. against him, and namely by a secret
friend of good place and authority about her: he was assuredly advertised,
that so far was she from treating with him in that matter, that already she
had given order, that he should the ^ext night be taken in his bed by the
Guard, and forthwith carried to the Tower.

And this being so abundantly testified both by the Dukes own voluntary
return to the Court from his house in Northfolke in Septemb^r then following,
and by the public displeasure and restraint of liberty, that the said Earls
of Arundel, Penbrooke, Leicester, and some others did then sustain for a time:
behold now, with what ^ace it is said, that he went about to contriue this
marriage without your Queens knowledge or cons^nt. For was it ever heard of,
that a man minding to do a thing without the consent of an other, does first
treat and imparte the same with such numbers of the intierest friends and
servants of his, from whom he would hide it? Who goes to so many of a Princes
Counsel, and labors them, to procure y^ Princes favor, in a a cause that he
would have hidden from the Prince?

Add unto this the impossibility, that the Duke must needs see of compassing
this marriage without your Q. consent who held the other party in close prison:
and join unto it his assured foresight to have thereby neither benefit, nor
aduanceme^t, without having your Q. favor before it, and succor after it, but
plainly the contrary, assured of all displeasure and danger of life, lands,
and goods.

Which points well waied, will discover sundry unsavory dealinges: whereof
one is a d^epe dissimulatio^ and great treachery in some of great credit a^out
your Q that pretended to ye Duke, to like and allow well of that match, that
encouraged him thereto, that said they saw nothing in it, but great honor to
your Q. and security to the realm, and that promised to obtain your Q.
consent thereunto: whiles withal in secret they wrought the contrary,
persuading her to think and take the same, as dangerous to her person, and
pernicious unto her state.

An other is, that when they saw your Q. displeasure to the Duke brought to
the highest that they wished it at: then opening them selves, what so ever they
misliked, (as impugning their fi^all and furthest end) must be termed treason
to your Q. perilous to her state, against her consent, without her knowledge,
rebellious, seditious, and what else they list to call it.

And finally these reasons laid together (Reader) in a wise man's consid^ratio^,
there should need no more answer to any of the rest of this Libel. For where
the first accusation is depr^hended to be so foul a lie, so well known a lie,
a lie so well testified, and a lie that carries in it neither reason, nor
likelyhoode: what credit can the rest hope to have? And therefore keep it
well in mind, and look to see it, that so notorious a lie must needs be
forged for some notorious purpose that yet lies lurking undiscovered. But now
let us see, what h^ says further.

Against the Q. of Scot.
4. It is also known (says he) that the Q. of Scotland has been the most
dangerous enemy that lived, against your Q. in that she sought to have the
Croune of England (as he says) from her immediately after Queen Mary's death.
etc.
THis lie is more manifest and shameless, then the first: This Macchiauel
imagines other like him self.
measured and con^ec^ured (no doubt) by, and upon this Authors knowledge and
consideration of ye monstrous and unnatural injuries, wherewith your Q. name
and authority (to her own p^rpetual infamy and dishonor) has been abus^d
infinitely to oppr^sse ye Q. of Scotland, her n^erest cousin, and Heir
apparent: which makes this Author to imagine the Q. of Scotland to be, not such
as (in deed by grace) she is, but such as by common course of nature most men
are wont to be, that have had the cause, that she has.

For of any proufes of her seeking the Croune from your Q. there is no man^r of
shadow nor color^ neither alleged by him, nor else where to be heard of, other
then the ioining of the Arms of England and Scotland in certain Scutchions
set up by her husbands the French Kings commandment, at a triumph in
France^ more then thirt^ne years agone, which by blood and descent she may most
laufully give and bear of any creature living, next unto your Kings laufull
children: and was such an error (if i^ were any) as is common in England, and
not accoumpted of: and yet no more imputable unto her, then as the wife is
culpable for the husbands fact.

But of any attempt made by the Q. of Scotland, little or much toward the
euiction of that Croune out of your Q. po^session, by style, by title, by
force, or by any other way (by which such enterprises have been wont to be
a^saied) the whole world bears witness with her, that no least sign nor
token has she given of any such intention: nor any leaft proof does this
lewd man bring forth of this his false affirmation, other then the weight of
his own credit alone, which is of great valor, no doubt.

And albeit this, that is already said, might satisfy (I trust) any
indifferent Reader, yet can I not so lightly digest it, to see so vile a lie of
so great consequence, so colourlessely fained, and so shamefully affirmed. For
in every wise man's judgment, that beholds what goes covertly comprehended
in this impudent publishing the Heir Apparent of your Croune to have been a
most dangerous enemy to your Q. that presently possess^th it, and holds her
prisoner: there will appear so deadly and so fatal a malice to be conceived
and ranckeled in the hearts of the principal Authors thereof, The malice of
this lie is mortal and traitorous.
against that innocent imprisoned Q. as manifestely tends and treatneth that
toward her, that is to horrible to be named, and ought therefore to move
every man, that for natures sake loves, or for dewries sake honors, the
just succession of the Croune of his country, well and advisedly to examine,
what cause and reason this Author has, with this colourlesse lie, that
imports her life, so falsely to burden and defame her.

And finding nothing that he has to all^age, but his own false saying, that
she sought to have the Croune, etc. it behooves every honest English man, no
further to credit him, then as the proufes he shall bring of his sainges, shall
deserve.

Which when thou haste examined and found, to rest and consist only in her
dead husbands making of the Arms before said, now more then xiij. years
before this accusation comes forth: and neither than, ^onuinced for a lie.
nor never sins, nor before, any manner of the least word, deed or thought,
uttered or attempted, that might insinuate any such meaning to have been in
her heart: when thou have called to memory the Q. of Scotlandes troubled and
oppressed st^te of life ^or this xij. years day continuing, and thereby the
want of all mean and possibility (though she had ^^ne so rash) to give any
show or argument of an en^mie toward your Q. When thou hear her accounted
and known to be wise, and for five years day almost your Q. prisoner one
where, or other: and thereby do perceive, how vain a folie^ yea how
dangerous an error it had been for her, any way to show her self a foe or
enemy to her, in whose hands she was: and when thou haste fonnde her sundry
o^ertures made, and a readiness from time to time al these ten or twelve years
past, to g^ue unto your Q. any assurance for her self and her laufull issue,
that possibly can be devised without prejudice of her own interest in
succession: yea when thou shall consider this matter of publishing her for an
enemy, never to break out, til now after x. or xij. years buriyng of that
quarrel in silence, and pretense of much amity and frindship of your Q. part
toward her (whereof there ar^ both living witnesses and letters extant to be
brought forth and showed) when thou have, I say, considered these things
well, and do see now this cankere^ rancor break out but now: it must, and
will (I trow) if reason fail thee not as w^l as grace, not only move thee to
expecte very good and manifest proufes of some actual crime, and offensive
fact done by her newly and of late, before thou give any credit to so unlike
and unproven a tale, that contains such consequence, and comes from such
a mouth, as has no face to avowe it: but it shall also plainly show, and
satisfy thee, Impossible to be tr^w.
that this report of her being your Q. most daung^rous enemy. is so far from
al reason and likelihood of truth, that by common intendment it is not possible
to be true.

Yea on the contrary side, let every indifferent Reader examine his own
knowledge and memory, ^ Sic^lian ^^yck.
whether your Q. have not manifestly been showed to be y^ same toward her, yt
you wro^gly surmise her to have been toward your Q. and the same proved by
factes and deeds put in ure and execution, infinite in number, and unknown to
no man: whereas y^ proof of this false accusation rests only in the bare
affirmation of a namelesse fellow, y^ yet affirms no more, when he comes to
his prouffes, but devises, intentions, meaninges and thoughts, yt never brake
out by word nor deed, that never were likely to any indifferent judgment, nor
do contain any certeintie of matter, time, place, person, or number.

And thereafter let him deem, and make account of this Authors conscience and
true meaning: yt either for mere flattery of Authority, or to cover his own
horrible falsehood and traitorous intention (if him self be, as it is likely,
one of the chief contriuers of the deep hidden treason yet undiscovered) he
shameth not, nor is abashed, against y^ open knowledge of al men, to charge
the innocent with the deeds of the guylty.

I have heard, that there was in your Country a man of mean honesty called
Scogan, Scogan.
who so fr^quently used (for covering of his own lewdnes) constantly to charge
other men with his own vices, that thereof it is grown a Proverb in your
language, that when one wro^gly charge an other with the fault himself did,
he that is wrongly charged, says to the other, Thou playest Scogan with me.
They play Scogan with the Q. of Scotland.
And who sees not now, this part played in his kind with the Q. of Scotland?
Or who might ever more aptly say to an other, Thou playest Scogan with mee^
then that innocent Lady may unto this Author, and to al them that set him a
work? Who (with more scurrilitie then ever Scogan used) would bear the
world in hand, that she had gone about those attemptes against your Q. which
all the world sees, she has (by the abuse of your Q. name and authority)
sustained even at their hands chiefly, that thus charge her falsely.

For who has had her subjects raised in rebellion so often, as she? How many
times by her wisdom and clemency have they been appeased, and still again
procured in arms to withstand her? Who has had her Husband, her Servants,
her Counsailours and Subjects barbarously murdered, but she? Who has had her
Realm invaded, her Territories bur^ed and spoiled, and her Castles and
Fortresses taken and rased, but she? Who is cast out of her Realm, and
dispossessed of her Kingdom, but she? Who has had her own borne Subjects
set up to usurp her Dominion against her, but she? What Prince has had the
hands of her Subjects laid on her person, but she? Who has been taken
prisoner by them, with whom they never were at war, but she? Who has been
holden close prisoner four years together by them to whom she fled for
succor, but she? Who has been by infamous Libels (purposely printed) defamed
in honor, and spotted in fame, but she? What Prince imprisoned has been
denied (by her own nearest Cosyn and kindred) necessary servants of known
confidence, for the safety and security of her person, but she? Who was ever
denied the free benefit, and relief of other men's liberality, or
frindshippe, but she? And by whom, and under whom susteineth she this?

To say (as I think) not directly by your Queen, nor expressly by her
commandment, nor otherwise by her, then as (being seduced and circumuented)
she has been abused to think necessary for her own state and security:
and by some men's taking an elle for every inche granted by her, and by
ministering wrong for right pretended: and in that manner, under the name and
authority of none but of your Queens: by some of her Counsailours the plottes
drawn, devised and contrived: by her messengers and money, the others Rebels
raised, by her authority ^ncouraged, by her succors maintained, by her men
and forces the others Country ruined, her Castelles surprised, and the
usurpers erected and set up to rule in her Realm, the other imprisoned,
detained from her State, and kep^ captive without crime, and without liberty
or release, upon any ransom condition, covenant, pledge, or other assurance,
that possibly can be offered, given or made. And this being so public, as no
man knows it not, out commes this Scogan, and as though your Q. were in the
same state by her, charge her to be the most dangerous enemy that your Q.
has.

It is a du^ble and (...) tr^it^rous to ye Realm.
Again, who so considers this Scoganish lie well, shall see it not only the
most pernicious and dangerous lie to the commonwealth, that could be imagined,
but a dubble lie also, containing in it self two lies at once: the second
part (I mean) that is brought in for proof of the former, being so open and
known a lie, as no man can be ignorant of: to confirm that I told you before,
that lies must always be maint^ined by lying. For who ever heard of any
attempt made by the Q. of Scotland by word, by deed, by law, or by force,
against the Q. of England? And can it be possible, that the possession of a
Kingdom can be sought to be wrested from them that have it, without some open
and outward fact in on^ sort or other?

Til this Author therefore have showed you some attempt given, certain and
particular, by word, writing or deed, and done by her, by herself, I say,
(for it is not enough against her, to say, her husband did this, or her Father
in Law did that, if any of them both had done ought at al^ til then, I say,
this lie is to dangerous and to pernicious also, by any honest or wise English
man to be harkened unto. For it plainly comprehends the alienation of the
hearts and affections of the people and subjects from their Heir apparent
and Prince in succession: yea in a crafty co^ert manner it carries in it the
assured mutation of the succession of your Q. and to that mark it is chi^fely
bent, to transferr^ the same from her and her House, that by blood and by Law
is the known right Heir in succession. Which in deed is but a fine cunning
way, to plan^ sedition, to create civil wars, and to engender such a
bottomless sea of bloody Tragedies, and infinite confusions, as happened
between y^ Houses of Lancast^r and York: the bitter memory whereof is yet so
fresh, yt no man, I we^e, has forgote^ it.

And this is the tale, forsooth, that even for conscience sake might not be
kept from you: and is told you by him, that under pretense of loving truth and
opening truth (that seditious folk would cover and hide) covers the seed of
the most pernicious treason and civil sedition, that can possibly be imagined
to be planted among you.

5. It is also known (says he) that when she could not get it by force nor
cunning, she solemnly promised to acknowlegde her error, and to recognize
the Right of your Queen, etc.
An other dubble and crafty lie against the Q. of Scotl.
Behold the folly of this honest man, who weneth that by his balde tale and
naked saying only, without prouf, he has persuaded al me^ to see and believe
more, then ever yet any other man made mention of, or himself had wit to speak
of. Yea rather behold the craft and falsehod of this Fox, Grounded upon the
diuisers false ^maginatio^.
that by art and cunning manner of speaking, would now bear you in hand, y^
either he had proved, or yourselues had granted that, which never yet was
attempted nor intended.

For having hitherto said nothing but in general terms, and that of his own
naked affirmatio^ only (that she sought y^ Croune of England) without any
intimatio^ of his part, to show how, or which way: now he goes on, and takes
it for granted, as if he had showed and proved, yt she had used both great
force, and much art in attempting the same. For he says, when she could not
by force nor cunning get it, etc. than she promised, etc. Which point needs no
further Answer (you see) til his folly has found out and showed us, what
forces she l^auied, where and when she employed them: what corruptions she
used, when, where, and to whom: or what other cunning practices or artificial
means she has put in ure for the removing of your Q. from enjoying her State
and dignity present.

For in cases of less weight, then these are, that touch Princes, Crounes,
and Realms, his wisdom must know, that the naked affirmation of Master R. G.
(carrying with it neither proof nor likelyhode, is far to weak a foundation
for any manne that either has wit or honesty, to take any mean thing for
proved, granted or concluded: much less in a case of this importance, can any
man be induced to think, that a Prince of her known wisdom, modesty, and
gracious nature, has committed so many, so rash, so indiscreet, and so violent
errors, as might have been attempted by force, and assayed by art. Or else let
him show and prove it (for say he will enough, They say much, but show nothing
I doubt not) when, where, with whom, and by whom any of those many practices
have been attempted by her, or by any of hers, against your Q. or against any
of hers, yt have been put in ure and executed (as all the world knows) against
her and hers, both in raising her subjects against her, in dispossessing her
State and Dignity, in imprisoning her sacred and anointed person, and in the
several murders of her dear husband, of her noble Uncle, and of her faithful
servant and Secretary. For so witless is no man, but that by these
experiences he se^th and knows, that such attempts might have been assaied
and gone about (at least) if she had had that conscience that the Authors and
executours of the other factes had: and thereby sees and knows, how lewdly
and lowdly this man lies, in tempering his speech so, as if she had left no
mean unassayed of policy, nor force.

6. It is known (says he) that she solempnely promised to acknowledge her
error, A nedeless^ and folish objection.
and to recognize the very true right to be justly in your Q etc. as laufull
daughter and heir to king Henry the eight. etc.
IN this Article, good Reader, The objection hinders the obiectors purpose.
the Author shows little policy, in my mind. For he ministers thereby unto
every Reader occasion of needelesse scruples and questions: both by his large
rehearsal of all your Q. Titles (to wit, as daughter to her Father, as sister to
her brother, as successor to her sister, established by the laws, confirmed by
the homage of the Nobles, Prelates and people, acknowleg^d by her Coronation,
and finally as worthy for her cleme^cy, etc.) and by his allegatio^ of the Q.
of Scotl. promise, to recognize and acknowledge the same.

For when no man has at any time showed him self by word, by writing, nor by
fact, to impugn nor interrupt your Q. quiet enjoying her state and dignity,
nor has looked for any such recognitio^ or acknowleging, as this Author now
begins to make men enquire of: this rehersall is plainly frutelesse and
needelesse, or rather does harm, than any good, to the universal opinion of
men touching your Q. interest unto that Croune, and persuadeth nothing, but a
likelihood, yt your selves do either mistrust some padde in the straw,
touching that matter: or for malice to ye Q. of Scot. have put into your Q.
head some more doubt of her own Title, then either the Q. of Scotl. or any
other have moved, or appeared to think on.

7. It is also known (says he) that she has not performed her promise, but
with frivolous answers has delaied it. Neither is it of any force to be
demanded, nor worth the having, if she would yield to perform it. For that,
she that could not neither get this realm etc. nor keep her own, etc. can
not amend your Q estate, etc. nor yet is her promise in any thing to be holden
fyrme or durable. etc.
IN this the Author grants yet, And charge the Q. of Eng.
that the Q. of Scotl. has offered and promised to do ynowgh, and all yt
lies in her, for the assurance of your Q. quiet possession. And this (no
doubt) is very true, saving that the condition is not here expressed, which
was always annexed unto the promise: that is to say, so that she might be
declared by Parliament to be the next Heir and Successor to your Q. dying
without laufull issue of her own body. And in this the Author sees not, how
he charge and burdeneth your Q. both with injury and ingratitude, by still
oppressing her, that has offered so much.

Yea but she has not performed it (says he) but differreth it with frivolous
answers, etc. The Q. of Scotl. readiness to assure the Q. of England.
Cuius contrarium verum est. For of this much I take on me (who account my
self as credible, as this Author of mine own knowledge to assure you, as
having been in some sort a party entreating those affaiers, yt for the
security of your Q. quiet enjoying her present Dominions, the Q. of Scotl.
ever has been, and yet is, ready to perform, not only what so ever she has
promised, but what so ever else also that any other Princes of Christendom
shall think reason for her to do, or for your Q. to demand. And the frivolous
answers and delays you speak of have been altogether made and used by your Q.
who by force of reason (being pressed often both by the Q. of Scotl. her self,
and by the letters and Ambassadors of all other Princes) has been constrained
to grant and promise the reformation and abe^^ering of the more then barbarous
injuries done to the other: and when it has come to performance, has either
made frivolous delays, or urged such other unequal demands, as gave manifest
argument, that she never meant it.

By whose default the Q. of Scot. is expelled.
And for her unableness to keep her own, I answer, y^ neither by any
misgouernance, nor other desert of hers is she expelled: and hereof I ween the
world will witness with her. For and if you could have showed any, who sees
not, but that here had been your time and place to utter it, and that you want
no malice to do it? Of which example and irritatio^ of yours if I should make
my pattern, and follow you (where not your frontes more then meretriciae) I
should make you blush, as bold faced as you be. But it would require a larger
place, and longer time, then my designement now will permit, to lay forth
the infinite corruptions, the innumerabile guiles, and false persuasions, the
fained letters, and fraudulent messages, the frequent forces, and manifest
violences, that (under your Q. name and authori^ie) have been used and put in
ure toward the Nobility of that Realm of Scotland, to move and inuit, yea
to draw and enforce them from their allegiance and obedience dew unto this Q.
their natural Sovereign, and to commit such outrages bysides, as by any
Christian Nobility have not been read nor heard of to have been done, til now.

Let the general reuolte there made in the year 1560. by the procurement of the
English: The seuer^^ rebellions of Scotl.
then the rebellion and ruin of the Monasteries by the Earl of Arraine,
abused with the hope to marry your Q. let the rebellion of the Earl of Murrey
and his Confederates, The murders.
with their flight and safety in England: let the slaughter of David the
Secretary, contrived by the advice of the Governor of Barwicke: let the murder
of the King solic^ted by some English men, let the setting up of Murrey to be
Regent, with a pension of 4000. pound English, let the sundry open invasions
of English forces into that Country, Usurpatio^ of her Crown. Invasions.
the violent hands of Subjects laid upon their Sovereign, the imprisonment
of her Royal person, Imprisonment of her person.
the rigorous threatening of her present death, if she refused to subscribe the
resignation of her Croune: Forcible resignation.
let the persuasion of the English Ambassador, that moved her in any wise to
do it: let the fair promises of your Q. letters and messages, Fair promises
from Ingland.
so that she would yield thereunto: let the surprising of the Castelles of
Dun-Britton and Hume, Surprising of her fortresses.
the rasing of Dunbarre, the constitution of Lineux to be Regent there, with
the barbarous wasting ^f the Country and overthrow of the Noblemens houses,
yea let the imprisonment of the Ambassadors priuileaged person, Impriso^me^t
of her Ambassadors.
and the violent taking of all her faithful servants both men and women from
her: Removing of her Servants.
let these points (I say) be searched, sifted and examined, why they were
attempted, how they were contrived, Al done by the Inglish.
by whom they were devised, by whom executed, by whom maintained, at whose
charges, by whose Authority, under whose name, countenance and encoragement:
and thereupon let the indifferent Reader give sentence, how justly and how
wisely she is challenged and reproched, for not keeping her own: if it had
been as true, as it is false, that she had once had it quietly, as in deed
she never had.

And this is so verified by the imminent danger and likelyhoode, France and
Fla^ders escaped hardly the same.
that both the great Kings of Spain and France did lately stand in, of losing
also, the one his whole state, and the other a great portion, even by the same
men's mean and ministry: that small reason or color is there left to any man,
to impute unto her any blame or default for the present lack of her own.

Now, on whether party the delaie of accord has risen by frivolous Answers,
let ye consideration of these points ensuing argue and declare. In whom was
the fault, that the meeting did not hold between the two Queens in the year
156^. for which there was on both sides so long preparation, and so many
faithful promises made? Did the Q. of Sco^l. deny, or del^ie it? On which
^^de the delays have (...).
In whom has the sault been, that with sower years traueil and suit, the Q.
of Scotl. could never obtain to comme to the sight, presence, nor speech of
your Q? Has the delaie been in her? Why was there no sentence given, nor
declaration published of her condemnation, or clearing, upon the treaty at
York before your Q. Commissioners? Did she sue to stay it? Who has made the
^riuolous answers and delays to keep the Q. of Scotl. from coming to your
Parliament, there to acknowledge and confirm your Q. estate in form before
mentioned? For, as it is well known, that she has importunatly labored for
it: so can no man think, that she could have any meaning to deny or delaie it,
when she should have come to that presence and Audience.

Of the sundry accordes treated between the two Queens, and of the several
ouertures at all times made by her of Scotland for assurance of her promise and
couenan^es, to have given the person of the Prince for xiiij. years with two
Earls and two Lords of Scotland, or their eldest sons for pledges: to have
made league with England offensive and defensive against all Nations: to have
pardoned and restored her Rebels, as your Q. should have required her: to
have procured and given the hands and Seals of the kings of Spain and France
for performance of her Capitulations: and finally not to have disposed of her
self in marriage, without your Q. advise and consent: of these treaties (I say)
let the Capitulations be brought forth with the offers and answers of both
parties, and then see, on which side the delays did grow, and who it was,
that made the frivolous answers.

Yea, in the last late treaty this summer past, when she and her Nobility had
in all points yielded to more, then any reason or indifferency could demand:
did not the time expire, and the talk comme to nothing by the default of the
English, that demanded for assurance so unjust conditions (as the Princes
person, all the chief Nobles on the Q. party, with the chief Castelles and
Fortresses of the Realm, to be rendered into the hands of the English, before
the Q. person should be set free, The^ seemed, ^^t ne^^r meant to res^ore the Q.
of Scotl.
and such other like Capitulations) as manifestly showed, that the demaundes
had no intention at al of her liberty nor restitution: but finally to depri^e
her for ever without hope of recovery. And yet this second Scogan now
charge her, as if the delays and frivolous answers had risen on her side:
which all the world knows, grew only upon the English party.

And when he has taxed her deeply (as he thinks) with this breach of her
promise, proved as you see: then he comes forth full gravely, and says, It
is no ^orce^ vvheth^^ s^e do it, or no: for nothing, that she can do (says he)
can amend your Q. estate. etc. Wherein the poor man either perceives not,
Robin Good^ellow shows him self a Goose.
what a gross and palpable folly he commits, or else his malice makes him
unjustly to burden her, against his own knowledge and reason. For, as with a
great faul^ he charge her, and imputes it to her for a great crime, and for
such would have ye world to take it, that she ratifieth not your Q. estate:
and yet he himself says here, that the same can not be done nor amended by
her, nor is of any force at all, whether she do it, or do it not.

For the assurednes of her word and promise, The Q. of Scot. promise alwaie^
assu^ed.
I refer the Reader to the relation both of the Frenthe and Scottish
Nobility, in both which Realms she has governed, and has showed her self
always so free and far from that crime of all others: that her Princely
courage and magnanimity in performing her word and promise in all occasions
what so ever, has been found, to be answerable to her honor, with what charge
or detriment so ever otherwise.

But on the other side, if I should here lay forth, what common fame says
in all the Courts of Christendom, The English promises contrary.
tou^hing the co^stancy and observation of the words and promises given, made
and written in your Q. name and behalf: I should lance a full unsavory sore,
and should show both this Scogan and his Authors to have played the right
Scogans in deed. But taking no pleasure to rippe up odious and displeasant
rehersalles, further then the just defense of the cause presses me, I shall
here proceed to the next Article.

8. It is said (says he) and credibly auowed. that the Q. of Scotl. was the
greatest cause of the rebellion lately in the North: whereby some honorable
houses etc. by her cunning practice were enticed to overthrow them selves and
their families with a multitude of mo English subjects, then she could have
done by arms in the field, if she had been in possession of her kingdom.
THe answer to this objection (good Reader) does minister occasion to speak
somewhat of that, A right Sicilian trick to charge her with his own cruelty.
which I mind to treat apart in a volume by it self: yt is to say, to open
unto you ye deep and hidden great treason in deed, from espying whereof these
pamphlettes and persuasions would feign misleade and draw you, by holding you
still in ye wrong consideration of yt late Northern troubles, and by setting
before your ^ies a false painted show of others, which were never intended.
Nevertheless I shall in this place but briefly show you ye true ground and
occasion of those late troubles (which this Author so often me^tioneth with so
odious terms) whereby your self shall see, not only how this Scogan now
labors to defame the Q. of Scotl. with the death of al those, that by
prete^se of justice suffered for the same by your Q. commission: but also, how
far the severity of yt execution surmounted the desert of the fact.

Thou must understand (good Reader) y^ as it many times happens in all commonweals, yt few or none do at the first perceive nor observe the mischievous
intentions of the ambitious, that suttelly by little and little and in length of
time do work and compass their aspiring purposes: even so in few or no places
it chances, but that some sooner, and some later, do fall into the reckening
thereof, and as by process of time and outward factes the matter grows
riper, so does the greater number come to discover and epsy it.

The causes and occasions of the Northen trob^es.
When your Q. therefore upon the first entry into her Reign, had committed the
government of her affairs unto some few mean and base persons, who
forthwith used those few of the Nobility (whom they reserved in appearance
of creditte) but as Ciphers and signs: who by sleight devises and false
persuasions did win her by the change of Religion against her own affection
to separate her self from the union she was (in that part) leaft in, with the
great Christen Princes her neighbors and allies: who persuaded her, to change
all the Counsel and chief Officers of the Realm: who induced her, to deprive
and depose together and at once, all her Bisshopp^s one and other, with
hundreds of the principal of the Clergy bysides: to hold their persons in
prison ten or twelve years together, till by stinche and close keeping, some
sooner, some later, they are all in effect pined away without color of fault
or desert (unless you account it a fault for a whole Clergy of a Christen
Realm, not to accept a new faith with the change ^f every Prince) to
subvert all the Altars in her realm: to burn all the Relics, Images, and
holy ornaments of Christ and his Saints: to constitute a new form of
public service in the Church: to create her self Chief Ruler of the same:
and by that authority to prohibit the Adoration of Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament: to abrogate the Mass with five of the seven Sacraments: to change
the form of the administration of the other two: of the dregs of the vilest
sort of the people, to erect a new Clergy, and to them to give ye cure of
souls, with all the Bishoprics and principal spiritual promotions of the
Realm: to permit them to marie, and with the goods of the Church so to
enrich them, as with great endowmentes bestowed on their bastardes, to
disparage in short time all the Noble houses of the Realm: to intrude them
into the possessions of all the Monasteries and Sacred fundations of prayer or
alms: to cast out of the Realm all the Religious of the same, that would live
in their order and habit^: y^a, when in a little more process of time, she was
by them so circu^^ented, as without the consent and against the advice of all
her ancient Nobility she was content to have her name and authority abus^d,
to the leuiyng of sundry exactions and paiments of her people, therewith to
corrupt and suborne great numbers of the noblest subjects of France, Flanders
and Scotland, severally to leauy arm^s against their several and natural
Sovereigns: and ou^r that, without color of cause, to violate the long
continued amity with the house of Spain, and to break the ancient l^ague
with ye house of Burgundy, by forcible taking of the kings money, by paying the
same unto his own and other Princ^s reb^lles, by spoiling his good subjects,
by succouring his rebels, by furnishing of Pirates, in infinite numbers, to rob
him and his people: and to infest the Seas so, as no passage might be free for
any honest man, and this with the great impouerishment of her Realm, and to ye
great dang^r of the same, by turning the old frinds and allies thereof into new
and mighty enemies, eue^ for their own indemniti^: when they saw, that under
pretense of Charity and Religion, the Realm was filled with mo then forty
thousand strangers, and pestered with ye very skom and froth of al Nations
adjoining that had abandoned their allegeanc^, and taken arms against their
several Sovereigns: when they saw, by such Rascall^s and Rakchelles all the
Artisans of the R^alme (being the borne subjects of that Land) oppressed in
effect unto utter b^ggarie: when they saw your Q. so craftily abused, as to her
own discomfort, to forbear marriage: to her great grief, to want succession of
her own body: and against the policy and security both of herself and her
Realm, to admit no known successor: when their crafty counsels had so
prevailed, that no entreaty nor petition could induce her to y^ one, nor the
other: and when they saw withal so many practices devised, and so many devises
put in ure, that tended to ye change of the known succession, and to the
dish^rison and destruction both of the Q. of Scotland, that is your Q. next
Heir and Cosyn, and to the extinguishing of your Q. own^ line also: when they
saw withal, by this mean, threatened the ruin of all the chi^fe Monarchies of
this part of Europe, and the bringing of them into the thraldom and
subi^ction of this confederate faction: when they saw, their own Country
within it self purpos^ly wrought into factious and parts, to make the way
open to Civil force and violence: and when they saw their own Q. now a Queen
but in name, and those rascalles reigning in deed and ^ff^ct over her and her
Realm: las^ly, when she was so far s^duced, as against al Laws of Nature
and Nations, and with her passing dishonor, to procure y^ dispossessing and
imprisonment of the Q. of Scotland, an absol^te Prince from many d^sc^nt^s, her
own nearest kinsewoman, and Heir apparent: to take her as prisoner, that
never had war with her: to hold her close prisoner, that fled to her for
succor upon hope given her by her letters and messages mo then a few: to set
up a Bastard to usurp her Dominion, and with so large a pension, as England
never gave, to maintain him to k^epe it against her^ yea, when she had so
wholly betaken her ^elf to the gou^rnem^nt of those few persons of mean
condition, that manifestly she contemned the persons, and left to use the
ser^ice and advise of her Nobility (that la^oured the just restitution of the
Q. of Scotland, conformable to her right, and to your Q. honor and safety)
and being withal observed, that al th^se notable injuries and oppressions done
to such a Lady, a Queen, and a desolate widow for many months, yea years
together, suffised nothing to satisfy nor qualify ye malicious thirst of her
destruction, which was then perceived (by some of the wis^r sort) by those
base men to be chiefly ^yed and intended, and that for a further purpose not
yet discovered: When ye Duke of Nor^hfolke (I say) and the other Nobility by
length of ten years time and more, and by these notorious mischiefs daily put
in ure, both at home and abroad, could not but see your Q. reputation touched,
her security endangered, ye amity of the Realm weakened, the treasure of the
Croune consumed, the people impouerished, their foreine frindes lost,
themselves contemned and in awe of their inferiors, and consequently their
honors slaundered, their Families and Succ^ssions in peril and likelyhod of of
ruin, if this form of government were not ab^ttered the sooner: thereupon,
each lamenting to other the sequel and consequence, that was in short time
like to ensue to themselves, to the Country, and to your Queen also, they
conferred now and than (as occasion served them to meet) how, and by what
mean your Q. might be induced, to take b^tter ways to the recovering of her
honor and fame, to the establishment of her security, and to prevent the
imminent dangers that by these means depended over themselves, and the whole
Realm. And the plat thereof being debated, was at length devised, and resolved
by a general consent of many both of the Counsel and other Nobility, to
co^sis^ principally in removing from her by some good means, The remedy was in
remoouing of two men from her.
two or three persons of mean birth and condition, that by false suggestio^s
and crafty speeches, had so intruded themselves into her favor and credit,
that with contempt and reiectio^ of all the reast, she was wholly governed and
ruled by them. And the same in a sort once offered and assaied to be put in
execution, and by a crafty mean shifted over and eluded: those subtle fellows
smothly dissembled ye mattter for a season, humbly crouching and lowly behauing
them selves, til they saw a better time.

But when they had within a few months after, so compassed your Queen (with
pretense of al care and ielouzie of her state and security) that they had
irremoueably persuaded her, Synons su^ teltie.
that the marriage of the Q. of Scotland with the Duke of Northfolke, must
needs be intended to her derogation (yet still putting him in comfort and
assurance of her good will to the same) and had by that mean^s wrought her,
first to deface him with il speeches and looks, than to take and defame him
with disloyal attempting this match, and at length to commit him prisoner to
the Tower: they thereupon procured her, to write out her Letters, to call in
also sundry others of the Nobility, namely the chief and principal in the
North parts.

The D. of N^rf. ^^so^ed.
Who having heard of the Dukes imprisonment, notwithstanding her many Letters of
assurance, that they knew he had both from your Q and her chief Counsailours,
if he would come up: when they heard of the r^s^rai^t of the Earls of Arund^l
and P^nbrooke, of the show of displeas^re that Leicester had sustei^ed ^or the
same cause, and of the straight keeping of the L. Lumley: they thereupon
discretely excused their coming a while, minding to hear ^if they might) what
should becomme of the others already taken. The Nobles of the North had be^ all
intrapped, if they had not armed them selves.
Which whiles they exp^cted, they suddenly understood, certain secret forces
and companies of armed men to be privily levied by your Q. commandment, and
by Commission prepared and laid in places apt for the purpose, by force to
take th^m^ and to bring them up prisoners.

Whereupon knowing and assuring themselves (as full well they might) that they
should find neither favor nor indifferency, No justice, where those men rule.
where and whiles those men ruled (whom they knew to be determinately bent to
go through with the face and form of Regiment before mentioned, for causes yet
hidden) unto which those of the Nobility and of the North parts especially
were most opposite and repugnant: they were constreined for their present
safety^ to make choice of the less of those distresses, that were presented
unto them. Of which the present seeming the harder (as naturally it does to al
men) they resolved rather to abide the hope, and to make proof of better to
come, then to render thems^lues to their present and assured ruin. And so
calling such good companies of their frindes, servants and Tenants together, as
might be hable to d^fend their persons from the present violences and forces
than beset about them: upon the gathering of that multitude ther^ followed and
ensewed the rest, as ye have heard of.

And these being the true causes and occasions, that moo^ed those Noble men and
Gentlemen to put thems^lues in arm^s: to wit, for God chiefly, for the
Catholic Religion, for the honor and safety of their Q. for preservation of
their Country, for due respect unto their Peers, for conservation of the
Ancient Amities of the Croune, for the removing of a mean man or two, the
causers of al those mischiefs, and for their own safety of body and soul,
so testified by their Proclamations in writing, so auowed by all confessions and
examinations, and so confirmed by all that has followed and fallen out syns, and
never proceeding so far, as whereof died above one person at the most, nor to
the spoil or loss of any man's goods to any valor: behold now, how rightly
the Authors of these Pamphlets play the Scogans here, who being ashamed (as
shameless men may be) of the severe executio^s, Syno^ ashamed of the cruel
execution in the North.
or rather of the cruel severity used toward the inferior multitude (whose
Capitaines by flight had saved themselves) for a fact of such quality as this
was in them that did but follow and obey their Masters and Lords) (of whom mo
then six or seven hundred lost their lives and goods, and their little lands
also, those that had any) these Scogans (I say) finding them selves now
confounded with this their own bloody proceeding, to cover the same, would now
burden and defame the Q. of Scotland therewith, craftily tempering their
words so, as to make the world ween and take their fact for hers.

And^ be not so much abused, A right trick of Synon.
Reader, by these scholars of Scogan, that for covering of their own
uncleanness, would draw you into suspicion of al your Nobility in effect: and
would make you mistrust them to have meant that to your Q. which themselves
have already contrived and executed against her of Scotland. For think not,
your Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Northpartes, and the reast also now troubled
and defamed, to be al so witless and hartlesse: but that if ever they had
meant any such thing, there were, and yet are among them enough, that both know
the means how to have contrived it, If ill had been meant, they knew how to do
it.
and want no courage to have performed it, in far other sort (I mean) then
ever was yet attempted, or thought on, I dare say and swear for them.

9. And it is known (says he) that your Q. as one void of a revenging
nature, did labor to have restored her to her Country, and saved her life
after the death of her Husband, and labored to put an end to the Civil wars
in her Realm, etc.
My purpose is not, good Reader, to accuse your Queen, The Q. of ^ngl. well
^ff^ct^d to t^^ other of Scotland.
nor to disalowe of her nature. For as I may, I honor her, and lament nothing
more, then that she suffers her self, her name, her Dignity and Authority
to be so much abused, her forces and treasures to be so ill employed to the
danger of her State, and to the dishonor and infamy of her person: to the
oppression of the innocent, whom nature binds her to defend: and to the
offense of the old frindes and Allies of herself, her Parents and Dominions.
And so well inclined am I, to think the best of her, that open cause will
permit, that I believe the brute, that said, she had been murdered in
Loughleuen, if your Queen would have consented to it: neither I deny, but yt
your Queen has been made believe (perhaps) that some means ^aue been used
in her name, and by her Authority, to the other ends and purposes alleged.

And of some few Letters have I heard, written by your Queen, that have
^arr^ed in deed such face and appearance: but when there has gone withal, yea
before them and after them, sometime to the same, sometime to other persons,
other Letters of so contrary tenors, secretly sent, your Q. writing to one
purpose openly, they write secretly to another
secretly delivered, and to be imparted to none but to them of the faction:
and therein to de^ise them the form, and show them the way, to animate and
encourage them, yea to innite, persuade, and hire them, to do clean
contrary, and to perform nothing of that, which the public Letters did
give face and show of: and when the event and success has disco^ered, that
secret advise to have taken place, and the public motion to have been
contemned: how can any man possibly be blinded in this?

Truly if I knew any such benefit or pleasure particular, that the Q of
Scotland had ^asted by your Q. means: I would not here conceal them, nor any
way seek to minish the honor or thank that she justly deserves. And sorry I
am, that the blemmish and blame due to her Ministers, should redound to
herself, and spot her cote.

For, like as nothing has been heard of, faithfully or effectually done by
your Q. ministry toward the others restitution, Restitution pretended, and
deprivation intended.
nor toward the compounding of the civil wars of that Realm, other then by
seeking to bring such of her Majesty's loyal Nobility and faithful Subjects
as have stood for her, to abandon their allegiance, as the reast have done, and
to unite themselves with the others against her, to her final deprivation for
ever: even so the whole world witnesses (I ween) that all the garboyles and
blouddy Tragedies in her Country committed these twelve or thirtene years,
The Q. of Scot. whole calamity wrought by the Enli^h without the Q. cons^nt,
as it seems.
have al in effect ben by your Q. Ambassadors and Counsaillers devised, by her
ser^ants, Pe^sioners and ^eed me^ practiced, with her name and Authority
countenanced, the Rebels and Traitors in her Country succored and
encouraged, with her money and men maintained, by her gifts rewarded, and by
her means restored: and contrarily, the Q. frindes and party from time to
time by her ^^en forces persecuted and oppressed, her Ambassadors imprisoned,
her servants diuersely a^flicted her Noblemens lands spoiled, many of their
houses burned, sundry of their Castles battered and taken, and some of their
persons murdered and quartered, that fell into the hands of such Regents and
Governors as she constituted: and finally, the Q. own person by the
Authority of yours, detained prisoner, sundry Regents one after an other set
up by your Q. countenance, to usurp her Dominions against her, yea her private
servants both men and women requisite for her honor and safety, by
co^ma^ndement of yours removed from her, al speaking with her, al writing to
her, al recei^ing and hearing from her, al relief sent or given her in money or
meat, al comfort don her by writing, word or look, al good report and true
relation made ^ither of her good nature, of her rare gifts, of her honorable
dealing, any commendation of her person, beauty, wisdom, virtue, or other
quality: yea, any least word spoken in the just defense of her Honor and
innocence, is accounted seditious, traitorous, injurious to your Q. and
tending to rebellion. And yet this Gnato blussheth not, so to temper his tale,
as if the Queen of Scotland had deserved all the ill in the world at your Q.
hands, and that she as one not inclined to revenge, had contrarily done unto
her singular benefittes and pleasures.

Ten exampl^^ of dob^^ d^aling.
If this general rehe^sal of so common known truths so lately put in vr^, do
not yet satisfy captious and curious ears that will say, that I challenge the
Authors of this Libel for want of particulers, and do bring forth none my
self: let this brief memory of some few, brought forth for example, suffice
to call the reast unto your own remembrances.

gave him the platte form of the general reuolte of all that Nobility in the
year 1560. by abusing him with a hope to marie your Queen: some be dead, and
some other yet living, and still covering the eggs not yet al hatched.

Likewise of them that taking advantage

When your Realm was the refuge and finishing of that, which he brought to
pass afterward.









Can his name be hidden, that with

Can it be doubted, from whom,

And can any man be in doubt, by

These few for example may serve to bring many mo to mind, and they be
particular enough for any indifferent man. The names of your English I do
forbear, in respect that some of them be dead, some other have found their
error, and be becomme honester men, and the reast may do^ the like, and (I
hope) will.

Nevertheless if I shall be further pressed thereto, I will lay forth to the
world such a Rabble of names, with their several actions and practices, and the
copies of such, and so many monstrous horrible letters (which ye writers
think are not to be seen) as shall fully satisfy every man, that I speak
not without my book, and shall make them to look for some better proof at
this man's hands, then he has brought yet, before they believe, yt she of
Scotl. has ought done toward yours, that deserves revenge, or that yours
has don ought for her, that is worth gramercy, her state now considered.

10 It is also known (says he) that the Q. of Scotl. did by writing utterly
renounce the Dukes marriage upon his first apprehension, etc. with some note,
that of her self she did not first move it, nor yet like of it. Also that the
Duke did the like at that time both by messages and writings, and acknowleged
his offense in seeking it: and under his hand and seal did firmly promise,
never to deal therein an^ further, or in any other matter with the Q. etc.
THis objection, good Reader, lacks little (for ought I se^ in it) but that
it might be granted, and pass unspoken to, without touch or reprorche to any
of both. If it had, I mean, the condition annexed, that the Q. and the Duke
did always express: that is to say, that without your Q. favor and good
consent, The marriage never intended without the Q. consent.
as they had not before ever intended it, they would not hereafter proceed
further in it.

And not unlike is it, that the Q. of Scotl. might answer in sense and effect,
as he has alleged: yt is to wit, that she neither first moved it, nor at
first liked it. For a rare matter is it, to find a right mean woman to be ye
first mo^er of a marriage for her self, or at ye first motion to appear to
like of it. And even so may every man see, yt any wit has, that without ye
favor of your Q. first obtained, ye other of Scotl. had little reason or cause,
to think y^ match any way beneficial unto her, regarding specially the state
she stood and stands in.

And for the Dukes part, as it has been already s^id, he never undoubtedly
meant to assaie it, without yt promise and assurance of your Q. consent
thereunto: if not by her own mouth, yet by them, that (for their credit with
her) all men knew were able easily to persuade and obtain it, if they had as
faithfully gone about it, as they did fraudule^tly promise it. Nay, this I say
further, that if he had not been first invited to think of it, and daily
animated, and encouraged for a long time together to proceed in it, Synon
circumuented ^he Duke.
even by some of them, that now most persecute him for it, and would make
treason of it: the matter had never been moved, nor thought on: to any purpose,
I mean.

This objection therefore expressing their promises of renuntiatio^ does more
burden and charge your Q. then any of them both. For being true that they
promised so firmly by hands and seals, by mouths and writings, The Q. and
Duke iniu^^ed.
as this man says: what could they do more, what could be more asked? And why
has your Q. then kept them still in prison now, more then two years sins?
For, that which he alleges in the accusation following, will neither serve to
excuse your Q. in that fact, nor to defend this Authors folly in framing his
tale no better. For thus he ^aieth.

11. And now it is certainly found (says he) that the former practice between
the Q. and Duke (notwithstanding their ^euerall renuntiations and promises)
has had continuance without interruption, etc. till now his last committing,
etc.
IF we granted, good Reader, that it were now found, as this accusation
supposes: how will that yet defend the injury and injustice don unto them,
for two years full before that this was found and discovered? For between the
Dukes first apprehension, and the date of this book, are more then two years
fully complete. Upon his first apprehension (says this accuser) they both
renounced and made promise, etc. Then why have they remained in prison ever
sins? For, if now it be found (as he says it is) that they have broken
promise: than, until now it was not perceived. For nothing can ^e said to be
found now, that was understood before. And for more then two years, before
this continuance of that practice was found, had they renounced and promised
(if this Author say true) which was as much as they could do, and that
notwithstanding, were kept still in prison, for two years fully, before this
new crime of their breach^ of promise was found or perceived, as this Author
t^lleth it.

Where Ma^chiauel rules, marriage (...) unlawful.
And now let us set, of what weight the fault is, that is newly found, being
gra^nted to be as y^ accusation affirms. Forsooth it is, that, by secret
means the treaty betvveene them for marriage, has had continuance vvi^ho^t
inter^u^tion etc. Now in what part rises the fault of this? They are within
age bylike, and Wards to your Q. and the Master of the Wards complains of
this, who having your Q. in ward already, can not endure the other should be
free: or else, there is between them some such nerenesse of kindred by
Consanguinitie or Affinity, as will not permit them to marie. and the
Bishop therefore complains of this.

Be it the one, or the other (as all men know it can be neither of both) it
must needs be, that they have wrong, that for talk and treaty only of marriage
(without contracte) which had been lawful, have been thus severely imprisoned
and defamed with treason. Or if any other impediment shall be alleged, when we
hear what it is, it shall be answered vnto^ And in the mean time, it must be
taken thus, y^ all this fault imputed unto them, rests in this: that by
secret messages or letters they have had mutual conference and intelligence
touching a laufull marriage between themselves. And is not this a sore matter,
and a greiuous crime?

Yea, but they were prisoners (he says) and without your Q. consent, and
against their own promis^ they treated it, etc. I answer, that none of all
these be just impedimentes to prohibit laufull matrimony, neither by
practice, nor book law. But contrarily, examples many both of old and late
years may be brought forth, manifestly proving, that neither ye restraint of
ye body by personal imprisonment, nor ye want of ye Princes consent, nor any
promise of ye parties, by message or letter (grounded only upon fear of
displeasure or temporal pain) are any sufficient impediments to stay a
laufull marriage.

And here this Author ends his rehersall of things known and certainly
found, as he terms them, which being all so weakly proved, so unlikely of
themselves, and so manifestly disproued by common reason and known factes, as
ye have heard: what may now be looked for in the reast, which he rehearses but
upon conjectures and reports, or rather as things not yet fully reported nor
coniectured, but as things yt might be said, and may be said, and hereafter
(bylike) shall be said, to be known things also.

12. But now appears it (says he) how dangerous the intention of that
marriage is to your Q. by other dangerous practices that have accompained and
followed this attempt (if you will believe him) which almighty God has
merueilously discovered, to the preservation, both of your Q. person, and the
Realm. etc.
THis objection threateneth some fearful bugge at hand, which bylike we
shall see anon. But whether this match were like to be dangerous to your Q. and
Realm (as he concludes it to be) or no, I mind not here to dispute long:
specially sins the same is already by a namelesse Discourser so gravely
discoursed, on both sides argued, and for the profoundnes of it published in
print, this somer past: which (seeming to conclude, that it were more safety to
your Q. and Realm, that ye Q. of Scotl^ married with a foraine Prince, rather
then with a subject of England) does yet chiefly rest and rely upon this, yt
she is to marry, or not to marry, as your Q. will, or will not, and when, and
whom so ever she shall appoint. For she remaining in your Q government, A
folish argum^^^ against the (...).
y^ contrary disputation (says he) is as much, as to ask, whether your Q.
may govern in her own Realm, or not.

Now let us (good Reader) turn our speech for a word or two from this
Hobgoblin, unto that namelesse Discourser, the force of whose argument being
grounded upon the Queen of Scotl. being in your Q. government, let us ask
him this question: to wit, whether the same reason does hold, or no, in every
other person that is in your Q. government, as well as in the person of the Q.
of Scotl? If he say no, I shall be glad to hear his reason, why? and to
understand the difference that he will make between the condition of her
person, and theirs: and why she should be more in that subjection, then all the
rest.

If he answer, for her proximitie in blood unto your Q. and for her Title to y^
Croune of England: I answer, that there is neither law, nor statute, private
of that Realm (now in force, as I take it) nor public in the world, I am
sure, that restrains the liberty of matrimony, more in a Prince, then in a
poor man. And so consequently no color of law to give to your Q. any such
Jurisdiction over the person of the Q. of Scotland.

But supposing your Discourser foreseeing, that he should have little thank to
make that answer (at their hands, I mean, that chiefly manage your Q.
affairs, and would bear the world in hand, that the Q. of Scotl. has to tha^
Croune no Title at all) will flee therefore to the other refuge, and answer,
that your Q. being sole and supreme gouerner in her own Realm, of al persons
and affairs whatsoever, has therefore the disposition and governance of al
persons in her Dominions, as well in their marriages, as in all other things
(for otherwise I see not, but that it would be somewhat absurd, to say, that
she should have more Jurisdiction in the person of the Q. of Scotland (who is
an absolute Prince of a for^ine Dominion, not borne under her subjection, nor
otherwise present in her Dominion, but by violence detained against her will)
then she has in the persons of her own borne subjects): and then if he rest
upon that supreme authority of your Q. to be preemine^t over ye persons and
marriages of all her borne subjects, by cause they be under her governance: I
see not then, that this discourser makes any difference between the marriages
of Christian creatures, and the brutish coupling of unreasonable beasts.

Christian marriages and brutish couplings is one with the ^iscourser.
For if your Q. Christian subjects be no more free in choosing of their wives,
nor may no more freely couple them selves in laufull matrimony, but at her
choice and election, as the horse and the mare, the dog and bitche be joined
and coupled at the will and choice of ye yomen of the Studdery and L^ash
(according to the race they desire to have the colts and whelps of) as this
Discoursers opinion seems to be: then behold, what ^stimation Christian
marriage is in with such discoursers, and what preaty doctrine is covertly
taught in pamphelets of such pretense, permitted by Authority.

The Discurser di^couereth, that in the marriage the chief fear was of
relig^on, and not or your Q.
Again, if thou mark the Authors scope in that discourse, thou shall see, that
it tends wholly in effect to prove that marriage likely to be dangerouse to
your new Machiauellian Religion, rather then either to your Q. or Realm.
Whereby you may see, that they, that set both that Author, and this a work,
would feign have it taken, that the security of your Q. and Realm, consisted
in the maintenance of that licentiouse doctrine, which has in short time
confounded al Princes and places, that ever yet received it.

In deed evident it is, that that match strongly impugned the secret and
final purpose of those two English Machiauelles, who for their own
advancement, intend to wreste the succession of the Crown to a wrong family.
But how it could possibly have endangered either your Q. or Realm, neither
does this Author show, or that Discourser prove, nor by any common intendemente
can be presumed. And by the way notable it is, that a thing so manifestly
beneficial to your Queen and common Wealth, should be accounted offensive,
and published to be daungerouse to your Prince, for impugning only the private
preference of two such persons.

I want no will here to spend a few words mo^ in answering any dangers that
could have grown to your Queen by this match, if the Discourser had brought
forth any worthy the speaking to. But because his objections and reasons be so
fond, frivolous and unable to move any man that wit or reason has: I may
rather think it to much, that I have thus far aparted my speech from my
principal purpose, then yield to be drawn to follow his folly any further,
specially sins this pamphelet now bears us in hand, that we shall see such
dang^rous practices to have accompani^d and followed that attempt: that if God
had not even miraculously saved both your Q. and the Realm, they both had been
in wonderful peril thereby. Which dangers when we shall come to consider,
there will be apt place to say thereunto, as the matter shall move, and truth
and reason require.

In the mean while note this here, that like as this Synon has already
wrought and brought the Que^ne of Scotl. into his own power, ready to be
dispatched at any sudden, to serve his final turn and purpose against the
Crown, under his false pretense of caring for the Q. security: even so under
a like false gloss, that this marriage might be dang^rous to your Queen, he
would execute his own private malice and revenge against the Duke, for
charging him once at Brinewich, as you know, with robbing the Realm,
dishonouring and indangering your Queen to raise and maintain Rebels abroad.

13. It was devised and determined (says he) that a new Rebellion should have
been moved nigh London. The City should have been taken by force, foraine
Soldiers in great numbers should have come out of the Low Countries by Sea
unto a notable Port of the Realm. So should Rebels and foraine enemies have
joined and proceeded to further things not expedient yet to be spoken of. etc.
HEre begins now (good reader^ the fire and flame to appear, The accusation
has all y^ properties of a lie.
that ye former obscure smoke did threate^ should break out. Which resting yet
in devises and determinations of many things to have been done (yea, rather in
his own bare and naked saying so) I trust every wise man will see some better
proof thereof, then the credit of a Robbin Goodfellow only, before they believe
so gross, so palpable, and so unlikely lies.

Devised and d^termined (this man says) it was: but he neither shows, by
whom, by how many, where the devise was made, when the determination was
concluded, nor any other cert^inty, unto which a perfect answer might be made:
and this is one of the most proper qualities and evident tokens of a lie.

The proposition therefore being so general and uncertain as admits no such
answer, as whereupon any certain issue or trial might be joined: I must
therefore frame my answer somewhat after the nature of the proposition, and
argu^ upon likelyhoods and probabili^ies: and so leave it to the Reader to
judge, whither of our two speeches carries with it most reason and likelihood.

Not likely.
Resort therefore again unto the consideration of the number and weight of the
things that he says were determined, and I affirm it to be utterly unlikely,
and never devised nor determined. Unlikely, I call it, and unlikely (I ween) al
men of common sense will think it, that any such rebellion at home, any such
surprising of such a City by force (with the sack and spoil of the welthie
men in it, as Master Fleetewoodes Oration o^t lauisheth and terms it) or any
conclusion to bring in foraine forces to sack your own, could be resolved or
determined by any of your own Nation, as a thing repugnant to common nature.

Unpossible also (in common reason) I must affirm it to be, Impossible to
common reason.
that any such thing could be devised and determined without the knowledge and
cons^nt of great numbers of sundry States and degrees: as things that
necessarily require the counsel and authority of Noblemen mo then a few, the
governance and order of Gentlemen in great numbers, the trauail and labor of
multitudes both of Soldiers and Capitaines, and the confederacy of some great
party and faction in the Realm and City it self, and consequently sundry
actual things to have been don and executed, by messages, by letters, by present
conferences of sundry persons, by money received and paid, by provision of
armor and munition, by constitution and agreement upon days and times, by a
readiness and assurance of ships and mariners, and by many other like
things, that require fact and action, before such enterprises can be resolved
and determined.

The prou^s of the impossibili^ie.
Let us therefore require of this Accuser, for the furnishing of his accusation,
to tell us of some few at least, that began this devise: of some few of those
many, that did determine it: of some of the multitude, that should have
executed it: of some Citizen or other that conspired to raise the reast, or to
let in the others that should come from without: or else from whence the
Ordinance should come to batt^r the walls, or the botes to enter by water. Let
him tell us the name of some strange Captain or foreine soldier waged or
hired, of some ship prepared, o^ some mariner taken up, of some armor
provided, of some Artillery mounted, of some sho^te or powder barrelled, of
some money given or borrowed, or of some Prince or great man that promised or
intended it. Let him gi^e us the message or Messenger, the Letter or Writer, of
some one or other^ that testify it. Let some Port be named so nigh the City,
as he speaks of^ some inhabitant there that would give landing to strangers,
some of those Gentlemen, that with forces should mete them, and guide them to
London: or some one thing or other of the many particulers that such an
exploite demands, let us entreat this accuser, to show us to have been done
in fact, that may give some breath or life to his accusation.

Syns every man knows, that it is no mean company, that can take London by
force, in which are thought to be not so few at this day, as ten thousand
armed men: and stands in so strong a Country, and so far from the Sea, as
I ween^, it were hard to find a foreine Captain so simple, nor so single a
soldier, that would put his foot there (without great and present aid to
receive him) where he must march many days in so strong a woody land, so
peopled with his enemies, and they of such valor, as Englishmen are known to
be, before he could come to join with his frindes.

And of these particulers so justly demanded, and so necessary to the
determination of such an enterprise, as he says was determined, til this
Author have showed and well proved some such good number, as may plainly
convince his affirmation to be true: we may in the mean time (I trust) with
right and reason take this tale of his for an impudent, malicious, and a stark
^taring lie, proceeding of a Devilish sprite, that intends to ground
thereupon some horrible and outrageous exploite.

And will you see it proved even by his own words? The rebels and enemi^s
(says he) thus joined, should have pro^eeded to further things not ex^edient
to be spoken of at this time. Now mark ye, how this betraieth the reast. For
by this it is evident, that they which serte this Hobgoblin a work, do by
these words reserve still unto themselves, a liberty to change and increase
these lies, as they lift.

For, well you see, having thought this time expedient enough, More remains t^
be devised.
to charge and defame both those Noble Persons by name, and a great number of
others bysides, with raising of the rebellion in the North, with conspiring a
new in the South, with intention to surprise London by force, to s^cke the
wealthy Citizens (as M. Recorder gabbleth) to bring in foreine forces and
strangers, to have destroyed your Q. person (if M. Recorder lied not) to seek
to have the Croune from her, and to be unto her the most dangerous enemy that
lived: these crimes (I say) having ben thought expedient enough to be uttered
at this time, what matter of more importance can there remain expedient yet to
be concealed, if the same were already hammered and forged?

These words therefore that seem to pretend other matters to be found, not
yet expedient to be uttered, must needs argue and infer, both that the
Authors have not yet agreed with their false accusers, nether have heard of any
other man, nor are resolved within themselves of any further matter, then they
have here already coughed out: and also that they have an intention, hereafter
to devise and set forth more, as already they have done all this that ye have
heard.

And here behold withal, how this Robin Goodfellow plaieth also the Scogan.
For whereas he perceives a general misselike and just discontentation
conceived by all States and Degrees among you, for the bringing in of such an
infinite multitude of Foreiners and Strangers, as swarm every where almost
throughout the Realm: to cover your eyes from beholding the same, he here
tells you and ^eareth you in hand, that other folks had conspired and
devised to have done the same thing, that his Authors and Patrones have already
performed. And the art is subtle and fine, that syns they can not prevent the
eyes and minds of the multitude from seeing and feeling sundry oppressions
grown by that fludde of Foreiners that they have brought in to serve a turn
at a day: they would now pervert the cogitations and talks of the people
from the Foreiners that already are there, to the Foreiners that they would
have them fear shall come.

14. These devises says he) were not only talked of, put in writing, and
fully concluded: but the Messengers were also sent over Sea in Lent last with
sufficient authority of commission and writings, to testify the determination
of them, that should be the Heads and Conductours of this Rebellion, as the
same being imparted on the other side the Sea was well accepted and allowed:
and thereof several Letters were speedily written to the said Queen, to the
Duke of Northfolke, and specially, to that ungracious Priest the Bisshoppe of
Rosse, the instrument of all the Dukes calamity, and the feed man of al
treason against England: that this enterprise must be kept secret^ namely from
the French, for causes of great moment, until the Messenger should post to
the Pope for money, and to the King of Spain for order and direction for men
and ships. and caet.
This is a long sentence, good Reader, comprehending in appearance many
particulers, and gives a face of a plain Story well opened and certainly
known: but being well observed, it will appear intricate, confuse and obscur^ly
writ^n of purpose, Obscurity of purpose.
to give the Author a shifting and starting hole, from being taken with many
manifest lies.

And if I had not ben somewhat exercised and trauail^d in the scrutiny and
search of these m^ns bold affirmations, I might as easily have been moved and
carried away to b^l^ue this whole and smooth tale, as many other (I fear me)
are. For surely few wise and modest men are there, that have the face, so
boldly and precis^ly to affirm never so known a truth, Impude^cie.
as these men do common known lies. Their words therefore must be well marked,
and their crafty sentences warely taken h^de of, if thou will not be seduced
by them.

Understanding me therefore, always to m^ane and affirm (til I see some
better proof) that there was by these persons (whom he names and
insinuat^th) never any such devise made, much less any such determination
concluded, much less any such put in writing, much less any messengers sent
therewith, or with any credit of such effect, neither any such thing imparted
to the Pope, nor Duke of Alua, whom M. Recorder (over rashly for a man of his
gravity) names to be Conspiratours and your Q. e^emies, much less any such
thing well liked or allowed by by them, much less any such certificate by any
letters to your Q. to ye Duke, nor to y^ B. of Rosse: understanding me always
thus, I say, I shall proceed to the consideration of this man's tale, as himself
tells it. For it were no reason (pardie) finding al to be lies that he
tells (and they so infinite in number) to grant him more, then himself has
wit to speak of, or for shame dare utter, or for fear of deprehension, dare
affirm.

As fair and as whole as this tale seems to be, No certainty showed.
yea though now he add, that the devises aforesaid were put in writing
(whereof he spoke not before) yet he tells thee not, that those devises were
in writing sent over, if thou mark his words well.

Nor in telling thee, the messengers were ^ent, yet he shows thee not, who
they were: he names not one, though they were many, neither whose Messengers
they were, nor what message they carried: no, not so much as that they were the
Messengers of the d^uisers, nor that they carried the written devises. Look
again on his words.

Repugn^^ce.
Of Messengers he speaks here in the plural number, as being more then one:
and within few lines after, ^ither he forg^tteth him self, and r^duceth it to
one only, or else all the Messengers, save one, did forgette themselves: for
here is no mention of answer, but from one alone.

With suf^icient authority of commission and vvritings (he says) they
went, but with whose Authority, by whose Commission, or with what, or whose
writings, here is no manner of mention, but a plain insinuation, that what
soever the Messengers carried (if ought were carried by any Messenger at al) was
not the written devises o^ the Rebellion, nor of the introduction of strangers.

But it sufficiently testifi^d (says he) the determination of them that
should have been the Heads and Conductours, etc. The Pope and Duke of Alua
ac^cused.
By this it should seem, that the Author means, that it was the
testification of some other men, given for the better credit of the deuisers,
determinours, heads, and conductours, and not their own.

But it was well liked and allowed (says h^) on the other side of the Sea:
by the Pope, and Duke ^f Alua, says M. Recorder. But neither what was
accepted, who accepted it, nor where it was imparted, can any man perceive by
ought that this Author says: and much less by that, that M. Fletwood has
said (who having lauishly termed those notable Personages, that be absent and
a thousand miles asunder, to be Conspiratours of an enterpris^ distant a
thousand miles from one of them, and Enemies to your Queen) makes no manner
mention, neither o^ Messengers, nor writings, nor of any other thing that might
give any life or ligh^ to the matter.

Of the well liking and good acceptance, se^eral Letters were speedily
written, says he: but whether by them that accepted it, or by them that
imparted it, or by any other that heard of it, or by any Spy that did
counterfeit it, he declares not a word.

^o the Queen, to the Duke, and to the Bishop of Rosse^ he says, the letters
were written: but whether they al three, or any one, or two of them, or none
of al three, received any such, he expresses not yet, nor gives not any
copy, any date, any subscription, any superscriptio^, nor any place, to whom
from whom, where, nor when any of al three Letters were written.

The lette^s gave charge, he says, to keep the matter from the French, but
from which French, he shows not: albeit no man is ignorant, how notorious
the factions of that Nation are, nor how ne^re in blud many principal
Personages of that Nation be unto the Que^ne of Scotland, from whom it can
not be thought, that she would have her counsell^s concealed. And therefore in
this the Author or deviser has given a great wound unto his whole tale.

Absurdity.
Til the messenger had b^n at Rome, says he, for money. Now he speaks of one
messeng^r in the singular number, that hitherto has talked of Messengers in
the plural: but what money he went for, what sum he required, for whom he
demanded it, or to what use, you see he l^au^th every man to conjecture at
large. Yea having said before (if M. Recorder and he do agree) yt the Duke of
Alua was of the conspiraci^: behold ye wisdom of this tale, that now sends
the Messenger to Rome for money a thousand miles of, where little or none is,
and presently cause there, to occupy what there can be gotten: having the Duke
of Alua and A^dwerpe both at hand, and in his way, being the Monopoly for
money of Christ^ndome at this day. And who sees not, how pregnant a suspicion
this gives, that all the reast is plainly forged?

And til he had been at Spain, to have order for men and ships, he says.
But what number of any of both, at whose instance, at whose charges, to whose
use, against what time, or for how long time, we know no more by this man, than
by the man in the Moon. And so gross is the folly of this falsehood, that he
forgeth, that the Duke of Alua wants no^ commission, to give men, money and
ships too, without sending to Spain therefore: as was well testified by the
last Civil wars in France, when the Duke Dewponts was there at the charges of
the English.

Hidden mischief as^eth a subtle and ^arke dealing.
And will ye see now, why the Author walks thus obscurely disguised in this
general and uncertain manner of speeches? Forsooth it is both natural,
necessary, and of old accustomed, for all false rumors, and ^orged devises,
meant for other mischievous practices, to proceed in that man^r: the rather
and the more, according as the weight and importance of the final intention
amounts unto.

For if we should here grant him, that there had b^n a Messenger or a writing
sent (as til it be better proved, I utterly deny, that ever there was any such
matter, m^aning or man) and should ther^with show him, how there might be
lauful wri^ings and lauful messages sent to your Queens dearest frindes,
testifiyng the good meanings of faithful subjects, and the same well allowed of
by her foreine frindes, and that certified at home: if I should^ I say, lay
all this open, and show in particular, how this might be (albe it, I say still,
there was no such thing) yet, because these crafty false forgers foresaw,
that they might be so answered, and the things declared and justified (if any
at al were): they therefore wade and walk^ in this general, confuse, and
uncertain manner of sp^aking, that they might always shift from us, and say,
that they meant not this man, nor that man that we should speak of: nor this
letter, nor that writing, that we should declare, and so of all the reast: but
that they might have scope to say still (as ^uer they have done, and here often
do) that such persons, and such writings as they meant of, were sent forsooth,
but not expedient at this time to be uttered from whom, from whence, nor when,
nor what the matter was, that the Letters did signify to be well liked and
allowed, nor by whom. For that is yet to devise, and shall come forth
herea^ter by likelyhode.

The B. of Rosse charged by Scogan, with Scog. fault
Now with the Bishop of Rosse he plaieth the Scogan again, as he did before
with the Queen his Mistress. For who is ignorant of the long enuie^ that
these men have borne to the Duke, for the good affection that the people
worthily bare him for his good nature, wisdom, temperance, and inclination to
justice? And who knows not, how the chief Aut^ors of these Libelles have
persecuted the Duke ever syns that he discovered himself at Grenewich, as I
remember, in the year 1569. to mislike with some of those base Counsailours,
that so much abused your Queen and the Realm, and would have removed them
from her? Syns which time every man seeing, how by degrees they have pursued
him, until they have brought him to the estate you see: now they would charge
the Bishop of Rosse to be ye chiefest cause of the Dukes calamity, whom
before and above al other, next unto his Sovereign and Mistress, he has ever
honored and served, as his public deeds do sufficiently testify.

Likewise in calling him the feed man of al treason unto your Realm: respite
but a while your credit thereof, till you have seen, what the treasons be,
that are in deed intended. And in the mean time, do but examine a little the
said Bishops procedings, sins he came into England, and to what end they have
tended.

Wherein finding yt he has none other wise done, The B. travel tend^^ to
prevent Synon^ treason.
but that which the duty of a good subject to his Sovereign, ye affection of
a good servant to his Mistress, y^ office of a Christian Bishop to y^ Church,
the natural and just love to his own Country, with the unfeigned good will and
service borne to your Q. and Realm, have bound him unto and required of him:
behold you then, what a regiment that is, and how y^ common weal is governed,
wherein so honest and upright a servant, in seeking to serve both his own and
your own Q. and Realms, directly and plainly, by truth, by reason, and by all
good policy (from time to time laid open both to your Q. and Council) is yet
now defamed with such odious Epithets, because his service and travail has
tended to prevent the secret hidden treasons, that yet lie undiscovered.

^5. The Messenger had his letters of credit from the Scottish Queen, the Duke
and others to the Pope, and the king of Spain. And so coming to Rome he
returned letters from the Popes gracious Holiness in the beginning of May, to
the said Q^ and to the Duke, and others. The letter to the Duke was in Latin
beginning: Dilecte fili, Salutem. But in deed the Duke might well say, he sent
not Salutem, but perniciem. The Duke had them, and read them, by the
intercession of that aforesaied ungracious Priest. The con^entes in some part
were, that the Pope well allowed of the enterprise: he would write also to the
King of Spain to further it, but his present business of the charitable wars
than in preparing against the Turk was the cause, that money could not then be
had for that summer: and yet his ungracious Holiness after his accustomed sort
comforted them all not to despair.
IN this paragraph (good Reader) the Author makes mention of two sorts of
letters or writings, Of the le^ters surmised to b^ sent.
as he did in the other: the one, yt the Messenger should ^arrie: and the
other, that he should return and send from them, to whom it is supposed he
went. And to avoid confusion, we must therefore divide our Answer, speaking
first of those, which he first mentioned, and than of the other, which he
lastly speaks of. Of the first he sait^ here, that they were letters of
credit, from the Q. from the Duke, and others. etc. Now forget not, that in the
next paragraph before he said, that the devises were put in vvriting, the
Messengers were sent over sea with authority and commission in vv^iting,
^uf^icient to testify the determination of the h^ades and Cond^^tors of the
Rebellion. etc. Join now these two paragraphs together, Centradiction.
and (if I be not deceived) tho^ shall see the one of them sufficiently
confound and confute the other, and plainly show, that the Q. and Duke be not
the heads, that before he spoke of, as al his former ^peach^s, til now, have
seemed to sound and insinuate.

For (protesting still, til it be better prou^d, that there was no such matter
at all) if the Mess^nger carried such writings as sufficed to testify both the
devises and the determinations of the heads of the rebellion: to what end then
were his letters of credit? For, letters of credi^ suppose the matters to go by
mouths, and are not wont to go, where the chief matter and purpose goes
sufficiently penned bysides, nor from those persons that have otherwise by
writing given sufficient testimony of the matter committed to credit. And in a
matter so dangerous both to the senders and carriers, who does use to make
superfluous writings, and to send mo letters then be necessary? This therefore
sufficing to show every wise man a plain probability, that al is forged and
feined: let us yet examine a little, what is in this accusation, if it were as
he says.

The Q. of Scotl. has reason to seek laufull help.
For the Q. part first, I mean, if she gave letters of credit to a Messenger,
that went to the Pope and King of Spain: what offense had it been, or to
whom? Who se^th not, what great reason she hath^ to seek to them both? Her
imprisonment can not take from her yt, which nature has given her. She
remains a Queen by Birth and Right, and by Nature she is bound to seek the
liberty of her person, and restitution to her own. And what just Prince, or
good common Weal can impute that for a crime, that all laws of Nature and
Nations do move all men unto?

If therefore there were any such Messenger, and any such letters of credit:
every honest man ought and is bound, to presume (till the contrary be proved)
that the credit was for the most likest and laufull cause: to wit, by laufull
means and mediation of foreign frindes, to come to that, that Nature and al
Laws gave her, which by any means at home she could not obtain. And now let
us resort a little to examine the likelihood and probability, The D. of Norf.
wrote to neither of both.
whether the Duke gave any such letters of credit to any such messenger.

The letters, says this Author, were to the Pope, and King of Spain:
between whom and this Duke how small the amity and acquaintance has been,
few or none in your Realm are ignorant. Letters of credit are not wont to go
between persons all estranged each from other: much less, where causes of
unkindness rath^r then of frindship have mutually occurred, as between y^ Duke
and the Sea Apostolic it is well known, has happened on both sides. The
Particularities whereof might be here remembered, ^e to the Pope for his second
marriage, and the Pope to him for the statute of primacy owed little.
if any man were so blind or ignorant, as to think, that the Duke could
possibly hope so much of the Pope, as men do of them, to whom they send
letters of credit, which plainly implie a confidence and an assured frindship.

No likelihood.
Add unto this, that if their purpose were (as this Author bears you in
ha^^) to move rebellion, to bring in strangers, to sack London^ etc. who can
imagine, that they (being known to be no fools) would seek aid a thousand
miles from them, for, and in an enterprise that required help so near at
hand? Let the creditte therefore be searched, that the Messenger ^aried by
mouth (if there were any such at all) let his written instructions and
commission be seen, if any he had, or le^ the firmes and hand^s of the
Conductors appear and come forth: let somewhat be seen, if all be not lies.
For without some more demonstration then this Hobgoblin has made yet, there is
in his tale so little reason and likelihood, that every man may and must (in my
mind) take al his whole tale for a wicked spritish lie, forged and f^ined to a
Devilish purpose.

Again, let it be considered, how unlikely it is, that any of them in the
stat^ they be in ^being known for wise^ would by letters, by credit or any
other way commit or attempt any unlawful action, that might increase the danger
and calamity that they both stood in: they (I say) yt when they were both
free, never gave the least show of any such mind, and willingly did put them
selves into your Q. hands, when they were at their several liberties, and
might have chosen to have gone else where. Thus much touching the letters of
credit, that these Authors do surmise were sent to the Pope and King of Spain.

Now concerning the letters that the Queen, the Duke and others are said to
have received: Of the letters surmised to be ^^ceiu^d.
mark you well, that this accusation makes no particular mention, what was in
the Q. letter, nor in any of theirs, whom he calls others, but a sentence or
two of the letter written (if the Author say true) to the Duke only, and that
from the Pope only. For, as from the king of Spain, he speaks not of any at
all. And that which he tells you of the Popes words to the Duke, The
accusation conuinc^th it self.
does plainly prove and convince (to every man that has grace or wit) that
if there were any such credit at al from the Duke to the Pope, or any such
answer from the Pope to the Duke: they both were far of a contrary sense and
meaning from that, which this Author has hitherto sought to persuade you.

For (says he) the Pope allowed well of the enterprise. was that, trow you,
an enterprise of rebellion? was that the enterprise of sacking London by
strangers? If the Pope could be thought to think it, yet being wise, and
having counsel, it is not like, he would write it. If he would needs write it,
yet he would not choose to write it first to the Duke of Northfolke, a stranger
to him, and a known Protestant from his educatio^.

Well, the Pope would write (says he) to the king of Spain to further it.
Judge thou Reader, whether that be like or not, that his Holiness esteems his
own credit so little with the greatest King in Christendom, that he would
require him to further a rebellion, and to sack a City of such force,
wealth, and renown, them selves both being known to have consumed both their
money and men in the repressing of the sundry rebellions, yt have been moved
under your Q. name and authority by ye very Authors of these Libels.

But now let us suppose and put the case, By 3. Examples it might be granted,
that they sent and received letters to good and lawful purpose.
that it were true (as we have showed it false) that there had been a Messenger
and letters of credit, and that the Pope had written, as this Author alleges
him: let us see, what will follow and fall out thereof, if it had been so, as
till he better prove it, we still affirm, that there was no such. Admitting
therefore, For liberty and restitution for them selves.
good Reader, were fallen into the state that these two noble personages are
in, as borne to a Kingdom, or other great possessions, expelled therfro, cast
into prison, and so pursued, that no man at home durst show him self thy
frinde, or to pity thy case, and that thou had so many years endured that
teadious captivity, and pi^yng prisonment, as they have sustained, yea without
color of cause by any law upon earth: and withal, if thou did find and
forsee ye maliciou^ machination, and daily contri^ing of thy final destruction
(whereof these Noble personages may justly stand in doubt) and if thou were for all that not desperate to find a frind of countenance and credit, yt with
authority would and were hable to treat and speak in thy cause, if thou
could find mean to lament thy case unto him: would thou now think thy
self indifferently d^alt withal, if (after all means used at home without
case or relief) for quiet and secret opening of thine unjust oppression, by
mouth or by writing abroad, thou should be accused of treason, and by printed
books defamed for a traitor?

Suppose also, thy self to be next heir to that Croune, For your Q. honor
and s^curitie.
or ye chief Peer of that Realm, holding thy Q. there not only as thy
Sovereign by duty, but as thy mother, thy sister and nearest kinsewoma^ in all
honor and affection: if now thou did by secret means of credit, or letter
lay open unto ye Pope and King (the chiefest Patrons and most ancient Allies
of that Croune) y^ miserable state, and desperate terms that thy Prince, thy
Country and whole Nobility stand in at this day, together with ye infinite
mischiefs and calamities yt all Countries adjoining do taste and feel by the
insolent governance thereof, taken in hand and ministered by one or two base and
inferior persons: and withal did require the one and the other (by some
means) to interpone them selves, to treat and traueil for ye remedy of it,
and by removing of those unworthy instruments, to cure and recover thy Q.
appaired honor and fame, for y^ more security of her Dignity and State, for
restoring of her Nobility now contemned, to ye estimation of their
predecessors, due to them by antiquity of bludde and vocation, to preserve the
Realm of England from utter impouerishment, and all Prouin^s adjoining from
infinite injuries and spoils: if thou (I say) by creditte of messenger, or
otherwise, had in this manner treated the matter with those ancient frindes
and Allies of thy Country, how so ever perhaps those base fellows (whom it
touched) might term it treason, conspiracy, rebellion, or what they would else:
had thy just Prince, thy Country or Nobility any reason, to complain, or to
condemn thee therefore?

For necessary relief of body and ^owle.
robbed and spoiled of all thy temporal goods, and bereeued withal of all
spiritual comfort, and so closely restrained, that neither for thy souls
health after ^o many years vexation in sundry garboiles, nor for the necessary
expenses of thy self, thy servants, nor of thy affairs, thou had
wherewith to sustain or comfort thy body or soul: if now thy credit or
m^ssage were unto those principal Princes, yt in both thy necessities are
(above all other) best hable to help thee for their succor and relief in
these thine extremities, and did crave ye cure of thy conscience at yt
hands of the one, and did commend thy self, thy State and Posterity to
the favor of the other, with petition of succor in money from both: if it
were thus (I say) or any other like, what honest man could accuse thee thereof?
Or what offense were it to any good Prince or well governed common Weal?

Thou may not yet take me, good Reader, by these examples alleged, that I
acknowledge them to have done any like thing. For verily I know not, that
either they wrote or sent at all. But being very sure and assured, that if they
did it, it was to no such end, as these lying libelles do falsely pretend: I
have therefore showed thee (for the better satisfaction of every honest and
indifferent man) among many other that might be alleged, these causes and
occasions yt might move them to write, but as examples: to show how those
letters of credit, that this obiector so precisely avouches, The answerers
suppositions, ^gr^e better with the accuse^s allegation: then the accuser with
him self.
might be very well, very laufully, and honorably meant.

And let us see, whether this supposition of mine does not bett^r co^curre and
agree with the very words of the Popes answer, as this Author feineth them,
then with his own bare and balde affirmation.

The contents (says he) of the Popes letters to the Duke were, that he
allowed well o^ the motion, and would write to the King of Spain to
further the enterprise. etc. Which may be, and is most like to be, by
honorable, by just and frindly means, to treat with your Q. for the liberty
of those Noble Personages, for their restitution to their Estats, for your Q.
better account of her Nobility, for her better knowing of those few base
fellows, that seduced her, and for less crediting them hereafter, for the
better consideration of her own Honor and fame, for some indemnitie for ye
Catholics of that Realm to live out of Schism in the unity of the Church,
as it is well known the Emperor Ferdi^ande, the French and Spanish Kings did
long sins treat with her for the same: and finally for some relief of money to
supply their own necessary affairs, whiles their own revenues are detained
from them, or for such other like purpose which might be very well allowed of,
and commended by his Holiness, though he had no present money to spare for ye
cause alleged. And can it in reason be objected for a fault, if the Q. for her
self, or y^ Duke for her, had required succor of money for ye relief of her
faithful noble servants and subjects: whiles both they, and her self are so
many ways iniuried and oppressed, and all their own wasted, burned and
detained from them?

Thus having reasoned a while with this Author, as if the most part of his
false affirmations had been true, we have leaft, I suppose, no material point
in this accusation unanswered, nor no indifferent man unsatisfied. For his
scoffs of perniciem, for Salutem, and his graceless terms of ungracious, for
Gracious, and such like, I account not worth the answering: holding few
Readers for so simple, Syno^^ ^alshood ^^trai^th him self.
as that can be abused by so gross a Rhetorike, either to think the men the
worse, for so lewd a man's word, or to imagine the Dukes pernicious state to
rise by mean of the Pope or Bishop^ but that by these lewd devises made to
shift away the obloquie thereof fro the Authors of these Libells, that have so
long persecuted them, does plainly show to every wise man the guiltines of
their consciences, that do see the fact so damnable: that feign they would
transfer the blame and brute thereof from them selves, unto the Pope and
Bishop.

Synons sophistry.
And as lewd a sophistry uses he, where he notes, that bysides the letters
(that he says, were sent and returned, to, and fro the Duke and Q.) he joins
in both this term, others, both to have sent, and received, etc. But in not
expressing who, he plainly shows him self to mean, as before he did (in
speaking of Heads and Conductours) that is to say, hereafter to devise, who
they shall be, and to charge whom he list with being Heads and Conductors etc.
with sending of credit etc. and receiving of letters from the Pope^ etc.

I pass over here, that the wise man forgets, to have feyned some answer to
have come from the king of Spain also, or from the Duke of Alua, whom M.
Fl^etvvood ca^leth one of the Conspirators. But he would bylike either have y^
Reader to think yt Nation to proud and discourteous to answer Prisoners
letters: or ^ls not having matter ready forged, to feine to be written by the
King or Duke of Alua (of whom it would not be believed, to say they lack
money) he was loath to come forth with any other particularitie, for being ye
more manifestly deprehended with a lie: which he forseeth to be more easy to
do, when he comes to allege things certain and particular, then while he
lurketh in y^ confusion of general speeches, and terms.

Nor I will not deteine thee longer in encountering this Authors folly and malice
against the Bisshoppe of Rosse: The B. of Rosse his fidelity.
whose wisdom, constancy and fidelity sufficiently commends him in the
eyes and ears of all the world, for so faithful a subject, and so trusty a
servant, as has been rarely found in this age: having not spared in this time
of his Princes oppression, with her to o^fer and commit his person and life,
to any travail or danger whatsoever.

But let us for a word or two examine, how unable and insufficient all this
whole tale is, to defame two such Noble, wise, and virtuous Personages in the
opinion of any man, A short show of the insufficie^cie of the accusation.
that has wit or grace.

First, the Libels are many that are put out to defame them.





16. It was also by the deuisers of these Rebellions and invasions determined,
Ireland.
that the Realm of Ireland should be assailed at the same time, thereby to
weaken the Queens Majesty's forces, or to divert them from defense of her
self and her good subjects.
THis lie, good Reader, is not much unlike unto the last, saving that of the
other, he seemed hable to feine some color and pretense, whereby to cover yet
a little his falsehood and malice: but of this the honest man is able to devise
none at al. And although he would craftily dissemble, and pass over the name
of him, by whom he means Ireland should be assailed^ yet may not I forbear
to tell you plainly, that he means the King of Spain, Lies forged against
the King of Spain.
whom by such forged devises they seek to defame, and to bring in hatred
likewise.

And behold the impudency of these men, that, albe it they did this Summer
last past object the same to the King him self by express letters, and were
forthwith so answered thereunto, that they had not to reply with any color of
reason or truth: yet now they shame not to come forth with the same again,
and care not how often they lie, how loud they lie, and will so prepare withal,
that they will not be told they lie, least you should perceive when they lie.

And it is worth the noting, how often they roue in this manner at the King of
Spain, sometime under the name of the Duke of Alua, of the Low Countries, of
foreine forces, and by such other speeches, as every man may see, whom they
mean, and yet this crafty child thinks it policy, to hide and forbear his
name, as well for that he wants that cover to cloak his lie withal toward the
King if he should have named him) that he found out for the Pope (for no man
would have believed the excuse of want of money to have been pleaded by the King
of Spain) as also because he would have a shifting and starting hole, ready to
reply (with saying that he meant not the King) against any plai^e
demonstration, that should be made to show how falsely he belyeth the King.

How plain a lie that affirmation is, time it self has sufficiently showed,
more then some years being passed, syns they pretended and said, yt they had
discovered that intention in ye King of Spain: though here the Authors shroud
thems^lues under obscure and uncertain terms, such as shall admit no answer,
that may come to issue or trial. For, by the deuisers (says he) of this
rebellion it was determined, etc. Now who were the deuisers, he has not yet
showed you: Ergo who determined this invasion of Ireland, remains yet to be
devised and named by the Authors of the Libels at their next contemplative
l^isure.

For who can deny, that if there had b^n any such intention, either in ye King
of Spain, or in any other Prince, but that there have been for this ten years
day together, many good times and apt opportunities to have executed the same,
by y^ sundry factions, seditions and rebellions, there moved yearly, and to
this day maint^ined, by and among themselves alone: not only without al aid
and succor of one man, or any money at al, but also without al comfort and
courage from any Prince living: yea without show of any word, any message, any
letter, any ship, any boat, any Captain, any soldier, any armor, or any
penny ever demanded toward it, that himself is able to allege, as
shameless as he is.

Now draws this Author toward his conclusion, and having spent the most of
his matters that he dare affirm, and thereby eased but little his stuffed
stomach of that tough malice that lies there congeled against the Queen
chiefly: he can not yet cont^ine from lasshing out some more vile and vain
lye^ against her, some less likely then the reast, and others of no weight,
though they were as true, as they be false. A lump of mo ly^s in Sy^^^ns breast.
And his own little reason yet serving him to see, that few or none will believe
him: he will not discredit his own reputation, nor the honor of his Authors,
with affirming these, as he has done the reast, but would, that you should
take some of these as credible reports, you wotte not by whom, and some
others as things that might be said, and may be said, rather then said yet, and
bylike her^after shall be said, as crimes yet vncre^ted, and not made nor
devised into their particular shape or form, but the confuse substance of
them reasting yet only in the breasts of the Authors. For thus it follows.

17 Now were it best to leave with these former branches: for it is credibly
said, that this tree of treason and rebellion has a number of other branches
of the very like nature: that is, in devising how the Scottish Queen should
have been conveyed away, sometime by disguising, sometime by plain force and
raising of rebellion, and so put to liberty and proclaimed Queen of England
and Scotland: but to increase the error of her style, she should have been
proclaimed King and Queen of England and Scotland.
IT is not only now time, but it was high time, yt you had ended this lewd
talk, before you began it. But where you presuppose your former accusations to
be so well set forth, that upon them, as upon things believed, you think you may
now proceed and persuade what you will bysides: you shall find, I ween, few wise
men carried away with that wrong Rhetorike. The accusations overthrow them
selves.
The weight and consequence of the matter, the importance of the persons whom
it touches, and the sequel of their credit or discredit, importing the whole
Realm so much: it mnst be a very simple and weak witted man, that is leadde
to believe you in any thing you have said yet.

And now if he will limit his credit of that you are to say, by the manifest
falsehood of that you have said: then must you bring him some better proufes of
your credible reports, then you have hitherto done of your naked affirmations.
For by that you have already said, it appears, Syno^s text to write upon
that whatsoever your own malicious invention can devise, whatsoever any
Traitor, or Spy corrupt with money can inu^nt, whatsoever any known e^emy
list to forge or feine, whatsoever any lewd rascal or boy, never so base for
flattery can imagine, or whatsoever prisoner or poor soul for torment or for
fear can be forced to say against the Queen and Duke: al is (for you) Text,
Authority, and Gospel enough, to publish, persuade, and to preach upon, and at
your mouths must be taken for credibly reported.

Yet see, good Reader, the goodness of God, that has suffered the Devil and
this limme of his, so to be meashed and entangled in their own turne^ and to
ouerwhelme themselves so deeply in their own malice, that their judgment
fails them in discerning the error of their own pen. For minding to show
now sundry other branches of the same tree of treason A treason made of no
trespa^e.
and rebellion (as he terms it) that he bears you in hand he has showed
you already: the first of these new branches, which he pu^teth in the front (as
it were) of his battle, is so far from treason, that it had been neither
felony, nor trespace, if it hab ben executed, as himself says it was devised.

For, the Q. says he, should have been conveyed away by disguising, and. And
had that been treason, trow you? What ye Lawyers of your own Realm for fear
or flattery will say, I am not very sure: but neither ^^ and violence (which
she never assaied, nor thought to do) yet is there no man, I ween, so
senseless, to think, that if she had by art, or other frindly, or peac^able
manner found, or set herself at liberty, that she could have thought this Style
and Title that he speaks of, to be commodious for her, or to tend to her
security or quiet.

And over this, waying well, that al these accusations of his, reast and
consist only in devises and deuisings (for no least thing shows he, that was
put in ure toward it) who wottes but himself, how largely this term of
devising shall be str^tch^d and racked, where him self being per^lesse in
authority, must be also the Judge? Where Synon is judge al is treason that he
will have ^o.
And if by the reast that w^e already see, it be lauful to divine of this: and
if by, and upon the apprehensions and imprisonmentes present, with the thick
thundering out of so many treasons, rebellions, conspiracies (and I wot not what
bysides) that these Libelles do so terribly threaten and diuulge, if by this we
may coniectur^ the sequel to come: we must look for none other, but that
every imagination of the parties themselves, that naturally aspire to freedom
and personal liberty, and every speech of compassion between frindes abroad
lamenting the calamity and hard state of these Princes, shall now be wrested
and drawn to come within the compass of this man's devises and deuisings, and
so (if his word may be law) shall be made Treason and Rebellion.

For, for such (you see) he has already published and condemned them, albeit
himself confesses, they proceeded no farther then to devise only: and of
their devising neither has he any other proof or witness but his own bare and
naked saying, that it is credibly reported: and that without showing, either to
whom, or by whom it is reported. So as the valor and credit of this accusation
uttered only by a Robin Goodfellow, I leave to the^, Reader, to way and esteem.

18. It might be also reported, how her Son should have been stolen out of
Scotland, The Prince of Scotl.
to be sent into Spain, with such like devises tending to move troubles in
the Realm, that was, and yet is (thanked be God) quiet.
I will not long trouble thee, good Reader, with the answer of this, which he
says might be reported: least perhaps he will say, that he does not affirm it
to have ben reported. His goodwil yet thou se^^t, tha^ will leave nothing untold
thee, that himself deuiseth, nor that is otherwise reported: no^or yet that,
that might be reported, though it be not. Neither will I occupy both thy time
and mine own, in laying forth the foli^ and malice of these Authors, who to
persecute still these Noble Princes, spare not to utter these frivolous
speeches, that have neither ground to lean on, nor certainty in themselves.

The Princes sa^ety (says Synon) is treason to England.
I shall therefore for ye answer of this Paragraph, only pray thee to look a
little into ye mind and meaning of y^ Authors thereof, and to tell me, what it
co^prehendeth and implies, yt an intention of removing ye person of the Prince
of Scotland into Spain (if any such intent were) should be here accounted and
brought in among ye devises of treason to England, and of moving troubles unto
that Realm. If thou consider this point deeply, thou shall smell and find out
the stinking ratte, that lies yet hidden between the benche and the wall.
For, little difference or none is there (if it be truly sifted) whether Spain
or France had the person of that Prince: unless it be this, that through the
great factions and civil seditions of the one, there may be some more hope of
finding one mean or other, to destroy him in France, rather then in Spain.

And he that remembers the wars of Leeth in the year 1560. with the causes
thereof then pretended and published in print, must plainly conclude, that they
that now would bear you in hand, that the intention of sending the Prince of
Scotland into Spain, were in effect treason, and te^ding to y^ trouble of
England, must needs mean, the sending of him into France, to be much more
prejudicial, and more clearly to tend to the motion of troubles in your
Realm: the Princes and Countries of Spain being known to be ye old Allies
unto ye Croune of England, and contrarily ye other accounted ye ancient
enemies of ye same. The treason therefore and troubles mean by these Authors
to be threatened to England, by th^s intention (if any such had been) must ned^s
reast and consist in removing the person of that young Prince unto the Country
or custody of any King, that is like and able to save and defend him. For, to
remove him into England has been pardie even by these Authors chiefly so long
sought, so many ways practiced, so violently urged and pressed: yt every man
may see, the traueilers thereof would have that taken neither for treason, nor
tro^ble unto y^ Realm.

But the mischievous machination and final end thereof, neither by your Queen
(as I suppose) nor by few others is yet known, sauoured, nor suspected. But
plain it is, that if the meaning thereof were for his security or
aduanncement: this intention of sending him into Spain (if ever it had been
thought) could not have been so offensive to these men, as here (by betraying
themselves unawares) they have confessed it to be. For how can it possibly be
thought, that the safety of the person and the advancement of the state of that
Infant, that is ye borne Heir to any Croune, can be treason, or te^ding to
move troubles to that Realm, which himself shall in succession enjoy?

And they that have already procured the murder of his father, the expulsion of
his mother out of her Kingdom, ye putting of his bastard Uncle in possession
of the same, ye imprisonment of his mothers Royal person for v. years almost
fully complete, the persecution unto death of all those that pity her state,
or wish it better: and finally, that thus by open corruption of accusers, by
subornation of false witnesses, by infinite numbers of namelesse Libells
printed, do still follow and persecute both her Honor and fame, and (as they
may) disgrace her Rightes, and disprooue her Titles to al her States, with so
many colourlesse lies, false s^landers, odious crimes, and by wrested arguments
against law, to prepare and make ready the way to her final destruction: and
that now in the end do pretend it to be treason, and to threaten troubles to
England ^if it had been meant) to put his person for safety out of that
Country, (where so many civil seditions and mutual murders for many years
have been, and yet are daily committed, raised and renewed) into the hands of
that King, that is best hable to defend him, that is the old confederate of
the chiefest States which he is borne to inherit, and that has choice of
daughters, for years and otherwise meet, to match with him: can this (I say)
be thought by any man that any wit has, to be meant by these fellows for the
Princes safety and security? Nay, but by this you may plainly see, that the
Authors of these Libelles have a far other mark and and in their eye, then
they have yet discovered.

19. And now it may be, that some will say, that many of these things are
doubtful, and percase wrested in report, either by malice, or by overmuch
credulity. But truly in such credible sort are all the things above
mentioned with sundry others to me reported to be very true, by such as have
cause to know them, and use not to report untruths, as I do boldly auow them
to be true.
IN this it appears, that the Authors inward and guilty conscience does
breath out and b^wray some part of the secrets of his own heart and knowledge:
yt testifies and tells him, how little credit wise men will give to all that he
has said. And if you mark his words well, you shall see, yt him self unawares
does not a little diminish the credit of his own speech. For albe it, he has
hitherto taken upon him, flatly and firmly to affirm, al y^ chief and
principal matters to be true and known truths, as he terms them: yet now
here he comes out, and calls all the matters a^ore mentioned, to be but
credible reports. For they all came reported to him, he says, in such credible
manner etc. as that he does boldly a^ow them to be true.

Now, His own refuge co^uinceth him.
how rotten a patche this is to botch up y^ hole withal, I leave to ye Reader
to judge. For what valor and weight yt bare and naked auowing of an unknown
Sprite or Hobgoblin amounts unto, who sees not? being grounded only upon the
credit he has in the reporters also unknown: whom he takes for such men, as
have cause to know the truth, and be not wont (he says) to report lies.

Until therefore that it shall please this Robin Goodfellow, somewhat further
to discover him self unto us, in such sor^e, that we may first know the man,
and then his wisdom, honesty, credit, and conscience to be such, as that
neither he will deceive, nor can be deceived: till then, I say, his wisdom
must pardon us, that still we take them, as we did before, for stark staring
lies in effect every word he has spoken.

And be your self judge, whether I have reason thus to say, or no. For
admitting that, which is most likely: to wit, that they be this man's Authors
and reporters of these lies now, that have been the Authors and reporters of
like lies here before: as for example: x^iij. examples of notorious lies,
published by Authority.
1. that New haven was taken but to the use of the French king, as to save it
from the House of Guyse y^ meant to usurp it: 2. that the Duke of Guyse was
coming with great forces to conquer England: 3. that the Condie first, and
the Admiral sins, have in every battaille prevailed against the French king:
4. that by your Lottery in London no man should leese above two shillings and
six pence, and great numbers should win large sums: 5. that the Prince of
Orange should drive the Duke of Alua out of Flanders: 6. that the king of
Spaines money was taken but to save it from the French: 7. that the Duke of
Alua has been coming with great forces to conqu^re England: 8. that he and
the Spanish Ambassador were the causes of all the spoils and robberies done
upon their own Kings subjects: 9. that no Pirates should be manteined in your
Ports: 10. that the Queen of Scotl. was with child by the Earl of
Shrewsburie: 11. that a Portugal Physitio^ should have poisoned your Q. 12.
that London should have been burned by certain fellows taken with balls of
wild fire about them: 13. that the King of Spain had poisoned his wife that
now is: 14. that the Lords of Leicester and Burley should have been killed by
the proc^rement of the Spanish Ambassadors Stuard^: and infinite other such
like devises, and preati^ stuff published among you, and g^uen out, some by
printe, some by Great men's letters, and some by lewd men's mouths, sent
abroad with them, of purpose to fill your peoples ^ares, and to move their
affections as authority would have them: admitting, I say, that those men
that for these ten or twelve years past have been the Authors and reporters of
these, and such other pretty devises, were also this man's Authors and
reporters of this like stuff, that he brings us now: then has the Author of
this Libell little gained, nor amended the credit of these his Accusations, by
t^lling us, that they come from such mouth^s (and from mouths of greater
Authority they can not come) but rather h^th helped me to the disprouing of
all that him self has said, by this allegation of such Authors and Reporters
as have told so many things before, alr^ady discovered to be so great ly^s and
manif^stly fals^.


20. And if they shall be found otherwise, than it is likely, that sum of the
Q. Majesty's Counsel will cause them to be reprehended: who upon this my writing
shall report them, and thereupon I will patiently suffer correction for my
hasty credit. For it is most likely, that such matters of Estate as these are,
will not be suffered to be communicated without reprehension.
WHen this Author wrote this, either he thought, that none should come to see
his book, yt by reading or practice had any understanding in worldly policy:
or else, to blind and abuse the simpler sort (which ar^ the greater number) he
was content for the prejudice of these Noble Princes, to lay shame aside, and
willingly to yield himself, by the wiser sort (yt are the fewer in number) to
be accounted both false, foolish, and malicious without measure.

For his reason brought forth in this Paragraph (whereby he would proo^e, and
bear the Readers in hand, that it is likely, that sum of the Counsel would
reprehend the reporters of these matters, if they were not true) is as poor a
clout to patche up the hole, as the other was before, and the plain contrary
over well known to be the likest thing that may be, according to that was
told you at first: Lies must ever be maintained by lying.

For, by his own words not six lines before, if you have marked them, it is
probably gathered, and by his other words within twenty lines following,
manifestly proved: that of ye Counsel they be, of whom this man has received
his informations, and instructions, if not immediate at their own mouths, yet
by such means as he is assured, yt the matter comes from some of yt
authority. Some of the Council be the ch^fe authors of the libell.
For he said (if you remember) that he received the reports by such, as had
cause to know the matters, and use not to report untruths.

which joined and laid together with his present words, that call these
matters, matters of State, and with the last words of his book, that do
affirm the Lords of the Counsel in the Sta^re chamber, to have said to the
Mayor and his Brethren the same in effect, that him self has said here these
speeches of his, I say, being laid together, do plainly convince him of a
false and crafty dissimulation, in pretending here, as though the Counsel were
so little of his couns^l in writing of these, that they would reprove him, if
he had written vntruely^ whereas he being in deed set a work by some of
them, to write as he has done: what likelihood is there of any reprehensio^ by
them for what so ever he has written, being by consent or commandment of
some of them selves?

For proof whereof, to whom (I pray you) are matters of State orderly
discovered, but first to the Counselors, and after by them to such others, as
they think meet to diuulge them abroad?

Then this man's Reporters being such, as did know these matters of Sat: what
other can they be, but either some Counselors them selves, or such others, as
in those matters they have made Cou^s^llers for the time?

Again, they being such, as use not to tell untruths, must needs insinuate,
yt they be persons of more then common a^thority. For upon mean men's mouths
there is no such warrant wont to be made by any wise man.

Plain ^^ou^es, that some of the Counsel be Authors of al ^hes aund^rous
raili^g books.
Add unto this the small likelihood, that either the Writer or Printer of this
lewd Libell (that seem to be persons but of base vocation) would or durst
endaunger them selves, with publishing such matters of State, and of such
importance, if they were not sure of good authority to back them: in this time
specially, when the searches are so straight, and the penalty so sharp, for
any least thing uttered by writing, printing, or by word, otherwise then
Authority would.

Again, behold how long it is, sins the first of these Libells have been in
print commonly sold: how daily new and mo do freshly come forth to confirm
ye former: how all come without name of Maker, Printer or Privilege, or ^erus^d
according to your own Consti^utions, and all sold without controlm^nt: and
with what severity likewise all books, al writings, yea all speeches and
words, that might answer the same, or show you any (...), ^e ^orbidd^^ holden
and kept back from you, yea and your own ears and mouths locked and shut
up mutually among your selves, from speaking or hearing of any thing contrary
to that, that these Libels geeue out.

Lastly, join unto this, the known experience testified ^y Stories for time
past, and witnessed still by daily practice, that there never wants in any
common Weal such petit odd fellows, as this Scogan R. G. is, that are ready
always by words, or by writing, to blase and set forth, what so ever any
persons of authority would have for the time spread and believed among the
vulgar sort: yea many times without the knowledge or consent of the chief
Prince or Magistrate, as most of these are, I verily believe.

And these points now laid together and well considered, has not this wise man
said much, trow ye, for the credit of these his sclaundero^s lies, by bearing
you in hand, that some of the Counsel would reprove his report, if it were
not true? when him self (you see) by the very process of his matter has
unwittingly discovered, that some of that authority were his Authors and
Reporters: and common practice has testified, that some of great credit, are
always setters of such Botchers a work.

And by this, be thy self judge (Reader) what a Scogan this is, that (having
hitherto borne thee in hand, that the principal cause of his writing was for
fear, least seditious mouths would make fals^ and sclaunderous repor^s, to
serve the appetites of the evil disposed) does now plainly show him self
here, to be the chief soother of some in Authority, and the seditious
sclaunderer of ye principal persons among your people: to serve the appetites
of some of so great credit, as know the secrets of State matters, and be no
more s^eldome wont to lie, then wicked Sprites be wont to say true. But then
he goes forth, and say^th.

21. On the other side, if they be true, as I have reported, and yet not fully
enough reported than time will shortly enlarge and confirm them, when her
Majesty shall cause the parties now imprisoned to answer openly thereto, by
order of her laws, as there is no doubt she will observe to all manner of
subjects that course, that hitherto she has done^ etc.
NAy, good Sir, that shift will not serve you neither, to win credit to those
your incredible lies. For whosoever beholds yt preside^ts past of unjust
Conuictions, and Attainders passed among you, shall see, that a form and
appearance of orderly proceeding by law suffices not always to make the
sentence perfect in every part. Good laws are abused by man's malic^.
The lamentable memory of the unjust overthrow of many noble Families of your
Realm, is yet so fresh and new, that few now (being of mature years) can be
ignorant of them. Of whom if I should here geeue you the several names, and
causes pretended against them: these Authors (I dare say) would (for many of
them) agree and say with me, that they were unworthily condemned, though they
wanted not a show of conviction by law. And though they would not for
stubbernes grant me so much, yet will the late restitutions made by Queen
Mary of so many Noble Families, so amply testify al crimes geeuen in evidence
against prisoners, not to be always neither so grievous in nature, ^or so
sufficiently proved, as the cond^mnation of the person does sometime seem to
infer: that it were here both vain and lost labor, and might be also
offensive, to use any particular nomination of them.

And take me not here, good Reader, to condemn or disalow your laws, your
Judges, nor your ordinary form of proceeding in those cases: but that I
confess and grant them to be as civil, as politic, as well ministered and
executed, and as seldom to err, as commonly y^ laws of any other Countrey^s.
But often it happens every where, and namely among you it has chanced also,
that by ye wants and defects, either of the party accused (that sometime is
not hable to answer for him self with that advantage, that his cause does
allow him) or by some error in the inferior ministers (that to satisfy
Authority do sometimes make great show of small things) or by ye error of the
Prince (yt is sometimes inuegled to think worse of his subject, then he has
deserved) or by the plain malice of some in Authority (that for some practice,
or revenge do sometimes procure and suborne false accusations to be forged and
testified): by these means, I say, and by many other such like, it happens
often, yt the law has his due course and form of orderly proceeding in such
sort, as the ordinary ministers (being innocent of the malice and fraud) have
not to answer to God, nor man for any injustice, and yet the party condemned
has plain injury and wrong. Law has of this co^rse and yet the party wrong.


And therefore what so ever shadow or show the face of orderly proceeding in
these matters may fortune to geeue: yet shall these vile lies and forged
sclaunders be never the truer, the more confirmed, nor the better believed by
any wise or honest man, sins there are so many ways and means, how evil men
may, and often do, by art and fraud, abuse and pervert the name and
Authority of Justice and Law: specially where there is ministered before hand,
unto every man, so many manifest occasions of suspicion, yea and plain proof
of false dealing, as in these cases are seen. For, who can look for any
upright trial, or since^e proceeding toward those parties, against whom are
used before hand such unwonted and extraordinary practi^es, to sclaunder, to
defame and belie them, and to bring them into hatred and discredit, as never
has been used against known and guilty offenders?

And over this, mark well, good Reader, how God has permitted the Author of
this Libell in these words (vnwares^ I dare say) to show him self either so
foolish, that no wise man ought to believe him, or so false, that no honest man
can credit him in none of all these matters heretofore reported by him.
Remembering therefore, yt in the ninetenth Article he told you, that all these
matters came to him so credibly reported etc. and speaking still of all, here
he tells you, that he has not fully enough reported them: in this, I say,
mark you well, what he confesses against him self.

If he have not fully enough reported the matters, that he has spoken of: it
must be granted, yt his reports of them do want some part requisite for a
report, either in respect of ye thing reported, or in regard of them, to whom
the report is made. If the defect therefore be in respect of the persons, to
whom he writes: that is to say, that his reports are in such manner laid
forth, as are not fully enough to make his Readers perceive his meaning: then
you see his gross folly and lack of wit, to utter his mind fully enough.

If it be (as al men's writings are) fully enough for some, but not fully enough
for all: then you see his grosser folly, that calls this not fully enough,
which is fully enough, as commonly any man's writings are. For never man
wrote so fully, ye wotte, as could satisfy every man. If the defect be (as I
plainly conclude it is, and you have seen proved) in the nature of the thing
it self: that is to say, that his reports do lack those necessary parts,
that a report ought to have, as truth and certainty of ye matter reported, and
a good warrant and foundation for y^ reporter to speak upon: then may you see
his fals^hod and malice more then fully enough.

Once granted it is by himself, that fully enough they are not reported: and
a report never so brief, containing truth, matter certain, and having a
lauful Author, is sufficient enough for the common number of wise and honest
men. For no man is bound further to enlarge his report, then truth and
certainty does require, nor to satisfy every man.

These words of his own then, you see, do plainly convince and conclude, that
either these reports be al false, uncertain, and ill grounded in more or in
less, (and than plaieth he the very Dauie, to think and say here, that they
are not yet fully enough reported, which you have seen proved to be to much by
altogether) or else the very Sot, to call that not fully enough reported, that is
fully enough for the purpose it is uttered for and every way more than fully
enough, being false in every part.

Since I wrote this, I am the more emboldened to think al these things true,
for that this present day the Lord Mayor of the City of London with a number
of his Brethren were at the Starcha^ber with the Q. Majesty's Council: where I
understood by the report of some of them, that heard what was said by the
Council to them concerning the present case of the Duke of Norf. that the
substance of al, that is by me before reported, is very true, with much more,
etc.
THis Author having now eased somewhat his laden stomach toward these Princes,
by uttering of these unsavory and filthy forged lies to their infamy and
confusion (as he hops) is come at length to the end and conclusion of his
spiteful poisoned Pamphlet, for whose credit he leaves no way unassayed.

For having uttered those arguments and reasons, that he hoped might induce
the multitude to believe him: yet his own guilty conscience does put him in
fear (you see) least his falsehood should be to easy to be discovered, and
therefore he flees now at last (as you may perceive) and craves refuge of the
wing of Authority. Whose own words yet (if you mark them well) do plainly
show, that himself has but even s^ant credit in them: The Writer believed not
the, accusations, when he wrote them.
how often soever he has affirmed and repeated them to be known, and well
known, and credibly reported, etc.

For in this Paragraph, rehearsing that by the relation of the Lords in the
Star Chamber, made after this Libel was written, he was the more emboldened
to believe them: he shows, that his own belief of them was but weak, when he
wrote them: and fearing, least other men would believe them as weakly as
himself, he shifted to this shore, which (God wotte is to weak to uphold
him in the judgment and consideration of them that either be of ^xperience, or
have been conversant in Histories, which are full of such Orations,
Declamations, Protestations, and Persuasions made in such public places and
presences, pretending to the people a terror of one mischief neither looked
for, nor thought on, thereby to cover an other, and far greater, not ripe to
be revealed.

Unwonted proceeding discrediteth the matter.
Pervse your own Stories of King Richard the third his usurpation of the
Croune, and murdering of his Brothers children, with diverse other unlawful
attemptes, that have passed in that Realm, when one has intended to compass
the displacing of a^ other from his Dignity and State. And behold the sundry
smooth tales, that for contriuing thereof, have been publicly told both in the
Star and Checker Chambers, in the Yield hall, and in other great presences:
and thereby shall you see, not only that this Authority helps nothing the
credit of these lewd lies, but rather contrarily, yt the extraordinary
publishing of them in such places, does give manifest suspicion, and diminish
their credit. Suspicion, I say, of a far fouler thing to be intended and at
hand, and shows evidently, that in the matter uttered and pretended, there is
little truth or rather none at al.

For short and plain proof whereof, This scla^^^derous form^ of proceeding
against them discovers an inte^tion of their destr^ction.
(if any thing may suffice to prove it unto thee) resort but unto this. Did
either the Queen or Duke, when they were free in their own Dominions, by any
least act, attempt the disturbance of your Q. or no? If they did, show it. If
they did not, then proceed. Is the Q. of Scotl. expulsed out of her State, or
no? Thou see she is. Was Ieames the Bastard set up to usurp her Dominion in
the Infantes name, o^ no? He was. Was Lyneux after him, and ^ar after Lyneux,
sent and suborned to do y^ same, or no? It cannot be denied. Were they al three
with pensions from England, with ready money, with forces of men and muni^ion,
procured, encouraged, and maintained therein, or no? It is well known to be so.
Had the Q. of Scotland, by Ieames his commandment ben murdered in Loughleuen,
if your Q. had not let it, or no? Your Q. and her Catilines can tell, and
this libel in one place insinuates no less. Did Ieames y^ Bastard determine
to murder the Infant Prince, or no? Let the Lords of Grange and Hume yet
living testify, unto whom Ieames moved the matter, when they were of his
party: and who for that cause desisted from him, and leaft his faction. Are
both the persons of the Q. of Scotland, and the Duke of North^olke, detained
close prisoners by your Queens name and Authority, and in the hands of hers,
or no? Their presence among you shows. Has the one ben so, for four years
almost, and the other, for two years full, before these forged treasons were
surmised against them, or no? Let the dates of their several imprisonmentes be
conferred with the date of this Libel, and let that speak. Have they had good
mean in prison to molest your Queens quietness, that found none, when they
were free? Let common intendment be judge. Or if any had been offered them, is
it likely, they would attempt it, whiles they were close prisoners, and their
li^es stood upon it? Let their known wisdoms and common presumption speak.

This then being their present estates unknown to no man, behold now what
these public and extraordinary speeches in y^ Starchamber and Yeldhal, before
such assemblies, and these unwonted Libels published in print to defame and
accuse them of co^spiring Rebellio^s, of inducing Strangers, of sacking London,
and of competencie with your Q. for her Cronne: behold, I say, what this must
infer, and does implie. Is any man so gross of capacity, that he sees not
whereunto it tends?

If the ^^ fame of every common prisoner be a shrewd evidence unto his Jury,
and a mean to further him toward the galowes: what must this purposed and
prepensed defamation of these Princes in prison promise and portend?

I conclude therefore, that these Starchamber talks, and Yeldhal orations, do
so little advance the credit of those slanderous lies: that to every wise man
(that considers by the Stories, what have been the sequeles of such unwonted
actions) they manifestly convince them to be forged and feined: and do bring
withal pregnant suspicion, of a further desperate intention, to be hidden and
covered therein.

And now, good Reader, consider well, I beseech thee, what thou have heard and
seen on both sides. Way the difference between words and deeds, and keep the
eyes of thy mind firmly fastened, rather upon the truth, the reason, the
proufes and likelyhodes of that, which is said by mine adversary or me: then
upon the bold^es of the affirmation, the Authority of the Speaker, ^uthori^ie
will t^^e no fo^le, who so ever smart therefore.
or the first face of the ends and sequeles, that may fortune to ensew. For it
is to be ^resumed, that persons in Authority ^a^ing thus far intruded
themselves into so public and important a Tragedy, will not take a foil in
their own imagination, whose blood so ever it cost therefore.

The number of the prisoners, you know, is great: and therefore great
difference of natures like to be found among them, some weaker then others, and
one subject to that, whereof an other is free. Authority carries in her hand
(as it were) all hope and fear, There are many ways of corrupt proceeding.
all pain and reward. Such as can not be won by fear nor pain, may yet be
seduced by flattery or gain. Torments have been tried, as the voice goes: and
subornations shall not want, as has been well proved. False arts and
treachery to deceive the simple and plain, have been so frequently practiced
with persons of less importance, yt among these no man can look for less.

Hard it were therefore, if among so great a number none should be found, y^
by pain or fear, by hope or by favor, by flattery or simplicity, have been
seduced, allured, nor constrained to say this or that, of him self or of
others. The malice borne toward them is evident, y^ crimes objected against
them, obscure and not likely. I have good reason therefore, to speak in their
defense, whiles nothing is passed, yt co^uinceth them: nor nothing proved, yt
binds me to think them guilty.

It is possible, that hereafter some of them may be condemned in form of Law.
For where such arts have been used to sclaunder and entrap them, no less can
be looked for. And yet yt ought not in reason to minish the credit of that I
have said, having hitherto said no further for them, then as mine Adversaries
false accusatio^s in defense of the truth hitherto known, have moved and
drawn me. Which consisting in hearsaies, reports, and in yt bare words of an
unknowen Author: I have answered with facts, with reasons and probable
consequences, that give to them selves more credit and authority, then any
man's name yt could be put unto them.

And if the Duke shall fortune hereafter upon any other matter here not
touched, or upon the same enforced above the just desert (as sometime it
happens) or through the subtle practice and malice of his enemies (as to his
Noble Father and Grandfather it chanced) to be by verdict or Parliament found
otherwise, then I here defend him to be: acknowledge thou, the true ground and
cause thereof to be (as in deed it is) the merciful hand and visitation of
God, now laid upon him, as than it was upon them: not for the causes pretended
against the one, nor the other (in the sight of God, that sees all truth) not
for the breach, I mean, of their allegeances against their several
Sovereigns (to whom in all loialty and affection, never were they, nor this
found inferior to any) but rather co^trarily for their overmuch adoring of the
same, for making their earthly Princes their Gods in this world. He his Q.
Elizabeth, and they their King Henry, whom (it may b^ presumed) they looued,
feared, and served more zelously, then they did their King and Creator of
heaven and earth, not sticking for satisfiyng the one, to offend the other.
They by conforming them selves (for pleasing their King) to his inordinate
appetite and affection some ways that might be remembered: namely of his
intrusion into ye Spiritual Primacy, which never Christen King attempted before
him. And this, by conforming him self (for pleasing of her) to be made a
principal instrument in her creation of a Feminine Primacy in ye Church of
God, which never Christian Q. attempted before her.

And for which, who so ever shall acknowledge the wonderful wisdom of God to
have provided, that that King her Father, and this Q. his daughter, should
render and yield one like payment and reward to this Grandfather, Father and
Son, for a manifest and merciful admonition, of them selves principally, (to
show them their own error ^or their reformation) and of all others, that may
take benefit of their example: shall make a frut^full and profitable
construction thereof: and the same, I doubt not, that Gods grace shall move
this Du^e to make to him self, to his own great comfort for the time he has
to live here, and to his eternal felicity afwarde.

The Second Part.
AND having now answered all the cruel accusations of this Libell, in such
sort, as who so has either honesty, wit, or grace, and may be suffered to
read it, shall find him self, I trust, amply satisfied therewith, and shall
plainly enough see the deadly malice, and impudent vanity of them: to clear
yet the same the more evidently to al sights, and to show the innoce^cie of
those Noble Princes more eminently then the Son at noone days, by vnbuckling
and lifting up (as it were) the visards and veiles of th^se Machiauel
Catilines, that like Robin goodfellowes would walk unseen and abuse the
world with idle fears, whiles them selves might freely finish their
determined mischiefs: I shall now (as in the beginning I promised) somewhat
open and touch unto you the very true grounds and causes, why all these false
accusations, sclaunderous surmises, and colourlesse lies are so impudently
forged, fained, and laid out to the world.

The Accusers Treason the cause of all the false accusations.
The mark and final end, whereof is to your Realm the most dangerous
Treason, that can be imagined to any common Weal, and the plats and practices
used to bring y^ same to pass, do likewise contain as monstrous, as
v^naturall, and as dangerous Treasons against your Prince, as can be devised,
and are already so far set forward, and so many of them put in ure, that the
end and intention beginning by them to break out ^to some of deep insight)
more soon, then the co^triuers would have it: these false fears are therefore
like flasshes of lightning terribly thundered out unto you, to abuse your Q. to
blind your people, and to deceive the world, by making you all to fix your
^i^s and min^s upon those fained fantasies: Treasons pretended in one, ^o cover
treason in an other.
and thereby not only to hold you from espiyng and considering the treasons
that are in deed every day under the name of good service committed among
you, but also fi^ely by those pretenses, to re^ooue and weed away those
princip^ll persons, that they fors^e like to be impediments to their final
intention: which (as the deuisers think) remains yet secret in the heads
and hearts only of themselves, being those two, that by other men's pens do
persecute these Princes, as the Principal obi^cts likely to frustrate their
pestilent purpose.

And because it is not commonly seen, The Accuser co^uinced, half clears
thaccused.
that one Traitor accuses and persecuteth an other, but that such do defend
and maintain each other: if I shall now show and open unto you, that these two
English Catilines (whom all you know to be the principal persecutours of these
Princes, and the privy publishers of these Pamphlets) are them ^elues y^ chief
offenders in deed, guilty and culpable of those crimes, of which they accuse
the other, and of greater also, if greater may be: it shall serve, I suppose,
to good purpose (bysides the declaration of the innocence of these Noble
persons) for your Prince and Nobility. Whereby they may see, and in time
provide for the prevention of the terrible treason finally intended against
them both, and the whole Realm: and may serve also, to admonish your Q. not
over long to endure those practices of abusion of her self: lea^t they shall be
so far run, before she resist them, that the Canker grown of them may be
incurable.

It is treason, to wrest the Croune for private Ambition.
And when I shall have proved, and made plain unto you, that these two
Macchiauelles for their own private advancement have practiced, and do daily
contriue, not only the wresting and diuerting of your Croune from that course,
race, and line, in which y^ Laws of your Country (concurring with all laws
of Nature and Nations) have established and settled it, but also for the same
private Avarice and Ambition of their own, have circumuented your Queen,
endangered her State, steined her honor, oppressed her people, impouerished
the Realm, and procured infinite perils to depend over the same, if they be
not in time prevented, for preference only of their own private policy: when
this, I say, shall be proved unto you, I shall then leave the determination of
the weight and quality of those crimes to your Queens consideration, and to
the judgment of your Lawiers, and shall thereunto conform mine own opinion,
how so ever I term them here for the time.

And for as much as it were somewhat absurd, to think that treason lighter
and less odious, The less perceiued^ the more dangerous is y^ treason.
that (being covered with the title of service and affection) is not
mistrusted, espied, nor provided for, then yt, which being open and apparent,
may be resisted and defended: I have thought it meet, not to pretermit some
brief insinuation of a few of those infinite circumuentions and abusions, by
which your Prince has been already deceived, to her own detriment and
prejudice, under those titles of duty and service, for serving in deed the
private turns of those two Machiauellians: who (not all unlike to Ulysses and
Synon the Greeks) to make themselves and their faction lords of your new
Troy, have forged a new faction, fraught as full of mischievous meanings to
your Priame now, as ever was the bulk of their wooden horse, to the Troianes
than. And that done, I shall turn to touch a little the festered Carbuncle,
that li^th yet unperceived, ranckling in the hearts and breasts of those
Coniurators.

The qu^et entry of Q. Elizabeth to her Croune.
No man will deny, I suppose, that at the death of Q. Marie the face and
authority of that Realm being wholly Catholic, and all the government,
treasures, and forces thereof reasting in the hands, order, and direction of
the Catholics alone, their party also being infinitely the mightiest and
strongest for number, for wealth, for credit, for force, and every other way,
and the party Protestant so base and low, yt few or none appeared to be of that
Faction: your Q. was than with as great honor, quietness, and uniformity of
mind, by all sorts brought unto her Croune, settled, and established in her
Royal seat, and with as great assurednes, as ever came any of her Progenitors
to the same.

Suerry in that she ^^und, and ^aug^r in the t^^^ge.
That she found also the whole face of y^ common Wealth settled and acquieted in
ye ancient Religion, in which, and by which all Kings and Q. of that Realm,
from as long almost before the Conquest, as ye Conquest was before her time,
had lived, reigned and maintained their States, and the terrible correction of
those few that swarued from it so notorius, as no man could be ignorant of it.
As king John without error in Religion, King John.
for contempt only of the Sea Apostolic, plaged with ye loss of his State,
til he reconciled him helfe, and acknowledged to hold his Crown of ye Pope:
king Henry the viij. King Henry the eight.
likewise with finding no end of heading and hanging, til (with ye note of
tyranny for wasting his Nobility) he had headed him also, yt procured him to
it. And than sought his reconciliatio^, and had obtained it, if death had not
prevented him. The two dukes also, of Somerset and Northumberla^d (thought not
in name, D. Sommerset.

D. Northhumberl.


yet kings in effect for their short times) with their own lamentable ruins, by
co^tending to pass y^ impassable botto^lesse gulf, that finds no shelfe nor
shore, but either their own infamous death by the way yt attempt it: or
infidelity, Barbarism and Turkish slavery to their Country in short time
following: as Afrik, Greece, Boheme, and Hungary have tasted and do testify.

That she found likewise all the great Princes and Countreies adioining unto
her, as Spain, France, Flanders and Scotl. in the same Religion settled and
united with her, and she with them, as children al of one Mother the Catholic
Church, by professing one faith and one form of Religion: which carries with
it an amity of such force and effect (as experience teaches) that where the
Religions are diverse, the frindship is weak, and continues neither long, nor
firm.

That than she stood free and indifferent, to make her own choice, without
prejudice to herself, to be served by all her subjects equally, and was by no
fear of any detriment to herself tied to any: nor forced to use one more then
an other, but as their habilities deserved, and as her pleasure was to choose.

Again, that being in this manner freely entered, and quietly possessed in her
seat, by the death of her Sister, Fleck, intruding him self, brings in his
mate.
the chief of these two Machiauellians than of mean state, and out of credit,
whose ambition endured not to abide the time of her calling, intruded himself
by preoccupation into her presence and service, some few days before the death
of her Sister: and (to win credit of wisdom) suggested unto her certain
false fears, and colourlesse suspicions against the chief of her Sisters
Counsel, and thereby obtained favor: and finding that he had a young Lady in
hand, that was inexpert in matters of State, of a deep wit, and timorous
nature, and thereby easily made suspicious, sone circumuented by them that
could cunningly abuse her, conformable to them that she trusted, and that
promised, with security, her ease and disburdening of the care of her weighty
affairs: he induced forthwith, a confederate of his own (by birth more base
then himself, nearly yet allied unto him, and in heresy more fervent then he)
into such credit and confidence at first, that forthwith was removed the most
upright Prelate and incorrupt Judge of Europe, to advance this second Synon,
the most known Briber of all the Isle of Britanie, to give him the chief place
and Dignity of that Realm under herself.

This being than the state and condition, in which your Prince, a young Lady,
and sole Uirgin, without help of Husband entered and was settled in her Croune
and Dominion, and took to her service this couple of Counsailers: I shall now
show you (following ye Metaphors of mine Adversaries) for their imaginatiue Tree
yt no man can see, a stinking Tree of Treasons planted in deed, with some of ye
crooked branches and unsavory fruits, yt it has already spread and brought
forth. And bewray I shall also yt Hen, that has laid mo eggs then a few, both
in yt North, and in the South, in the West, and East parts, and in every corner
through out your Realm, of Treasons, that stand not (as mine Adversaries
pretended treasons do) in sayings, ^urmises, devises, and reports: but in
doings, in fac^s, and in common known actions, of which no man justly shall
plead ignorance.

The Q. circumuention.
Your Q. therefore resting and reposing her self (now beginning to reign)
chiefly upon the co^sidence and counsel of these two new broumes newly brought
in, and sweeping al clean, as they seemed: you will not deny, I suppose, but yt
she was wrought and seduced (against her own affection than, and against the advice both of her Nobility, and faithful oldest servants, forthwith to
intrude into the Spiritual Dominion, and to usurp to her self the chief
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to change the Religion both in substance and show,
to set up a new Party and Faction, with the reiection of the former yt she
found: and so consequently from time to time after, to prosecute and follow ye
same than begone, by what so ever else apperteined thereunto, and was by those
two thought meet, for yt maintenance thereof.

And this is it, Womanish Primacy is the tree, and Synon, the Hen.
that I call ye Stem, the Stock, and body of the Tree of Treasons, yt spredeth
and brings forth ye Branches and fruits, of which I shall herafter entreat:
in which Stem and Trunk (being rotten at heart, hollow within, and without
sound substance) has our spiteful Pullet laid her ungracious eggs, mo than a
few: and there has hatched sundry of them, and brought forth Chicke^s of her
own feather, I warrant you. A Hen I call him, as well for his cackeling, ready
and smoth tung, wherein he gives place to none) as for his deep and subtle
art in hiding his Serpentine Eggs from common men's sight: and chiefly for
his h^^nish heart and courage, which twice already has been well proved, to be as
base and deiect at ye sight of any storm of adverse fortune, as ever was
Hens heart at the sight of a Fox. And had he not been by his Confederate, as
with a dunghill Cock, trodden as it were, and gotten with egg: I doubt, whether
ever his Hennish heart joined to his shrewde wit would have served him, so
soon to put the Q. green and tender state in so manifest peril and adventure.

And that thus she was induced to do without cause or need for her own
part, let it be considered, that neither the Pope, nor other Prince,
Papisticall subject, nor none else, at home, nor abroad, had any way attempted
any least practice against her, neither for her succession before she came to
the Croune: to unquiet her entry, when she should come to it: nor to disturb
her, when she was in it: nor no least murmur, grudge, nor want of satisfaction,
found in any of her people, that might, ^eeue color or shadow o^ fear, or
mistrust.

And withal, let it be remembered, that to uphold and maintain her in the
course and trade of the old Religion of her Progenitors, which she found
established (against any attempt of Heretics, that by example of Her Sisters
molestations might be mistrusted) she found assured, and had in a readiness
both the same people at home, The Q. pillars in the old religion.
and the same Princes abroad: that even than lately and freshly had
miraculously (it must be so confessed) recovered and wroong it out of the
jaws, as it were, and power of the heretics, that before by tyranny
possessed and oppressed it, and that with an evident demonstration of Gods
special favor, and allowance of that Religion.

For syns it can not be denied (by them that in their hearts acknowledge any
God) but that God more respects the right Religion, Q. Mar^e called to the
Croune for Religions sake.
the true faith, and the soul of man, than he does the earth of ye Country,
the bodies of the people, or their lay and civil governance: Law also and
Reason telling us, that the chief inte^tion of every Act must be presumed and
deemed to be for the principal sequeles and effects that follow it: and every
man seeing, that the chief and most effectual consequence of Q. Marie^
miraculous coming to ye Croune, was ye restitution of ye old Religion: it must
necessarily be concluded, y^ more for y^ Religions sake, then either for her
self, or her people, she was by Gods mighty and miraculous power brought unto
her Croune.

Well, ye Religion notwithstanding being altered, as you have heard: we are now
first to see and search out some of ye fine devises (for all no man knows,
but her self, nor she can now remember) used by these two Synons, to draw and
inuit her to ye change thereof: than to consider of the truth, and untruth of
the persuasions, and after to examine, who gained, and made most profit of ye
same. But ye persuasions passing in secret between her and them, I can
therefore come to know but few of them, and may thereby perhaps not speak of
the chiefest: of those, I mean, yt contained the suttlest and deepest hidden
circumuentio^s of all the reast. Nevertheless those yt I shall here speak of
(being such as are publik^ly known) shall suffice, I ^rust, to induce your
^ueenes memory, to remember many mo: and her wisdom, to discern the
fraudulent arts, by which she has b^ne abused.

The five (...) arts to draw (...) to the ^^^nge.
And for the first of them I put thi^, that by persuading her falsely, that the
most Reverend Prelate Cardinal Poole (b^ing for lerning and virtue y^ light and
star of your Nation) with diverse of Q.

By bearing her falsely in hand, that y^



of her (against her own affection) the pretended establishme^t of the Schism
by Parliament, and penalties to be put, by color of Law, upon cases of
Religion. The performance and true meaning whereof every man now sees and
fe^leth, either by himself, or by some frind of his. For what family is there
found among you so mean, as has not had some of his kindred, alliance,
frindes, or servants, called by letters, vexed with Process, arrested by
Officers, polled by Keepers, conuented by Commissioners, fined, imprisoned,
entangled by bands, publicly arrained, or forced to flee, and one way or
other impouerished, to the notorious decaie of him self, and al his, for
hearing of Mass, for not coming to Communion, for refusing their Oath, for
absence from schismatical sermons and service, or for but speaking in defense
of ye Catholic faith.

As the first Serpent tempted with to intrude and entangle her self in the
Ecclesiastical ministry, by telling and assuring her, that if she would
begin it, and give ye President: al y^ Princes her neighbors would follow her
therein, for y^ spoil and gain that went annexed therewith. Whose example
nevertheless no Prince can yet be found, that will imitate or embrace.

fruits o^ that tree, bitter to your Queen and Realm.
Now when they had by these arts and devises, and by other mo like not so
publicly known, wrought her and brought her to this intrusion of her self
into yt spiritual Regiment and change of Religion: let us consider a little
(before we proceed to y^ reast) what y^ same carried and co^prehe^ded in
itself: what branches, I mean, this holow trun^k and Tree has uttered and
spread forth, and what difference of fruits your Q. and her Catil^es have
gathered thereof.

Princes that profess Christ's name, that who so hates most his office, is
yet glad of his frindship: the rash renouncing o^ the amity thereof, may more
importe her, then all the English Sect of Synon can profit or avail her.

In that went away the ministry and contrary and opposite things, y^ one upon
pain of eternal damnation, the other upon loss of present life. Which was
an intolerable clogge to every Christian conscience, and must therefore needs
engender some decaie of the ^eruent affection that the Catholics had toward
her, who were then the strongest, and her most assured party.



that they reject: she planteth, that they grubbe up: she mainteineth, that
they repress: and contemns, that they adore. And how can this possibly
s^ande and co^curre with that hearty amity, that assures Princes in their
States? Or can it be denied, that every Prince is not yt stronger, for the
faithful frindship of his Co^federats? Or were her Progenitors forced (for
their own safety) to seek those foul shifts, that have in her name and
behalf been sought out, in every Country about her? The practices used to
uphold thenterprise hitherto, do make plain demonstration of short
continuance of such amity.

In that, was also contained a general

In that, went comprehended, her Histories at home and abroad (more for these
men's fault, then for her own) to be accounted, called, written, and recorded
by those odiouse terms, and repro^heful Epithets, that persons condemned for
Heresy and Schism have been wont to hear: And with the skorneful nicknames of
a Shee-headde, a Breetchelesse Head, and a domme Head of the Church by S.
Poules prescription: to y^ manifest diminution of that Reverend estimation,
that is dew to her, by Parentage, as a Kings daughter: by Dignity, as a Q.
and by profession, as a Christian.

In that was the seed sown, and y^ foundation laid, whereupon ineuitably must
ensew her Excommunication, if she persisted. The weight of which yoke I leave
to be considered by the Histories and Presidents of times past, yea and by
their own startling, storming, and raging thereat, that seem unto her most to
contemn, and to make least of it.

tied, to cleave and lean to them, for better, for worse: and might no more
without prejudice depart from them after, than he that leaving the dry land,
sits in the water upon an other man's back, may leave him that carries
him, without weeting his skin. Which practice is more perilous to a Prince
(if it be deeply considered) than at the first face it appears.

In this, was necessarily comprehended the Surplisses in their Synagogs, their
feelde preachings, their secret lectures, and the infinite differences of
Sects, of seruises, and forms of Religion used in corners, and known to all
men, give trial and testimony.

keep the names and show, God knows how little while some of them shall.

In that goes also contained such

Yea England it self (if tr^eth mai^ be confessed) does so plainly prove it,
for their little time, as will admit no contradiction: if the general manners
of the multitude now, be compared with their conditions in Q. Mary's time,
which was but yesterdai^ to speak of. The difference whereof is so notable to
all Foreiners, that than li^ing among you have for eight or ten years been
absent from you, and be now returned to you again: that they seem to find, as
it were, a new Land, a new Nation, new Laws, new customs, and manners, and
plainly a new face and aspect of the people.

Yea, go yet a little nearer, and if thou be indifferent, I will demand none
other Judge but thy self, of the difference, that thou find between the
modest manners of them, that are yet such Catholics among you, as the time and
place will permit, and the unbridled light conditions of the professed
Protestants generally: between the fideli^ie of the one, and the unfaithfulness
of the other: between the sincerity of the one, and the craft of the other:
and between the brideled fear of conscience in the one, and the insolent
impudency of y^ other. The notorious odds whereof in so short time do make
manifest demonstration, whereunto it tends and must come, in the revolution of
a few years mo.

home (that in all things obeyed her without exception) she accepted for the
same the painted promises of her vpstart Protestants, that obeyed her no
longer, then til their Party were of strength.

And for the foreine and ancient entier amity, that she had with y^ Sea
Apostolic, with the Emperor, and with all the Princes of Italy, Spain,
France, Flanders and Scotland, she accepted the amity of a Condie, an Orange,
a Lodowike, a Murrey, a Murton, and a French Admiral: that have hitherto let
fall by the way, all that ever leaned and reasted upon them.

These now being the profits and fruits that your Queen and Country have
reaped and gathered of this Tree of mutation: let us see, what other fruit it
has yielded to the Deuisers themselves, and to their frindes and faction, The
sweet^ fruits of that tree, for Synon and his mates.
that have been the drawers of your Queen, to the planting thereof: and
whether their own private turns be thereby no better served, then hers, nor
their own a^arice and ambition no better advanced, then she, her Croune, or
Realm are strengthened. ^^ be to frivolous and vain to abuse any wise man. For
they y^ under King Henry were as Catholic, as the six Articles required: that
under King Edward were such Protestants, as y^ Protector would have them: that
under Q. Marie were Catholics again, even to creeping to the Cross: and that
under Q. Elizabeth were first Lutherans, setting up Parker, Cheiny, Gest, Bill.
etc. than Caluinistes, aduauncing Grindall, Iuell, Horn etc. then Puritans,
maiteining Sampson, Deering, Humfrey, etc. and now (if no^ Anabaptists, and
Arrians) plain Macchiauellians: yea, they that persuade in public speeches,
Sino^s table talk treason to God.
that man has free liberty to dissemble his Religion, and for Authority do
allege their own examples and practice of feining one Religion for an other
in Q. Mary's time (which contains a manifest euacuation of Christ's own
coming and doctrine, of y^ Apostles preaching and practice, of y^ blood of y^
Martyrs, of y^ constancy of al Confessors: yea and of y^ glorious vain
deaths of all the stinking Martyrs of their innumerable Sects of Heretics, one
and other, having always taught, the confession of mouth to be as necessary
to salvation, as yt belief^ of heart): shall these men now be admitted to plead
conscience in religion? And can any man now be coosyned so much, as to think,
that these men by conscience were than moved to make that mutatio^?

And, as for the fear of the French, I need not deteine you, or stand
thereupon. For the Discourser of the marriage intended between the Duke of Norf.
and the Q. of Scotland has sufficiently (and in that part truly) satisfied
all men, and delivered us of all fear of oppression by the French, by
allegation of the policies of Burgundy and Spain: though there were no more to
be said unto it.

And thus having seen, that this mutation of the Religion (made not for
conscience, nor for any cause or need of your Queens part) her coosyning
Counselors have gained to them selves and their Faction honor, and Authority,
richesse, revenues, creditte and strength in the highest degrees every way:
and your Queen contrarily nothing but damage and dishonor, decay of amity
abroad, less assured at home, among her Catholics less loved then before, Q.
Eliz. award at 40. years old.
among her heretics now contemned more then ever, and in fine, keeping the
name of Queen to herself, circumuented to yield unto them the substance and
effect of all Kingly Dominion: this being seen, I say, by them that will
acknowledge the sight of that they see, to be all the fruits hitherto hatched of
that mutation, and common reason teaching us withal, to deem and presume the
intention of every enterprise by the principal effects that follow upon it: we
must conclude, that purposely they did draw your Q. by suttletie unto that
attempt, that contains in it her own detriment and prei^dice of her Realm,
to serve thereby their own turns, to advance themselves and their needy
Faction, and to quench alitle the thirst of their own private avarice and
ambition.

And if this much may be seen in so few (for hard it were to show you al) of
the deep deceits and subtle circumuentions used to seduce her, to renounce y^
ancient Religion of al her Progenitors, if this much may be seen by the
manifest prejudice proved to be grown to herself thereby, if this be to be
seen by the peril already appearing to depend upon y^ Realm for the same, and
if this also be seen by the notorious advancement of y^ private procurers
thereof: what would appear, trow ye, if the hidden and secret practices,
known to none but to herself and to them, might once come to light? And how
evident and odious would it appear, if all the detriment^s and perils of
hers^lf and her Realm, and all the private gains of these ungracious Guides
could be called to memory, and set down by writing, as fully and effectually,
as every man sees them?

But being plain enough to them that will see any thing, xii^^. other eg^es
lai^d by that Hen.
let us now proceed to see, what eggs our unhappy Hen has laid in this
holow tree, yea what Chickens she has hatched there, or rather what other
branches and fruits of like sap and sauo^r this unsavory tree has budded and
brough^ forth, and what harvest in the end it gives hope of.

If I should begin to rehearse in parti^ular A lying Regim^nt.
any of the infinite numbers of impudent lies published by Authority in y^
time of these men's government, to claw ^^ching ears, to blind simple sights,
to sclaunder Catholics, to belie Princes, and by abusion to hold the world
occupied with cra^ts and vanities, from looking into ye practices of these
Co^iurators: ^he number of them are so infinite, that neither should I find
end, when I had begone them, nor could tell of which to make choice before
other (when all be so impudent and of importance) nor ye tenth, no not the
twenteth of them that present them selves unto my pen, would this place permit
to be expressed unto you.

I must therefore remit the considerations of them to your own memories, and
pray yo^ to re^ewe the sundry printed Pamphlets, Proclamations, Libels,
Letters, Rithmes, and other like things sent out among you: and to remember^
what has been told you by them, and otherwise of the wars of Le^th, and
Newhauen, of the Rebellions in France, Flanders, and Scotl^ of the Lott^rie in
London, of la^ding of y^ King of Spaines money, of y^ sundry Treaties of your
Q. marriage, of the Papists practices, of prohibiting Pirates from the Ports, of
these present troubles, of the Dukes of Alua and Guise, of the Duke of Norf. of
the Q. of Scotl. of them that were suborned to be apprehended, some with balls
of wildefire, and some with daggs, and hired to confess, that they should have
burned London, and killed great folks, first for show im^risoned, and ^han
dismissed and rewarded: and finally of the delays of restitutio^ between the
low Countries and you, and of infinite other like devises: and thereupon to
deem indifferently, and to acknowledge what you find, and you shall see, I
doubt not, that with lies they began, with lies they go forward, and still
do maintain one lie with an other.

But to come to some of their particular Uniuersall rebellion.
among other who can plead ignorance, how often they have by lying abused
their Princes name and Authority, to sow sedition, and to raise Rebellion in
France, Flanders, and Scotland: to the touch of her Honor and fame in the
world abroad: to the danger of the quietness of her State, when those Princes
shall find themselves hable, and think the time mete to revenge or reform it:
and to the passing consumption of the Nobility in all those Countries.

Consumptio^ of treasure.
and that ways employed: as well for corrupting the subjects of those
Countreies by present money and pensions to renounce their allegiance, as for
waging the Rebels and soldiers that have been in arms: namely y^ Condy, Duke
Dewponts, the Admiral, and other in France: to Orange, Lodouike, and others in
Flanders: to I ^ames, Lineux, Morto^ and others in Scotland: to the great
diminishing of her own treasures, and to the great impouerishing of the whole
Realm.

Exa^^ions.
Who has not tasted and felt to his cost the new inuent^ons to pill your people
for these purpos^s: and (bysides accustomed Subsidies, Fifteenes, and lones) to
levy new exactions of them by forcible Tasking and Collections, under false
names of Lotteries, of Building of Poules Steeple, of Charity for the
afflicted Brethern, and such other feined titles, employed to the raising and
maintenance of Rebellion in all Provinces adioining.

Yea, who can hope for better, Synons accustomed similitude.
where the chief Manager of your affairs professes, the yearly fleesing of
the Subject by extraordinary paiments to be as necessary a policy for the
Prince, as is the yearly shearing of the sheep a needful provision for the
Subject?

Who can deny, that (which experience Foes of frinds.
whereby they induced your Q. to lay hands upon the king of Spaines money, for
payment of yt French Rebels, and to spoil his subjects ever sins, as by way of
Preoccupation, to injury him before hand, that meant to oppress her, as they
lyengly said: whereof three, yea thirtene years experience has given good
proof. And whereby they have not only violat^d the old League long continued
between your Q. and him: her Realm, and his Countries: but also made her
Amity unassured with the mightiest and sincerest frinde, that she had upon
^arth.

And who beholds not with tears the lamentable prays, Catholik^s the pray
of Protestants.
that mutually you make one of an other, among your selves: whiles for thirtine
years time, or more, al your Catholics have been good prays for your
Protestants: and thereby the strongest Party of your people infinitely more
weakened, then the weaker sort be strengthened. The bare and needy Brethren,
that by the spoil of the Papists ^re set up, being in creditte or force
nothing comparably advanced to y^ others decaie in number and strength. And
like as of this every man fe^leth more or less, by him self or his frinde
(by loss^ of Lands, Rents, ready money, Pensions, offices, or credit in his
Country) even so shall both your Prince and Realm find want of it, if ever
God permit them to feel the force of any foreign enemy, unless it be in
time prevented.

^aste of No^^litie.
that sees not, and bewaileth not with tears the blood, the wasting and
consumption of your Ancient Nobility both in number, in wealth, in credit
among your people, and in Authority with your Prince? Whiles these base men
(holding the Key of both in their hands) derive thereof little or nothing to any
that are more Noble then them selves: but do participate all in effect unto
the base or needy sort, to raise a Nobility of their own quality and
constitution, and to be sure of them against a day of service to come.

And who perceives not the great Her self weakened.
For (bysides that every Princes chief security reas^eth in the loialtie and
ability of his Nobles) your Queen being her self of no new risen Race: her
surety must be presumed (by all common intendement) to consist more in the
confidence of her Ancient Nobility, whose parents have been nourisshed under
her Progenitors, then upon a new Nobility, that accounts y^ thank of their
advancement to be dew rather to those that rule her, and preferred them, than
unto her self, whom they reckon to be but the hatchet in the workmans hand.

And who sees not most evidently, that these Catilines have been the cause of
drawing the Excommunication out against her? Excommunication.
Is it not well known, that they only have holde^ her from admitting the
access of all the Popes Legates and Nuncios so often sent fro Rome into
Flanders and France, Card. Ferr^te.

The Abbat Martinigo. The Abbat. S. Salute.


frindely to admonish her, and charitably to move her, to reconcile her self
to the unity of the Church, and to join in Religion with the other Christian
Princ^s, and with them to govern her people by one Faith and Doctrine,
according to the steps of her Progenitonrs? Have not these men. I say (for
fear of y^ decaie of their own private Dominion that might have ensewed
thereby) so rejected that, which should have been her safety, that they made
her not only to deny a^dience unto them, but likewise to contemn the sundry
frindly motions both of the Emperors Ferdinande and Maximilian, and of the
Kings of Spain and France, made unto her for some pe^missio^ to have been
granted to the Catholics of her Realm? Yea have they not upon those motions
more rigorously increased the severe searches and scrutinies, and executed more
sharp penalties (above and against law) toward every Catholic, that in any
corner, never so secret, could be found to have used the liberty of his
conscience, in hearing of Mass, were it but twice in a year?

And did not the Sea Apostolic for twelve years time suffer this contempt, in
hope and expectation of better? And could he (without some note of omitting his
duty and office, any longer forbear, autentikely to declare to the world,
that contumacie to be within the Censures of the Church? And can this work
any less, then her manifest infamy in all Christian Nations, which esteem
that A^thoritie? And does not this contain some prejudice and derogation to
her State and security, by danger of Foreine correction: unless she return,
I meane^ or have some more privilege, then any Christian Emperor, or King ever
had before her? Let the Stories tell ^ou: and not to trouble you with many,
namely those of the late king of Navarre, and of your own King John her own
Progenitour. Yea, contains it not her plain weakening and vnsuretie at home?
Where (whiles she thus persisteth) Christ's ordinary Authority upon earth
(being the Supreme Judge of all obedience among Christian men) has set her
Christian subjects free, from obeying her for Conscience sake.

I will not here say what further, but for the reast do refer thee to the
Presidents and examples of all Christian Princes and Nations excommunicated
before her. Of which I wish thee by thine own reading to make thy self I^dge,
and not to trust to these men's impudent expositions and gloses: but upon thine
own pervsing of the sequeles ensued (in few years to speak of) to every
excommunicated Emperor, King, or Country, that persisted obstinate: be thy
self Judge, whether it shall be wisdom or policy for your Queen, to trust to
these Machiauellians light regard and estimation made thereof.

Neither is it obscure to men of any insight, that these Carlines do prepare
and Their ow^^ strengt^.
What other can their fortifiyng of them selves and their Party every way
portend: but that they will be in case to govern the Prince, and dispose the
Realm at their pleasure and devotion?

Let it be considered, what numbers of Fluddes of foreiner^.
for Rebellion and heresy ^led out of other Countries, are drawn into your
Realm: yea and under those Titles what multitudes of Pirates, th^eues,
m^rderers, Churche-Robbers and idle vagabunds be flocked thither by ^eapes.
Behold their placing and planting in s^ndry parts, even in the heart and bowels
of the Country. And soberly way it, what it may importe you, to have amiddest
among you forty or fifty thousand Strangers (I speak far within the compass
of wisemens account) in readiness always, to be employed to any sudden
exploit^ among you, I mean, yt are by these Catilines purposely divided into
factio^s among your selves (some for Religion, and some for Succession) and
your Captain Coniurators so provided, that they will have the disposing both
of their own Party, of the indifferent sort, and of the foreine forces wholly
at their own design^ment. This being deeply weied, manifestly implies an
intention both to make a question among you, ere it be long: and to ouerwey the
same also, on which side so ever the Contriuers of the devise shall apply them
selves.

League with Rebels and Pirates.
Flemmish and Scottish Rebels, with ye preparation they have made to have all
the Pirates persons and vessels (in effect) of this part of Europe, collected
together upon the English seas: and with the liberty of the use of your Ports
(for sale of their spoils and stolen goods) to be waged, hired, and in
ordinary service, as it were, of those Captain Pirates, that by bribes rob
them that have robbed al others: wh^rby to the infamy of your Realm is
verified and confirmed the infamous prophecy that said: Anglia e^it meretrix,
malorum omnium nutrix. And being thereby accounted the Nest and Den of those
thieves, that live by the Spoil of all other Nations, it remains subject and
in danger to answer the same at one time or other, if not by restitution, by
way of revenge: or else with such charge to it self, by standing on her own
guard, as will be over heavy for the Country to bear.

At home likewise apparent it is, how Their own Alliance.
For being by their own marriages allied already to ye house of Suffolk of the
Blood Royal, and by consequence thereof to the house of Hartfoord also, and
their children thereby incorporated to both: mark you, how now by marriage of
their children, with wily wit and wealth together, they wind in your other
noblest Houses unto them that are leaft, I mean, in credit and countenance.

Consider likewise, how at their own comme^dacion and preferment, they have
erected, as it were, almost a new half of your Nobility (of whom also they
have reason to think them selves assured) and the reast than (that were out of
hope to be won to their faction) behold, how by sundry fine devises they are
either cut of, worn out, fled, bannished, or defaced at home.

And add unto this, how they preserve and save harmless all their own
frinds and Alliances in all Criminal causes that do occur, and in
Iudicialles prefer them, with the injury of any third whatsoever, that will
not with money bye his just sentence. By which mean they may hope (when their
day shall come) to find that, that is commonly found every where: that is to
say, that affection for kindred sake shall bear more sway, th^n the respects to
God, or to Justice shall be hable to resist. And let your Q. consider, whether
the end of this practice do tend more to her strengthening and securiti^, or
to their own.

The Re^lmes force in their hands.
that every man sees, must needs perceive, and (having any wit) can not but
consider, what goes comprehended in the making of them selves mighty and
strong in money, plate, Jewels, Armor, and other short treasures, by their
long Bribery, corruption, and sale of Justice. How rich their Bishops and
ecclesiastical Ministers be^ by long possessing al ye Spiritual Promotions of
y^ Realm, and by spending little or nothing thereof. And further, yt in their
own hands, their frinds, and Faction remain al ye Offices of ye Realm, y^
charge of all the Ports, the keeping of all the Fortresses, the Princes
treasure, Armor and Munition, together with the whole Navy, which are the
only walls and bulwarks of yt Island. And these points being laid and
considered together: who sees not, yt in their hands they have both yt Prince
present, ye Succession to come, and the whole Realm to dispose at their will?

And will you see the same yet better proved? Words may deceive.
yea, by their own confessions, if men's facts and doings can not be d^nied to
be far ye more surer and truer vtterers of the secrets of men's hearts and
meanings, then are their smooth tungs, and dissembled words. Let us therefore
now consider their manifest attempts made against the Croune it self.

Let us behold, Their deeds speak, that they crow at the Crown.
how lustily they have assailed the same, daily more and more, and now of late
specially, finding your Q. beset round about with fears and dangers prepared
by them selves, meetely well weakened of all frindeship at home, and abroad:
the Country (what for Religion, and what for Succession) divided into Factions
and parts: and themselves withal now in strength every way. Let us see, I
say, what other eggs this Cockatrice has now laid, and well sitten on, till
the Cockerell Chickins be quick in the shell, that shall crow at the Croune
it self.

Eng. and Sco. in their way.
Remembering therefore, that Ambition abides not any ordinary time, and that both
the Houses and lines of King Henry of Eng. and of his Sister Q. Margaret of
Scotl. (the one reasting presently in your Q. that now is, and the other in the
Queen of Scotl.) were opposite objects, and as plain impediments did lie in
their way against their purpose of bringing the Croune immaturely to the
third House of Suffolk, unto which them selves are united, and their children
incorporated: and would prevent also the last refuge, which is by their own
force and frinds to be hable (in case that Family of Suffolk by any accident
should quail, and be repelled) to give the Regal chair to whom they list,
finding, I say, these two Houses and Lines to stand strongly in their way: we
have now to see and consider, what arts and devises have been used, to cut of
and extinct them both.

And perceiving that the Queen and Line of Scotl. for many respects was more
easy to be removed and cut of (by Parliament, by pining imprisonment, or by
plain force and violence) than was your Q. and House of England, Description
of the Q. of Engl.
which reasted in a fair young Lady of goodly personage, of rare beauty, of
singular wit of excellent qualities, learned, la^guaged, rich, and mighty in
Dominion, and thereby so likely to marie and to have children, yt less could
not be looked for, and that the rather for ye earnest motion and labor that
the greatest Prince of Europe did make even at the first to join with her in
marriage, and for the other daily offers and solicitations made by all other
Personages of account, both at home, and abroad that have been to marie these
fourtene years ^ime, to have matched with her: and finding withal, that the
cutting of of the house of Scotland would little avail them, and that their
final purpose should be little or nothing advanced thereby, if that Line and
House of England should by Succession continue and encreace: and perceiving no
way, how by violence to make an end of that of England without their own
present ruin and fall, till them selves and their Party were stronger: the
de^ise therefore rested, and concluded in this.

The plat to remove both.
First by art and policy to make that Queen and House of England so to waste
and consume it self, that in, and with that person of her self, that whole
Line of hers might finish: and withal to compass her (being the greatest and
principal of the two) to be the instrument of the extirpation of the other,
either by color of law, by appearance of polici^, or by plain force.

Three seuera^l assalts against the ^ine of England.
This being the platte, they found no better way to compass the same, then by
often laying before her many crafty and s^ttle arguments, and many false
reasons (for want of matter in fa^te) to keep her in ^eare of her own State,
as though the same were dangerous: to make her believe, that still she stood in
peril of rebellion by her Catholics: of the King of Spaines aspiring to her
Croune: and of the Q. of Scotl. competency with her for the same, by the help
of the French, with whom she was mightily allied, as they pretended.

By often and crafty inculcatio^ of these colourlesse dangers unto her, as if
she had been beset round with perils on all sides, and sure of no Prince to
stick unto her, they obtained for themselves increace of credit, as careful
Counselors for her security: To hold the Queen unmarried.
and persuaded withal, yt there was none assured pillar for her to lean unto
against all events, but to keep her self free, to hold her self unmarried:
and what so ever she pretended, never so often, and to whom so ever, yet to
retain her marriage in her own hands to be disposed by her self, when any
extremity should so require. For by that only (said they) she should be hable
always to make her peace, to preserve her own State, and to draw to her party
what Prince she would: bysides that by prete^ding to marry now here, now there,
and no where in deed, she should always with the hope thereof so feed every
foreine Prince, that she should th^reby be hable, both to encounter any storm
rising toward her self, and to advance what so ever purpose she listed else.

This, you must consider, asked crafty conueiance, and fine subtle means of
utterance (least by persuading it grossly, her wisdom might have perceived the
meaning) and therefore at times between they have often interlaced pretenses of
preferring some few of the many motions that have been made unto her for
marriage: and with appearance of words and looks, and of feined reasons faintly
laid forth, have wished to see some Succession of her own body. But in the
end yt boule has allwai^s so come about to his bias, that neither Prince, nor
subject, Catholic, nor Prot^stant could yet be found, in whom there was not
seen either some notable imp^diment, or an other proponed to be meter, then
he: to shift over the matt^r, that none at all might be had.

Now examine a little, how this concurreth with her confidence reposed in them,
and with their pretenses of the Honor, love and care, that they owe her, and
have of her.

Can that man honor or love me, Treason to her person.
that desires to see my Succession and Posterity buried with my person? Can
they love me, that procure for me the want and lack of them, that should be my
chief surety and defense? What thing in this earth is, or can be so great a
safety for the person of any man that has possessions, as to have children of
his own, either Natural, or Adoptiue? Your Q. is permitted to have neither of
both. And in whom is the fault, but in them, that first dissuaded her from
marriage with the Catholic, that every way was meetest for her: and n^ith^r
can, nor will since find any Protestant, to supply the place?

What other is this, but to kill her alive? What is it else, but with her body to
bury her memory: and with her corpse, to carry all her Succession unto her
Sepulcher? Yea, what is it else in deed and effect, but by extincting her race,
to prepare way for an other, which they have in store.

Pretend what they list by words and shows: th^se deeds speak manifestly, yt
her own life should not thus long have escaped their hands, if they could have
won her consent, to have made away the Q. of Scotl. whose person and Issue
remains yet between them and their designement.

And by this fine art, they have drawn your Q. to loose her youth
vnfrutefully, until she be now in effect forty year^s old: and they being
thereby in very great hope, yt now she shall have no Succe^sion of her own,
having also gotten her next Heir into prison (where not unlikely they hoped
that by close air, by want of exercise, or by some dissease she would have
died long ear this) and to reast in their power to make her die, when they
list: and likewise having in ye mean while made them selves strong (as ye have
h^rd) they now see their own w^bbe more th^n half wo^en, and therefore do
begi^ne to proceed forward unto some other atte^pts, yt reuele more and more
their hidden inte^tio^.

For being now more then half assured Dissinher^ting of the Cro^ne.
she should have no children likely ^o live, but that her self thereby should
rather be endangered: to pren^nt now, that none other should be declared nor
accepted as her child by adoption, as Heir by law, nor as Succ^ssour by right
to the prejudice of their purpose: they have by pretense of law compassed, that
like as by art they have provided, she shall have no Children naturally, ^uen
so by Statute they have prepared, she shall have no Heir iudicially: l^ast
there might be any leaft, when your Queen shall be dead, to reueng^ the violence
that shall hereafter be offered her, if she will not die by nature, when, or
before that they think it time, to have her remoou^d.

Now look a little, good Reader, into this Law, and consid^r, whether ^uer
there were public thing more pernicious to a Prince, or more noisome to a
common Wealth? Hardly is there so mean a subject in your Realm to b^ found,
as has not one known Heir or other, to succeed him in his goods, and by
justice to persecute any personal injury offered unto him. Only your Q. may now
have none. Who reuengeth the Husbands murder, but the wife? Who the Fathers,
but the child? And who the Uncles, but the Nephew, or they, that by Nature and
Law are presumed to be nearest to the Parties iniuried? And what must it
portende, that this benefit is taken from your Q? How infinite are the
examples in every Story, of them, whose deaths have ben^ hastened by want of
having some known Heir: whereby sundry Competitours of their goods have put
them selves in several hopes to gain by their deaths.

And if this has been common in mean men's cases: how much more dangerous is
it, and more assuredly to be looked for in a Princes case, whose Croune can
lack no Competitours, and whose Heir specially is labored, yea enacted
before hand to be doubted of, and unknown? For this m^^^th them, that think
they have good Titles, to hasten their Claims: least by this law their
interests may be brought into oblivion: and puts them in hope, who had but
weak Titles, and thought to have given place to other, that if they can make
them selves stro^gest, they may be preferred before them, that (before this
law) had better interest then they, and by this law have now as little as
they: for it barreth all a like.

And to your common Wealth, yt never dies, what can be more odious, more
dangerous, and more unnatural: then so to disfournish it of a known Heir, as
to have no mark of obedience nor allegea^ce left, whereupon the people may fix
their eyes? Let the question be proponed, and see whether in the intention of
that provision there can be, by any possibility, any other or less presumed:
then a plain meaning and resolution, to bring ye Cards to shuffling for the
Croune, now, when them selves be strongest, to the end that he that can win
it, may wear it. For if the words of that Law be marked, it is evident, that
the meaning of the Procurers thereof is, to have (as well after your Q. death,
as before) a pretense and color of law to impeache all Interests and Titles to
the Croune what so ever: to the intent that (failing of their purpose to place
the Croune in their own Family) no Title should be so clear, but that by
color of this law, there might be somewhat to say against it: whereby the
trial and judgment thereof may come to the sword: now, I say, when as they
account them selves far the strongest party. And what this imports unto all
States and Degrees of the whole Realm, I ween there is no man so simple that
s^eth not.

If he said, that can not lie, that a Kingdom divided in it self, can not
stand: consider whether it be possible, to have any greater Division, then
this Statute does purposely prepare to have. If in the end of King Henry's
viij. days (who leaft behind him three Children) it seemed yet necessary for
the safety and quietness of the Realm, to have declared mo Heirs in
succession (if God would have suffered him to perform it): how opposite and
contrario^s is this policy now, not only to ^stablish none, but to establish,
that there shall be none: not three, not two, no not one?

In all ages hitherto by all the Princes that have been, and by all their
Councelles that have served them, such care and respect has been had to
prevent Civil division and sedition for the Croune, that nothing has been
preferred, nor so sone provided for, as to make the Succession known: as
foreseing, that no one thing in the world can so so^e bring a Realm unto
ruin, as to leave the known Heir in doubt. And now among you, not only an
Heir is not ^stablish^d, but your known Heir is labored to be made not
known, and by special law pro^ided (yea under pain of Treason) that no
Heir at all shall be known. And what does this implie, but that the laborers
and procurers thereof would have with your Queen the present Head of that
Common Wealth, the whole common Wealth to die also: and with her death, that
the whole Sat of the Kingdom should perish withal?

Bysides, consider how in this Law. they play the honest men with her in an
other point: craftily to make the world hold her for infamous, and
incontinent. For, in the prohibition of any Heir to be named, they except only
the Issew of her body, An. 13. Reg. Eliz. cap. 1.
with the term and addition of Natural. Which Term being in your Statutes
and Judicial writings strange and unwonted, and in all other languages
signifiyng plain Bastards: and they, now purposely forsaking the accustomed
words of your Law in such cases, by changing lawful, for Natural: and by
leaving the old usual words of lawful Heir, lawful Children, or Children
lawfully begotten, for the new term of Natural Issew, that in all languages
signifies Bastardie: what other can be gathered of this (being spoken of your
Queen, that is unmarried) but yt they would thereby covertly insinuate unto
the world, that she has, or minds to have children Natural, and not
lawful? And is not this a token both of their small reverence, and less
affection toward her?

Believe not, I say, their gloses and false expositio^s: but let them either
show you those Terms of Natural Issue, to have been used to signify in your
Law writings, lawful Children: or else (what so ever their words shall be) you
plainly see, they have herein played the very ones, even with her, whom they
pretend so much to adore.

Well, having now brought your Q. to this, Your Q. defenses taken from her.
that neither by children of her own body, nor by any Heir known they feel^
any impediment, nor stand in any fear: behold, how now they come nearer unto
her, even to the plucking of her principal feathers. He that inte^deth to
stock up a tree by the root, does first hew and dig away, what so ever
defenses of earth^ stone, or wood do grow or lie about the stemine.

A Princes chief defense must be granted to consist chiefly in foresight of
his peril by wisdom: in force of faithful frinds to resist it, and in fear
of Heirs to revenge it. And now behold, how the principallest of all these are
by fine arts and devises pared and weeded away from your Queen.

Was there any man in that Land for Sir Nicol^s Throgmorton.
for wisdom, more circumspect, forecasting, and of deeper foresight: of
counsel, more inuentiue, or of better consideration, then was Sir Nicolas
Throgmorton^ And is not ^e finely weeded away from her?

The Duke of Norfolk.
who in all her services was so zealous and assured, and who with frinds and
force was so well hable to defend her, as was the Duke of Norf? And mark you
now the art, by which he is also pared away from her.

The Q. of Scotland.
so nere unto her, to succeed her, in the world, and so ready and hable to
revenge any violence offered her, as was the Queen of Scotland? And behold,
whether she be not also weeded away from her: made sure enough, I mean, from
persecuting any injury that shall be offered to your Q. and brought into that
state, that the offerers may be out of all fear of her. Yea rather see,
whether they both, as mother and daughter, be not subject and in peril to
receive one end (though not in one place, nor perhaps at one time) as did the
two Hargills, Father and Son.

If Q. Elizabeth the widow of King Examples.
Edward ye fourth in th'apprehensions of the Lords Rivers and Graies, did
wisely and truly foresee the destruction of the young King her son: can not
this Q. Elizabeth the Daughter of King Henry ye eight (being a Paragon of
wisdom among women) foresee, what is toward her self, when the Duke of
Norf. and Throgmorton be taken from her? And did the other Q. a widow forsee,
ye death of her Son to hasten and approach, when his young brother and Heir
might be suffered no where, but in the murderers hands: and can not this Queen
now (though a Uirgin for state, yet a widow for wisdom) forsee, how near her
own end draws, when her Heir is already in the hands of them, that have
circumuented her self to extinct her own Line, and have procured the others
deprivation with the slaughter already of her husband and servant? Does Queen
Marie of Scotland now plainly see, what James meant toward her, when he
abused her so much as to make her deprive her self of the Earl of Huntley:
and will not Q. Elizabeth of England, by so fresh and manifest an example, be
taught to see, what Sinon means toward her, that circumuenteth her so much,
as to make her to deprive her self of her Cousin of Norf?

Her defenses removed, her impug^ers are secure.
Who about your Q. has the head (now Throgmorton is gone) to meet with Sinons
shrewd head, in ye foresight of her safety, or in espiyng his false crafts? Who
about her has the force, the frinds and zeal also, to defend her person, and
to resist these Catilines malice, now the Duke of Norf. is gone? against them,
I mean, that have made them selves so strong. And who shall call those
Caitifes to account (whiles the Q. of Scotl. remains in their powers, or when
she shall be dead) for the force and oppression, that they shall offer your Q.
which imminently now hangs over her head?

The Scottish Prince is an Infant, so (as bysides the hope they have to make
him away to) sure they think they are, by the death of yours, to reign and
^nioie their Dominion, whiles he is within age, at leas^: and in ye time so to
prepare also, that he shall never come to full age. To leave therefore the Q.
of Scotl. in this manner a prisoner, at these men's order and devotions to be
made away at every sudden, is a plain promise and assurance to them of al
security and indemnitie, for murdering of your Qu^ene her self.

As the Queens of Scotl. life therefore is your Queens preservation: and her
strength, and good state, is your Q. surety and assurance: even so is the end
of the Q. of Scotl. life, the entry and beginning of your Queens death, if
either History of things past, or probable judgment of things present may
suffice to tell and teach her the truth of her own state at this day.

And having now compassed in this manner the extincting of the House and Line of
England, Now against the Line of Scotl.
and brought it even to the brinke to be finally ended at every sudden, when
them selves list (and which has by likelihood no long time to tarry, now Norf.
is gone, and the Q. of Scotl. ready to be gone after him): let us now s^e and
examine some of these men's arts and attempts, by which they have assailed the
House and Line of Scotl. and how little that wants of utter extirpation and
rooting out also, that their way may be plain and smooth to the House of
Suffolk their own family.

Fi^e of the in^^nite Attempts against that Line.
For proof whereof I will not her^ deteine you with the rehersall of the sundry
atte^pts made unto your Q. sundry years past by Parliament, to have removed and
cut of that Family. Nor I will not hold you with remembrance of ye occasion
first taken, and quarrel picked, only upon an arms made in Scutchions, at a
Triu^ph in France: whereupon ensewed the subornation of ye whole Nobility of
Scotl. to revolt against their Sovereign, the inuasio^ with an Army into that
Country, the surprising of Lith, ye rasing of y^ walls and Bulwarks thereof,
ye expulsion of the French yt were y^ security of the Princes State, y^
barbaro^s ruin of all ye Monasteries, her subjects usurpation of y^ spiritual
possessions, and temporal Dominion: and by degrees af^erward, sundry slaughters
and murders, new invasions with English forces, the imprisonment of her person,
her exp^lsio^ from her state, and other Tragedi^s many, of which the end is
not yet seen.

With these, I say, I shall not deteine A pike put between the 2. Que^es.
but begin I will with remembering unto you the assured amity and vnf^ined
frindship that was between your Q. and her from the time of her return out of
France, being a widow, until her marriage with the Lord Darley. Which amity
continewing so many years with so many evident tokens of sincere meaning on
both sides: I would now demand, what just cause of your Queens fear, or
mislike any man could see in that match and marriage. Only this, every man may
see, was contained therein: that whereas before she was without Children, and
these Catilines thereby assured, that with her own life her Line should
finish: by this marriage now they found them selves prevented of that hope,
whereupon ensewed so cruel a persecution against ye Q. and her husband, as
gives evidence to al men, that her chief offense was, in providing by marriage
to have laufull Succession.

Again, The ^onfed^r^tes ambition to reign.
being before her marriage in all matters of State subject to Ieames the Bastard
(a third confederate Catiline with these two) whereby their monstrous Impe of
womanish and lay Primacie newly planted, did spring and take root in both
Realms: when she now with her marriage began to take ye Regiment into her
own hands, and to discover her self to be Catholikly inclined, these two
points so pierced and struck these Catilines to heart, that the feud thereof is
deadly and implacable for ever.

For if she could have been content, still to have enjoyed the name of Q. only,
and with her own life to have ended her line (as your Q. gives them hope yt
she will do for her part) and would still have suffered her Bastard Brother to
have reigned and ruled both her, and her Realm, as his Co^federats yet do
yo^rs: they had, no doubt, permitted her much longer, then they did.

But when she had now by her marriage discovered her inte^tion and meaning to be
so fla^ly repugnant and contrarious to theirs, albeit to every wise and honest
man's sight, that marriage had been your Q. security: behold, how than was
renewed unto your Q. memory the buri^d matter of the Arms made in France, and
great dangers and fears pretended now again, and often, and suttelly laid
before her. And thereupon new Ambassadors and Messengers sent into Scotland
thick and threefold, A badge of Synons.
with letters and arrants of one sense to the Queen, and secret Commission of
contrary practice to I^ames the Bastard and his confederates.

Then went new Plats and Devises to raise new rebellions: and they repressed,
the Rebels in England succored, by in^reatie from thence reconciled, money and
pensions secretly promised, aied and succor ready prepared, her husband won
to join with her enemies, and to consent to the murder of her Counselors:
and he no faster won to this, then other were wrought to dispatche him: he
abused with the bait to have the State to himself: and they with the promises,
that she should be enforced to marry the unknown murderer, when her husband
were killed. Then her person imprisoned, and after their manner deposed:
imprisoned, I say, first among her own traitorously, and then among you (to
whom she fled for succor) unnaturally.

Infamies against the Q. of Scotland.
that lies also in their way) out went than Books and Libels, Letters, and
Songs, Rimes and Talks at every table: yea by tongues of Authority to spot
her honor, to reproach and defame her for an Aduoutresse, a murderer, a
Papist, a Competito^r of your Croune, and whatsoever else could be Her
dishe^ison by Parliament.
forget not, how vehemently she was pre^sed (even at y^ iumpe) by whole
Parliamentes two or three, one in an others neck, to declare her Heir in
succession of the Croune: in hope, that if then they might have obtained your
Q. consent thereunto, it had not ben uneasy (as they had made their parts in
both Houses) to have set both her and her son byside the Cussion.

That devise taking none effect neither, behold now an other, I wot not whether
more impudently false, or more insatiably malicious. For having by plain
rebellion deprived her of her State, and otherwise iniuried her with y^ most
loathsome and odious wrongs, that y^ Devil of hell could devise: An other badge
of his.
they now write and print out to ye world, that she is a Competitor of your
Croune, an enemy to your Q. a raiser of rebellio^s, a shedder of English
blood, a caller in o^ foreine forces, and finally charge her with conspiring
and intending of the very same mischiefs against your Q. (who never tasted
jot of them) yt herself has received through ye suggestio^s of these Synons
at your Q^ hands. Which is a manifest and invincible argument, Treason t^ both
the Crou^es.
respecting the considerations of her person and theirs (she being by birth
inheritable to ye Croune, of which they be borne subjects) that they mean to
deprive her of her State and life too.

An other plat also of the same kind is, The betraying of Nor^.
specially being remembered, in what credit, honor, and reputation he was even
with these Caitifes, until he disco^ered himself to owe some affection y^ way,
and to yield to the motions made unto him for marriage with her. Which proceeding
first from your Nobility and Council, and by them al (in effect) so well liked
and allowed of, was, no doubt, so maturely ^igested: that there was nothing
possibly to be found in it by any honest meaning man, that could any way have
prejudiced your Q. but sundry ways have strengthened and advanced her
security.

But these Catilines, and those Councillors looking with far different and
unlike eyes: these upon the Queen, and Realm, and right Succession: and they
upon themselves, and their private traitorous mark, made, as you s^e, far
diverse and unlike constructions. Whereupon (for their credit with your Prince
above the others) has ensewed all this late lamentable Tragedy: out of which
marriage no indifferent man alive of common sense and intendme^t could have
sucked^ nor wrested any doubt, fear, or suspicion toward your Q. respecting
what was to be considered in the person of the man, and in the state of the
woman: she your Queens near Co^yn, expulsed from her State, and so
imprisoned in her custody, that her personal liberty, the recovery of her
Realm, her marriage, and whatsoever else should happily follow after, was al to
be received at your Queens hands, with what conditions and assurance so^uer
herself would have demanded: and he your Queens nearest kinseman, of power
best hable to serve and defend her, in readiness and affection thereto, well
proved to be inferior to none, a mere subject of England, no way allied to
any foreign Prince, in Religion than a Protestant undoubted, and yet also, if
the great ingratitude of these injuries has not lately by grace opened the
eyes of his heart. So as no color of cause remains of mis^iking that match,
other then, that the same might have turned to the preservation and safety of
that Q. and her succession, longer, then these Catiline Caitiues do intend
she shall li^e.

It would be to long a work, Comp^risons between this Tragedy ^ that of K.
Richard the third.
to pervse in this manner all the points attemted against her by these
Machiauellians, that do breath and spire out their fatal malice toward her. To
be therefore as brief as I can, I shall put yo^ in mind of the last Tragedy of
like nature and quality wrought among your selves, by K. Richard ye third, as
the Stories make mention: compassed by like fraudulent, imp^dent, and
mo^str^ous means, and ended with that Tyrannical and blouddy success, that
this also threateneth and plainly porte^deth.

Uouchafe therefore with your self to compare the manner and form, how ye
terrible mischief was contri^ed and wro^ght by steps and degrees, from a far
time, before the end thereof appeared: with the manner and form of proceeding
toward these great Princes, and other Noble personags now. And so shall
thou, I doubt not, see so much therein, as shall suffice to show thee in thine
own co^cept, the whole substance and effect of yt I mean to say in my next
volume, if occasion shall require. And for thy help therein among ye infinite
resemblances that may justly be made between yt Tragedy and this, I shall put
the in mind but of some few, to induce ye rest yt better unto thine own
memory.

Begin thou therefore with ye pike that was put in the life of king Edward the
fo^rth, and the stomach and tooth yt was fead and maintained all his time
between ye two kinreds of him self and his wife. And unto yt lay thou this
suspicion now put, and this Division now wrought by false persuasio^s, between
your Q. yt now is, and yt Q. of Scotl. her next Cousin and heir appare^t.

Remember yt fine devises, and far fet policies D. of Clarence.
upon prece^se pf preue^ting the danger of his Children, and the troubles of
his Realm: but meant in deed, as to weed away yt person, that the deuisers of
yt Treason did foresee, might, and would be th'impediment of their final
p^rpose. And compare thou that unto the sundry notable personages already made
away (I will not say by your Q. co^mandme^t directly, but all the world
witnesses it to be by their practice, yt have used her name and Authority to
those plats and devises) I mean, yt several destructions of the Dukes of Norf.
D. of Norf.
and Guise, D. of Guise.
yt L. Huntley, L. Huntley.
the Lord Darley, L. Darley.
the Archbishop of S. Andrews, Archbishop of S. Andrews.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Throgmorton.
and of David the Secretary: David.
and the neernes there unto of others yet ly^ing, God knows how little while
they shall. For let no man look for long life, that stands in their way, if
God prevent them not.

L. Ryuers

L. Graies.


Sir Thomas Uaghan, Sir Tho. Uaghan.
and the reast of the Q. kindred than, with the soft and mild speeches at the
first made of them, and sundry comfortes given them, that al should be well: to
blind and stay the multitude for a time, from seeing that at the first, that
shortly followed after. Compare thou that (I say) with the first apprehensions
of the Duke of Northfolke, Norf.
the Earls of Arundel and Penbrooke, ^rund.

Pemb.


the Lord Lumley and the reast, Lu^^^y.
with the quiet smoothing over of the same again for two years time, til now:
and their deaths, to the deaths of them, that are yet to die, before this
Tragedy shall take his full effect.

Libelles and Pamphlets printed and published against the other now, how they
would have destroyed your Q. brought in foreine forces, taken London, invaded
Ireland, yea and then have proceeded to further things (says the Libel) not
expedient yet to be uttered.

Remember the Queen than a widow, Q. Elizabeth than, Q. Marie now: widows
de^^^ed.
of being an harlotte, of killing her husband, of raising Rebellions, and I
wot not what bysides: to bring the people to hate her, that for her rare honor
and virtue have worthily loved her.



That Kings brother th^^, ^ this Q. son now.
to get the yo^ger Lamb into the woulfes mouth, was a supposition, that the
Mother intended to send him over the sea, to the great dishonor of the
Nobility, and to the great discomfort of the little King his brother, that
lacked him for a plaifellow, and other like Arguments: against which nothing
could satisfy, til the innocent were in the murderers hands. And compare this
to the surmise alleged in this Libel, that the Prince of Scotland should have
been conveyed into Spain: and to the infinite practices and devises used to
get him into their hands in England, that have already both the person of his
Mother in prison, and your Q. also at their government and devotion: and whose
thirst nothing can quench, whiles either mother, or son remains alive.

Mark you, how al those motions and pretenses then were covered with the
iustest and most plausible shows, that could be devised: to wit, with the
Kings security and comfort, with the honor of the Nobility, with preuentio^
of troubles to the Realm, and with all good meaning to every man bysides: til
their heads were of, that were desperate to be won to the final Treason
intended. And compar^ the same to the af^able and plausible apparences now,
that pretend nothing but your Q. security, whom them selves have
endaungered, if any danger be toward her: that pretend her hono^r, whom they
have dishonored, by abuse of her name and authority, more than ever they are
hable to recover: that pretend, to prevent the troubles of the Realm, who have
in deed begone to bring it into mo troubles, both foreine and domestical,
than they be hable to end, or bring it o^t of aga^^: that pretend, to defend
the Realm from invasion of foreiners, who have already so pestered it with
such infinite numbers of Strangers, to serve a private turn of their own, as
since the Conquest was never seen in that Realm: and that pretend the safety
of London and general liberty of the Realm, when they have brought

Let the example of the Bishop of York and Eli^, B. of York.

B. of Ely.


of the Lords Hastings, L. Hastings
Stanley, L. Stanley and all ye o^de Council.
and others, who not knowing the end finally meant, had been instruments with
and for the secret hidden Traitors in the overthrow of the Q. kindred, and in
helping to bring the matter toward some ripenes, against whom there was no
color of quarrel, other then their own honor, virtue, and fidelity, that
showed them not likely to be won to so foul a Treachery, when it should
come to be revealed: Let this example, I say, (joined unto the unjust
captivity of the Earls of Arundel, Worcester and Sowthampton, of the Lords
Cobham and Lumley, the B. of Rosse, with so many other Knights and Gentlemen
imprisoned at this present, for the very same cause and none other) be a
pattern and president unto some others of the Nobility now, that yet think
themselves full safe, and in the matters now in hand do go on and join with
the r^ast (for the fair pretenses and shows made) as not sauouring the filthy
fine intended.

Let them, I say, Shreusbury

Darby.

Sussex.

Huntington.

Bedforde.

Le^cester, and the rest.


(as safe as now they think them selves) look at the end, for the end yt the
others had: vnle^se they can in the mean while win so much of themselves by
little and little, as when the end shall appear, headlong to tumble down with
the reast into the depth of al dishonor and infamy of deposing their just
Princes, to their own perpetual reproach, and utter extirpation of their
succession for ever.



with the like deaf ear given then to the one, and now to the other.

Behold likewise the instruments Shaw.
nor now no Sampsones. Sampson.
Among the Lawyers there wanted than no Catisbees, Catisby.
nor now no Nortons. Norton.
And as a Duke of great dignity, D. of Buck.
wisdom, eloquence, courage and authority in the Realm was than found out,
to advance and solicit that unnatural enterprise, as chief of the Council,
highest in rule, and principal Officer under the Prince than: even so have you
one or two now, so far from Dukes borne, that they be the first Gentlemen
of their Genealogy, who for wisdom and wealth, for alliance now and
creditte, for eloquence of tongue, for authority with your Prince, and for
reuenew also, being equal or superior to your Noblest of birth, and the
chief Councillors and Magistrates of your present government, that are the
Capital contriuers of this treason now in hand.

Brake^bury,
a noble Shrewsbury has been found now, Shreusbury
of whom neither than, nor now, any hope could be had, to make them y^
slaughtermen of such a shambles: even so for a Caitif Knight found out than,
to whom Brakenburie must render the keys of those Innocents: I could name you
an other Knight found out now, to whom Shrewsburie must yield the custody
of this Queen. But whiles the choice is his own to relent unto, or resist so
vile a villainy: I will not do him the injury (before his desert) by name to
resemble him to Boutcherly Tirell.

incorporated, do a couple of Catilines now all this that they do.

The pretenses alleged both of that,

Finally, as that practice ended by K. Ed. the fourth th^^^ Q. Eliz. now.
so this devise must finish in ending the Impes of king Henry the eight, when
the last Line has been made the mean, to waste and weed away all those,
that first should follow and succeed it. In the ^oresight whereof, be not
abused, neither by fair speeches, that pretend better, nor by the difference
of the ways used thereunto. For what variety so ever is in the ways and
means used to any one thing: (if the fine and end be one) the fish pardie is
caught, for which the net was laid.

And therefore if your Queen by art and cunning be wrought to finish and
extin^te her own Fathers Line, by want of Issue of her own. body, under
pretense of politic reserving her marriage, as a trumpe in store against all
events, and by violence and force to extirpe the other Line of her eldest
Aunte, under pretense of her own security: the end of both two, thou see,
is one, and ^ath made the way plain, to the pestilent purpose finally
intended.

Now this correlation and comparison of that Story past, with this Tragedy
present, being e^larged (in a wisemans consideration) with infinite other
parts, wherein the same may aptly be resembled and do answer each other,
having showed the one already to have extirped the Issu^ and Line of king
Edward the fo^rth, and the other now to tend to the rooting out of all the
Heirs of your blood Royal, (as well them, that may yet come of King Henry
the eighthes body and Line, as all ^he r^as^ that are already descended from
his eldest Sister Margaret married to the king of Scotl.) that may claim
before the Issue and line of Marie his younger Sister, now called the House of
Suffolk, unto which the two Capitaines of this Coniuration have united them
selves, and incorporated their Successions: Prou^sions, for the house of
Suffolk.
if thou shall vouchesafe unto this (well kept in memory) to add also the
politic and abundant pro^isio^ made for the continuance and establishment of
that third Line and Family: this end (I doubt not shall appear so clear unto
thee, that though thou would wink and close thine eyes against it, thou
shall palpably feel it, and fall upon y^ account of it, whether thou will, or
no.

Begin therefore with remembering, how little it failed, that that Family had not
set both your Q. and her Sister bysides the Cushion, in the year 1553. And
let your Q. own wisdom inform her, whether her own entry at first, and
reign ever sinces could have been (by common judgment) so quiet as they were,
if that family had standen in the same full force and hope at the death of her
Sister, in which it stood at ye death of her Brother, or unto which it is now
restored again.





the Question, by the traueill of Rob. Beale, in the year. 1563. and procured
by the counsel of these two Catilines, and is reserved in secret, to serve the
turn, when the day comes.

Consider with this, the Books and

Behold, how the Princes displeasure

Consider again the severity used, to how for that cause only ye priuileged
person of an Ambassador, against the Law of Nations, had hands laid on him,
remains yet prisoner, his servant tormented, and betrayed in close prison,
and both yet threatened and endangered of their lives: and look withal, how
your own mouths are stopped, and your ears are closed, and your hands tied
among your selves, every one from speaking, hearing, or writing mutually one to
an other, in ye defense or advancement, of ye Honor or Right of any of ye
House, and how freely with favor and thanks, every man may speak and write what
he will in prefere^ce of ye other.

at all shall be named or known: whiles these of the younger House (for their
authority with your Q.) have the judgment and jurisdiction, with terro^r to
stop all mouths, yt shall speak or write of ye right of ye elder house, and
with all severity do it, and have like power to wink at, to excuse and reward
all those, yt shall set forth the younger, which also they do.

Than consider, how the Captain Catiline

Behold also, how the Duke of Northfolke of that younger Line now of Suffolk
was honored and esteemed by these two Catil^nes, and his credit every way
advanced and commended for many years together, whiles they nothing doubted,
to have him (for kindred sake) the principal Pillar and head of their Faction.
And lay that to the depth of all deiection and disgrace, that forthwith and
sodei^ly he was turned and tumbled into as soon as ^u^r he had g^^en show of
his affection, to unite and ioin^ him sel^^ (in a n^erer man^r of union) unto
the elder House of Scotland.

with the blood Royal: and now looks by the fourth alone to make the band
stronger, then by the other three: if he may, I mean, bring his purpose to
pass of wasting and weeding all away, yt are between them and the Regal
Seat. Then is he sure, still to govern and reign, which is the point, that
chiefly he aspire^h to. Then shall he be sure, to keep his lands and goods
corruptly gotten, whereof he stands in doubt and fear. Then shall his
succession be Coosins to the Croune, and annumbred among the noblest: what more
afterward, who wotteth yet?

Many other provisions might be here remembered, made by these Machiauelles for
their own assurance, to the evident prejudice and contempt of your Prince, to
ye danger of her Crown and State, and threatening plainly the ruin of your
Realm: but that my purpose for this time has been, rather (by showing some
few things in brief manner) to induce your selves to the larger sight and
memory of mo, than to dilate these matters Historically, till they shall be
somewhat riper, and more fully fallen out.

Now therefore that you have seen but the shadow, as it were, or a few brief
Notes of that monsterous Massa that might be showed you of the Tragical
Treasons and false sleights daily put in ure and committed among you: I shall
leave ye reast to be collected by your own wisdoms, not doubting but yt if
with leisure ye vouchsafe to look depely into these few memories here laid
before you, they shall suffice to bring much more to your own minds (yt are in
your own Countr^is affairs more informed and better exercised) than I (yt am
but a stranger among you) can come to know, or dare yet express.

Let deeds and not word^s, be judge.
And that which I have said, reasting (as you see) not in meanings only, nor in
devises and determinations alone (as all the sclanderous accusations of these
Princes alleged in this Libell do consist) but being things put in ure and
execution, as every man knows: it shall b^houe you, like wise men, so to
deem of the meaning and judge yt intent, not as deceiuable words may abuse
and g^eue show, but as the facts do purporte and minister cause. By which line
and square if ye measure your judgments, ye shall than easily discern, not
only the vanity of the several accusations of this Libell in them selves, and
the truth of the particular Answers made unto e^erie of them aparte: but also
the fatal feude and deadly malice, from whence those surmises ar^ risen and
sprung: to wit, from the roots of Ambition and malice only, whose nature being
insatiable, it never ^easteth, whiles any matter remains, whereon it may
work.

And therefore do the Q. of Scotland what she will, Neither innocence, nor
ouerture can avail the Q. of Scotl.
offer what she can, and be she whatsoever she may be: wise men think, and
long have said, yt she sees not y^ woorst, but the best of her State, whiles
these two Catilines sit at the Stern of your common Wealth: whom nothing will
satisfy, whiles ought lies in the way between them and their mark. But what
so^u^r tends to prevent that end yt they shoot at, as I have showed you,
must be turned and termed dangerous to your Q. tending to Rebellion, moving
troubles to the State, seditio^s, and sclanderous, and I wot not what bysides,
as by this Libell appears.

And who soever is foreseen not likely to be woonne, to be an instrument and
mean to advance that end of theirs: be he what so ever by nature, by d^etie
or affection, never so ne^re to your Queen by blood, never so dear a frinde,
never so faithful a subject, never so affectionate a servant, yea or by grace
never so sincere of life: he must, and shall be persecuted with fire and sword,
and either by sudden murder taken away, or by false accusations condemned,
defamed and brought into disgrace, as a Traitor, Conspirator, Rebel and
sclaunderous ^ower of seditions, and finally wasted, and weeded away by one
mean or other: as by these Noble Princes, the nearest of your Q. blood, the
most affectionate unto her, of any two y^ live, I dare say, and by the reast
of your Nobility and Gentlemen now fled, imprisoned, and otherwise defaced,
(no few in number, if they be well marked) does manifestly appear.

And now that you have also seen (sensibly I trust, A glass presented to the
Queen.
though succintly touched) some of those other great Treasons (for hard it were
to tell you of all) that are in deed daily committed among you, and little
espied, nor but by few discerned, for the plausible pretenses that they go
co^ered and disguised withal, for as much as the whole body and corpse of this
Co^iuration, and all the practices by which it is compassed (be they never so
impious in the sight of God, never so odious in the sight of man, never so
traitorous to your Q. never so dangerous to your Realm, never so loathsome to
him that has any spark of honesty left in him, nor never so manifest and
apparent to them that are not natural fools) are made yet to bear and carry
a face and show, like a right Sinons Horse, of a Sacrifice to your Pallas or
Diane, colored and painted, I mean, with the bright glistering titles of your
Queens service, safety, Honor and profit, and be as boldly published, and
as impudently auowed by books, Proclamations, by Letters of Authority to all
Countries and Courts, by open Orations, and secret subor^ations of whisperers
at home, to dasell the dim sighted ^ies, to claw the itching cares, and to
fill the hungry mouths of y^ babbling multit^de, as if all were meant and
intended only for her quietness, honor and security in her Seat: and by this
bright shining show and pleasant sound do the sooner deceive both her self and
every other good subject bysides (for every honest man must needs allow all
careful provision for a Princes surety, and few are so de^pe sighted, that
they can look through the timber or wood, to see what is hidden in the hollow
horse within): for as much also, as this terrible Tragedy seems not yet so
nigh to his end, but that there are many plaiers not yet comme to the Stage,
that are like to play blooddy parts in the same (for of the blossoms already
showed yo^, the fruits must be looked for, as the harvest time of this sowing
season that you have seen) and because the losses and detriments thereof
partly are, and more will be irreco^erable and above all recompense, if it go on
vnpreuented in time (for, bysides many other, what can counteruaile or restore
the infinite ruins that go comprehended in displacing of Princes, and in
wresting ye Succession of Crowns from their dew course?) and prevented it can
not be, whiles the mischeuous mystery remains unperceived, and while you
harken still to the Syrenes song, that this Horse of Sinons sounds without
forth, and do not harken nor attend to know, what treason to Troy he
brings in his bosom: for as much likewise, as the most principal, and of all
other the most pernicious art used to compass and to contriue this Treason,
and that never wants nor is absent from any part or practice thereof,
rests and consists chiefly in abusing your Queen with lies, fables and
false persuasions, some finely forged, and other gross enough, so heaped yet,
and thick laid out, one in an others neck, and every one so boldly
bolstering out other, that the very impudency and copious fludde of them
deceives many modest minds, that without great trial and long experience,
can not ween it were possible, that all should be so false, as they are, being
laid out by any that bears the face of a reasonable man: And finally, for as
much as no live can be a iuster measure to deem or divine of things unseen
and undone, then is the observation of things past, nor no credit being more
equally dew, or attributed to any man's words or deeds, that are obscure, to
come, or of doubtful event, then answerably to his former faith and honesty,
and as he has in other words and deeds appeared to deserve: I have upon
these considerations thought it necessary here to conclude, with laying before
you, or rather (in speaking to you) by presenting to your Q. some few images or
looking glasses, as it were, drawn out of the matters before remembered.

Wherein, and by which (if she vouchesafe to consider them) she shall, as in
patterns or samplers of things done and past, plainly see and discern, not
only what is ^o come, and to be looked for hereafter: but the very truth also
of her own, and your Stat^s pr^sent as they are, which it passingly imports
both her and your selves, and your Nobility most of al, nakedly to behold
without veil or visard, and to be no longer abused nor deceived, as you have
been in the sight and judgment of your own affairs, but that you may by
li^ely preside^ts of things freshly past, wisely and in time foresee what is
coming: that being warned, you may be half armed: that by other men's harms
you may provide to be harmless, and that you may rather prevent the wound,
before you receive it, then seek to salve it, when it shall be to late.

This art of abusing you by lies, The sight of ye truth preserves your Q.
this crafty circumuention of your Queen by false and subtle arguments, making
both her and you all to ween, your form of Governance to be far other then it
is, making you believe, your doings and proceedings to be otherwise deemed of,
then they are, persuading you, that the world abroad is blinded and abused by
your words and pretenses, as most of your own are at home, terming that to be
your Queens Honor, that is her manifest reproach, calling that her safety,
that is her evident danger, naming that to be for her service, that is every
way loss and dishonor unto her, prete^ding that to be for the common quiet of
the Realm, that is in deed the ^pparent confusion and ruin of the same, and
finally feining, that of your doings Foreine or Domestical you have not to
care, nor need not regard what any other Nation say or think, because you
are an absolute Monarchy within your selves: these, and such other wrong
conceiptes grounded upon fraudulent reasons and crafty arguments, being to
your own sightes and outward show, like deceiuable spectacles before your
eyes, that make white things appear green, and one thing, many, unto your
sightes: forasmuch as it were a plain injury to your Q. to preiudicate her
so much, as to think her so unnatural, as to be careless of her own Honor
and State present, of the prosperity of her Succession, of the quiet of her
people and Realm, and of the Noble fame and renoune of both in time to come,
when nature shall have exacted of her the tribute of this life (for that were as
much, as to condemn her of plain infidelity, Atheism, and more then Moorish
Ma^hometisme) and careless plain^ly must she be thought to be, both of the one
and the other, if being made to see the horrible outrages, the dangerous
detrimentes, and dishonorable infamies, that daily and hourly do spring and
appear in the particular practices of this Coniuration, both toward her
people, her Nobles, her nearest of blood, her own person and State, her
Posterity for ever, her fame among men, and to her soul before God: and
likewise, if having the great vaniti^ and deadly malice of the coueines and
crafts contrived to cloak the same withal, laid open before her, and made
plain unto her: if it were, I say, to much wrong to think, that yet she
would be careless to prevent them, or prefer the present and private, before
the remedy and provision for the common and perpetual: it shall not therefore
(I trust) be tedious nor fulsome to the indifferent Reader, that for conclusion
of this Pamphlet, I do assaie to lay open before her some few of the treasons
and practices before touched, nakedly, alone, and bare as they stand, and as
they be o^ themselves, without those lying couers and defenses, yt are laid
aloft over them: by seuering and removing them, I mean, from those false
additions, lewd and loud lies, that go over linked and joined unto them. To
the end, that both she, and your self may see them in their own likeness, as
other men do behold them, that you may look on them with like eyes, as other
men do, that you may judge of them, as the indifferent sort does, that you
may know them for such, as of truth they be, and that you may by them, as in
lively images and true looking glasses, see and discern all the rest: and
thereby leave at length, to deceive your selves, as long you have done, by
looking upon these matters with partial and affected sights, and by making a
far unlike judgment of them, unto that which all equal eyes do deem and
discern them to be: yea imagining them to be of a clean contrary shape and
form, from that, which they show to all the world bysides your selves: not
all unlike to them, that dancing naked in a net, suppose that no man sees
their unclean parts, which every man beholds and laugheth at. And that you
may yet in time (if you take hold of it) help and assist your Q. to deliver
her self of this long ^hraldome and abusion, wherein she lies tied hand and
foot, as it were, with lies, fables and painted words put upon such poisoned
deeds, as for their own vile substance would sh^tter, moulder and come to
nothing of themselves in every man's sight, if they had not those forged
persuasio^s mingled always with them as mortar or lime to hold them together:
and by which malicious mixture she is dragged and drawn to her own passing
detriment, and to the irreparable ruin of her Realm for ever.

1. And not to trouble you with many, The chang^ of Religion laid naked.
since the sight of a few may serve to make your own wisdoms to look for
the like in the reast that shall be showed you in these: turn again to behold
a little the first public action of these men's regiment, the violent
innovation of Religion: by Law, I mean. Whereof though I have at some length
treated already, and may therefore seem (to some perhaps) over often to
iterate one thing: yet shall I not long hold you therein, nor appear tedious, I
trust, to any indifferent Reader, that weyeth the importance, which this cause
carries in it, for so many diverse and sundry respects, as have not yet been
spoken of, nor can here be all remembered. Let that Change of Religion, I say,
be vewed by it self, stripped out of those vain fables, Lies stripped from it.
and idle lies, suggested to draw your Queen unto it.

And first, weed from it the untrue surmise, that said the Change was
convenient, because she could not assure her self of her Catholics, etc. as if
they, that having all in their hands, received and settled her in her State:
that ever since, I say (and for twelve years time no man will deny) have qui^tly
sustained manifest oppression in body and goods, evident abasement in honor
and credit, violence, pillage, and disgrace every way, without fault or
offense, or without foot or finger moo^ed against her, might with any reason or
color, be feared or mistrusted of Rebellion, if they had found favor and
justice.

2. C^t from it likewise that feined Devise, that said it was necessary against
the Scottish Title and French faction than etc. as if the ancient and
universal alienatio^ of al English hearts from those Nations specially: as if
the firm amity of the Catholic king of Spain well witnessed by his motion at
that time, to have married with your Queen, and well tried by his refusing to
conclude any peace with France in the year 1559. till England were satisfied
for Calice: as if the very policy of all his own Countries (truly testified
by the namelesse discourser of the intended marriage between the Queen of
Scotland, and the Duke of Norf.) as i^ the factions in Scotl. it self: and as
if the low state that France was then in (as appeared by their peace then taken
with so many dissad^antages) suffised not to show, how vain that suggestion
was, and how contemptible, the woorst that they could have done.

3. Take that lie also from it, that persuaded the Change to be requisite, to
satisfy and win the party Protestant at home, feined to be the stronger
faction etc. Which was than so far the weaker in deed, that none at all
appeared, neither member, nor Head, no nor Sinon him self, y^ than durst seem
to be of that side: and when the Catholics had in their hands the whole
Governance and Authority, the Navy, the Ports, the Armor, the Treasures,
the Offices of credit, assured also of the aid and support (if your Q. stood
indifferent) of the Sea Apostolic, of the King of Spain, and of him of France
also: who of purpose to attend the p^rging of his Realm from ye Protestant
pestilence (crept into his Country by long licentious wars) had even than
deerly bought his peace with Spain, as every man knows.

4. Pare from it also that lie and false art, that made your Queen believe,
that al Princes adjoining (to have the spoil of their Churches) would follow
her example in that attempt, etc. Whereas manifest experience has taught every
man, not only that no one will follow her: but also that both the chief, that is
to say, they of Spain and France, have consumed their treasures, have
bestowed the lives and blood of their Subjects in great numbers, both by
battle and justice, and have sustained al personal peril and danger of their
States: rather then they would admit that Atheism into their Countries. And
look on Denmark, Germany, Swetia, Polonia and Moscouiato, if you will: and
see whether any one of them all can be induced by her example, to go one jot
further foreward, then they were before.

Yea, look on all the free Cities of Eastland, or else where, and on Hamborow
it self, where they preach publikly, that who so lodges any man of the
English Religion, is an host unto Satan, and lodges a Devil in his house.
And against their impudency, that will say all these Countries and Cities last
named were of your Religion before, and be all one with you: let their Churches
decently adorned with images, let their Altars standing, let their doctrine of
Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, let the use of Auricular Confession,
of Private Mass, of Latin Service, and of infinite other points of the old
Religion permitted to all that will: let every gate of their Cities, every
high way in their Countries, decked with Crucifixes, and Crosses, being all
public marks, and known differences between their Religion and yours: let
them, I say, give ^^idence, and ^estifie, not only that no Prince nor lauful
Magistrate in Europe has followed her example: but also that never any yet did
lead her the way, in that exorbi^^nt course, I mean, that she has been
misseledde to run.

5. Se^er it also from that smooth and sweet lying speech, pretending, that
they meant not to constrain any man's conscience, forsooth, neither to force
any manne to comme to their Sects, till Godde, pardie, should draw him: nor
to leave and lack the use of his own Religion in quiet and priua^e manner,
etc. whereas within less then one ^eare they expelled all the Religions of the
Realm, that would live in their Order or Habit: they took away their ho^ses
and lands without color of cause, and forthwith after deprived the
Bisshoppes and Clergi^, removed the Laity (al in effect) from Queen, from
Council, from cre^i^^^, and Office, in Court and in Country.

And of the reast since let the sundry imprisonmentes, arainements,
amerceamentes, and other public punishments of al sorts of Catholics, yea
of wi^owes and women, only for hearing Mass in a corner, let the multitude of
them that are called up by process, that remain in bands, that are fled,
hidden, and in prison, for not taking the Oath and Communion, and for not
coming to sermons and service: yea, let the pining deaths in stinking
prisons, of al your old Clergy (in effect) that neue^ made fault: let these, I
say, speak and declare, what meaning there was hidden under those sugared
shows.

6. Lay aside also from it that idle plea and forged defense, that will ascribe
the quie^nes of your Queens Reign hitherto unto that innovation and change of
Religion, etc. since every man knows, that by the Catholics only she
entered, by them only she was placed, by them established and confirmed in
her Royal Seat, and by them chiefly obeyed and maintained ever since:
chiefly, I say, by them, who are well known to be most in number, and
strongest party yet, if she stood indifferent.

Yea, who sees not plainly the contrary? to wit, that by that Change she gave
unto her Adversary king Henry of France a manifest advantage against her, such
as must needs increase ye allowance of his quarrel, and decaie the force of her
defense, to the dubbling of ^er danger and trouble? For though the several
deaths of two French Kings in so short time as could not be looked for, did
abetter the s^quele of that rash attempt more than could be hoped of: yet does
that event following nothing commend the temeritie of that fact and Counsel
preceding: so as every man of common sense must ne^des confess, that ye
quietness of her reign is more to be attributed to Gods secret ordinance, to
the peaceful nature of the greatest Princes in her time, and to the loiall
fidelity and conscience of her Catholics: then to the temerarious and wilful
mutations made by her Machiauellians.

7. 8. Take from it also those two manifest lies, that pretended the Change to
be for conscience sake, and for truth of the doctrine, etc. as if the old faith
o^ the Church from Christ's days to your own, and the general faith of your
own, and all other Nations, y^ ever professed Christ's name, had been false
and erroneous. And as if they could be said to have conscience in Religion,
that have no one Religion: but that like the mutable Chamelion (that lives
without substance, by ai^r only, and changes his color to what so ever it
stands on, white only excepted) have for substantial Religion, certain
imaginatiue opinions: which they alter with every time they live in, the time
of truth excepted, and do daily pass and change from one sect, to an other, in
such manner, that now after xiiij. years end, no man yet wotteth, which sect
shall prevail?

And who sees not, that, what so ever your words are, your deeds do convince,
that to be a manifest lie, even from the beginning? For did you not even at
first prohibit all Catholic preachings? Did you not by bands tie the
Catholics specially from al private writing and speaking against your Heresy?
Did you not close them up in prison, and keep them in co^^^ituted houses,
because they should not dwell among your people, l^ast by their words or
examples they might stay the multitude in the Catholic faith? Does not your
prohibition of al books written against your doctrine, and your extreme
punishments inflicted for having, keeping or reading of them, plainly implie
and convince: that your selves than did, and yet do se^ and know, that your
doctrine is false, and not hable to abide trial of learning? Yea did not
Grindall^ Parker, Pilkinton and some other confess the same to some yet living
witnesses by th^se express words: that (what so ever y^ truth were) being now
beg^nne, it must be gone thorough withal for credit and reputations sake?

9. Remove it also from that flattering lie, by which the Parasits and
clawbacks bare your Q. in hand, yt by the change of Religion, she should clear
ye question of her Mothers marriage, and of her own legitimation. etc. whereas
clean contrarily she raised and revived thereby ye buried question and scruple
thereof: which time had so put to silence, and bro^ght in oblivion, that neither
was her self, nor her interest to her Crown any way prei^diced by that^ in
the opinion of subject at home, nor of friend abroad. But on the other side,
by that mutation offensive to so many: her Fathers life and manners, her
Mothers marriage and death, yea her own bir^h and conversation is made the
subject and ma^ter of much secret talk at home among ^er own, and of more
open speech and penning every where abroad.

Tenthly, yt the Minister lack not one lie for his tithe, strip it out of that
couein and crafty lie, that bare you in hand at first, that ye change was no
change nor repugnancie in Religion: but yt both were one in substance and
effect, and that both parts might be saved well ynowgh, because they believed in
one Jesus Christ, etc. And see what your Ministers tell you now, and whether in
their pulpits any crime be exclamed on co^parably to y^ old faith and religion.
Yea see, whether open adultery, professed usury, purposed perjury, sacril^ge,
incest, slaughter of Priests, murder of Catholics, marriage of brother and
sister together, or ought else be punnishable equally to the confession of the
Catholic faith.

And can these two Religions be called one in effect, whereof the one teaches
that to be Idolatry, and the high way to hell: that the other does adore, as ye
chiefest outward Honor, Sacrifice, and service, that man can do, or give to
God in this life? And can that be called one in effect, whereof who so
professes ye Affirmative, shall die as a Traitor, by ye rigor of this your
new law^ and he that professes ye Negative, go^^h demned for an Heretic, by
your own and all other old laws of Christendom? Et sic de caeteris. For ye
differences be mo, then can be expressed: more repugnant, then white and
black: and more notorious, then a man's nose in his face.

These examples now sufficing to show you the vanity, the absurdity, the
false sleights, and malicious arts used to draw your Q. unto yt change: and the
discovery also and disproufe of them, resting not in words and affirmations,
but proved by time, and consisting in facts, which can deceive no man, being a
just balance, in, and by which you may measure and wey all the other
fraudulent reasons and crafty arguments suborned unto her, to wind her into
the reast, and may be assured to find them like unto these that you have heard:
laying them apart, I say, from that mutation and change (as your reason, I
suppose, sees cause to do) let us now return alitle to behold that
innovation, as it stands, alone by itself, and without this false furniture,
which you have heard: that the change may appear to yourselues in the own
similitude and same form, in which it shows it self to every other man,
that has common sense, and stands indifferent: whom your Sinons can not
bleare and blind, nor deceive with sugared terms put upon unsavory things, as
they have done your Queen, and all the reast almost, of your own at home.

Being aparted therefore from them, The true Anatomy of the ^ew Religion.
see now, how this change looks, and what it is of it self. A change it is,
made from one Religion that you had, unto an appearance of many, and to none at
al in deed. From ancient, unto new, if any be: from universal and common, to
private and singular: from that, which had the uniform consent of yourselues
at home, and of all the chief Christian Nations of Europe bysides: unto that or
them, in which neither yourselues are agreed, nor no Monarchy Christened
agrees with you.

A change from a Religion governed by a just Monarchy, to a mo^struous
Policratie of so many heads, as there are Princes, yea of women Heads, of
children Heads and of popular heads: as though there were as many Gods, as
there be absolute Princes: and as if it were lauful, to have as many diverse
fourmes of regiment in the Church of God, which can be but one: as we may have
several policies in Civil Kingdoms, be they never so many.

A change from that, which was planted by poor Apostles, unto this, yt is
planted by the usurpers of Princes powers.

A change from that, which made Fisshers Apostles, unto this, that makes Friars
Apostatas.

A change from that, which was builded by preaching an^ persuading: unto this,
that is erected by plain cruelti^, and constraint. A change from that which
was spread through ye world at first, and ever since maintained by the written
Gospels and Epistles of selie, simple, weak, and base men: unto this, which by
Arcabusses and Pistolers o^ armed soldiars, is first intruded, and than
maintained euerywhere.

A change from that, which by no least penalty constrained any man to leave
the faith or Religion that he had: unto this, which by fear of Authority, by
commandments of Commissioners, by processes with sureties, by bonds and
other vexations, by fines, by Amerceamentes, by deprination from livings, by
turning out of Offices, by disgrace in Country, by defacement in Court, by
displeasure of the Prince, by loss of lands, by confiscatio^ of goods, by
personal imprisonment, Al ye Clergy left by Q. Marie.

B. Fissher.

Sir Tho.

More.

German

Gardener.

^owel.

Abel, Fethersto^, etc.


yea by sundry deaths, some long and lingering, other short and violent,
compels most men by word or by deed, in more or in less, to fall from the
faith in which they were baptized.

A change from that, which did draw no man unwillingly to it: unto this, which
by infinite viole^ces forces me^ to accept it: yea, makes them that by grace
and wisdom do abhor it, yet seem to allow it. A change from that, which by
ancient and general Laws corrected only those that would needs depart from
it, when they had freely first professed it: unto this, which by a new and
private law, yea before law, above law, and without law, punnisheth,
impouerisheth, imprisoneth, and every way oppresses them, that never accepted
it, nor yet allowed of it.

A change from that whose first fruits were to run into wildern^s, to forsake
the world and all the felicities of this life: unto this, whose first fruits
are, to rob Churches, to make Monks and Fri^rs to rob their Cloisters: the
vowed women, to run away with varlettes: the professed men, to steal away
lay men's wives and daughters, and to make them rob their husbands and fathers.

A change from that, whose Bishops and Priests promised chastity, and for
far the greatest number lived continent lives: unto this, whose Bishops and
Priests (if it have any) profess procreation, and many of them plurality of
wives. A change from that, which was served by the ministry of them, that had been brought up in learning, order and obedience: unto this, whose ministers are
made of Tinkers, Cobblers, Broomemen, Chimneisweepers, Canelrakers, and of the
basest in qualiti^, and lewdest of condition that can be found among the
people, because the honester sort will not accept the vocation.

A change, I say, from a bridle against sin, to a spur of al iniquity.
From that, which feared men from doing ill: to this, which fears men from
doing well, least thereby they may be thought Papists. From that, which by hope
of Gods reward in^ited men to good works: unto this, which by hope of man's
advancement, allureth men to mischief. From conscience in ceremonies, to
defye Sacram^ntes. From contrition of hear^ for sin, to induration of heart in
sin. From confe^^ion of si^ne by mouth, to concealing of sin by others.
From seeking to satisfy for sin, to dubble and heap sin upon sin. From
shamefast and seldom swearing, to open and usual perjury. From fear to lie,
to plain and usual impudency. From building of Chapels, to robbing of
Churches. From ^recting of Alters, to overthrowing of Abb^ys. From praiyng for
souls, to suppressing of Chanteries. From giving of alms, to dissoluing of
Hospitals. From ^reeping into Couents, to bragging in Courts. From vowing of
chastity, to mariyng of Monk^s. From consecra^ing Uirgins, to wedding Nonnes
and Friars. From promising poverty, to professed usury. From voluntary
obedience to obstinate ambition. From fasting fish days, to flesh on Fridaies.
From watching in prayers, to sleeping by payers. From Churchemens praiyng, to
lay men's preaching. From sermons by Doctors, to women's lectures. From
reasoning, to railing. From ^^uerent speech, to scoff^^ and scor^^s at al holy
things. From pulpittes in Churches, to fiel^es and woods. From honoring of
Saints, to burning their Images. From going in Pilgrimage, to haunting of
harlottes. From visiting Prisoners, to pliyng the Gromeporters. From penance
and Pardons, to only faith. From we^ping for sin, to laughing at sin. From
scruple of small sins, to glory in great.

And from that, which through Charity, contained men in the limits of
Piety, Justice, Temp^rance, and virtuous exercises: unto this, which by a
solifidian hope, first induces in man loosenes of life, r^denes of mann^r^,
wildenes of lokes, pride of speech, ha^tin^s of g^sture, and a Ruffianlike
russhing into al vice, and after unto Atheism, Barbarism, or Machometes ^aith
at least.

And from that, which kept your feminine sex in all womanly gravity: unto
this, that leads them that be the z^alouse imbracers of it, into al iolitie
and galantrie. From that which taught them maidenly bash^ulnes: to this, that
t^ach^th them to blush at nothing, and has drawn them from the English
sobriety, to the French vanity. From the rare and plain^ speech of England,
to the Spanish complementes. From cl^ann^s by wasshing, to unsavory painting.
From moderate feeding, to Flemmish quaffing: and from being the examples of
modesty to al Nations, to be the Patronesses of bravery, and of al lightness to
all the Dames of Europe: by sucking, as it were, and selecting together the
immodestest demeanours of every Nation. From fear to hear, to be bold to
speak I will not say what. From sober looks, to light eyes. From sad and
seldom speaking, to bold babbling what so ever, least they might seem
ignorant. From learning of their husbands, to teaching their husbands. From
obeying their Parsons, to commanding their Uicars. From woorking, to playing.
From sparing, to spending. From hiding their locks, to imbrodering their
smockes. From samplers in their hands, to skarfes on their arms. From books
of prayer, to ballades of love. From occupying beads, to feathers in their
heads. From wearing Christ's Cross or Image, to carry their friends colors
or visage. From dis^a^fe and needle, to follow the fiddle. From blusshing to
hear^ of marriage, to laughing to hear of lone. From the bondage of wedlock
with one, to the liberty of loving many. From a decent fearfulnes co^^enient
to their kind, to an indecent hardines for their sex. From trembling to see a
sword drawn, to carrying of daggers, and discharging of dagges without fear
at all. And (not to say all) from bashful modesty and shame fast behavior
comely for women, unto a more then mannish audacitie in word, in deed, and in
all demeanor: plainly repugnant to all holiness of life, and to the qualities
of a profitable wife: if she set ought by her self, I mean, or will be
esteemed among her betters.

A change, I say, from that Religion, which condemned all errors, unto this
which contains all heresies: no heresy almost, being of old condemned, that
is not now among you re^iued and professed. Yea unto this, that by Parliament
vnsaincteth Sancts Canonised and confirmed by miracles 300. years together: S.
Tho. of Cant.

Matthew.

Barthol.


unto this, that for want of wives meet for gentlemen, gives by Parliament,
the lauful wife of the living labourer, to be a kinghts Lady and Lemman^ Unto
this, that for fear to lack lauful procreation, brings forth children
between Brother and Sister. And finally unto a Religion, Gerard and Jane Donat
that terms it Tyranny, to burn heretics, by the common laws of
Christendom more then twelve hundred years old, and by an English Parliament
constituteth new Capital crimes of her own creation only, such as never were
crimes among your selves before, nor to this day are not in the whole world
bysides.

A religion, that forbids the Image of Christ crucified, in Church, or
elsewhere: and permits the pictures of paramours in every house. A religion,
that as treason forbids the use of holy Relikes and consecrated things, and
printeth for Saints obstinate heretics, publicly condemned, dying
impenitent, and traiterous murderers of their Masters. Pultrote the soldi^r
print^d a Saint for mur^eri^g his Capitain the D. of Guise.
And so, a Religion that makes your Q. to her own dishonor the bird that
blemisheth her own nest, Lambert printed for a Martyr by this Q. whom her
fathers own mouth sente^ced to be burned.
by condemning her Sister, her Brother, her Father, and al her Progenitors, as
murderers of Martyrs, and slaiers of Saints, who condemned that for heresy,
whereof she for Treason condemns the contrary. A fit fruit for the first
feminine Head, that ever took Moses Chair in Christ's Church.

A Religion of Negatiues, a Religion of Lies, a Religion of Liberty, a
Religion that leads to loosenes and to al lewd life. A Religion that of
Scripture denies sundry whole Uolumes: that of the Text it self corrupts
places infinite, and untruly translateth the rest, that should decide, I
mean, any questions of controversy. And thereby (how so ever they abuse you
with words of reverence unto Scripture) a Religion it is, that leaves you in
deed no Scripture at al, by the judgment of your own laws. For if a writing
rased in any least letter by a stranger, after the sealing, be justly pleaded
not to be the deed of him that sealed it: how can your Bible be called the
Word or Scripture of God, whereof so many whole books are denied, so many
places corrupted and changed, so many Texts falsely translated, and s^ many
false gloses and expositions put upon it?

A Religion, that falsifieth ye Fathers, that sclandereth the Doctors, belieth
the Popes, belieth the Emperors, belieth the practice of the Church, and all
Histories, that do testify the truth of things past. A Religion, that has
neither externe Sacrifice, nor outward Ceremonies, other then by Rebellion to
deprive al Princes, that impugn it: by poison, by Pistolets, or by treason to
murder what Catholic soever lies in their way, to lead Nu^nes naked about
the markets, French facts lately pu^ in ure, and in printe.
to flea Friars, to martyrise Mo^ks, to kill Priests, to make living men butts
to shoot at, and marks for Arcabusses and handgonnes, to bowell men quick,
to fry their flesh alive, and this to justify as acceptable sacrifices to
their God, and as the most sacred Ceremonies of their profession.

A Religion, that generally every where is first apprehended, most zelously
^mbraced, and most vehemently maineteined, by the lewdest of condition, ye most
vicious of manners, the most co^tentious, the busiest, vnquietest, and worst of
conversation. Whereof let every man's private experience give testimony, that
may remember, I mean, the first Preachers of this doctrine, and the prime, and
most fervent disciples thereof in every town, City, Uillage, Parish and
househol^.

A Religion I say, that calls Christ in the Sacrament, an Idol: Mass.
that calls the only Sacrifice of ye Christian Church, Idolatry: that
professes it to be sin for any man to believe, ye fasting, praiyng, alms,
vows, penance, or any other good work does please God, or appease his wrath:
that teaches your Christian faith to be false doctrine, and heresy to be the
true faith of Christ: Adoration of the Sacram^nt.
yt teaches the chiefest outward service and honor to God y^ ever was used
where Christ's name was professed, to be Idolatry: that teaches sacrilege,
incest, and the wilful slaughter of sacred and anointed persons, to be
virtuous and acceptable to God: and that teaches, the old, the common, and
known way of salvation, to be the high way to damnation. I call it therefore,
by inevitable consequents a Religion that turns darkness into light, and light
into darkness: and that teaches Hell to be Heaven, and God him self to be the
Devil of Hell. A change also I call it from that Religion, in which your Queen
followed the steps of her Progenitors and of al other Princes: The ends must
needs be contrary, whose ways are repugnant.
unto this, wherein she is the first, that ever usurped womanish Primacie. From
that, wherein she was united with all great Princes her neighbors: unto this,
in which she stands post alone, and has neither Prince nor lauful
Magistrate to acco^panie her. From that, by which she was assured to keep her
old frinds, that were of ability to stand her in stead, both at home, and
abroad: unto this, for which some of necessity are forced to fall from her, and
the reas^ are decayed both in number and affection: and by which new enemie^
are engendered both secret and open, and no friend wonne^ that may be trusted
and is worth the having. From that, which was so light and easy to bear, that
n^^er Christian King found himself weary of the burden ther^of, but her Father
alone: unto this, the deadly paise and weight wh^r^of has been so heavy and
intolerable, yt it has sunken and oppres^ed so infinite numbers of great,
Noble and worthy Personages (and of Queen's especially) that have within these
forty or fifty years assaied to uphold it, Four Protestante Queens, A.B. ^.
H. K. P. I.G. thr^^ of them died infamousely, and the fourth, ^scaped the fire
narrowly.
first in Germany, than in England, than in France, and Scotland, and lastly
in Fla^ders: that if your Q. should see the lamentable list of their names laid
together, she might with reason, and would I ween, be shrew their hearts full
heartily, that have made her a Companion of so unfortunate a fellowship.

A change it is from that, which of her own wis^dome she was not willing to
leave: unto this, whereunto she was wrested with many perils, and without gain
to herself, ^or their gain^ only, that twisted her to it.

And to conclude, a change it is, to a Religion so plainly Turkish and
Heathen, that no where has it passed or fixed footing, without leaving behind
it the very printes and foot steps of Machomettes Armado. Whereof let them
be Judges, that have seen in Hungary and Slauonie the decayed Cities, the
wasted Countries, the ruined buildings of all sorts, and the desolate aspecte
of all that falls under man's eye, where the Turks army has pitched any time:
and have seen withal, and will compare thereunto the subverted monasteries,
the overthrown Abbeis, the broken Churches, the torn Castles, ye rent
Towers, the ouerturned walls of Towns and Fortresses, with the co^fuse heaps
of all ruined Monumentes remaining yet as Relics of this Religion in those
parts of France and Scotland, where it has had Dominion. Yea be your selves
Judges, yt for your years can remember the standing of your Abbeis, and do now
behold the great difference and decay of al your own great Cities and
Towns, where your Monasteries were planted, in comparison of the state, that
the same were in, when the Catholic faith flourished among you.

Many other like properties and qualities it has, mo then can be showed you
particularly, which do contain danger, dishonor and disprofit to your
Queen, and Realm every way: but these be enough, I trow, to show it a change,
and a change for the worse. Wherein, if you think, that ^eruour of spirit has
carried my pen to far, let ye points be showed, in which the indifferen^
Reader remaieneth unsatisfied, and they shall be justified, not by surmises and
words only, but by demonstration of times, places, persons, and facts, as the
matter will permit.

And this being the true shape and likeness, in which your present Religion
appears, and shows it self to all men's eyes abroad (that are not, I mean
of the Confederats) your Wisdoms can discern, how much it imports, that
you leave at length to deceive yourselues therein, by weening, that your
Provincial Parliament can either alter ye truth of the Christian Religion, or
blind the eyes of other Nations, or close ye mouths and stay the pens of
other men: (how so ever by art and force you have done with your own) but
that the same that was true before, shall be true for ever, and will be so said,
deemed, and written for ever: how so ever you forbid yours to say it, or hang
them for saying it. And this is the first wall and ward of your Common wealth
that is broken down, to make an entry for your Sinons horse, that brings in
his bosom the ruin both of the Temple and Town of your Pallas and Troie.

The violation of common Justice evident.
her Realm, and al her a^faires, so wholly into the hands of her two
Catilines, that al cases of importance, not by ordinary Justice, but by their
wills, and authoriti^ must be determined: that al be ^duanced that they
commend, and al oppressed, whom they would abase: what other, I say, is
followed, and does ensue of this (if it be truly looked on, without the lies
sent out to shadow it) but that the Justice of her Realm generally is
prostibulated, to be sold or hired by money, malice, or affection: few or none
being, that by themselves, or their frinds, have not felt the smart of unjust
decrees, procured by briberie, or for difference in Religion? Yea, what matter
comes to hearing or sentence, where they two sit as chief, without
briberie, in so excessive manner, as if their own two hands sufficed not to
take fast enough, without the help of their Ladies, that must be presented
also, ere any end can be gotten of charges or suit? And can any man deny,
that a light crime in a Catholic is made most heinous, yea, very virtues in
them punnished for vices: and huge horrors in Protestants passed over, or
pardoned as light peccaduliums?

Consider your Statute made for the Oath of your Womanish Primacie, Eliz. An.
5. Cap. 1.
which under great penalties of Praemunire, and of death by Degrees, binds the
inferior multitude unto that, wherein it leaves the Nobility free. Way well
the evident injustice, and the passing absurdity of that Law, and ye shall
find it as vile a practice, as filthy a fetch, and as dangerous a dishonor,
as ever was contriue^.

The meaning of the Act, ye wotte, contains as well matter of conscience
between God, and man's soul: as matter of duty and bond, between Prince
and Subject. Now who ever heard, that the Gentleman and Yeoman, the Artisan,
and the Labourer, have to accounte for that before God, Whereof the Baron, the
Uicount, the Earl, and Duke stand free and not chargeable? As if y^ ^ne sort
had souls, and the other none at al: or, as if the poor and mean man were
bound in the sight of God, with heart to believe, and with mouth to confess so
special a point of faith and Doctrine, whereof the Nobleman is free, and bound
to neither of both.

And was it ever heard of, or read before now, that any Monarch, or Prince, was
more a King over his subject, that is a Gentleman, or under: than over his
Uassal, that is a Lord or above? Or that one of them was bounden to acknowledge
such a Title, and Superiority in his Sovereign, as the other might safely
deny? Yea, the self and same, for the third refusal whereof the greatest
number infinitely must by this Law die as Traitors, and the fewer number
freely may, not only three times, but thirtene, thirty, and three hundred
times refuse it, and bid their King go whistle him, and charge them withal,
over whom he has Authority in that behalf? Look you upon the consequents,
which of very just reason, that Law carries in it. Let the Degrees be surueied
between the lowest Labourer, and the greatest Duke in your Dominion. And
according to the difference of their Dignities, let your Princes jurisdiction
over them be rated and proportioned, in such wise, that over the highest sort,
his Regalitie be least: over the meaner and middle sort, somewhat more: and
over the lowest sort, greatest of al, in as many different proportions, as
there are differences of degrees among your people: (for so of reason ought it
to be, if this Law be an equal pattern and president) and than, shall you see
your Kingly Prerogative and Authority, so measured and minced from more to
less, til your Duke may account himself fellow with his King, and the poor
man must take his King for more then a God. Can any thing be thought upon,
more iniust and absurd before God and the world?

Behold you also, how base, and filthy the practice was: that to win somewhat
in so vile an enterprise (which to all the Nobility appeared so far out of
course, and so repugnant to reason, that they could not possibly be induced to
yield them selves subject to a yoke so exorbitant, and opposite both to Gods
Law and man's) the Caitifes so circumuented yet both the States, of the
Nobility, and Commons, that the one accepted such a Thraldom, as never
before was laid on Christian men's necks: (for by King Henry his Law, the
Commons were that way no further bounden, then was the very Noblest o^ the
Realm) and the other by oppressing the people with such a b^rden, whereof
them selves would be free, incurred so dangerous, and so dishonorable an
infamy, as will not in many ages be cleared again.

For was there ever practice more infamous, or perilous unto the whole State of
your Nobility, then by such a mean to put a pike between themselves on the
one party, and all the Gentlemen and Commons of the Realm on the other
party, who should ^eele themselves laden, and burdened with such an
oppression, both toward God, and their Prince, as the Nobility, that clogged
them, would bear no part of it with them?

Could any thing possibly have benne devised more iniurio^s to the people,
more infamous to the Nobility, and more like to bring the Rulers in contempt
of the inferiors, and to make the base people repine at their Superiors
gouernemente? But I tarry to long in opening the iniquity of that, which is
so manifest and so palpable an injustice of it self. Let us therefore
consider an other.

Behold likewise the equal Ordinance of your Wednesdaies fast: Eliz. An. 5.
Cap. 5.
where the rich sort, that are fewest, being hable to buy flessh and fissh,
may freely eat both: and the poor sort most in number, being unable to buy
fish, must either get white meat, or ea^e stones. And see what justice it is,
that forbids the subject to honor, to acknowledge, or to confess his duty
and office to his Sovereign, that shall be, or so much as to have his person or
name fixed before the eyes of his mind, to obey him the better, when the time
shall come.

And look upon the equality of that law, that creating a new crime of that,
which was none, ordeineth the penalty thereof, to have relation, and to take
place, from xiiij. years before the crime was constituted, or any offense
committed. These things, you see, do bear the names and titles of laws. And
were there ever things hard of, that more directely impugned common Justice?

Many examples mo might be brought you, of the open violation of the Justice of
your Realm, which I call ye rupture and ruin of the second wall and ward of
your Common wealth, broken down to bring in the hollow Horse that I have told
you of. Wherein abuse yourselues how you will, and at your pleasure stop the
mouths of your own: but prevail you can not, to stay other men from seeing
and saying as they find it in deed: that is to say, naught else, but the
raising, enriching and strengthening of those two Catilines and their
Confederats, with the weakening and prejudice of your Queen, with the injury
of your Nobility, with the pillage of your people, and with the general
detriment of your whole Realm.

Than come to the estats of your ancient The waste of Nobility, and hope of
foreine force, manifest.
and of your forainers brought in from abroad. I put them together, because I
would be as brief as I can. Consi^er, whether ever ye one were brought so low,
or the other ever risen to that greatness and strength, since the smoke of your
Conquest was extinguished. Account the number of your Dukes, Earls, and Barons
fled, imprisoned, impouerished, defamed, disgraced, and brought into your
Princes disfavor. If you behold it (as other men do) aparted from the lies
put forth to excuse it, and finding them not so few in number, as fourtene or
fiftene, and of your principalest: it must appear many in your Common Wealth.

Of Knights and Gentlemen of good hability, above four hundred may be named
unto you, yt at this day are brought into the same Predicament. And where

^^ A true description of the party Protestant.
which lying til your Queens time like a dead lump of flesh, without spirit
or life, was by her Machiauellians first set a foot, and brought forth to
show their face in the world. Divide it, I say, from the lies suborned to
countenance and accompany it: if you will behold it, as other men do, you must
acknowledge it, as the creation of a Co^federate company of licentious and
unbridled persons, dispersed in every Country (as the Jews lately were) that
being limited by no law of God nor of Conscience (nor yet of man, where they
be of strength to show it) are the professed enemies of al Monarchy and Kingly
Dominion. Which whosoever sees not, is more then be^tle blind, so gross and
senseless, or else so impudent and shameless: that he is as unworthy to be
talked and reasoned withal, as is a stock, or an image of stone.

The professed poison I call it, of al kingly Regiment. Whereof can any man be
ignorant now, Where the^ are able, there they vsurp^ the gouernanc^.
that has seen this fourtene years experience of every Country, where the
Confederats for number and strength have been bold to show themselves? How they
have, I mean, somewher by art, and elsewhere by force, either won the
Dominion into their own hands: or have given proud pusshes for it, with the
great consumption of the Nobility, with excessive slaughter of the people,
with the Princes passing charge and danger of State.

In England you see, In Engl. by art.
what by art they have won, and who reigns in deed, by, and under the
name of your Queen. And for proof, if she have been always well inclined of
her self, to favor her Cousin and Sister of Scotl. (as, no doubt, she has
been) and yet that fa^our so little auailed, that under the cover there of the
clean contrary has been compassed, and al possible oppressions laid on her,
that her deadlyest enemy could devise, under that wing and protection of your
Queens good affection, til by degrees she be come to the state, you see her
in: let this be o^e mark to show you, who raign^th in deed, whosoever bears
the name. And if your Queen saved the others life in Loghleuen (as it is
believed she did) and yet the other, brought now by other means, and in an
other place into more danger of life, then ever she was there: let that speak
and tell you, who rules and brings his will to effect. For can it be thought,
that they that defame, deprive, and imprison a Prince, do mind any less, then
to destroy him at last?

And can any manne with reason think, that if Sinon did not intend by one
mean or other, to make her away: would his shrewd head defame him self in
this manner, and spotte his own fame among al men, with the just suspicion
of procuring her murder, though she should fortune to die by nature, by
casualtie, or by others fault, as a great^ womanne did not long since (you
know) of whose death, he knows, some giltlesse persons were infamed
^aultie? And how near death has she benne once or twice already, through
duresse of imprisonment? Or is there any difference in substance and effect,
which way sh^e die, (if her dai^s be shortened by malice of man) whether it
be, by short and blouddy violence, by intoxication, or by such manner holding
and entreating, as by experience they know shall kill her in little more tracte
of time? This being seen (I say) to be done to her, whom your Queen has
saved, and would save: tell me than, who is found to reign as King in deed,
whether he, or she?

If your invasions into Scotland and France, if the money sent to pay Rebels
in both, and if the Commissions and Process to call the Catholics to the
Oath and Communion, were done and sent, some without your Qu^nes knowledge, and
the reast against her opinion and advise: let these things bear witness, who
has the Dominion.

Yea if their contempt of her be such, and so manifest, that every man sees,
how they coosen and scorn her, in what soever question her pleasure impugneth
theirs^ be it for case of Religion, for matter of war, for Coosyn of Scotl.
for advancing or defacing, for punishing or rewarding, or what soever else, how
s^ily they smile at her in their sleeves, in appearance yelding unto her words,
and winding her finely to yield to their deeds either by weeping to her face,
when they laugh behind her back, or by feining siknes for sorrow, when they
^reat for anger, til she send to comfort them, and do relent to their lusts: if
this practice, I say, be so frequent and common, yt no Court Christened is
ignorant of it: who can be said to reign and to rule, but they, whose
pleasures do^ prenaile? Thus much for England.

In Scotl. by force.
In Scotl. than it is manifest, that when the Con^ederats could be permitted no
longer by art to govern both Prince and Realm: they forthwith by force
deprived their Queen, and with plain violence usurped the Regiment by strong
hand, and so do keep it to this day.

In France likewise, if a mean^ subject holds the Kings nose to the
Grindestone, In France by halues.
if he have maintained against him now twelve years wars in his own Realm,
if he keep the Kings towns, mangre ye Kings will, if by force of sword he
missed little to have laid hands upon his Sovereigns person, if he coined
money under his own stamp, if he and his faction do kill whom they list
without impeachment, if the King be constrained to permit them their
preachings, to write his known R^belles, good Cosins and Councillors, and to
call their Rebellion his own good service: if it can not be denied, but that it
is so, than be your selves judge, whether that faction in France be partetakers
with the king in his Dominion, or no.

And let the several assaies given in Flanders by the Confederats there, An
Fland. assaid to the^^ cost.
to the lamentable ruin of that Nobility, declare also, what they aspire unto
in that State. And let these al together (being open known facts) put in ure
by that faction (that was not seen in the world, til your Sinons set it up)
serve to show you, with what eyes the indifferent multitude of men abroad do
see and behold the same: what they think of it, and take it to be: and what
your Quee^e her self shall bylike find and taste of it, if any way she
encounter them, or when so ever she shall offer to deliver her self out of
their thraldom, and to take her Regiment out of theirs, into her own hands.

And pass not this over as a matter of words and arguments only, but look
upon the printed books, called The Blasts of the trumpets, that manifestly
impugn al womanly Regiment: and behold, how the French law called Lex Salica,
that dissableth women to reign there, is by these Confedera^s adored and
extolled every where. Consider, how nearly and narrowly your Queen and her
Sister escaped their several violent and forcible attempts, i^ y^ years of
1553. and 1554. And wink not wilfully at this performance and execution of
their purpose, with the Queen of Scotland, that they assayed before against
those Sisters of England. And remember, that neither in Flanders, nor France,
are the ^oles of the same fire quenched, nor the ashes yet cold to this day.

And finding the intention of their hearts so manifestly testified by printed
books, by daily and public speeches, by frequent facts and deeds, from year
to year, and from day to day renewed: can it be less, then a plain
fascination and sorcery, if your Queen can not yet be induced to se^ it? Or if
she see it, how far from policy is it, and what a blindness of heart and
judgment is she fallen into: if yet she think it for her safety, to be made
the instrument of the others confusion?

Can it possibly tend to the service of any of both, that one of them should
now persecute an other, when their common enemy is so evidently seen to be
ready to devour them both? Y^a, is not all that they both can possibly do each
for other, not only little enough, but also to be feared to be far to little,
to keep any of both in their Seats: from which the one is already removed,
and the other abides but the devotion of them, that in word and deed r^pine
at women's Rule?

Some among your selves, I know, do see it plain enough, if they durst show
it: and do shed therefore tears of blood from their hearts, wisshing both those
Qu^enes to make better account each of other, each to help and assist other,
and each to fortify and strengthen other, as foreseeing al to be little
enough, against the malice intended to both. And in the sight of foreine
Nations y^ practice threateneth so manifestly your Queens speedy ruin (if it
be not in time preue^^ed) that her offended enemies rejoice to see it so near
at hand: and the indifferent sort condemns them, that see it not, as gross,
senseless, and void of common reason.

The truth of your state with France.
touching the true principal defenses of every common Weal, that remains
governed by a Christian Monarch: behold in a few words their est^mation and
concept of your foreign treaty with the Nations your neighbors.

And to begin with the French: Behold the sedition sown in that Realm, and
renew the memory of the wars of Newhauen: put aparte, I mean, from the lies
that were forged for the recovery of Calice, by those means to feed and
foster it up withal. Look also on the often raising of Rebels against that
king syus, after sundry accords and pacifications. Consider the calling in, and
payment of foreine forces, to invade his Country, the secret subornation of
the Co^federats even to this day, to hold his Towns from him against the
Articles of the last Treaty. Divide from these, the lies and fables, put forth
to cover those facts withal: and imagine with your self, whether that King
for his youth feels not, or for lightness forgets, or for favor forgeeueth
that consumption of his treasures, that waste of his Nobility, that infection
of his people, that danger of his person, and that division of his Crown (as
it may be said) that he has sustained, and to this day indureth by those
means. Or is he ignorant, and has no man to tell him, who has wro^ght him
this woe, and therefore wot^th not whom to accuse?

Nay, what soever your words are, and how bravely so ever you brag of the
matter unto your Q. your Acts do show, and your deeds do speak, that your
selves do see, what remains laid up in store against you, til it may stand
with his policy, to show and lay it out. Why fawn you else so much upon that
new friend in face, made of your old enemy in heart? Wherefore else do you
uphold that Faction in his Country, and every way feed the division between
him and his subjects? Why else do you send some to treat a league with him in
apparen^e, and others to practice with his Rebels in secret, to hold that
they have? You think it is not known (and every man sees it) that eue^
presently you have in his Court, some as Ambassadors, to manage one thing in
show: and some privy workers, to contriue an other in hucker mucker.

How so ever you bolster up the matter to your own, assure your selves, that
you can not deceive free sight^s abroad, but that other men b^holding deeply
al parts of the same, do find therein of substance and weight that will abide
si^ting, naught else in the world, risinge toward you, or your Queen, but
great charges lost, much ^are cast away, English blood spilt, dishonor only
gained, a seed of Quarrel sown, a root of revenge planted, and laid up in
the deck, to be demanded against you, when your dissembled french friend shall
see his time to exact it: and which, the English people and Nobility must
answer in time, in what Princes days so ever it happen. Calice thereby is made
irrecouerable, and the face of Religion in France, as it was.

With Scotland likewise look The truth of your de^lings in Scotl.
with the same sight and judgment, that other men do, whom with lies you can
not abuse: the particulars whereof be more fresh and conspicuous, then that
here they need to be expressed again. And looking on them, without the known
lies, put forth to excuse them, (for so do other men behold and consider
them) see, whether ever there were by King or Queens name, so many treacheries
committed, more heinous and indigne for a Kingly vocation.

If it were honorable in Charles the Emperor, to restore the Infidel and
Barbarous King of Tunis: if King Henry the eigth, Father to your Queen, leaft
not to urge the redemtion of Francis the French King (being just prisoner) til
he had procured his liberty: if it were great honor to the King of Spain, to
restore the Duke of Sauoy, and to succor the French king against his rebellious
subjects: if the Pope and other Princes of Italy, thought themselves bound,
both in honor and justice, to assiste the same King in those his Civil
wars: if these, I say, be facts open and known, and such, as no man has the
face, but to speak honor of them: be your selves then judge, what must be
thought and said of these twelve years troubles and oppressions under your
Que^n^s name, and by her Authority, laid upon her Cousin of Scotl.

Over which lay what cover you will to dec^iue your selves, and to blind your
own: few wise or honest men can you draw thereby, that be free from fearing
you, to ween the same to be otherwise, then they are, nor for other to take
them, to wr^te them, or to speak of them, but that your Queen (while she will
bear the burden of her Coniuratours crimes) will be deemed, and infamed, to be
the contriuer of al those Rebellions against that Lady, that Wydow, that
Christian Queen, that Absolute Prince, of her own blood Roial, and nearest
kinsewoman: that she has been the inuader of the others Country, the spoiler
of her good subjects, the countenance of her Traitors, the surpriser of her
Fortresses, the procurer of the barbarous outrages committed against her self,
her husband, and her Secretary: of the usurpation of her Dominion, of her
unnatural deprivation: and finally the unjust gailor of her personal
imprisonment, against al laws of Nature and Nations.

Pervse likewise your proceedings with Your terms with Spain Burg. and Fland.
with the same sight (I mean) that other men do survey them: and let not the
Kings good inclination to patience and peace, and his unfeigned affection to
your Queen and Realm, deceive your judgments, how so ever perhaps it
increaceth your insolency. For the wise and indifferent sort can neither be
blinded with your painted Proclamations of many words and few true, nor with
his sufferance, be it never so commendable in a Prince of his might, I mean:
but that they see the injustice and the ingratitude of surpri^ing his mo^ie, of
deteining the goods of his subjects, of robbing his people from day to day, of
secret succouring and assisting his Confederate Uassals, of cutting away the
mutual traffike, access, and concourse between his own Countries by calling
together and mainteining of Pirates.

Which, being severed from the lies and fables, that you put forth to cover it
with (with which you please your selves and blind a few) the indifferent
multitude yet, that be the beholders and lookers on, can not but see them as
they are, nor find less in them, then manifest injury and open robbery of
Millions of poor men, done by a kind of Commission, as it were, from your
Queen (as her authority is abused) and proceeding of an vnprincelike
ingratitude, and unthankful nature (she bearing others faults) toward her
dearest, her surest, and her mightiest frinde upon earth. And without policy
also for her and her Realm, since it cannot be possible by Nature (be that
King what he may be, yea though he were as patie^t as Job) but that this
dealing must weaken and minish ye hearty amity and aff^ctio^ between him, and
her, between his Countries, and hers, and between both their successions. Which
her Posterity and Realm must remain liable to answer, to the smart of every
state therein, one way or other, in whose time so ever it shall fortune to come.
Wherein who so sees her security increased, her honor advanced, or her
Realm benefited, must ^etch his authority from Machiauel only. For, example,
in any honest Author, is none to be found, of any Christian Princes security
to be greater, by the doubtfulnes and decay of the frindship of his
Co^federats: nor that ever Christian Region was benefited, by weakening the
amity with her old Allies.

Behold, how her mildenes and Cleme^cy Your Q. clemency^ infamed b^ their
tyranny.
by speech and print was justly commended, and remains, no doubt, in her own
good nature still: and the renoume thereof redounding to her great Honor, whiles
those Coniuratours (I mean) found not yet them selves in sufficient strength.
But now the world abroad, finding the great terror and fear, that
universally oppresses the hearts of al your people, and ouerwhelmeth, in a
sort, your whole Realm, cannot but hear and see that co^mendatio^ of her
clemency, that was justly her own, quite and clean converted, into an iniust
infamy of other men's tyranny.

For, bysides the late extreme executio^s in the North, in Norfolke^ and about
London (above the measure of the delicts, because the most of them were
Catholics) and bysides al your prisons pestered with Noble men and Gentlemen,
no man almost wotteth why: bysides this (I say where few or none, to speak of,
can pass from town to town unsearched: where no letter almost goes from
friend to friend vnopened: where no man's talk with other scant scapeth
unexamined: where it is accounted treason, rebellion, and sedition to have, or
to see to send, or receive, to keep, or to hear any letter, book, or
speech, that might show you any part, either of this Coniuration, or of the
crafts and falsehoods used to bring it to pass: yea, when the just
commendation of a^y Noble man among your selves (whom these base fellows do
envy or malign) is accounted a crime and derogation to your Queen: and where
every man that justly imputes any of these disorders unto those Catilines, is
taken and punished, as an attributour of the Governance from your Queen to a
Subject: can any man that has wit or judgment, see other therein, then
thraldom and slavery? Yea, what servitude can be greater? What governance can
be further from clemency and mercy?

Finally, sequestring this change of your State, from the lies laid out to
excuse it: it does plainly conclude and convince, that these Caitifes will now
have your Queen to bear the burden of their Cruelty.
And because they feel them selves now in strength, will bring her into hatred
and obloquie, to kindle in the hearts of her people a wearines of her
subjection, and a mislike of her regiment:
that they may be the readier and gladder to embrace the mutation, that these
men intend to attempt, and to bear well, what so ever shall become of her,
when these fellows shall think the time ripe, by death, or deposing, to remove
her.

Your Q. surety less by one half.
that do behold the unfeigned affection and r^uerente regard, that the Queen
of Scotland has always borne unto yours, as to her Mother, her Sister, her
de^rest Coosin and friend: that do believe likewise your Queen^s go^d
inclination and affection toward her for many years together showed, by
s^eking to restore her (if these libells say ture): that forget not, how for all
that time, there was no fear had of her, no rumors of reproach raised against
her, she hold^n in no suspicion, nor no motion or memory of quarrel against
her: that did see also, your Queens security than a^sured, the stronger, the
great^r, and every way undoubted, for the favor and good terms, that her
successor stood^ in with her: that seek and search to know, what she has
since committed, so offensive to your Queen, as should deserve the intr^aty,
which now she receives: or how your Queens safety should be the greater for
the others peril, when a third is seen prepared to supplant both: and
finally, that see the fear and i^louzi^, that by your printed libels and
public imprisonments you pretend and seem to stand in, of your Queens safety
now: they, I say, that as standers by and lookers on, do indifferently behold
these points, s^cluded from the glos^s and fables blown out to feed fools
withal: what other thing possibly can they discern therein, and judge to be
meant th^rby, but a plain preparation, yea almost half an execution of your
Queens r^m^uing: she remaining the less by one half in every man's sight,
whiles the other is leaft in hands of the third, as plainly she is, while
these two Catilines govern al three?

If the reading of approved writers The Q. ma^^ an Instrument to (...) her self.
if the Histories of ages past do testify the practice, and if the judgment of
the indifferent sort, that be not parties nor Age^ts to the action in hand, be
the truest glass and image, by which every man may see him self and his
doings, and if the late examples of our own Familiars, and the uniform
counsel of present and assured frinds, be a better line and measure to square
our daily doings by, then are our own partial and affected fantasies: if this
be so, then is it high time, yea and more then high time, that al you that
tender your Queens assurance, or your own preseruations, do look on this
matter with an other eye, then yo^ have done. Not by any violent and unlawful
attempt: take me not so (for I mean it so little, that I hate and abhor it)
but by leaving nothing vndon^ with your Queen, by counsel without ceassing (ye
that be called to that place) and by petition without end (you that be not
called so high) that she will vouchsafe with her own wisdom to way the weight
of this cause, to see the same in it, that other men see, and in time to
prevent and provide for the worst.

She may remember, I suppose, that when her Father King Henry was foreseen to
draw toward his end, and had made a provision to govern his Realm by
certain Executours and Assistants, with special prohibition to have no
Protector in his Sons Minority: h^ that then had the purpose in ^art to
frustrate that ordinance, to make him self Protector, and to govern both
Realm and King, played his first Pageant in King Henry's own life, and made
the King him self the first instrument, of fru^trating his own intention, and
the laier of the first stone, in the others buylding, by taking away, before
him self died, the Noblest, the mightiest, and the faithfullest Subjects (if
any might be said to be more faithful then other) that he had in his Realm:
the famous Father and Grandfather (I mean) of this Noble Norf. now also cut
of, even for like cause and crime in truth and in deed. For though other
faults were pretended in both, yet their very chiefest crimes in deed were,
that they than, and this now, were the hablest, and the likelyest to resist
that purpose than, and this practice now intended.

She may also remember (I doubt not) how he, that than had in mind, after to
remo^e that Protector, played also his first part in the Protectours own
time, and made the Protector him self, the prime root of his own ruin, and
first to put hand to the others work: by ^utting from himself his natural
Brother, and in applying himself to be so popular: of which the one was the
ground of his fall, and the other, should have been his pillar to lean on. In
whose decaie there wanted not (though I will not affirm so much) that did
prognosticate, the reign of the Infant King Edward not like to continue long,
whose name was used to his Uncles confusion. And it can not be, but that she
remembers, that the foundation made by that Brother of hers (if that may be
called his, that was done in his name) to have deprived both herself, and her
Sister, was a pretense of Religion, and fear of Foreine Dominion: though no man were so blind, but that he saw, it bended and tended to a far other
mark.

Of the several murders of the D. of Guise, of David the Scottish Secretary,
and of her Cousin Darley, called King of Scotland, it can not be, but she
sees, that whatsoever the several pretenses were, the sequeles of those acts
shortly brought forth the plain deprivation o^ the one Prince, from her whole
Dominion: and the dividing of the other into halues, as it were, between that
King and his Confederate subjects. On which examples, being al so fresh and
new, when men, that be wise, do deeply bethink them, and do withal remember,
what ougly pretenses were used, to shadow them al when they were in doing,
which in this short time have already appeared so vain, so idle, so false,
and fabulous toys, as your s^lues (I dare say) will now confess them to be:
this being so, what less or other can it now be, then a plain bewitching,
that your Queen being of so rare wisdom, for a woman, should yet be so
circumuented and blinded, as not to see herself made the instrument of her
own undoing?

Will they, troweth she, lack pretenses to plead and to object against her,
when they see their time, that have found these pretenses against her two
Cosi^s? Will they lack matter, to defame her to the world, and to bring her in
hatred and obloquie of the people: that have forged so many colourlesse
sclanders against these, that are her nearest in blood? Specially having given
them before hand their pardon, as it were, and a free discharge, of what
villainy so ever they shall commit against her? For, less tha^ that, do few
wise men deem and gather of this captivity of those two Princes, that are her
children, her heirs, her pillars to lean on, her stays to uphold her, her
faithfullest frinds, her most loial ser^ants, and the only reuengers of her
quarrel and wrong.

Your realm purposely di^ided into factions.
being not trauersable in the eyes of al them, that can and will see light at
noone days: reuewe a little again the other committed against your Country and
Realm: the two seeds of sedition (I mean) purposely sown, to divide it into
Factions, that it may rent it self in pieces. For like as no man denies, but
that Civil sedition and intestine division is the most pernicions poison,
that possibly can be given to any common Wealth: even so must al men confess,
that by nothing earthly, are al men drawn thereunto so soon, so sharply, and
so uneasy to be reconciled, as when for their Religion, on which reasteth their
souls, or for the Title of their Crown, on which rests their lives and
their wealth, a question, quarrel, and pike is put, whereof not only two, but ten,
or twenty parties and Factions may have color, each to resist and withstand
other. And see, whether purposed preparation be not made for both, and both two
planted, yea and well grown already: as if one of them were to little, or might
fortune to be appeased, that yet the other tha^ might serve, to tear the
Country a sunder.

Of the quarrel for your Crown, you have somewhat heard before, how the Title
of a third House is provided for, and preferred before the second, which in
law is before it. How they both two, and al other interests bysides, are
labored by law to be brought in oblivion, and to becomme unknown: now, and at
this time (I mean) when the Contriuers thereof find them selves in that
strength, that they shall be hable to make them selves Judges and Arbitrato^rs of
the quarrel, and to give the Croune to whether Party they list. And look not
hereupon, as upon a forced or streined argument: but look upon your own Law,
that gives to him, that can first lay hands on it, whatsoever is found
without an owner. And this last new Law taking his e^fect (as needs it must,
if it continue in force any time) leaves your Croune without Proprietarie to
claim it, v^ occupanti concedatur. And the Cro^ne of your Realm, being such
a Garland, as few in Christendom do pass or exceed it: can any man imag^ne,
that mo then one will not press to lay hand on it, when they shall find it free
for him that can catch it? Or if such provision shall be made in the mean time,
that none but one shall be hable to attempt the same: then s^^, how base the
reast must be brought before.

And over that, bysides the duty the people does owe, to whom so ever they
tak^ to have just Title (and for such the Multitude takes, who so ever is by
Authority among them commended for such one unto them) bysides this, I say,
if both by Nature, by Justice, and by all experience, every subject looks for
advancement and reward at his hands, whom they can set up: now behold you,
whether here be a bone cast forth, or not, for your own to stri^e for? yea
though that law should fail of his effect, whiles that Title of Scotland, that
your Law prefers, is by false arts and arguments labored to be
supplanted. Neither is it to be forgotten, that in like cases it has chanced
in other Countries: where, whiles two such Titles have been at contention, the
weaker has been glad, to call for Foreine help to make him equal with his
Adversary, who many times has taken the bone from both.

For Religion likewise, behold how manifest it is, yt they will have the
contention maintained. For being impossible (as ^uery man sees) to e^tinct ye
Party Catholic, whiles France, Fla^ders, Spain, Italy, Ireland, a great
part of Germany, Poolland, Swicherla^d and diverse other States cannot be
induced to admit any other, yea whiles your own Authority in all public words,
and appearance, and in all prete^sed Letters to Princes, do give and make show,
that Catholics with you may live after their conscience, that none of them are
impeached for their Religion nor faith: ye^ whiles to crave the thank and
glory to be accounted clement and merciful, your Go^ernors make choice, to
pretend other crimes against such. Catholics as they would kill, and rather to
pine them and waste them away, by length of imprisonment, and oppressions, by
pillage and endelesse vexations, then by speedy and violent death (which were
less pain of the two, and the way to extinct them) are not al these evident
argumen^s and plain demonstrations, that th^se Contriuers will not have the
Catholic party so utterly extinct, but that there should still remain a Party
of them, to uphold and maintain the inward division, how so ever they
oppress it, and seek to make the other the strong^r?

And what possibly can come of this among your selves, but the same that you
have seen come to pass in Scotl. and France: when so ever any gappe shall be
opened, whereof both parties may have hope to take hold? And who can say, that
these practices are not purposely procured to bring forth this end, that is so
evident to be s^^ne ensewing upon them? And can there be to any Country^ a more
unnatural Treason intended? How so ^uer with fear you tie up most tungs among
your selves: there be numbers, that see it plainly enough, and where they dar^
trust, do speak^ it also. And as for the reast of the world abroad, few or
none of any discourse, conceive otherwise, nor look for less.

And now, The Conclusion.
good Reader, look what I have here showed you, to be the speech, sense, and
sentence, of al foreine Nations, and of many of your own, if they durst show
it (speaking s^uerally of the most number of them whose judgments are
regardable) in these few particulars, of which by iteration in a sort, I have
made new mention: the like could I also show you, of all the reast before spoken
of, and so sensibly prove them, as by reason they should not be denied. For
most certain, vndo^bted, and w^l known it is to them, that converse with
Strangers abroad, and a^e trusted by your grauest at home, that it is not the
stopping of the mouths of the multitude among your selves, nor yet the forged
fears pr^te^ded to your own, that can stay the tongues or pens of the world
abroad, nor deceive them in seeing the truth of those affairs, upon which the
eyes and ears of all the West world are bent at this day.

But these sufficing to bring more to mind, and plainly showing to them, that
have any eye open, that these painted pretenses of plausible things, s^ggested
to draw your Queen on by little and little ^ro^ time to time, into this
confusion, have so far failed and wanted to performing that they promised,
and of bringing forth the fruit, that the fair blossoms gave hope of, that
after fourte^e years, following the trade and steps of those men in steed
o^ al quiet, security, and prospesperous Reign, she never fo^nd her self
less quiet, less secure, nor her State more doubteful: wisdom (I wene) yea
and Machiauell him self, if he were now living, would think it good policy
to ^rie Ho bytimes, to believe words no longer, but deeds an other while: and
rather wisely to acknowledge her self seduced and out of the way, by following
those erroneous Guydes, that forsaking the high way of her public office, have
led her the by-path of their own private gain: than wilfully to run forward
without sparing thick or thin or care of inconueniencie.

If your Q. therefore shall vouchesafe to consider, No benefit to her, nor hers,
by none of all the changes.
by occasion of these few, what other important mutations and practices have
passed under her name and Authority, since the time of her Reign: and shall by
that great wisdom, wherewith God has endued her, disco^er and find (as
easily she may, since every man sees it) that by none of them al, unto her
self, or her State, to her Realm or Dominions, to her Line or Succession, to
her Nobility, or people, no manner quiet nor security, no common benefit,
nor care, no provision, nor honor, no estimation, nor other advancement has
ben^ in deed and in truth purchaced or procured, But preiudices many.
but clean contrarily by them al almost, her self in Honor touched, her
security of State weakened, her assured friends in number minished, and in
affection alienated, and thereby her Realms and Dominions endangered of
damage, her known Succession by penal law labored to be brought in doubt
(that of her own body fast growing to despair, and that of her next Line,
brought even to the brinke to be utterly extirped) her Nobility so wasted in
number, and their credit so consumed, that few or none of them have authority
with her, or reputation with her people: and finally, her Commons so corrupt
with want of conscience and la^ke of fear to sin, and so fast growing to
inciuilitie by lack of Justice and Religion, that al fidelity is ^ailed, al
mutual trust ceased, and scant is one man found that dare and may safely trust
an other: yea and that all this has been by art and cun^ing compassed and
contrived by a couple of Companions (whom she called to credit, of base
parents borne, at s^hoole barely maintained, first called to Court, the one
from Book, the other from Buttery, now more then Barons by Office and
Dignity, more then Earls in possessions and wealth, and more then any Dukes
in authority with her) chiefly to feed their own humors, to serve their
own turns, and to bring their own private purposes about, which were, to
root out the old Religion, and with the name of a new, for a while, in short
time to leave none at al, to raise a Rabble of Rascals as base as themselves to
countenance and acco^panie them, to enrich themselves without limit or measure,
to pla^t them a Posterity among the Noblest, to ^stablish their own Authority
stable and permanent, and finally, to advance that Family unto the Croune, to
which by marriage they have united them selves: if this fruit and end only, her
self (I say) shall see, to have grown and been gathered of all the mutations in
her time, and in truth to have brought forth none other to her self, nor to
any of hers, and the promised bringing also al Princes to her bent, to be at
this day as far from performance, as when they began it, what show and face
so ever they lay on the matter: tha^ has she great reason, now at length, to
know these Catilines for such, as they are, and to cash and cast ^oth them and
their Counselles, out of her credit and Court, and thereby recover her self
out of their thraldom and subjection: in which by fraudule^t fears, by
crafty counsel, by false persuasions, and by many a loud lie upon many an
honest man, they have long holden and de^^ined her.

Out of which captivity if she were once delivered, and thereby at liberty to
lay the fault where it is (which she can never do, whiles they be the chief
of al her consultations there would be do doubt, but that grace would so work
with her wisdom and good nature, that in short time she would redress these
disorders, and restore her self again to her primative quiet and first
assured State.

The best (...) of her ^^^urne with safeti^.
The way whereunto (if I may presume to show it her) is, first to reconcile her
self unto the Sea Apostolic: whereby she

Than, to renew and establish the unfeigned

Than, to restore her Cousin of Scotland

Than, in one place or other to marry

Than, to reduce her Nobility to their just and woonted credit, and by their
advise

Than, to rule her people by Religion

And lastly, to repair the wasted Treasures

These shall she find to have been the steps and presidents of her Royal
Progenitors. And in these shall she find true qui^tnes, both outward, and
inward, true honor before God, and man, unfeigned amity abroad, and hearty
obedience at home, faithful love and reverence of her Coosins and Heirs, and
al duty and loialtie of her Nobility: which are the principal and undoubted
pillars of al security and safety of every Christen Princes State. And by
these, shall she long (if God so please) enjoy her Reign, and end it (when
God will) with the quiet and peace, that she began it.

Which way if her pleasure be not to take, but that (either for favor, or
fear of the Faction that her self has set up) she shall make choice to run
on the race already begone, The inconveniences of going forward.
with what so ever eue^t: it is not only likely, but it must be looked for,
that she has already seen the best and the quietest of her time.

That she shall be, as she has been, in every thing almost, still circumue^ted
more or less. Her name shall be abused, her Authority missapplied, the Religion
of her Realm so often turned this way, and that way, til none at al shall be leaft
in her peoples hearts, the Justice of the same shall be set as an harlot out to
hyre, he^ Nobility shall be wasted, til few be leaft of them, and they of no
credit. She shall bear the Infamy of consuming the old, and her Catilins shall
have the glory of erecting the new. She weakened by the one, and they
strengthened by the other. Her people shall obey her no farther, then fear of
man's law shall enforce the^, her Foreign frinds shall fall from her, her Foreign
enemies shall grow insolent and glory over her, her Realm shall still be
impouerisshed and oppressed with Strangers, of whose love nor service she can
never be sure: of Foreign invasions ever in doubt, of tumults at home never
assured, her Nobles brought low that should defend her, her Kindred consumed,
that should stand by and succeed her, her security talked of, but nothing
intended, the succession of her own line in short time desperate, and she made
the Instrument to extinct the next.

Which when she has done, and taken them away, whose lives are her suertie:
then shall the time be ripe, untimely also to make an end of her own, if God
by some mean prevent not the malice of them, that this way lead her, for
their own^ ambition, to her own destruction. And than shall she leave her
Croune in question, the Religion in debate, her people divided for both, and
her Realm answerable for in^inite injuries to al Nations adioining (the smart
whereof, you my Lords of the Nobility, and your Successions, shall cheifely
feel) without hearty frinde abroad to succor or defend it.

And after al these troubles and garboiles in which she shall lead and end the
rest of her reign, with the l^cke of all the comfortes of this life, yet shall
she leave the things, for which she forreinly contended, in little other terms,
then she found them, as fourtene years experience already has taught her. For
still remain both Flanders, and France, Italy and Spain in their former state
touching Religion (which she was borne in hand^ by her caitife Catilines, would
with her have renounced the obedience of the Church of Rome) and Calice still
French as it wa^ before: and their Princes still so ready and hable in all those
their Contreis to impugn her Proceedings, that she has no more hope, then she
had at the first, of drawing them to follow her example therein.

Whereby her wisdom may see, with what care and fear she turmoileth, how
vainly she labors, and is likely at last in great infamy to end her
days, and with her body to bury her honor, with more reproach for other men's
faults, then ever any Parent of hers, Prince of that Realm, has sustained for
their own. Which God grant her as much grace to consider and prevent, as he
has given her wisdom to understand and perceive.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Fol. Page. Lin. Fault. Correction. 5. 1. 9. pooke powke. 2^. 2. 17. her state
her, of her state. 25. 2. 13. demandes, demanders. 49. 1. 11. your Queen the
Queen. 5^. 1. 27. forgeth, forgeteth. 73. 1. 19. Sat, State. 122. 2. 25.
example: Bishop examples: Bisshops 145. 1. margin. Barthol, Bar. Ibid. 2.
margin. Donat, Dannet. 1^5. 2. 2. for coosen, for her coosen 166. 2. 6. her?
herself?


