VERSES Of Praise and Joy, Written upon her Majesty's preservation.

Whereunto is annexed Tychbornes lamentation, written in the Tower with his
own hand, and an answer to the same.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1586.

VERSES OF PRAISE, AND JOY, Written upon her Majesty, after the apprehension
and execution of Babington, Tychborne, Salisburie, and the rest.
Among spyny cares sprung up now at the last,
sprowt higher then the hautiest of their heads:
That with thy Roselike Royal peace (O Prince)
all other princes thou must ouer-peere.
Thee and thy Realm oppressed it happ'ly pleased
our highest God in safety to preserve.
For this, thy people publicly applaude,
and every where abounds godly love.
Good f^rtune and an everlasting fame
attend on th^e in all thine actions.
This makes thy friends, this makes thy foes admire,
and daily hold thy name in reverence.
Honored art, Princely behavior, zeal to good,
and with thee rest a Royal majesty.
These four fair gifts (O Prince, of right renound)
thy Princely mind most Princely Ente^teignes.
Live Sovereign Lady, Live Elizabeth
health of thy Country, help to all our harms.
Seeld seen, thou Reign'st a maiden and a Queen,
Long may thou live, and heaven be thy home.
Tychbornes Elegy, written with his own hand in the Tower before his execution.
MY prime of youth is but a frost of cares,
my feast of joy is but a dish of pain:
My Crop of corn is but a field of tares,
and al my good is but vain hope of gain
The day is past, and yet I saw no sun,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
My tale was heard, and yet it was not told,
my fruit is fallen, and yet my leaves are green:
My youth is spent, and yet I am not old,
I saw the world, and yet I was not seen.
My thread is cut, and yet it is not spunne,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
I sought my death, and found it in my womb,
I looked for life, and saw it was a shade:
I trod the earth, and knew it was my Tomb,
and now I die, and now I was but made.
My glass is full, and now my glass is run,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
Hendecasyllabon T. K. in Cygneam Cantionem Chidiochi Tychborne.
THy prime of youth is frozen with thy faults,
thy feast of joy is finished with thy fall:
Thy crop of corn is tares auailing naughts,
thy good God knows, thy hope, thy hap and all
Short were thy days, and shadowed was thy sun
T'obscure thy light vnluckelie begun.
Time tries truth, and truth has treason tript,
thy faith bare fruit as thou had faithles been:
Thy ill spent youth shine after years has nipt,
and God that saw thee has preserude our Que(...)
Her thread still holds, thine perished though vnspun,
And she shall live when traitors lives are done.
Thou soughtst thy death, and found it in desert,
thou look'dst for life, yet lewdlie forced it fade:
Thou trodst the earth, and now on earth thou art,
as men may wish thou never had been made.
Thy glory and thy glass are timeles run,
And this, O Tychborne, has thy treason done.
In nefariam Babingtoni caeterorumque coniurationem, Hexasticon.
Quid non Papa ruens spondet, modo iussa capessas?
en diadema tibi, sceptraque, pactus Hymen.
Dissimilem votis mercedem nacta, sed ausis*
and sceleri retulit turba nefanda parem.
Successere regi regno, coruoque coronae,
pro sceptro laqueus, pro thalamo tumulus.
The same in english.
The Pope to prop his ruinous state,
does golden proffers make:
Crown, scepter, royal marriage bed,
to those his part that take.
The traytrous crew late reapt reward*
not fitting their desire:
But as their purpose bloody was,
so shameful was their hire.
For Chair of state, a stage of shame,
and crows for crowns they have:
Their scepter to a halter changde,
their bed become their grave.
Ad Serenissimam Reginam Elizabetham, Apostrophe.
Regna, viue, vale, mundi, patriae, atque tuorum,
splendida, sola, vigens, gloria, vita, salus.
In te speramus, per te spiramus ouantes:
det spirare tibi saecula multa Deus.
Pro te dulce mori, nisi pro te viuere durum*
at sine te mors est viuere, vita mori.
The same in english.
Reign, live, and blisfull days enjoy,
thou shining lamp of the earth:
The only life of countries state,
thy subjects health and mirth.
On thee we ground our hope, through thee
we draw our breath with joy:
God grant thee long amongst us breathe,
God shield thee from annoy.
To die for thee were sweet, to live
were wretched but for thee.
Without thee, death a second life,
life double death should be.

