A prayer meet to be said of all true Subjects for our Queen Elizabeth, and
for the present stare.
Minister. O Lord, save our most gracious Queen Elizabeth.


Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.




Let us pray.

O Almighty God, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the only God and gouerner of
all things: Thou art he, by whom alone Kings do reign: Thou most high,
bear the rule over all the kingdoms of men: Thou in Christ thine only
Son, being the most gracious Father of thy chosen Church, do for the
comfortable nourishing of it, dispose the Royal state among men. Through this
thy grace it is come to pass, that we the English nation now a portion of the
same thy Church, do enjoy ye government of Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have
against al practices of thine adversaries delivered out of perils: and by thy
mighty hand brought to reign over us. Mercifully guiding her, thou have made
her unto us a mother, to thine afflicted flock a nource: in that benefit which
we have in liberty of true Religion and common peace. Merueilously protecting
her, thou have kept her to defend us, to use and hold ^ as purposes to spoil
her of us, us of her, and both her and us of thy Religion, and of peace,
determining to deliver us over, to the tyranny of that shameless sinful man
of Rome, and the bloody sword. In which purpose of mischief: if thou had
permitted them to prevail, we had suffered for our sins at thy hand O Lord,
most justly, but at their hands most unkindly, unnaturally and unjustly. For we
do offend thy majesty many ways, we offend not them any ways: Yet such is
their waywardnes, that they do hate us, yea such is their wickedness that they
will hate us, only because we in truth do profess, to serve thee. For this
cause they conspire against thee, O God, like hipocrites, against our Queen
like Traitors, against our common country like spoylers, against us even as
Cain did against Abel. But thy great goodness has devised better for us, then
they do: Thou have spared us, whom they would have spoiled. Thy wisdom has
unfolded their wickedness. Thy providence has prevented their purpose. All
honor, praise, with thanks in the congregation, and by every member thereof be
given to thee, O God of grace, O Lord of pity, O father of mercy for ever
and ever. And now we beseech thee, O merciful father, be not provoked with our
sins to give us over to the lust of our ennemies: do not make us a reproach to
these heathen. Let not the Jew, the Turk, the Papist in our overthrow triumph
against thee, saying: Where is now their God? but of thy rich mercy in Christ
forgive our sins, by thy renewing spirit amend us, and work out the good
work which thou have begone among us. Confound and bring to naught the
attemptes of these and the like enemies, as thou did at Babel. Infold them
in the folly of their own counsels, as thou did Achitophel. By thine Angel
sinite their force, as thou did to Senacheribe. In their desperate attemptes
let them be browned, as was Pharao. In their treasons overtake them, as thou
did Absalon. If any of them are to be converted, turn them as thou did
Manasses. Otherwise let them feel their due punishment: as did Dathan with his
conspirators, that of these also may be left an example of thy justice to the
posterity. We do likewise most humbly beseech thee to continue thy goodness
toward us even of thine old wonted mercy. Deliver our Queen Elizabeth from
evil: Direct her in the true knowledge of thee, to acknowledge thy benefits
toward her, and her duty toward thee: Kindle more and more in her heart
zeal to serve thee her self, and to have thee served of us sincerely. Guide
her still to govern us justly in godly peace. Give unto us also which are
subjects, thankful hearts to thee, faithful to her in thee, charitable
toward all men, that all which live under her government, Counselors,
Ministers, and every other in their place and calling, may be thoroughly
sanctified in holiness to live before thee. Thus prolonging her reign over us,
do thou in it plant thy Religion among and in us, so that it may with power
reform and rule us, and remain to our posterity after us, that the praise of
thy name may continue in the Hearts and Mouths of the English nation, that
England may say for ever: The Lord be praised. Amen.

God save our Queen Elizabeth, and confound all her enemies. Amen.
Priere propre a dire pour chacun vray, and fidele subict, pour nostre Roine
Elizabeth, and pour l'Estat present: mise en Francois par Jacques Bellot,
Gentilhome cadomois.
Le Ministre. Seigneur saune nostre tres-gracieuse Dame, la Roine Elizabeth.


Reponse. Et nous exauce par ta miscricorde, quand nous t'Inuoquout.


Prions le Seigneur.



DIEV tout puissant, Roy des Roys, Seigneur des Seigneurs, le seul Dieu, and
gouuerneur de toutes chooses, C'Est de ton oeuure que les Rois regne^t: Toy
tres-haut as la souuerainete sur tous les Empires du monde: Comme tu te
monstres pere des tiens en ton filz Jesus Christ, aussy pour la co^seruation
and asseurance de ton Eglise: tu establis les Rois enter les homes: Par ceste
tienne grace (Seigneur) tu nous as suscite Elizabeth nostre Roine pour auoir
gouuernement surnous, laquelle de te^ps en temps, il t'a pleu deffendre de
beaucoup de perilz, pour confermer de plus en plus, sonsceptre, and, sa
couronne a l'Encontre de tous ses aduersaires: Tu as este sa conduite, and
address par ta bonte: Tu nous l'as donnee pour mere, and pour nourrice, a ta
pour Eglise, a fin que souz sa protection, estans maintenuz en paix, and
liberte de conscience, nous puissions te seruir tout le temps de nostre vye en
saintete, and Innocence: Tu nous l'as conseruee miraculeusement: Tu l'as gardee
pour nous deffendre, and nous fair Iouir de ce grand benefice: Tu as
maintenant par ta puissante, and admirable mercy manifest les practiques de
ces cruelz, and cauteleux ennemis, qui auoient conspire de l'Oster du millieu
de nous, and l'Esteignant, d'exterminer la Religion, and troubler la Paix: Et
ainsy nous vendre and liurer en proye a ce detestable filz de perdition, and
sa^guinaire Antechrist de Rome. Seigneur, nous confessons qu' a cause de noz
pechelz, and rebellions, nous sommes indignes de ta faueur, and meritons
d'Estre exposez a l'aba^don pour estre deuorez de ces cruelz rebels: Mais ce
pendant, O Dieu! Ce que tu eusses peu fair iustement, eust este excecute par
eux iniustement: Nous prouoquons a tous momens ton ire a l'Encontre de nous,
and neantmoins, nous ne leur donnons aucune occasion des' Offencer contre nous:
Mais leur malice est sy grande qu' ilz nous haissent sans cause: Voire leur
Impiete est sy horrible, qu' llz cerchent nostre tuine, seulement pour ce que
nous inuoquons ton saint nom: Ilz atte^ ^ de son friar Abel: Mais ilz n' en
veullent pas tant a nous qu'a toy O Dieu: Or par ta singuliere bonte, tu nous
as espargnez, and retirez de leur danger: Tu as confondu leur sagesse, and les
as surprins en leurs ruses, and finesses: Aussy (Seigneur) tout honeur,
louanges and graces t'En soient rendues a Iamais, en l'assemblee de tes fideles.

Maintenant, nous te supplions (pere misericordieux) de fair paix auec,
lestiens, and de n'abandonner ton heritage: Ne permets point que nous soions en
risee, and moquerie aux Infideles, Queles Iuifs, Paiens, Turcs and Papists, ne
triomfent contre toy de nostre desolation, Et dient: Ou est maintenant leur
Dieu? Mais selon tes grandes compassions, ne nous Impute point noz offenses,
and pour nous render conformes a ta volonte, Renouuelle en nous ton esprit:
Acheue l'Oeuure que tu as commence en nous, and poursuy de confondre, and
disciper les enterprises de ceux, qui te sont contraires, comme Iadis tu
confondis, and discipas l'Enterprise de Babel: Enueloppe les en la folly de
leurs propres conseilz, comme tu enueloppas Achitophel: Frappe les par ton
Ange, comme tu frappas les forces de Senacherib: Submerge leurs desesperees
enterprises, ainsy que tu noias Pharaon: Preuien les en leurs trahisons, ainsy
que tu preuins Absalon: Et sy quelques vnz d'Entre eux sont a conuertir, Change
leurs coeurs, comme tu feis a Manasses: Sinon, fay leur sentir leur just
punissement, comme tu feis a Dathan and a ses accomplices, a celle fin qu' llz
seruent d'Exemple a la posterite, pour cheminer en ta crainte, and adorer tes
Iugements: Nous te supplions aussy treshumbleme^t, de continuer tes bontez
enuers nous, selon ton ancienne accustumee misericorde: Deliure de tout mal
nostre Roine Elizabeth: Sois luy pour guard, and forteresse: Address la de
plus en plus en la vrage cognoissance de ton salut, a fin que recognoissant,
co^bien grands sont tes benefices enuers elle, Elle S'estudye a auancer le
regne de ton filz: Enflamme en son coeur, le zele qu'Elle a de te seruir, and
de fair que ton service soit conserve enter nous en toute purete: Conduy la
tousiours, a fin qu'Elle domine sur nous en bonne paix: Ne souffre point, que
nous son peuple, soions ingrats enuers toy: Mais nous octroie un coeur pur,
pour te rendte l'honeur, and recognoissance, que nous te deuons, and que nous
tous, qui viuons souz son authorite, Conseillers, Ministres, and autres, chacun
en sa vocation, Menans vne vye saint en ta presence, luy rendions obbeissance
tell qu'll appartient: Et prolongeant son regne sur nous, Il te plaise la
guider en sort, qu'Elle pla^te de plus en plus, la piete enter nous: Qu'elle
reform ce qui est a reformer, and qu'elle nous gouuerne en Justice, Sy que tell
bien nous demeure a Iamais, and a nostre posterite, faisant que la louange de
ton nom continue es coeurs, and es bouches de nous tous, a fin que tes fideles
puisset dire a perpetuite, Le Seigneur soit love. Ainsy soyt-il.

Dieu sauue nostre Roine Elizabeth, and confonde tous ses ennemis, Ainsy
soyt-il. Los equitable.
Imprinted at London by Richard Jones, welling near unto Holberne bridge.


