THE Banquet of Sapience, compyled by sir Thomas Eliot knight.

Newly corrected and imprinted.

Anno Christi. 1564.



To the king our most gracious sovereign lord, the prologue of sir Thomas
Eliot knight, to the Banquet of Sapience.
AFter long fasting and also much travail, it has been thought ever
(most noble Prince) not only convenient, but also to stand with good reason,
to have a dinner or supper provided with meats sufficient, as well to recreate
the vytall spirits, as to restore eftsoon the strength abated by labors.

Moreover in this time of the year, called the Spring time, provoked by the
natural beauty and joyous aspect of the florishynge habyte of this temporal
world, the nature of them, in who^ is any spark of gentill courage, requires
to solace and bankette with mutual resort, communicatinge together their
fantasies and sundry devises, which was not abhorred of the most wise and
noble Philosophiers, as may appear to them, that have vouchesaued to read the
works of Plato, Xenophon, and Plutarche, which they named Symposia, called
banquettes in English. Semblably I being styrred (most excellent Prince) by
a like imitacion, consideringe the long abstinence and fasting of this
present ^^ nte, with also the continual travail that your highenesse, your
counsel, and diverse your subjects have susteygned in consuliynge about the
weal^ publyque of this your graces most noble realm, I have provided this
little bankette (so is this little treatise entitled) composed of sundry wise
counsayles, gathered by me out of the works of most excellent persons, as
well faithful as Gentiles. And like as in this lusty time, things do appear
in sundry delectable colors and facions: so in this little book shall your
grace and other readers behold sentences sundry and diverse, which I do apply
unto banketting dishes, made and seasoned by Sapience her self, and served
forth to the table by the^, which did write or pronounce them. And as for me,
I have no more part in the banquet, nor deserve any more praise therefore, then
one of the^ yt bears a torch before every course when they come from the
dresser: And yet where there is such abundance, I may perchance for my labor
hau^ the reuercio^ or scraps of some of the dishes. Finally forasmuch as
diverse meats be of diverse qualities, some sweet, some poynaunt, some eygro
doulce: it shall be expediente, that every dishe of this banquet, be thoroughly
couched doubtyng not bu^ how so ever the taste shall content men, all shall be
wholesome, if they be well masticate, and not hastily devoured. This little work
with my labors have I dedicate unto your highness, unto whom of bounden
duty, being your humble servant, I ow all my studies, prayer, service and
loyalty, besechinge your grace to receive this little work, as a token of my
sincere mind and intent, according to your accustomed and incomparable
gentleness. And for my part I shall daily pray the auctour and fountain of
Sapience to preserve your most royal person in the abundance of his
grace, to the comfort of your loving subjects.

The Introduction to the Banquet.
SApience has builded a hause for her selfe^ she has prepared her wine, and
la^^ e forth her table: she calls ou^ abroad in ^ he streets, and in the
chief assemble of people, and at the gates of the city, she speaket^ with a
loud voice: Ye babes, how long will ye delight in your childishnes? And how
long will fools co^ ete those things, which shall hurt them? And they which
lack witte^ hate knowlage and learning? Come on, and eat ye my bread and
drink ye my wine, that I have ordained now for you. To me do belong caunsaile
and equity: mine is prudence: and mine also fortitude. By me kings to reign,
and makers of laws do determine those things that be rightwise. By me princes
do govern, and men in a^ ctoritie do give sentence according to justice. I
love them that love me: and they that woke early shall find me, with me do
remain both substance and renoume, stately riches, and Justice: my fruit does
excel gold and stones precious: and my branches are better then fine tried
silver, my walks be in the high ways of justice, and in the middle of the
paths of judgment, to the intent that I will make them rich that do love
me, a^ d foll up their treasures.

THE BANQUET OF SAPIENCE.
ABSTINENCE.
Wine and youth is a double flame of carnal desire. Hieroni.


That man seldom falls into things unlawful which in things lefull can
sometime refrain. Gregorius.


A man should so know the craft of continence, that therewith he may sle^ the
vices of the body, and save well his person.

Nature is content with a few things and littell, whose contentacion if thou
do oppress with excess, that which thou eatest, shall be unto the
vnpleasa^t and hurtful. Seneca.


Better is a man pacient then strong, and he that maistreth his will,
surmou^teth a conqueror. Solomon.


ADVERSITY,
THe potters vessel is tried in the furnes, and good men be proved in time of
adversity. Solomon.


Hyde thy misfortune, that thine ennemie rejoice net. Periander


There is nothing so grievous, but an upright mind may find therein solace.
Seneca.


In all thy troubles remember this reason, hard things may be mollified,
streicte things may be lowsed, and heavy things shall little grieve them that
can handsomely bear it. Seneca.


Trouble is cause of patience: patience makes proof: proof brings in hope:
hope is never rebuked. Paulus.


My child neglect not gods correction, but when he does punish thee, think
it not tedious, for whom god loves, him will he chastise.

Coals being in the forge, do burn and consume, but the gold is there tried:
the one is turned to ashes, while the other is fined. Augusti.


The forge is the world, good men are the gold, adversity is the fire, the
workman is god.

It pertains to virtue, to suffer adversity: it belongs to wisdom in
adversity always to be merry: pluck up thy heart and suffer gods pleasure, for
the chief^ part of virtue is to taste and feel how sweet and delectable is
the lord of all wisdom. Bernard.


The wise man in tourments is evermore happy. Lactantius.
But he that is troubled either for faith or justice, or for god almighty,
that sufferance of pain brings a man to perfect felicity.

I judge the ^ o be miserable, that never knew misery. What a man may, or
may not, it is never perceived, until he be proved. Seneca.


AFFECTION.
VUhere affection ones in the heart of man enters, and flows into his
breast, and drowneth his heart, fidelitee, virtue, good fame, and honestee him
clean forsakes, and he daily in all mischief increases. Plautus^


Where affection abounds, there good fame and virtue oftentimes perishes.
Euripides


AMBICION.
THey that be infected with ambicion and are desirous of honor, would be
exhorted to possede only such treasure as is unspotted, and clean from all
mischief, which may not of any annemy be corrupted, nor with rebuke noted,
nor with any dishonestie sclaundered. Pluturch^


The devil did fall only because he rather would be a lord then a subject.
Augusti.


He that is in authority, let him consider how he comes to it, and coming
well to it, how he ought to live well in it: and living well in it, how he must
govern: and gouerninge wisely, he must often call to remembrance his own
infirmitee. Gregorius


A virtuous man should receive rule or auctoritee, as if he were thereto
compelled: but he that lacks virtue, though he be compelled, yet let him not
take it.

Ambition is a subtle mischief: a privy poison, a covert pestilence, the
forger of deceit, the mother of hypocrisy, the nourice of envy, the
fountain of vices, the mouth of devotion, the blinder of hertes, making
diseases of remedies, and sickness of salues. Bernard.


It is hard for him that desires to be above all men, to keep alwaie equity,
which is the chief part of justice. Tullius.


He that is desirous of glory, is soon stirred to do things against equity.

AVTHORITIE.
High authority is always in peril. For it is hard to hold that, which thou
can not welde. Quintus Curtius.


They that would excel all other in a city or country, should allure their
inferiors with indifferency, gentilnesse and liberalitee: And content great
me^ with diligence, affability, and sobrenesse, and with good reasons retain
them in the weal publik^, in one consent and agreement. Pluturch^


Flee that authority, wherein springs continually new occupation and sundry.
Seneca.


AMITY.
I Suppose this to be the very true law of amity, a man to love his frinde no
les nor no more tha^ he loves him self Augusti.


Amity either takes or makes men equal, and where inequality is, by
pre-eminence of the one, and much baseness of the other, there is much more
flattery than friendship. Hieronimus.


In amity the thing is not so much to be sought for, as the will and intent,
the one between men is oftentimes given, the other only proceeds of love, and
the same thing to will or will not, is constant amity.

Where the manners be diverse, and studies repugnant, can never be frindship^
Ambros.


He that is beloved in time of prosperitee, it is veraie doubtefull, whether
the fortune, or else the person be the thing that is favored. Gregorius.


A faithful friend is a sure protection, he yt finds such one finds a
tresure. Solomon.


A friend is not known in things that be pleasaunt^.

In things displeasaunte, an ennemie is ^^^ ied.

They be never faithful in friendship, whom gifts have gotten, and love never
ioygned. Isidorus.


That is true friendship, that looks for nothing of his friend, but only
his favor, as who says, without meede, loves his lover.

We be not borne for our selves only, but partly our countreie, partly our
friends claim an interest in our natiuitee. Plato.


Let us see that we use always that lyberalitie, whereby we may profit our
friends, and do no man damage. Tullius.


In things most prosperous the counsel of friends is most to be used.

The strength of a realm does not consist in great puisaunce or treasure, but
in friends, whom thou can get neither by force, nor provide the^ with money,
but they be provided with gentleness and confidence only. Salustius.


APPARAILE.
THe apparaile, the laughter, and gate of a man do show what he is. Ecclesiast


The right apparaile of christen men and women, is in no manner of deceitful
painting and trimminge, nor yet the pompous apparaile and jewels, but it is
their good conditions and manners.

Neither to much sluttishnes, nor exquisite nicenes becomes a christian.
Hieronimus.


Thou woman when thou paintest thy face with material colors, thou put
out the true picture of god. Ambros.


Foul manners worse then dirt defyleth fair garments, fair conditions do
garnysh foul garments with laudable acts. Plautus.


She is not well apparailed, that is not well manered.

He that feign would have business, let him get him a ship and a wife. For in
no two things is there more business, for if thou intendest to apparaile them
both, they two will never be sufficiently trimmed.

ALMS DEED.
IF thou have much, give thou abundantly: If thou have little, yet give some
what gladly: thereby do thou lay up a good treasure again the time of
necessity. For alms delivers the from sin and death, ne will suffer thy
soul to enter into darkness. Tobias.


Blessed is he that considers the poor man and nedy, in the troublesome day
the lord shall deliver him. David.


He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor man, he shall ones cry,
and god shall not here him. Solomon.


He that does alms, does offer up sacrifice. Eccle^ i.


If I give al my goods to the feding of poor men, and have no charity, it
nothing shall profit me. Paulus.


Alms of the heart is much more than alms of the body. The alms of charity
without worldly substance suffiseth, that which is corporalli given without a
merciful heart, is not sufficient. Augusti.


Per^ ite compassion is to prevent the hungry ere the beggar desire the.
Charitee is not pefite, when crauynge exhorts it. Idem,


ACCVSATION.
IT is better that an ill man be not accused, then to be suffered to go
unpunished. Liuius.


ARROGANCY.
A Sturdy heart shall susteigne damage, and he that loves peril, therein
shall perish. Ecclesia^^


The congregation of proud men shall never prosper: the sin that in them is
planted, shall be dug up, and not b^ perceived.

To set little be that, which men do deem of the, is not only the sign of
an arrogant person, but also of a man foolish and dissolute. Tullius.


AGE.
AGe which is reverend, is not accounted by length of time, or nu^bre of years,
for the wit of man is not the hoare hears: but very age is the life
uncorrupted. How seemly is it to a white head to have a good judgment, and to
old men to understand counsel? Seneca.


There is nothing more reprochefull, than an old man, which has none other
argument to prove that he has lived long, but only his years. Seneca.


AVARICE.
O With what difficultee shall they that have money enter into the kingdom of
heaven? Uerily I say unto you, more lightly may a Camel pass thorough the eye
of a needell, than a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven. Christus apud
luca^


No doubt but they that be rich, or coueite to be rich, do fall in
temptacion and snare of the devil, into sundry unlawful desires, and also
unprofitable, which drowneth a man in damnation and death everlasting. Paulus.


To a man covetous and nigarde, substance is to no purpose: to an envious man
what profyteth riches? Ecclesi.


From the least to the most, all men be covetous, from the prophet to the
priest, all do dissemble. Ieremias.


The chariote of avarice is carried on four wheles of vices, which are fainte
courage, ungentleness, contempt of god, forgetfulness of death: And two horses
do draw it, reuenie and nigardship: to them both is but one cartar, desire to
have: that cartar drives with a whippe having two cords, appetite to get, and
dread to forlette. Bernard.


He that heapeth up riches, and sets his mind to gather for other men,
having no respect to justice, his goods shall be consumed in riote and folly.
Solomon.


He that hydeth corn, shall be cursed of people, and benediction shall light on
them that be sellers.

Substance sone come by, shall minish, and that which by little and little with
labor is gotten, shall increase and continue.

Hell and pardicion be never filled, nor the insatiable eyes of a covetous
person.

He that makes haste to be rich, and has indignation at other, little weneth
he how sone after, need will attach him.

Everlasting woe be to him that couetously does gather to maintain his house,
that his neste may stand high, and thinks to escape the great stroke of
vengeance. Abacus.


Poverty lacks many things, couetise all things. The nygarde to no man is
good, but to him self he is worste.

Money, if thou can use it, is thy servant and droudge, if not, she is thy
lady and sovereign.

To practice in the public weal for to get richesse, is not only a shame,
but also a thing to all men most odiouse. Tullius.


Inordinate desire of riches and rule is the first matter, whereof springs al
evil for covetous appetite, subuerteth crede^ce honesty, and all other
virtues. Salustius.


It is hard to consent us with that, which occasion does proffer, for the
thing that comes first, does abhor us when we hope to have better. Q.
Curtius.


BABBLYNG.
THat which passes out of ye mouth comes from the heart, and that is the
thing that defiles a man. Matheus.


In much babbling lacks no sin, he is wise that can te^per his language.
Solomon.


A babbling enemy shall less annoye thee, than he that speaks nothing.
Seneca.


That which is oftentimes spoken, troubles the hearer. Aristotle.


Talk so with men, as if God did here thee, speak so to God, as if men
understood thee. Macrobius.


BATTLE.
THat fortitude which preserves by battle the country from infidels, and at
home ^ efendeth feeble men, and true me^ from thieves, agrees with justice.
Hieroni.


In wars ye multitude, nor the puissance unlearned, may so much avail
toward victory, as knowledge and exercise.

He that desires peace, let him prepare for wars, he that would vanquishe,
let him instruct well his people: And he that would acheue his exploytoures, let
him fight with craft, and not with chance or adventure.

War would be in such wise taken in hand, as nothing but peace should seem
to be sought for. Tullius.


Octauian the Emperor was wont to say: That war should not be stirred
without suretee that the gain should be more than the charges, least that the
victory gotten with loss and small adua^ ^tage, may be like to a fish hoke of
gold, which either being broken or lost, can not be paid for with that that
it takes Sextus Aurelius.


Uictorie rests not in a great army but the strength of the battle comes
from heaven. Machabeorum.


Chabrias a noble man was wont to say, an host of hearts that had a lion to
their captain was more to be dread, than an host of lions being led with an
heart. Plutarch.


These four things ought to be in a great captain, knowlage in arms,
valiante courage, authority, and fortune. Salustius.


Sobrenes in a soldier is no less commendable, than strength and hardiness.
Julius Ces.


Idleness is most contrary to soldiers attemptates.

BENEFIT.
Do thou good to a good man, and thou shalt find recompense, and if he can
not requite thee, yet god shall remember thee. Ecclesi.


If thou practice beneficence on a person unworthy, thou geuest occasion to
fools to do lewdly. Democr.


That penefite comes late, that abides a crauynge. Seneca.


A shrewde turn is sooner requit than a good turn, for thank is reputed a
charge, reuengeing for a gain and advantage, Tacitus.


Those benefytes are most thankeful, which a man fyndeth ready, and comes on
quickly, wherein is no tariynge, but only the shamef^ stnes of him that shall
take them. Seneca.


BISHOP.
A Bishop must be without faut, as the steward of almighty god, not proud,
not wrathful, not drunkely, no fighter, not covetous of dishoneste gain, but
a good householder, bountiful, wise, sober, just, holy, and continete,
having the true manner of speech, which is according to learning, wherewith
he may exhort by wholesome doctrine, and reprove them, which will speak to the
contrary. Paulus ad Titum.


BOSTINGE.
BE thou praised of an others mouth and not of thine own. Let a stranger
commend the, and not thine own lips. Solomon.


Nothing does more minishe a man's commendacion, then much auauntinge the
success of his acts. Cicero.


It is a foul thing a man to tell much of him self, specially that which is
false, and with mockes of them which do here him, to seem to resemble the
bosting soldiour. Cicero.


CHASTITEE.
IF thine eye be simple or clean, al thy body shall be bright. Christus in Math.


Chastitee is the beauty of the soul, or of the kings daughter, which is
from within.

Where necessitee is laid unto chastity, authority is given to lechery, for
neither she is chaste, which by fear is compelled, nor she is honest, which
with mede is obtained. Augustine


Chastity without charity is as a la^pe without oil, take the oil away,
the lamp gives no light, take away charity, than pleases not chastity.
Bernard.


There be sire things, that do preserve charity, soberne^ se in diete,
occupacion, sharpenes of the inner apparel refreigning of the senses, that is
to say, the five wits. Also selde communication, and that with honesty, and
eschewing opportunity of the person, the place, and the time. Cassiodorus.


CHARITEE.
IF I had the spirit of prophecy, and knew all mysteries, and all manner of
cunning: Also i^ I had all faith, in so much as I could translate and carry
away mountains, yet were I nothing, if I lacked charity. Moreover, if I did
distribute al my goods, in feding poor people, and although I gave my body to
be burned, having no charity, it nothing avails me. Charity is pacient and
gentill. Cheritie has envy at no man, it does nothing amiss, it is not
puffed out with pride, it fs not ambiciouse, she seeks not her profitte, she
is not moved, she thinks none ill, she reioyseth in no mischief, she ioyeth
with truth, all thing she suffers, al thing she believes, al thing she
hops, al thing she bears. Charity never fails. Paulus.


CONSTANCE.
AS well to much rejoicing in prosperitee, as to much sorrow in adversity
betokens lightness. Tullius.


What so ever is done by necessity is shortly dissolved, and that which is
willingly received, of long time abides. Hieroni.


He that is constant feels no trouble and is without heuinesse. Seneca.


Nothing so well becomes a man, as in every enterp^ y^ e and taking of
counsel, to be sure and constant. Tullius.


What is so great folly, or so unworthy a wise man's constance and grauitee, as
is false opinion? or boldly to defend that, which he does not understand well
and sufficiently?

CARNAL APPETITE.
Carnal appetyte is always a hungered, and of that which is passed, a man is not
satisfied. Hieronimus.


It agrees not with reason, that he whom fear can not vanquishe, to be
subdued with couetise, or he which can be overcome with no pain, to be
vanquished with carnal affection. Tullius.


Carnal appetite more often leaves behind her, cause of repentance, then of
remembrance.

Carnal appetite ennemie to reason, lets all counsel, and dousketh the
eyes of the mind, nor with virtue will have any medlyng.

CONSIDERATION,
HE that intends to do any thing let him con^ yder^ not only how
convenient the thing is that ought to be done, but also what power he has to
bring it to pass. Tullius.


If we will consider what excellency and preeminence is in the nature of man,
we shall well understand, how horrible a thing it is to flow in excess and to
be wanton and delicate, how fair and honest it is to live warely, continently,
sadly and soberly.

He whom fortune never deceived, does not without cause remember the
uncertainty of sundry adventures. Liuius.


If thou consider well things that be passed, thou shall the better give
counsel in things that may happen. Socrates.


Remembrance of acts passed shows to us wherein we offend, and conferring
it with things that ^ e present, we are taught how to refourme it. Galenus.


CONFESSION.
COnfession is the remedy of souls, the confounder of vices, the restorer of
virtues, the vanquisher of devils, what will ^ ou more? It stops helles
mouth, and sets wide open the gates of paradise. Augu^ ti.


The vengeance of God cesseth where man's confession timely preuenteth. Ambros.


Confession is the life of a sinner, the glory of good men, to offenders
necessary, and yet unto just men not inconvenient. Bernard.


Augusti.
CONTEMPT OF VVORLDLY THINGS.
THe world is a sea, and man's covetous desire, is naught else but a tempest.
Do thou love God? than walk thou on the sea, and the fear of the world
is under thy feet: love thou the world? and he will swalowe thee. For he can
toll his lovers unto him, but he can not bear them. Therefore, when thy heart
flittereth in covetous appetite call to thine aid Christ's divinity, that thou
may vanquishe thine inordinate folly.

The pleasure of this world is vanity, which with much expectacion is looked
for, and when it is come, no man can hold it. Augusti.


Boste not of to morrow, thou wottest not what the day will bring, when it
comes. Hieronimus.


Set little by richesse, and thou shalt be rich: set little by renown,
and thou shall be famous: Care not for afflictions, and thou shall overcome
them pass little on rest and quietness, and thou shall obtain them. Chrisost.


In things perteining to man, nothing is so diligently done, but that as well
by the puissaunce of man, it may be undone, for the works of men mortal, also
be mortal. Lactantius.


Nothing is so happy, that it is without fear. Where there is suspicion, the
life is unpleasant. Seneca.


He that is dedicate to the hasardes of Fortune, he prepares for him self much
matter to trouble, which will not shortly be slaked. Idem.


There is one way to go surely, that is, to set little by things worldly, dnd
a man to hold him contented only with honesty. Idem^


CUSTOM.
IN things whereof holy scripture has determined no certaintee, the use of gods
people, and statutes of fathers are to be holden for laws, and likewise as
transgressors of gods laws ar to be punished, so contemners of ecclesiastical
customs ought to be chastised. Augusti.


The wound often renewed is hard to be healed. Isidorus.


Custom teaches that to be little, which seems to be great. Seneca.


Educacion and discipline fourmeth good manners, and men sauoreth always of that
thing, which in youth they have learned.

In truth which appears openly, custom must give place to verity. Augusti.


CORRECTION.
HE that binds a frantike man, and waketh him that has the letargy or
slepynge sickness, displeases both, loves both, and heals both: both
whiles they be sick do disdain him, and when the i be hole do thank him.
Augusti.


Correct not a skorner, least that he hate thee, correct a wise man and he
will thank thee. Solomon.


In correction wrath is specially to be prohibited, for he that will punish
wha^ he is angry, he shall never keep well the mean, which is between to much
and to little. Tullius.


A gentil horse is ruled with the glimse of a rod: A dull royle will uneath
stir with the thrust of a spur. Quintus Curtius.


It is better to be of a wise manne corrected, than to be with the flattery of
fools deceived. Ecclesiast


The ear which will hear his own life rebuked, shall dwell in the middle of
them that be wise men. Solomon.


Be of thine own living a sharp correctour, and of other men's a gentill
refourmer^ and let men here the command small things and easy, and that
thou thy self do great things and peynfull. Chrisost.


Correct thy friend secretly, and praise thy friend openly. Seneca.


It is the part of a wise man, to root up vices, and not the offenders.

A good captain orders his men better by keeping them from ill doing, than
by sore chastising. Salustius.


COVNSAILE AND COVNSAILOVRS.
THey that do al things with counsel, are governed by wisdom. Ecclesiast


Call not them to thy counsel, which lack discre^^ on, for they can love
nothing but that which contenteth their appetite.

To every man disclose not thy mind, lest some do dissemble and after reproach
the.

Son, do al things by counsel, and when thou have done thou shall not
repent thee.

Observe well the law, and follow good counsel, and thy soul shall have
life, and thou shall walk truly, and thy foot shall not trippe. Solomon.


Believe not every spirit, but prove well the spirits if they be good. Joan.


Armure abroad is of little effect, but if there be counsel at home. Tullius.


Governors of the weal public, ought to be like to the laws, the which
not for displeasure, but only for equitee do punish offenders.

That public weal is in better state and in a manner more sure, where the
Prince is not good, than where the kings counsailers and compaignions be ill.
Valerius Maximus


All violent attemptates being set forth without counsel, at the beginning
are puissaunt, but in continuance they are insufficient. Tacitus.


Who will judge him to be necessary iu an other man's cause, which to him self
appears unprofitable. Ambrosius


There ben two things to counsayll most contrary. Haste and Displeasure.

After hasty counsel, next follows repentance.

Ill counsel is worst to the geuer. Hesiodus.


Power without counsel oftentimes breaks his neck with his own bourdeyn.
Aoratius.


COMMVNICATION.
VUhan thou art among fools, keep thy words in store. Ecclesiast


Among wise men be ready to commune.

In the presence of great men presume not to speak, and where as be thine
elders talk not to much.

Honor and praise be in the words of a wise man: The tongue of a fool is
his proper subuercion. Solomon.


Dispute not with a person disdeinfull least he sittyng styl^, do lie in a
wait for for thy words. Tullius.


It is a thing foul a^ d reprochefull, in a sad mattier, to bring in
words wanton or mete for a bankette.

CRVELTIE.
Look what measure you give unto other, like measure shall be met unto you.
Christus in Math.


They which delight in the fall of good men, shall be taken in a trap, and shall
be consumed with sorrow or ever they die. Ecclesiast


Judgment without any mercy shall be given to him that will not be merciful.
Iacobus.


The best example, whereunto a prince should conform him, is to be such one to
his subjects, as he would that god should be to him self. Seneca.


It is even as ill at home as abroad to be much feared, as ill to be drad of
thy slaves and droudges, as of thy chief servants: no man lacked power to
do harm: Add also thereunto, that he that is dradde, of necessity fears.
Never man might be terrible, and also in surety. Idem.


CVRIOSITEE.
Seek not for that, which is out of thy reach: Search not those things, that
exceadeth thy puissaunce, but think on that, which God has commanded the,
and in his sundry works be not to curious. Solomon.


COMPASSION.
THey that trust much to their friends, know not how shortly tears be
dried up. Quintus Curtius.


DEATH.
HE must live il that lacks knowledge how to die well. Seneca.


They which prepare them to battle before that battle approaches, they
being always ready, do easily sustain the first brunte, which is most
troublouse, so death or fortune always looked for, is and seems more easy with
less pain suffered.

One day demeth another, but the last gives judgment of all that is passed.
Plinius.


DELICATE LIVING.
AS it is impossible, that fire should inflame within water, so is it
impossible, that contricion of heart, should be great in things that be
delicate: for they be mere repugnant the one to the other, the contricion being
mother of weping, delicatenes of laughinge, she straineth and wryngeth the
heart, this louseth it and sets it at liberty. Chrisost.


DECEIT.
MEn can better suffer to be denied than to be deceived. Seneca.


Where wrong is committed by two manner of ways, either by force, or by
fraud, fraud belongs to a Fox, force to a Lion, both the one and the other
is to the nature of man wonderful contrary. Tullius.


We ought more to beware of the envy of our friends, than of thassaultes of our
enemies, for these be apparent unto us, the other is covered: and the craft to
anoye, which is not looked for, is ever most dangerous. Laertius.


A false witness shall not be without punishment, ne a forger of lies shall
escape from correction. Solomon.


DETRACTION.
NEither detractors nor yet extorcioners shall possess the kingdom of heaven.
Paulus.


Never detract or backbite any man, nor be seen to get praise by rebukinge of
other: but learn more to adorn thine own life, than to defame others,
remembering the scripture, which says. Love not to pull away a ma^s praise,
lest thou be plucked up by the roots. Hieronimus.


To slander, or to here slaunderers. I can not tell of them two which is
most damnable. Bernard.


We ought to suppose that detracting or ill reporting one of an other for a
private auantage, is more against nature than to suffer any discomoditie, be it
exterior or bodily. Tullius.


DRVNKENNES.
A Drunken work man shall never be rich, and he that sets naught by a
little, shall by a little and a little come unto nothing. Ecclesiast


How sufficient unto a learned man is a small quantity of wine? for therewith
when thou slepest, thou shall not be troubled, nor feel any pain.

Everlasting peine shall be unto you, that do rise early in the morning to
drink excessiuely, and to quaffe until night, that ye may be with wine
excessiuely chaffed. Isaias.


Lechery, wine and sacietee, co^sumeth all wisdom. Oseas.


The drunken man confounds nature, loses both grace and honor, and renneth
headling into everlasting damnacion. Augusti.


Wine inordinately taken, troubles man's reason, makes dulle understanding,
infebleth remembrance, sends in forgetfulness, powers in errors, and
brings forth sluggishnes. Boethius.


DISCORD.
Every realm divided within it self shall be made desolate: and every city and
house divided by mutual co^tencion, shall not long stand. Christus in Math.


In three things my spirit is well pleased, which he also commended before
God and man, the good concord of brethren, the love of neighbors, also man
and wife of one consent and agreement. Ecclesiast


If they, which make peace, be called the children of God, without doubt the
disturbers of peace be the children of Satan. Gregorius.


They that sustain one part of the people, and neglecte the other part, they
bring into the city a thing very peryllous, that is to say, sedicion and
discord. Tullius.


With concord small things grow to be great, with discord the most greatest
things be brought unto nothing. Salustius.


War is sone made, but it is not so shortly discussed, for he is not sure to
finishe it, that first took in hand to begin it.

DIGNITEE.
HE is honorable, a great estate, and a noble man, which disdaineth to serve,
or be subject to vices. Chrisost.


If thou will esteem a man truly, and know what he is, behold him naked,
and let him lay aside possessions, authority, and other fables of fortune:
finally let him put of his body, and behold thou in his soul what he is of him
self, and what he has of o^ her which is not his own. Seneca.


DOLOVR.
LIke as a moth in a garment, and a worm in a free: so heuinesse hurtteth the
heart of a man. Solomon.


In heaviness it is to be forseen and provided, that nothing be done
desperately, nothing fearfully, nothing wretchedly, or any thing folyshly. Idem.


There is no sorrow, but that length of time shall minish it, and make it more
easy. Ser. Sulpitius.


DOCTRINE.
LIke as fair legs be in vain to a criple, so unseemly is doctrine in the
mouths of foles. Solomon.


Doctrine is of such puissaunce, that in good me^ it is the armor of virtue,
to persons corrupted, a spur to do mischief. Gelasius.


Like as woll takes some colors with one only deping, some not without
often steping and boiling, so some doctrines once apprehended be forthwith
showed, some other except they be depely received, and long time settled,
colors not the mind, but only touches it, and that which is promised, it
nothing performed. Seneca.


Doctrine is an ornament to men being fortunate, to men unfortunate a refuge
and succoure. Democr.


No man may profit in hearing so much, but whiles he lives he shall have
need to be taught. Ambros.


A corn field or a wit being never so fertile, without it be exercised, may
never be fruitful. Tullius.


Philosophy is not a commue workmanship, or made for to brag with. It is not
in words but in matter: ne it is given only to pass the time pleasauntly, but
it sets the mind in good frame, the life in good order, it rules our acts
and shows what is to be done, and what to be undone, she sits at our
stern, and among the uncertain sourges, she orders the right course of
our passage, without her no man is in surety. Seneca.


Men believe better their eyes, than their ears. Idem.


It is a long way to go by ruler and precepts, the way by example is short and
commodiouse.

We teach our children liberal sciences, not because those sciences may give
any virtue, but because they make the mind apt to receive it.

DISSIMVLATION.
Sorrow will be to the^ that have double hearts, mischeuous tongues, ill doing
hands, and to the ill liver, that enters into the world by two sundry
ways. Ecclesi.


I hate those men, which in their acts be fools, and in their words
physicians. Pacuuius.


DIETE.
IN many meats is occasion of sickness, and gredie feding shall approach
unto cholere. Eccle.


To him which is fallen to a distemperance in heat or cold, it is expedient
to give things of contrary qualities. Galenus.


If thou will preserve the te^perature which is in thy body, to a moist nature
give things moiste, and a dry nature, dry things, if thou will alter the
temperature, give ever the contrary.

Ye may not only remember, that contrary things be healed by their contrary,
but also in every contrary ye must consider the quantity.

When sickness is in his force, than the most spare diete is to be used.
Hippoc^


The preservation of health begins with labor, which meat and drink
ouertaketh, than sleep ensues, than Uenus follows, but each of them in a
measure. Hippo. and Galenus.


Unclean bodies, and they which of superfluous humors be not well pourged,
the more ye nourish them, the more do ye hinder them.

Stomakes in winter and springtime be hottest, and sleep than is lengest.
Wherefore in those times, meat should be taken in greatest abundance. Hippo.


Suddenly and very much to euacuate or to fill, to make hot or to cool, or
any other wise to remove the state of the body, is very dangerous, for to
much of any thing is enemy to nature.

EASE.
Much ease and default of co^petent labor, makes heat feeble, which should
resolve and make thine that which ought to be purged. Galenus.


They that live in much ease, do gather commonly a fleumatike or slimye juice
in their bodies.

They that do labor much, do gather juice choleric or melancolye, the one
in Summer, the other in corn harvest time, or toward winter.

EXAMPLE.
SO let your light shine before all me^ that they may behold your good works,
and may glorify your father which is in heaven. Christus in Math.


Who so ever lives ill in the syghte of them, over whom he has rule as much
as in him is, he sleeth the beholders. Augusti.


The bishops conversation and household, is set as it were masters of commune
discipline on the top of a moun^ ain. For what so ever he does, all other men
think, they may lawfully do it. Hieroni.


Devout conversation without communication, as much as by example it
profits, by silence it hurts. For with barking of dogs, and staves of the
shepeherdes, the raging wolves be let of their purpose. Hieroni.


More avails example than words. And much better be men taught by doing,
than they are by speaking. Leo.


In the knowledge of things, this is it, which is chiefly most wholesome and
profitable, to mark well the lessons of every example, which is put in famous
remembrance, whereof thou maeist take for thee and thy country, that thou
may ensue, or that which has an ill beginning, or a foul ending, thou
may the better eschew. T. Liuius.


ENVY.
Envy is blind, and can do nothing but disprayse virtue. Liuius.


It is a scab of this world to have envy at virtue. Tullius.


O the miserable conditions of people, that are to be governed, among whom
diligence is hated, negligence is reproved, where sharpnes is perilous,
liberality thankelesse, communication deceiptful, pernicious flattery, every
ma^s man's countenance familiare, many men's minds offended, wait to hurt
privily, fair words openly, when officers be coming, they tarry for them,
while they be present, they do awayte on them, being out of authority, al
do forsake them. Idem.


ELOQVENCE.
Eloquent words become not a fool, nor liyng lips a man in authority.
Solomon.


FAME.
BEtter is a good name than abundance of riches, for good estimacio^
surmounteth all treasure. Solomon.


Those men say ill of thee, that be ill them self. Reason answers, I
should be sore meued, if Cato, Lelius the wise, the other Cato, and the two
Scipions, should so report of me, or if these men should say this with a
ripe judgment, which they do now by malice corrupted. Seneca.


The acts, and not the fame should first be considered. Tullius.


The infamy of man is immortal, for she is alive when thou think her dead.
Paulus.


FAITH.
OUr lord will reward every man according to his justice and faith. Regum. ^.


We that believe Christ, let us follow Christ's living. Hieronimus.


They which believe in God, let them endeavor them to excel in good works
Paulus ad Titum.


Like as the body is dead, wherein is no spirit, so that faith is dead where
there lack works. Iacobus.


The faith of a christian is joined with charity, and without charity, is
the faith of the devil. Augustine


Faith not exercised, sone waxes sick, and being unoccupied it is assaulted
with sundry displeasures. Paulus Romano.


Not the hearers of the law be rightwyse in the presence of God, but the doers
of the law shall be justified. Christus apud mat^


Not every man that says to me, lord lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but they which do the will of my father which is in heaven.

FEAR.
THe root of wisdom is to fear God and the branch thereof, shall long time
endure. Solomon.


There is none authority of so great a puissaunce, that oppressing with dread
may long endure. Tullius.


Whom men fear they do hate, and every man whom he hated, he desires to
peryshe. Ennius.


Dread and terror be weak bonds of love, for if that they break, and men
cease to fear, than begin they to hate.

It is more danger to be dread than to be despised, for needs must he fear
many whom many fears. Seneca.


FOLLY.
A Foles way in his own eye is best a wise man hears good counsel. Solomon.


He that answers before that he hears, proves him self to be a fool and
worthy rebuke. Ecclesiast


A wise sentence in a fools mouth, shall not be regarded, for he tells it
not in opportunity. Paulus


Talk not long with a fool, and with him that lacks wit, keep not much
company.

He that sets much by him self, where in deed he is naught worth, he
brings him self into folly.

It is the property of a fool to seek out other men's faults, and forget
his own. Tullius.


FLATTERY.
MY son, if il me^ will feed the with flattery, consent not unto them.
Salomon^


Better are the strokes of him that loves truly, than the false kysses of
them that do flatter thee.

Tale bearers, rioters, glosers and flatterers, fle far from them, as from thy
chief enemies. Hieroni.


Within thy self, behold well thy self, and to know what thou art, give no
credence to other. Seneca.


Whose ^ ares be so stopped from truth that he may not abide to here truth of
his friend, his health and prosperity is to be despayred. Cicero.


Like as worms sonest do breed in soft wood and gentle, so the most noble
wits desirous of praise, gentle and honorable, most makes of flatterers,
and do noryshe such persons, as be their destroyers. Plutarch


The familiar compaignion, which is always like pleasant, and gapeth for
thanks and never biteth, is of a wise man to be always suspected.

Great men's sons learn nothing well, but to ride, for in other doctrines
their masters do ^^ a^ ter them, praising all that they speak. At wrestling
their fellows fall down or they be thrown: But the rough horse, when he is
rydden knoweing not whether he that rydeth be a prince or a subject, a rich
man or a poor, casts him out of the saddell, i^ he can not good skill of
ryding.

FORTITVDE.
FOrtitude and constance is the high way, he that tourneth to much on the
right hand is foolehardye and froward, to much on the left hand, is ^
earfull and cowarde. Hieroni.


Fortitude is an affection of mind, sust^ ining patiently peril and grief,
and being always free from all dread. Tullius.


Fortitude appears not but in the time of aduersitee. Gregorius.


To a wise man none ill may happen, for he stands upright under every
burdeyne, nothing may appayre him, nothing displeases him that ought to be
borne: for what so ever might happen to man, he never complayneth that it has
chanced unto him. Seneca.


All things ought to be forthought on, and the mind forti^ ied against all
that might happen. Banishment, tourments, sickness, battle, shypwreckes,
think on them daiely.

To suffer grief quietly and coldly, it profits much to consider, and so to
do it is a great honesty.

Needs must he that is valiant, be of a great courage, and also invincible:
he that is invincible despyseth all things that be transitory, supposyng them
to be inferior unto him. But no man may despise those things, whereby he may
be grieved, but only he that is valiaunte. Wherefore it happens that a
valiante person can never be grieved, all wise me^ therefore needs must be
valiant.

It was wont to be a great praise and a meruaylous, to have patiently taken
all froward adventures, not to have been subdued by fortune, but in all
adversity, to have retained their estimacion and dignity.

The tymorous dog barketh more fore then he byteth. Q. Curtius


We see the greattest ryuers fall with least noise.

FORTUNE.
FOrtune can never make that to be thine, that nature denies thee. Boethius.


It is a natural sickness in men to behold with sore eyes the new
advancement of other. Tacitus.


Look how many wonderers, so many enuiers. Seneca.


As fortune becketh, so favor enclineth Justinius.


Innumerable be the examples of changeable fortune, for where made she ever
great joy, but where sorrow proceeded? or what sorrow has she caused, that
has not proceeded of ouermuche gladness.

Felicity begins by the ordinance of god, where misery is esteemed by the
judgment of man.

The enterprises be in our puissaunce, but their conclusions fortune
determines. Seneca.


To bear rule is chance, to give rule is pu^ saunce.

Fortuue fauourynge variaunce despises constance.

Whose hope, reason, or imagination, depends on fortune, in him nothing may
be constant or certain. Tullius.


Fortune is to great men deceitful, to good men vnstable^, all that is high
is unsure.

What fortune high raises, she lifts up to let fall.

In things which be moderate, continuance is constant.

Chilo the wise man being demanded what fortune was, answered: A lewd
phisicio^, for she made mani folks blind that trusted much to her. Chilo.


Oftentimes fortune corrupts manners. Q. Curtius.


GOD.
THe eyes of god be more bright then the son, beholding eu^ ry where all the
ways that men take, the depenesse of that which is bottomless, seeing men's
thoughts, where they think them most secret. Solomon.


In the heart of man be many devises, the will of god ever abides.

No sapience, prudence, nor counsel, may prevail against god. The horse is
prepared to battle, but yet god gives alwaie the victory.

They that fear god, will believe his word: and they that love him, will keep
his commandment. Ecclesiast


Blessed be the name of our lord, for wisdom, and puissaunce be of him only,
he alters times and ages, he also translateth and ordeineth kingdoms. Daniel.


GOVERNOR.
VHere as lacks a governor, the people decaieth, where as be mani
cou^sailes, there lacks not sure^ ee. Solomon. Proverb.


In the multitude of people is the state of a king.

In the fewenesse of subjects is the princes dishonor.

A prince that gladly h^ areth leasings, has al his officers peruers and
wicked.

Woe is the country, where the ruler is wanton, and they in authority break
their fast tymely.

Happy is that land, that has their king noble, and where men in authority
eat in good season.

He that is a governor offe^deth more grievously by his example than by his
offense. T^ llius de Oui. 3.


Where a governor lacks, the people shall perish: the sauegard of them is
where be many counsa^ les. Solomon.


Rulers have done t^ inges with folly, and sought not ou^ lord: ^ herfore they
understand not, and their flock is broken and scattered. Ieremias


Prepare thy self, and furnishe so thy conditions and manners, and set forth
the form of thy lyuinge in such wise as he that in middle of eueri man's
sight leads his life, and may be hid from no man. Plutarch.


The common people are wont to search and behold curiously the manners, lives,
and conditions of them that be rulers, although they be covered never so
closely, or hid and kept with hanginges and courteynes never so privily.

GOOD MEN.
A Good man shall receive abundantly grace of our lord: He that trusts in
his owse wit, does ever vngratiously. Solomon.


We may call that man gracious, to whom nothing is good or ylle, but a good
mind or an ill, which is a lover of honesty, contented only with virtue,
whom no fortune extolleth or oppresses, nor knows any thing to be better,
then that he may give to him self, to whom very pleasure is, to set little by
pleasure. Seneca.


GLVTTONY.
HAunte not the company of drinkers, nor the dyners and suppers of them, that
bring flesh with them to eat, for they which attend only to drinkinge and
making of bankets, shall be consumed. Solomon. Prouer. 33


Not the use of meat, but the inordinate desire thereof ought to be blamed.
Augusti.


The rich men would not be constreigned to eat that which poor men eat^
the, but let them keep the custom of their infyrmitie, being sorry that
they can not otherwise satisfy their nature. If they chaung their custom, and
therefore be sick, let them use their superfluity, and give to poor men that,
which unto them is convenient and necessary. Augustine


Unhappie are they, which have their appetite more then their stomach. Hieroni.


Gluttony is an ill maistresse to serve, she always desires and is never
contented. Ambrosius


What is more insatiable than is the bealy? that this day she receives, to
morrow she expels: when she is full, she disputes of continence: when she
has dygested, she byddeth virtue farewell.

Denise king of Sicile, when he he had eaten potage, which a Cook of
Lacedemonia had made, he said that the meat did not delight him, the Cook
answered, it was no marvel, for it lacked spices: when the king asked what
spices he la^ked, he answered, labor, sweat, rennynge, hunger, and thyrst,
for with such manner of stuff, the meat of the Lacedaemonians was ever
prepared. Cicero^


GLORY.
Glory is a thing substanciall and perfectly expressed. It is the praise of
good men, conse^ting together, a voice incorrupted of them that judge well of
an excellent virtue. Tullius ^ us. quest.


The chief and perfect glory stands in three things, if the multitude
love us: if they have good o^ inion of us: if (as it were meruaylynge at us)
they suppose us well worthy to be had in much reverence. Offic. 2^


Thus says our lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
stonge man in his strength, nor the rich man in his substance^ but he that is
glorious let this be his glory, to know and and understand me. For I am the
lord that does execute mercy, judgment, and justice in earth: these things
do please me, says our lord god. Ieremias.


Nor that fire makes smoke, that quickly is kendled, nor that glory causes
envy, that shortly appears. Plutarchus


GRACE.
THe grace of God, why it is sent unto this man, and not unto that man, the
cause may be privy, but without justice truly it may never be. Augusti.


The grace of Christ, without the which neither children nor men may trust
to be saved, is not given for merits, but is favorably disposed without
deseruinges, and therefore it is called Gratia, which does signify favor in
English.) Augus. de natura and gratia.


Grace (as I do suppose) consists in three things, in abhorrynge things
which are passed, in despisynge things present, and in desyring things which
for us are prepared. Bernarde.


Grace is given for this cause, that the law be fulfilled, t^ at nature be
restored, and that by sin we be not subdued. Augustine


HVMBLENES.
Never suffer thou pride to rule thy wit or sentence: for in her all
destruction takes root and beginning. Tobias.


On whom says our lord shall my spirit rest, but on him that is humble and
gentill, and dreadeth my words? Esaias.


God resists proud men, but to them that be humble he gives his grace.
Petrus.


The more honorable thou art, the more humble thy self unto all men, and
thou shall find favor both of god and of man. Ecclesi.


In thy thought extol not thy self like a bulle, ne be thou proud of thine
acts, but in humblenes keep ever thy courage Solomon.


The greatter thou art, the more humble be thou^ and in the presence of god
thou shalt find grace.

How great so ever thou be, be humble in all things, and thou shalt find
grace before god.

HASTE.
THe emperor Octauia^ was wont to say, nothing became worse an emperor or
king then haste and fool hardiness: for that which was well done, was sone
done. Sextus Aurelus.


HONOR.
AS vnsittyug is honor to fools, as snow is in summer, and hail stones in
harvest. Solomon.


Honor nourishes cunning, and with praise men's wits be kyndled to study.
Tullius.


Honors very great, wherein is pride, and to much statelines, like great and
corporate bodies, be thrown down sodeinly. Plutarchus


Honors substantial and perfect, and also favor of them, which have a good
turn in remembrance, and be in rendryng thanks very diligent, should not be
refused.

HYPOCRISY.
TAke heed of false prophets that come to you in the garments of sheep, but
within they be rauenouse wo^^ es, by the fruits of them ye shall perceive
them. Christus apud mat.


He that desires to seem that he is not, he is an hipocrite, he feigneth to be
good, yet does he not practice it, for in ye praise of men he estemeth his
profit. Augusti^


Dissimuled equi^ ie is not properly equity, but double equity, for it is
both iniquity and dissimulacion. August.


Hipocrites are vile in apparaile and proud in their courage, and while they
seem to despise al things in this world, they seek by means to attain to
all things that be of the world. Gregorius


The nighest way to renoume, is to be such one in deed, as every man would
be reputed. Tullius.


He that feigneth him self to be a friend, and is not, is worse than he that
is a forger of money.

Openly to hate or to love, more belongs to a gentle courage, than to hyde
in his countenance what his heart thinks.

HVMILITEE.
Every man that exalts him self, shall be brought low, and he that hu^bleth
him self shall be advanced. Christu


All men delight to be high, the griece is humilittee, why set thou thy
foot so far from the? thou will fall and not clyme, begin at the griece,
and thou art forthwith at the top. Augustine


He that does gather other virtues without humilitee, ^ oath as he that bears
fine powder into a boistous wind. Gregorius.


That man is happy, which the higher that fortune aduau^ceth his substance, so
much the low^ r he avails his courage. Seneca.


ILL MEN.
THree kinds of p^ ople my soul has hated, A poor man proud, an old man
lacking wit, a g^ eat man a liar. Ecclesiast


There is no hope of remedy, where that which sometime were vices, be turned
to manners. Seneca.


That which the ill man most dreadeth, shall come unto him, and that which he
desires, shall be given unto good men Solomon.


The ill man shall vanishe away like a storm, the good man shall stand fast,
like an everlasting foundation.

The work of an ill man is ever unstable, he that sows good works, has a
sure advantage.

Do thou none yuel, and none shall come to the: Leave yuel company, and yuell
will forsake the. Ecclesiast


If a Morayne may change his skin, or a lybarde her spots, ye may also do
good, when ye are brought up in ill. Ieremias.


To him that does ill, ^ here is no greater penance, than that he displeases
all men, and contenteth not him self. Seneca.


JUSTICE.
NO man may be just, that fears ^ yther death, pain, exyle, or poverty,
or that prefers their co^traryes before very equity. Tullius.


The foundation of perpetual praise and renown is justice: without the which
nothing is commendable.

King Egesilaus being demanded, which was the better, either Justice or
Fortitude, he answerrd, If al men were just, we neded no fortitude. Agesilaus


The glory of a good man is to do justice. Ecclesiast


Justice exalts the people, but sin makes people wretched and miserable.

The emperor Alexander, hering that a poor old woman was ill entreated with
one of his ^ ouldiours, he discharged him, and gave him in bondage unto the
woman, to get her her living with his craft, forasmuch as he was a
carpenter. Alexand. imperat.


Aristides, called the rightuouse, being demanded of one, If he were rightuous
of his own nature, Nature, said he, has much helped me thereto, but yet by
mine industry I have helped her also. Aristides.


In the path of Justice is life, the way that turns therfrom leads to
death. Solomon.


Justice mou^teth the people in honor, syn makes people wretched and miserable

Be not over much just in extremitee, and favor no more then is necessary.
Ecclesiast


My son, desiring wisdom, keep thou true justice, and god almighty will
give it unto the. Ecclesiast


He is a just man that spares not him self. Ambrosius


IVDGE.
According to the judge of his people, so be his officers. Solomon.


Such as be rulers of a city, such be the commons.

Presents and gifts make blind judges. Ecclesiast


Covet not to be a judge, except thou be of power able to subdue iniquities,
least perchance thou shall fear the state of a great man, and give occasion
of rebuke in thine own hastiness.

Everlasting woe shall be to them, which make vnrigh^^ ous laws, and do
write against justice, to the intent that they will oppress poor men in
judgment, and violen^ ly subuerte the cause of the people. Esaias.


All do love presents and follow rewards, to the fatherless child theyd ^ e
not minister justice, the poor widows matter comes not before them.

Here therefore ye kings, and understand ye Learn ye judges of all parts of
the world. Give ears ye that rule over multitudes, and delight your self in
the trouble of people, for power is given to you from our lord, which shall
examine your acts, and inserch your thoutes, for when ye were ministers of his
kingdom, ye judged not straightly, ne kept the laws of true justice, ne went
after his pleasure, horribly and shortly he will appear to you: for most sorest
judgments shall be to them that have rule over other To the poor man mercy is
granted, but the mighty man shall suffer mightily torments. Sapien.


Take thou no gifts, which do make wise men blind, and do peruerte the
words of them that be righteous. Moises in Deuter.


IVDGEMENTE.
HE that justifies an ungracious person, and he that condemns a good man,
they, before god are both abominable. Solomon.


The kyte in the air knows her time, the tu^ til, the storke, and the swalow
do come at their seasons, my people know not their lords judgment. Ieremias.


A good man will n^ t in his friends cause, do against a weal public
against his oath, nor against the trust, which is put in him, for he lays
aside the parsonage of a friend, when he takes on him a judges office.
Tullius.


The ^ mperour Alexander would never suffer to be sold the office of a judge,
or great authority in the execucion of laws, saiynge, Needs must he sell
that does bie. And I will not let that there shall be merchants of
governance, which if I do suffer, I may not condemn: for I am ashamed to
punish a man that byeth and sells. Alexand. August.


Themistocles being the chief judge in Athenes, when there came to him a
great musician, which desired of him a thing somewhat against justice,
Themistocles answered, if in singing thou do not regard Number and Time,
thou art not worthy to be called a good musician: nor I a good judge, if I would
prefer before the laws, the pryuate favor of any one person.

IGNORANCE.
IF a blind man do take upon him to lead one that is blind, they both shall
fall in the diche. Christus apud mat.


Sapience and doctrine of fools be despised. Solomon.


INGRATITVDE.
HE that does render an evil turn for a good, evil shall not depart from
his house. Solomon.


The hope of a person unthankful, shall relent like winter yse, and as water
superfluous shall vanishe away. Sapien.


The greatter benefytes that men do receive, the more grievous judgment
shall be given them, if they do offend. Chrisost.


A good man does all thing well, if he do a^ l well he can not be vnky^ de.
Seneca.


He that thinks alwaie to crave, forgets what he takes.

In couetise nothing is worse than that she is unkind.

He takes away the mutual course of giving and ^ akyng good tournes, who so ^
uer neglec^ e^ h to render equal thank to him that deserves it.

That is a person dishonest, which knows how to ta^ e a bene^ it, and not
how to requite ^^. Plautus.


IDELNES.
THe good Emperor Antonine, withdrewe from diverse persons their pensions and
salaries, perceiving them idell, saying, that there was nothing more
reprochefull or cruel, than that they should gnawe and devour the weal
public, which with their labor nothing increased it. Antonine.


Idelnes has taught much unhappiness. Ecclesiast.


He that will not work, shall not eat. Paulus.


Some times be taken from us, some times do escape us, some flow away not
unwitting unto us, but the fowlest loss of time is of that, which by our
negligence does slip away from us. Seneca.


Idelnesse wears strength, as ruste does iron, the bronde vnstered bourneth
slowelye, and if he be moved he causes the fire eftsoon to kendle.

We are not brought up so by nature, that we should seem to be made for game and
solace, but rather for gravity, and for some studies more serious and
weighty. Tullius.


Idleness without learning is death, and the grave of a quick man. Seneca.


INORDINATE APPETITE.
THe root of all mischief is inordinate appetite, which some men following,
have erred from faith, and brought them selves into many sorrows. Paulus.


There are three things specially, which men be wont to desire inordinatly,
Richesse, bodily pleasures, and great authority. Of richesse do proceed il
things, of pleasure dishonest things, of auctoritee vain things. Innocent.


There is no grief in lacking, but where there is inordinate desire in having.
August.


That which is other men's, likes us best: that which is our own, lyketh
best other. To flee inordinate appetite is very nobilitee: but to subdue it,
it is royal and princely. Seneca.


The reasonable mind must judge the to be rich, not thy possessions or men's
estimacions.

CVNNINGE.
A Man to perceive that he is ignorant, is a token of wisdom, like as to
perceive, ^ hat he does wrong, betokens justice. Dydimus.


In much cunning is much indignacio^. Paulus.


Cunnyng causes us to know, whyther we shall come: virtue, how that we may
thither come, the one without the other little aua^ leth, for of cunnyng
springs virtue, of virtue perfect felicity. Lactantius.


Cunnyng is to know god, and to embrace virtues, in the one is sapience, in the
other is justice.

Science is a knowlage conueniente, stable, and never declining from reason.
Galenus.


Esteem thou much cunning, to be more worth than coin, for this shortly
decays, cunnyng ever continues. Socrates.


The wise Solon made a law in Athenes, that the child should not be bou^de^
to succor his father, of whom he had received no manner of doctrine. Plutarch.


KING.
HE is in great error, that thinks a king to be safe in his person, where
nothing may be safe from the king, sense surety is assured by mutual
suretee. Seneca de clementia.


Theopompus king of Lacedemony, unto one that demaun^^^ of him, how a king
moughte most surely keep his realm, and defend it, said, If he give to his
counsailours liberty to speak alwaie truth, and to his power neglects not
his subjects when they be oppressed. Theopo^pus.


Troth and compassion keeps a king, and his place of estate with mercy is
stablished: Solomon.


O ye kings, if ye delight in high places, and sceptors, make much of Sapience.
Sapientia. Plat^.


Most happy is that pulike weal, where either men studious of wisdom do
reygne, or where the king is studious of wisdom.

To be in a fury, it may be called womanly. Seneca.


It never besemeth a king to be angry.

If thou will subdue all things unto the, subdue thy self unto reason: I^
reason rule the, thou shall rule many.

It besemeth men to fear their price, but much more to love him.

LENDING AND BOrowyng.
Lend not to a greater than thou art, and if thou have lent, account it for
lost. Solomon.


LOSS OF A FRINDE OR of goods.
HE that is robbed and loses his coat, where he has no mo, if he had leauer
lament him self, than to look about him, and provide how to escape from told
taking, and to find some thing to cover his shoulders with, would thou not
think him to be a natural fool? Thou have buried him, whom thou did
leave: Seek now for him, whom thou may love. It is much better to prepare
eftsoon a friend, than to weep for a friend. Solomon.


LABOUR.
BY custom of labor we shall make the pain more easier to suffer. Tullius.


Cato in an oracion, which he made to the men of arms of Numantia said,
Consider in your minds my fellows, that when ye do a thing well by labor and
travail, the labor soon passes, the thing well done always remains. But
if ye do ill by inordinate pleasure, the pleasure sone vanishes, but the deed
that is ill done never remoueth. Pontanus.


It is a token of a feeble and tender courage to flee from things laboriouse
and peynefull, of the f^ rbearinge whereof slouthe is engendered, and niceness,
and their continual companion unthriftiness.

To labor in vain, and a man weriyng him self to get naught but
displeasure, is extreme peevishness. Salustius.


LAW.
NO law is to all men commodiouse, it is enoughe if to the more part, and in a
generality it be sufficient. Liuius 34.


Sharp punishment of unlawful acts is the discipline to live well and warely.
Cecilius.


The king Antiochus wrote to the cities, being under his obeysaunce,
commau^ding them, that if he require them by his letters to do any thing that
were contrary unto his laws, that as to him that was ignorant they should
repugne and deny it. Plutarchus


Trafane the emperor most noble and valiant, by no marcial affairs might be
called from geuyng laws to his people, but that now in one place, sometime in
an other he would sit openly and here suites, and also give judgments.
Dionisius,


The law is good if it be laufully used.

The people that are without law, and do that which in the law is contained,
they be a law to them selves. Paulus.


This is once certain, laws were invented for the preseruacio^ of people and
countries, and for the quiet and prosperous life and estate of men that live
underneath them. Tullius.


Like as where there be many phisicions and medicines, there are many dyseases,
so where as are many laws, there be many mischiefs and greattest injuries.
Arcesilaus.


LAWS.
VUhere men apprehend in a little trespass, some be grievously punished, some
uneath are touched, it is great cause of discord in a weal public. Modestin.


Low is a high reason engendered of nature, which commands that which
ought to be done, and forbids the contrary. Tullius.


Laws of men may be likened to copwebbes, which do tie little flies fast,
and with great flies are broken. Anaxag.


LECHERY.
LEchery is enemy to god, and enemy to virtues, it co^sumeth all substance,
and deliting in the appetite present, lets that a man can think on
poverty, which is not long absente. Augustine


If we will consider the excellency of man's Nature, and the dignitee thereof,
we shall well perceive, how foul and dishonest thing it is to be resolved in
lechery and to live wantonly. Tullius.


Contrary how honest and fair a thing it is to live temperately, continently,
sadly and soberly.

Youth intemperate, and full of lechery, makes the body to be in age
withered and feeble.

LIBERTY.
IN very much libertee it is hard to be moderate, or to put a bridle to wanton
affections. Hieroni.


They be out of liberty, that do not labor in their own business, they
sleep at an other man's wink, and set their feet where an other man
steppeth. Terentius


What is liberty else, but to live as thou would?

Truly of ouermuche license happeth great pestilence. Theren.


LIBERALITY.
HE only is liberal, the which spends after his su^ s^ aunce, and as it is
needful. Aristotle. et hic. 4.


Liberelitie is not in the multitude or quantity of that which is given, but
in the facion of him that gives, for he disposes it after his substance.
Aristotle.


He gives very late, that gives not until his friend craves. Seneca.


Beware that thy benefitte excede not thy substance, for in such lyberalit^ e
is an appetite to take vnle^ ully, that there lack nothing to give away
bounteously: for where men give and be nedy, they be constrained to pluck
eftsoon from other, of whom they purchase more hatred than favor of them
that they give to.

In giving, these things must be considered, what thing, and to whom, how,
where and where ore thou geuest.

When thou employest a benefit, chose such a person as is plain and honest,
of good remembrance, thankful, absteinynge from the goods of other, no
nigarde of his own, and specially to all men beneuolent.

The greatness of the benefit is declared, or by the commodity, or by the
honesty, or by the necessity. Tullius.


There be two fountains, which do approve liberalitee, a sure judgment, and
honest favor. Valerius


LIFE EVERLAlastynge.
O The deep richesse of the wisdom and knowledge of God, the judgments of
them, how impossible is it to comprehend? how impossible is it to find
them? Paulus.
who knows the mind of the lord,or who was his counsailour or first gave it
to him? and he shall be recompensed? for of him, and by him, and in him, are
all things, to him be glory into the world of worlds. Amen. Sapientia.


That which God has prepared for them that do love him, faith does not
take it, hope does ^ ot touch it, charitee does not apprehende it, it passes
all desires and wisshes, gotten it may be, esteemed it can not be. Augustine.


We may lightlier tell, what is not in life everlasting, then what things be
there. Augusti^


There is no death, there is no waylinge, there is no werinesse, there is no
sickness, there is no hunger, no thirste, no chaufynge, no cor^ uption, no
necessity, no heaviness, no sorrow.

LOYALTY
THe liynge lyppes are to god abominable, they that do truly do please him.
Solomon.


MALICE.
VUho that provides for an others destruction, let him be sure that a like
pestilence is provided for him so that of a like thing he shall sone after be
partener. Tullius.


By malice a man sleeth his own soul. Sapientia.


Malice drinks the more part of his own venim. Serpents, the venim which
they have for the destruction of men, without their own peril they keep it,
malice hurts him most, which does retain it. Seneca.


MARRIAGE.
LIke as in chafe or hears of an haare, fire is sone kendled and sone put
out, except some other thing be myxte with it to nourishe and keep it: so
love sodeinly in^ lamed in man and wife with beauty or personage may not dure
long, except being ioygned with good conditions, it be nourished with
wisdom, and thereby receives a lively affection. Plutarchus


Women that had lever rule foolish husbands, than obey wise men, be like them
which would rather lead a blind man, than follow him that has both sight
and good understanding.

House and goods we receive of our friends, a wise wife is properly given of
god. Solomon.


Depart not from a wife that is sad and wise, which thou haste taken in the
fear of god, the grace that is in her honesty surmounteth all riches.
Ecclesiast


Art thou bounden to a wife? seek not to be lowsed. Paulus.


Art thou lowse from a wife? seek not to be married.

Marriage in all things s is honourarable and the bed immaculate, for God shall
judge fornicatours and also aduoutrers.

Themistoles a noble manne, hauiuge but one dough^ er, demanded of her,
whether she would be married either to a poor man having worshipful manners, or
to a great man with l^ ude condicio^s. She answered, Sir, I had leauer have a
man lackyng possessions, then possessions lacking a man. Themisto.


The vice of a wife is either to be taken away, or to be suffered. He that
takes it away, makes the wife more commodiouse, he that suffers, makes
him self better, by obteinyng of patience. Varro.


MERCY.
MErcy is a temperaunce of mind in the power to aduenge. Seneca.


Compassion regards not the cause, but the estate of the person. Mercy is
joined with reason.

Nothing is more commendable, nothing is more worthy to have place in a great
man, than placabilitie of mercy. Tullius.


Blessed be they that are merciful, for they shall be sure of mercy. Christus
apud Mat.


Among many virtues none is more wonderful, or more gracious than mercy, for
in no thing men do more approach toward God, than in giving to men health.
Fortune may do no more, nor also nature can will no more than prese^ ue life.

MANNERS OF MEN.
IN felicitee is imperfection, where things dishonest do not oneln, delight,
but also cont^ nt, and there ceasseth hope of all remedy, where that which was
vice is turned to be manners. Seneca.


NATVRE.
VUyttes enforced do bring things ill to pass. The labor is in vain wherein
nature strives. Seneca.


Al nature of beastes^ fowls, serpents, and of all other things by man's
nature is tamed.

That which is infixed and engendered by nature is not lightly removed by
craft. Iacobus.


Thou do naught thou man most unkind, which say, that thou haste
nothing of God, but of nature. I tell the. Nature without God is nothing, nor
God is without nature, but both are one, and be not diverse in office. Seneca.


NECESSITY.
Necessity makes that quick, which else would be dull, and of^ times despair
is chief cause of hope. Q. Curtius.


Suffer, and blame not that, which thou may not escape. P. Mimus


Think how they that be gyued, take first grievously the weight of their
Irons, and let of their going. At the last, when they leave to disdain these
things and do determine to suffer them, necessity compels them to bear it
valiantly, and custom to think the peine easy. Seneca.


It is Necessity, that in peril of wrecke discharges the ship of his
burdeine. It is necessity, that by pluckyng down houses do keep them from
burning. Time makes necessity a law.

NOBILITY.
VUhat nobility riches or puisau^ce may be steadfast and sure, s^ ns god may
make kings baser, ye than those that be lowest. Lactantius.


The only liberty before god is, Not to do service to sin. Hieroni.


The chief nobility before god is, To excel in all virtue.

What avails noble lineage to him, which is with villain manners reproched?
or what reproach is a poor stock unto him, which is with good manours
adourned? Chrisost.


He that bosteth a^ way in his ancestors, declares him self to be unworthy
of praises.

The more honourabl^ that the life of the au^cestour is after esteemed, the more
reprochefull vice of the lineage that then succedeth. Salustius.


Iphicrates a valiant captain, but the son of a shomaker, being therewith
imbrayded of Hermodius a noble man borne, answered in this wise, My blood
takes beginning at me, and thy blood at the now takes her farewell. Iphicrates


OBSTINACY.
TO resist in vain, and with much travail to get naught but displeasure is
extreme folly. Salustius.


OBEDIENCE.
VUhat manner of obedience may be there, where vice is much made of and rulers
not regarded, whose contempt is the origi^ all fountain of mischief in every
weal public. Pontanus


Ye servants obey your soueraines carnal in all things, not serving to the
eye, as it were to please men, but in simplicity of thought, fearinge
almightye god. Paulus.


Better is obedience than sacrifice. Solomon.


He that resists authority, resists gods ordinance. Paulus.


It is a general covenant made by mankind, to be obedient to kings, how
much more unto god, which reigns over all creatures? August.


If thou will be wise, be ever obedient, for it is written, Desire thou
wisdom, then keep the commandments, and god will give her unto the?
Bernardus.


Theopompus the king of Lacedemonia, to one which said, That the country was
well kept, because that kings there knew how to govern: he answered, No
not so, but rather because the people knowethe how to obey them. Theop.


Some fautes of rulers and officers ought to be tolerate, for he that goes
about to correct, shall not profit so much as use to disobey their superious,
shall bring to men detriment. Aristotel.


PATIENCE.
THe pacient man will suffer for a time, and after shall come restitucion of
gladness. Ecclesiast


All that happens unto the, suffer in thy trouble, and have patience alwaie
in thy poverty: for gold and silver are proved with fire, and men be
acceptable when they be in the oven of worldly adversity.

Better is he that contemns wrong, than he that is grieved therewith, for he
that contemns it, does despise it, as if he felt it not, but he that is
grieved therewith, is tourmented, as if he felt it. Ambrosi.


If thou will be of noble courage, suppose that no displeasure may happen
unto the, but say this of thine ennemy. He would have hurt me, but he
hurts me not: and when thou perceiuest him to be in thy danger, think that
to be vengeance sufficient, that thou moughtest be revenged. Seneca.


PEACE.
BLessed be they that make peace, for they shall be called the children of god.
Christus apud Man. Idem.


Every realm divided against him self shall be made desolate, and every
city or house in himself divided shall not stand or abide.

He that has not peace in his heart, the the mouth, and the act, ought not to
be called a christen man. Augustine


He that punishes his body, and keketh not concord, he praises god on the
taber and not in the quire. Hieroni.


PERIVRIE.
HE that provoke a man for to swear, and knows that he shall swear
falsely, he is worse then a murderer, for a murderer ^ leeth the body, but he
^ leeth the soul, ye two souls together, his, who^ he procured to swear, and
also his own.

The punishment of perjury by gods law is death, by man's law perpetual
infamy. Tullius.


I say unto you, that ye in no wise: do swear, least that by swearyng ye come
to the point to swear lightly, and by that lightness ye come unto custom,
and from custom ye fall into perjury. Augustine


He that is ready to be forsworn, he seems to be forsworn before he swear
falsely, for God judges not only by deeds, but also by thoughts, which
proceed from the heart. Io. Chry.


No man swears o^ ten, but he is sometime forsworn, like as he that uses to
speak much, speaks sometime things out of season. Idem.


He is a double of^ endour that takes the name of God in vain, and deceives
his neighbor. Isidorus.


PERIL.
THere is nothing so sure, that it is out of danger, perchance of that thing,
which is of no puisaunce. Q. Curti^


If thou may not clearly escape out of peril, choose rather to die
honestly, than to live shamfally. Socrates.


POVERTY.
IT is soon made ready and easy, that nature desires, to things superfluous
sweat is required. Seneca.


The patience of poor men at the end shall not perish. David.


Better is little in the fear of our lord, than great treasure, which will
never be ^ aciate. Solomon.


They be poor in spirit, which when they do good, they give praises to god,
wha^ they do ill they lay faut in the^ selves. August.


The life of man is not in abundance of riches, but in virtue and faith, this
treasure shall make the a rich man, if thou be rich to god ward. Ambro^ i.


If thou will live after nature, thou shall never be poor, if after thine
opinion, thou shall never ^ e rich. Seneca.


PRAYER.
GOd is far from them, which do not honor him, and gladly he will here the
prayers of good men. Solomon.


Watch and pray ye, that ye enter not into temptacion. Christus.


Thy prayer is thy speech unto God, wha^ thou read, god talks with the:
when thou praiest thou talkest with god Augustine


The two wings, wherewith a man flees unto god, be these, if thou forgeuest
him which has offended the, and helpest him, who has need of the. Augustine


With fasting corporal passions are to be cured, with prayer the pestilence of
man's mind is to be healed. Hieroni.


PVISAVNCE.
It is a pestilente puissaunce, to be of power to do harm. Seneca.


PRODIGALITY.
VUhat thing is more foolish, then to endeavor thy self to do gladly a
thing that thou may do it no longer? Tullius.


Excessive expe^ces of that which should maintain thy household, drinks up
the fountain of just liberality. Tullius.


PROSPERITY.
IF god suffer ill men to have much prosperity, than his indignation is much
more grievous. If he leave ill deeds unpunished, then is his punishment more
dreadful and perilous. Augustine


The world is more dangerous laughyng than louryng. Idem.


If thou had the wisdom of S^lomon, the beauty of Absolon, the puissance
of Samson, the long life of ^ noch, the riches of Cresus, the power of
Octauian, what can all this auay^ e the, wha^ finally the body is given to
woormes, the soul unto dyuelles, to be with rich men in pain everlasting.
Hieroni.


In all fortunes adversity, the most unhappy chance is, to have been once
happi. Boethius.


Perfect felicitee is the use of virtue. Aristotel.


Much abundance makes corn to lie, bowghes are broken with their own
bourdein, the fruit that comes often comes seldom to ripeness. Seneca.


PROVIDENCE.
PLato does like^ man's life unto a chance of dice, the better it is, the more
it is desired of him that casts it, but what so ever chance comes, there
is good craft in the using of every thing as it happeth, the one is not in
us, that is to say, what we shall throw: the other is in us, if we be wise,
that is to say, to take in good worth the chance that does fall, and appointe
to every thing his place, so that the thing that well chances, may profit
us, and that which evil chances may not indomage us. Plato.


PRIDE.
THree kind of things my soul has much hated, and I am much discontented
with their disposition. A poor man proud, a great man a lier, an old man a
fool, and lacking discrecion. Ecclesiast


God resists them that be proud, and to the^ that be humble, he gives his
grace. Iacobus.


proud in wisdom, in strength nor in riches, it is one god that is wise,
puisant, and full of felicitee. phofilides


PRVDENCE.
PRudence consists in the knowlage of good and ill. Tullius.


A wise man does all thing by counsel, and a fool soon discovers his folly.
Solomon.


More easily may one resist ill mocio^s, than rule them, and more easily refuse
them than moderate them. Ecclesi.


To him whom fortune never deceived it is folly to remember the uncertainty of
sundry adventures. Liuius. 30.


The help of God is not only gotten with wishes and prayers, but by vigilante
study, diligent executing, and wise cou^sailing, all things come to pass.
Salustius.


Separate them that do craftily flatter the from those that do faithfulli love
the. lest ill men have most profit by the. Socrates.


Be sure of friends, that speak not ay pleasantly. Aeschilus.


Those, which to content the, will speak unthriftily, forbid them thy house,
and put them out quickly.

PROMISE.
THese promises are not to be kept, which a man makes either by fear
compelled, or by craft deceived. Tul. off. 1.


The noble king Agesilaus to one which said to him, ye have promised: by god
said he, that have I, if it be right, if not, I tha^ spoke, but I promised not.
Agesilaus.


The fonndacion of justice is credence, that is to say, constantnesse and
troth in sayings and promises. Tullius.


Those promises are not to be kept, which be harmeful to them, unto whom thou
have promised, or by the which thou shall receive more detrimente, then they to
whom thou made promise, may thereby take profit.

O the shameful confession of fraud and commune mischief of man: more
credence is given to men's sygnettes, the^ to their sowles. Seneca.


PASTIME.
NAture brought us not forth, as we should seem to be made for pastime and
solace, but rather to gravity and studies of more weighty importance. Tul.
off. 2.


Recreacio^ of wits are to be suffered, for when they have a while rested,
they spring up oftentimes more better and quick.

PVBLIKE WEAL.
TO use the qublike weal for a particular gain or advantage, is not only a
thing foul and dishoneste but also mischeuous and very abominable. Plutarch.


To chaung sodeinly the customs and dispocision of people, and with new laws
hastily to rule them, it is not only hard, but also unsure, as the thing that
requires much ^ y^ e with great power and authority. Plutarch.


Like as the hand diuyded in fyngers is therefore never the feebler but to
every purpose is the apter and redier: so he that joins to him^ other in
governance of a weal public, aided with company, ^ hall accomplish the
thing in experience the more effectually.

A prince of a weal public ought with all study and diligence, expel and
drive out of his country ambition and sumptuous expenses, wherewith the mind
being nourished and styrred, is made more cruel and fierce, and with a
prodigal wantonness appears to be riottouse: and if he can not bring it to
pass, at the least let him abhorte them and keep him self from them, and
resist to his power those that desire it, and with all mischief do assay to
atteine it.

Dwell not (said Plato) where superfluous expenses do surmouute the revenues,
nor where ill men be m^ re made of then good men, nor where the rulers, for the
more part be liars. Plato.


QVIETNES OF MIND.
Art thou put from thine office? thou shall be t^ e more at home, and the
better apply thine own bu^ inesse. Thou labourest to be nigh the king, but
thou art disapointed, thou shalt liu^ more surely, and in the less
business. But thou art tourmoiled with much care and business: ye warm water
(as Pyndare says) does not so swetely ease and comfort the delicate members,
as honor joined with authority makes labor plesa^t, and to sweat easily.
Plutarch.


To him that wol^ e be quiet, and live in most surety, the right way is, to
set naught by exterior things, and to be only contented with virtue: for who
so ever estemeth any thing to be about virtue, ye or to be good, but virtue
only: he sets forth his breast naked to al thing that flees from the hand
of blind Fortune, and with great study and diligence abides her shot. ^
eneca.


REASON.
NOt only fortune helps men that be valiant (as is the old proverb) but
reason much more, which as it were with precepts, confyrmeth the puissance of
prowess^. Tullius.


What thing in man is best? Reason: for by that he goes before beasts, and
follows the Gods. Wherefore a perfect reason is that good, which properly
belongs to man, all other things is to him commune with beasts, for if he be
strong so is the lion: if he be fair, so is the pecocke: if he be swifte, so
is the horse: I do not say, that in every of these things, the other surmount
him. For I seek not that thing, which is most excellent in him, but that
which is his own, and belongs properly to him, for as he has substance, so
has the trees: and as he has voluntary meaning, in likewise has not only
the beasts, but also the woormes: If he have a voice, so has dogs, and
much louder, the egles more sharp and percynge, the bull much greatter, the
nightingale sweeter. Than what thing properly is a man's own? surely reason:
for that being in the right course and perfect, makes a manfull of felicity.

RELIGION.
REligion pure and immaculate in the sight of god, is to succor pore children
and widows in their tribulacion, and to keep them selfs uncorrupted in the
temporal world. Iacobus.


He is a strong thief, and tourneth gods house into a thefes cabin, that of
religion seeks promocion. Hieroni.


REPORT.
Among thy friends detracte not the king, nor in the most secret place of
thy chaumber report none yuell of a great man: for the birds of heaven will
carye about thy voice, and they that have feathers, will tell thine opinion.
Ecclesiast


RICHES.
TO much riches makes place to los Some things be more easily gotten than
kept. Q. Curtius


Richesse shall nothing avail, when god will take vengeance: good deeds
shall deliver man from damnacion. Solomon.


Substance soon gotten shall apayre: and that which is gathered by littel and
littell, shall increase in thy hands. Solomon.


Riches becomes not a fool, nor a vile servant to have rule over princes.

He that gathers treasure with a tongue full of lies, is vainglorious and
foolish, and at the last shall fall into the halters of death.

That rich man is blessed, that is found without blemishe, and that follows
not richesse, nor puts his trust in money and treasure. Let see who is he,
and we will commend him. For in his life he has done wonders Ecclesi.


They that would be rich do fall into temptacion, and the snare of the devil,
also into many unprofitable and harmfull desires, which drown men in death and
pardicion. Paulus.


Command thou the rich men of this world, that they presume not to highly,
nor trust to the uncertainty of their richesse, but to do well in god, that
lives ever. which gives us abundantly all things to use at our liberty,
and to be rich in good works, and to give gentilly, to participate with
other, and to make with their treasure a good foundation for the time coming,
for attaining to the life, which is very certain. Paulus.


SAPIENCE.
MEn called wise men are not to be honored for every word that they speak,
but for their stabilitie and constancy in virtue. Tul. tus. 5.


Princes become wise by company of wise men. Euripides


The ardent desire of wisdom brings one to the everlasting kingdom.
Sapientia.


O ye rulers of people, see that ye love wisdom, that ye may have a
perpetual kingdom. Ecclesiast


The root of wisdom is to fear god and the branches thereof be of long
life. Ecclesiast


A wise heart and that has understanding, will abstain from ill deeds, and in
works of justice his purpose shall prospere.

The thoughts of a wise man at no time, nor for any fear shall be depraved.

A temperate and moderate person, n^ des must be constant, he that is
constant, is quiet of mind, he that is quiet, has n^ vexacion, and
consequently no grief or disease: and all these things no perteine to a wise
man^ wherefore it follows, no grief or disease may be in a wise man. Tullius.


The greatest token and office of sapience is, that the deeds do agree with the
words, and that the person be ever one, and like to him self. Seneca^


Let thy mind and thoughts hereto extend: only wish and busyly care for
to be with thy self always content, and satisfied with the goods that of the
do proceed, all other desires referryng to god.

Wisdom excels strength, and the prudent person is to be preferred before
him that is puisaunt. Sapience.


A wise man's joy is so surely wrought that no fortune may break it, and is
always and in every place quiet: It depends on none other thing but it self,
nor looks for the favor of man or of fortune.

SCIPTVRE.
AL scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach or to reprove, to
correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of god be perfitte, and
fournished unto every good work. Paulus.


The scripture and the creature serve both for this purpose, that he may be
sought for and loved, that created the creature, and inspired the scripture.
Augustine


If according to the saiynge of Paul, Christ is the virtue of g^ d an^ his
wisdom, he that knows not Scripture, knows n^ t the virtue and wisdom
of god, for ignorance of scripture is lack of knowlage of Christ. Hieroni.


Let us not think that the gospel is in the words of scripture, but in the
under standing, not in the skin but in the marowe, not in the leaves of
words, but in the deep roots of reason. Idem.


SIMPLICITY OR plainness.
THe symplicitie of just men shall adresse the^ to god: And the deceit of ill
men shall be their destruction. Solomon.


The just man that walks in his simplicity shall leave his children after
him happy.

Prudence without simplicity is malice and craft, and simplicite without
prudence is maistres of f^ ly. Hieroni.


SICKNESS.
SUfferance of sickness is tolerable, if thou contemn that, which last of
all she does menace. Seneca.


In many meats is hid much sickness. Solomon.


Nothing so ^ uch lets health as often change of medicines: The plant never
proves, that is oftentimes set. Seneca.


The first cure of sickness, is the preparacion of good air, which
conserueth the heart. The second is moderacion and order of meat and drink:
The third is in derectio^ of labor and rest: the fourth is forbearing to much
sleep and watch: The fifte is the discreation in expellyng^ or stoppinge the
humors: The sixte is the temperance of gladness, anger, fear, and sorrow. The
departinge of these from their equal temperance is cause of all sickness.
Io. Dam^ +c^ nus.


SVPERSTICION.
Nothing more effectually rules a multitude than s^ persticion, else be they
unruly cruel and mutable. Q. Curtius


Not only philosophiers, but all our forefathers did ever separate
Supersticion, from true religion, for they which prayed al day, that their
children might ouerliue them, were called supersticious which name afterward
was larger extended. Tullius.


He that is inclyned to supersticio^, shall neuuer be quiet.

Supersticion is a mad error, for it fears the^, which ought to be loved,
and whom she worshippeth, them does she violate, what diversity is it, whether
thou deniest god, or speak ill of him? Seneca.


SHAMEFASTNES.
THat which thou art ashamed to speak, be also ashamed to think. Hieroni.


Shamefastness is to be much made of, for as long as that abides in the
mind, there is yet a place for good hope to rest in. Seneca.


Diogenes beholdi^ ge a young man blushe, said unto him: son be of good
comfort, this is the right color of virtue. Diogenes


SILENCE.
Receive not a swalowe into thy house, that is to say, ha^ e not in thy house
clatterers and men full of language. Pythag.


An yl^ man is sooner vanquished with silence then with answers: for malice is
sooner styred with words than reformed. Chrisost.


Like is a city is which stands wide open, and is not compassed with walls:
so is a man, which can not keep s^^ lence. Solomon.


TRVTH.
ALL the ways of our lord is mercy and troth. David.


Let the tongue be ignorant of liyng and swearyng, and love so well troth,
that what so ever thou speak, think that thou swearest. Hieroni.


Troth most commonly with many words is skattered to nothing. Lactantius.


TEMPERANCE.
TO a well ordered country or city those expenses be thought meet and
convenient, that be little and moderate, the end whereof is necessary and
honest, pleasant and thankful: so that it lack both reproach and damage.
Plutarch.


A temperate and moderate person, not wanton nor affectionate to his own
appetite, may be to no man in his country chargeouse, to no man cruel or
greuouse, to no man daungerouse: For he is of nature familiar and gentill,
easy to men that will come and speak with hi^, whose house is unlocked, not
shut, bu^ open to all men, where every man, as it were in tempests an^
storms, may repair for their succors. Plutarch.


What does that man lack to live in felicity, whom valiant courage delivers
from all sorrow and fear, and Temp^ rance calls from carnal appetite, and
lets him not exceded in foolish reioysynge.

TALE BERERS.
TEll no ill tales of god and his saints, nor report not ill of the prince of
thy country. Solomon.


Ill reporters be to god odiouse. Paulus.


M^ re offends the tale bearer that minisheth the love in a man's heart from
his nighe friend or neighbor, than he that pulls meat from the mouth of a
hungry beggar. For like as the soul is more precious then the mortal body:
so is the food of the soul of more estimacion than the nourishment of
carraine. Hieroni.


VERTVE.
NO man may be said to live a short time, that has attained of perfect virtue
the perfect reward.

It besemeth v^ rtue to be free from all dread, and out of subjection. Gelasius.


Virtue is suer one with most deep roots perfectely set, which with no
manner of violence may be destroyed. Tull. tusc.


It is the virtue of an honorable personage, commendably to rule, and also be
ruled. Aristotel.


Flee from young and wanton desires, and follow justice, faith, charity, and
peace, with the^ which honor god with a clean heart. Paulus.


Virtue is to be honored, not the Image of virtue, nor she is not to be
honored with censing or prayer, but only with a good will and purpose.
Lactantius


Virtue is to restrain anger, to mitigate desire, and refrain carnal
pleasure. Paulus.


The fruits of the spirit, is charity, ioyfulnesse, peace, patience,
bounteousnesse, long sufferance, gentilnes, faith, temperance, continence, and
chastity.

As the coming of one swalowe makesh not spring time: nor one hot day or
hour makes not summer: so one virtue makes not a virtuous person, nor one
little time in prosperity, sets not a man in perfect felicity.

Where richesse is honored, and estimacion rule and authority thereon
attends, there virtue waxes dull, poverty is had in reproach, innocence is
reputed for ill will is malice. Salustius.


VOLVPTVOVSNES.
CAto the elder inveighing against the people for their inordinate living,
said, It is in vain to talk to a bealy that lacks ears. Cato.


WIFE.
A Foolish child is the fathers heart sore, and a brawlinge wife is a house
always dropping. Solomon.


A wise woman builds up a house.

An unwise woman will destroy with her hands that which is build.

That man is blessed that has a good wife: the ye^ es of the^ thereby are
doubled Philo in Sapientia.


No head is more mischeuous than the head of an adder, no wrath exceeds the
wrath of a woman. Ecclesiast


It is more pleasante abidyng with a lion or dragon, than to dwell with an
ungracious woman.

Like as the climing on a sandy hill is to the feet of an old man, so is a
clattering woman to a man that is quiet.

A woman if she have soueraintie, is to her husband froward and contrary.

Give not to the water that serves thy house never so little an issue: nor to
an ill wife license to wander.

A constant wife rejoices her husband, and in peace shall prolong the term of
his life. A steadfast woman is a golden pyller set on baces of silver.

VAYNEGLORIE.
LEt us not be desirouse of vaineglory, one provoking the other with mutual
envy. Paulus.


The vaineglory of this world is a deceiteful swetenes, an unfruitful labor,
a continual fear, a dangerous adua^cement, a beginning without providence, an
end without repentance. Augustine


There is not so much joy in high climyng upward, as there is sorrow in
falling hard downewarde, no so much renoume after victory, as after ruin
reproach of folly. Ambrosi.


What should he that is strong, auaunt of his strength, whom bodily sickness
brings to feblenesse?

What should tht rich man auaunt of his riches, whose hope by a thief or a
tyranne is soon disapointed?

VIRGINITEE.
VIrginitee is sister of aungelles, va^quisher of lusts, prices of virtues,
possessour of good things. Cyprianus


The woman unmarried, and the maiden vncorrupt^ d, think on things that
perteyne unto god, to the intent to be holy in body and soul. Paulus.


What profits a whole body with a mind corrupted? Better is an humble
matrimony than a proud virginity. Augustine


A maidens speech would be circumspecte, sober and selde: not so excellent in
elloquence as in bashfulnes. When thou speak, let men marvel at thy
shamefastnes: when thou speak not, let them wonder at thy wisdom and
sobrenesse. Ambrosi.


WRATH.
A Fool immediatli discovers his anger, he that hides his injury, is wise
and crafty. Solomon.


An angry person provoke contencion, but he that is paciene, appeaseth debate
when it is stirred.

Be not familiar with a man full of anger, nor keep not company with a furious
person, least thou learn his ways, and cause the soul thereby to offend.

Let every man be swifte in herynge, slow in speech, and slow in displeasure.
Iacobus.


By wrath, wisdom is lost, so that it can not appear, what should be done,
nor how it ought to be done. Gregorius.


The chief remedy of anger is delay, that the fury may abate, and the
darkness that makes wit blind, may decay, or at the least w^ y be not so
gross. Seneca.


Haste and wrath be the chief ennemies of counsel. Bias.


Plato being demanded, whereby a wise man is best known, he said: A wise man
when he is rebuked, is therewith not angry, nor any thing the prouder when he
is preised. Plato.


FINIS.
The Table of this present book.
ABstinence. Adversity. Affecion. Ambicion. Authority. Amity. Apparaile.
Alms deed. Accusacion. Arrogancy. Age. Avarice. Bablinge. Battle.
Benefit. Bishop. Bostynge. Chastity. Charity. Constancy. Carnal appetite.
Consideration. Confession. Contempt of worldly things. Custom. Corection.
Counsel and counsailours. Communication. Cruelty. Curiosity. Compassion.
Death. Delicate living. Deceyte. Detraction. Drunkenness. Discord. Dignity.
Doloure. Doctrine. Dissimulation. Diet. Ease. Example. Envy. Eloquence. Fame.
Faith. Fear. Folly. Flattery. Fortitude. Fortune. God. Governor. Good men.
Glory. Gluttony. Grace. Humblenes. Haste. Honor. Hypocrisy. Ill men.
Justice. Judge. Judgment. Ignorance. Ingratitude. Idleness. Inordinate
appetite. Kunninge. King. Lendynge and borowynge. Loss of a friend or of
goods. Labor. Law. Laws. Lechery. Liberty. Liberality. Life everlasting.
Loyalty. Malice. Marriage. Mercy. Manners of men. Nature. Necessity. Nobility.
Obstinacy. Obedience. Paciente. Peace. Perjury. Peril. Poverty. Prayer.
Puissaunce. Prodigality. Prosperity. Providence. Pride. Prudence. Promise.
Pastyme. Public weal. Quietness of mind. Reason. Religion. Report.
Richesse. Sapience. Scripture. Simplicity or plainness. Sickness.
Supersticion. Shamefastnes. Silence. Truth. Temperance. Tale bearers. Virtue.
Uoluptuousnes. Wife. Uaineglory. Uirginity. Wrath.
FINIS TABYLAE.
LONDINI Excudebat Henricus VVykes.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. LXIIII.


