THE ^ROBLEMES ^F ARISTOTLE, with other Philosophers and Physicians

Wherein are contained diverse questions, with their answers, touching the
estate of man's body.

At Edenborough, Printed by Robert Waldgraue. 1595.

To the Reader.
EVery man does wonder (gentle reader) at an Eclipse of the Sun or of the
Moon, and gazeth at a Blazing Star, and beholds with admiration, an
exquisit picture, drawn with the pensill of a skillful hand, yea all novelties
do please, be they never so small. But if they be once common, be they never
so great wonders, no man vouchsafes to give them the looking on. But then as
Seneca does say: Non est AEthiopia inter suos (...) color. The self same does
happen in man, and in the wonderful workmanship of his body, and unspeakable
excellency of his soul: for if we regard his excellency, he does surpass
all creatures under Heaven; and therefore the Egyptians being ravished with
the co^templation of man's dignity and perfection, doubted not to call him a
terrestrial god, a celestial creature, a messenger of the god Lord and Master
of things below, and a familiar friend unto those who live above, miracle of
nature, and as Seneca does (...) him, Natures darling.

It is said, that after that Phidias a most famous caruer had made Mineruas
shield, he engraued his own portraiture so lively, and deeply in the same,
that it could never be taken out again, without the defacing of the whole
work. So God himselse a far more excellent workman then Phidias, after he
had made the universal world, and all creatures therein, for a token of his
skill, drew it a new in a small compass, as an abridgement of all his works, to
wit, when he made man, who is a Microcosme or little world, and in him printed
his own image and similitude, so lively, that no power what soever is able to
blot it out. This image and similitude is the soul and understanding, which he
would never have printed in man, unless he had first made him a body of a
substance fit and apt to receive that impression, and unless also he had so
skilfully framed it, that it should be worthy to receive so great an ornament,
as the understanding is. And therefore the body of man is made of a complexion
most pure and delicate, and in shape comely and beautiful, and yet
notwithstanding, all these perfections which man has in himself, few or none
take delight in the study of himself, or is careful to know the substance,
state, condition, quality, and use of the parts of his own body, although he
be the honor of nature, and more to be adm red then the strangest and rarest
wonder that ever happened. The cause of this is no other, but because man's
nature delights in novelty, and neglects to search out the causes of those
things which are common.

I have therefore thought good, to give thee in a known tongue, this little
book, written by the deepest of all Philosophers who teaches the use of all
the parts of man's body, their nature, quality, property and use, which may
bring thee in reading of it, if read it thou will no less delight then profit,
nor no less profit then delight.

Farewell ^

The first Problem.
Question.

AMongst all living creatures, why has Man only his face and countenance
lifted up toward (...)?

Answer

Unto this question there are diverse answers: first, (...) proceeds from the
will of the creator himself. And although that answer be true, yet in this out
purpose it seems not to be of force, because that so all questions might
easily be dissolved.

Secondly, I answer, that for the most part cuery workman does make his first
work worst, and then his second better, and so God creating all other beasts
before man, gave them their face looking down to the earth, and then secondly
he created man, as it does appear in Genesis, unto whom he gave an honest
shape lifted up unto heaven. But yet this answer does not seem to be to the
purpose, because it is drawn from divinity, and does also derogate from the
goodness of God, who makes all his works perfect and good.

Thirdly, it is answered, that man only among all living creatures is ordained
unto the kingdom of Heaven, and therefore has his face elevated and lifted up
unto Heaven, because that despising worldly and earthly things, he ought to
contemplate on heavenly things.

Fourthly, that the reasonable soul is like unto Angels, and finally ordained
toward God, as it appears by Auerroes in the first de anima, and therefore
he has a figure looking upward.

Fifthly, that a man is a microcosme, that is, a little world, as it pleases
Aristotle to say in the eight of his Phys. and therefore he does command all
other living creatures, and they obey him.

Sixthly, it is answered, that naturally, there is unto every thing, and every
work, that form and figure given, which is fit and proper for his motion; as
unto the Heaven roundnes, to the fire a pyramidall form, that is, broad
beneath and sharp toward the top, which form is most apt to ascend: and so
man has his face up to Heaven, to behold and wonder at Gods works.

Question. Why is the head of beasts hayrie?

Answer. The answer according unto the opinion of Constant is, that the hayres
are an ornament of the head, and of the brain, and the brain is purged and
euacuated of grosle humors, by the growing of the hair, from the highest unto
the lowest parts, which pass through the pores of the exterior flesh, and doc
become dry and are converted into hayres. This appears to be true, because
that in all man's body there is nothing drier then the hayres, for they are
drier then the bones, as Albertus Magnus does affirm, because that some
beasts are nourished with bones, as dogs, but no beast can digest feathers
or hair, but do void them undigested, and are so due that they are unfit for
nutriment.

Secondly, it is answered, that the brain is purged four manner of ways,
first, of superfluous watery humors, by the eyes: from melancholy by the ears:
of choler by the nose: of fleume by the hair, and that is the intent of the
Physician.

Question Why have men longer hair on (...) head then other living creatures?

Answer (...) 3 degenerat animal. says, that man has the moystest brain of
all living creatures, from the which the sweat proceeds, which is converted
into the long hair of the head.

Secondly, it is answered, that the humors in man are fat, and do not become
due easily, and therefore the hair grow long in (...) in other beasts the
humors are easily dried, and therefore their hair grow not so long.

Question, Why do the hair take deeper root in man's skin then in other living
creatures?

Answer. Because they have greater store of nourishment in man, and therefore
grow more into the inward part of man. And this is also the reason, why in
other beasts the hair does alter and change with the skin, and not in man,
(...) it be sometime in a searre or wound.

Question. Why have women longer hair then men?

Answer. Because women are moyster than men, and more phlegmatic, and therefore
there is more matter of hair in them, and by a consequence, the length also of
their hair does follow. And further more this matter is more increased in
women then in men, from the interior parts, and especially in the time of their
monthly terms and flowers, because the matter does then ascend, whereby the
humor which breeds the hair does increase. And Albertus does say, that if
the hair of a woman in the time of her flowers be put into doung, a venomous
serpent is engendered of it.

The second answer is, because women want beards, and so the matter of the
beard does go into the matter of hair.

Question. Why have some men soft hair, and some men hard?

Answer. We answer with Aristotle, that the hair has proportion with the
skin: of which some is hard some thick, some subtle and soft, some gross;
therefore the hair which grows out of a thick and gross skin, is thick and
gross; and that which grows of a subtle and fine, is fine and soft. Also
when the pores are open, then there comes forth much humor, and therefore
hard hair is ingendered: and when the pores are strait, then there do grow
soft and fine hair. And this does Aristotle show in men, in whom we have an
evident token, because women have softer hair then they, because that in
women, the pores are shut and are strait by reason of their coldness.

Secondly, because that for the most part, choleric men have harder and
thicker hair then others, by reason of their heat, and because the pores are
ever open in them, and therefore also they have beards sooner then others And
therefore the Philosopher says, that those beasts which have hard hair are
bouldest, because that such hair proceeds of heat and choler, the which
choler makes men to fight. Aristotle also gives example in the Bear and the
Boar: and contrariwise those beasts which have soft hair, are fearful,
because they be cold, as the Hare and Heart. Aristotle does also give another
reason of the softnes and hardness of the hair, drawn from the climat where a
man is borne: because that in a hot region hard and gresse hair is ingendered,
as it appears in the Aethiopians, and the contrary is true in a cold
counney, as toward the North.

Question. Why have some men curled hair and some smoothe?

Answer. The answer is, that the cause of the curling of the hair is great
abundance of heat, so that if there be much heat in a man then his hair does
curle, and grow upward. And a sign of this is proved true, because that
sometimes a man does enter into a bath smoothe hayred, and afterward by the
bath becomes curled. And therefore the keepers of bathes have often curled
hair, and also the Aethiopians and choleric men. But the cause of the
smoothnes, is the abundance of moist humors, which tend downward, and a proof
of this is, because that women for the most part have smoothe hair, because
they have much humiditie in them and small heat.

Question. Why do women show their (...) by the hair of their (...) part, and
not else where, but men in the breast.

Answer. We answer Physician like, because that in man and woman there is
abundance of humiditie in that place, but more in women, because men have the
mouth of the bladder in that place, wherein the urine is contained, of the
which the hair in the breast is ingendered, and about the navel. But of women
is said, that the humiditie of the bladder, and of the matrix or womb is
joined and meets in that low secret place, and therefore is dissolved and
separated in that place, through much vapors and fumes, which are the cause of
hair, and the like does happen in other places where hair is, as under the
arms.

Question. Why have not women beards?

Answer. Because they want heat, as it appears also in some effeminate men,
who are beardles for the same cause, because the are of the complexion of women.

Question. Why does the hair grow in those which are hanged?

Answer. Because their bodies are exposed to the sun, the which through his
heat, does dissolve all the moisture into a fume or vapor, of which the
hair does grow and increase.

Question. Why is the hair of the beard grosser and thicker then else where,
and the more men are shaven, the thicker and harder it grows?

Answer. Because thar according unto the rule of the Physician, by how much the
more the humor or vapor of any liquor is dissolved, by so much the more the
humor remaining does draw to the same place: and therefore how much the more
the hair is shaven, so much the more the humors gather thither, and of them
the hair is engendered, and do there also wax hard.

Question. Why are women smoothe and fair in respect of men?

Answer. The answer is according unto Arist 1. de generat, animal because that
in women all humiditie and superfluity, which are the matter and cause of the
bayre of the body is expelled with their monthly terms, the which
superfluity remains in men, and through vapors does pass into hair. And a
sign of this is, because women have seldom any running at the nofe, or
impostume, or (...), because such matter is expelled also. And we see some old
women begin to have a heard in their old age, that is after forty or fifty
years of age, when their flowers have ceased, as Aristotle does teach (...).
de (...).

Question. Why does man only above all other creatures wax (...) and gray, as
(...) and Aristotle affirm?

Answer The answer according unto the Philosophers is, because that man has
the hottest harr. of all huing creatures: and therefore nature being most wise,
least man should be suffecated through the heat of his heart, has placed the
heart which is most hot, under the brain which is most cold, to the end that
the heat of the heart may be tempered with the coldness of the brain, and
contrariewise, that the coldness of the brain may be heated with the heat of
the heart, that thereby there might be a temperature in both. A sign to prove
this, is because that of all huing creatures, man has the worst breath.
Furthermore man does consum^ half his life in sleeping: which does proceed on
the great excess of the coldness and moisture o(...) the brain, and by that
means does want natural heat to digest and consume that moystnes: the which
heat he has sufficiently in his youth, and therefore in that age is not
graye, but in his old age that heat fails, and therefore the vapors
ascending from the stomach, remain undigested and unconsumed for want of
natural heat, and then putrify, of which putrefaction of humors the whitenes
does follow, which is called graynes or hoarenes. Whereby it does appear that
hoarenes is nothing else, but a whitenes of the hair, caused by the
putrefaction of humors about the roots of the hair, through the want of
natural heat in old age. Sometimes also graynes is caused by the naughtines
of the complexion, which may well happen in youth, and sometimes by reason of
the moystnes undigested, and sometimes through over great fear or care, as it
appears in Merchants, Sailors, thieves, from thence comes those verses.
Cura etc.

Cura facit canos, quamuis homo non habet annos.

Question. Why does red hair grow white sooner then other?

Answer. According unto the opinion of Aristotle, because that rednes is an
infirmity of the hair, for it is engendered of a weak and infirm matter,
that is to say, of a matter corrupted with the flowers of the woman, and
therefore they wax white sooner then black hair.

Question. Why do Wolves grow grisly?

Answer. The better to understand this question, note the difference betwixt
graynes and grislynes, because that graynes is caused through the defect of a
natural heat, but grislienes through devouring and eating, as Aristotle
witnesses, 7. de animal. The Wolf being a very devouring beast, and a great
eater, he lets it down gluttonoasly without chewing, and that at once
enough for three days: of which meat gross vapors are engendered in the
Wolfes body, and by a consequence grislienes Secondly, graynes and grislines do
differ, because graynes is only in the head, and (...) lines over all the
body.

Question. Why do horses grow grissie or graye?

Answer According unto Aristotle, because they are for the most part in the
sun, and in his openion also, heat does accidently cause putrification, and
therefore of that kind of heat, the matter of the hair does putrify, and by
a consequence, they are very quickly pild.

Question. Why do men become balde, and trees fall their leaves in winter?

Answer. Aristotle does give the same reason for both, because that the want of
moisture in hoth, is the cause of the want (...) hair and of the leaves. And
this is proved because that a man becomes balde through Venerie, because that
leacherie is a letting forth of natural humiditie and heat. And so by that
excess in carnal pleasure, moisture is consumed, which is the nutriment of the
hair, and therefore baldnes does ensue. And this is evidently proved in
Eunuchs, and women which do not grow balde, because that they do not depart
from that moystnes. And these upon Eunuchs are of the complexion of women.

But if you ask why Eunuchs be not bald, nor have not the gowte, as
Hippocrates says? The answer is according unto Galen, because the cause of
baldnes is drines, the which is not in Eunuchs, because they want their
stones, the which do minister heat unto all the parts of the body, and the
heat does open the pores, the which being open, the hair does fall.

Question. Why are not women bald?

Answer. Because they are cold and moist, which are the cause that the hair
remains: for moistnes does give nutriment unto the hair, and the coldness
does bind the pores.

Question. Why are bald men deceitfulli according unto the verse:

Si non vis falls, fugias consortia calui.

Answer. Because baldnes does witness a cholerike complexion, which is hot and
dry, and cholerike men are naturally deceitful, according unto that verse:

Hirsutus, fallax irascens, prodigus, audax.

And therefore it follows, a primo ad vltimum, that bald men are deceitful
and crafty.

Question. Why are not blind men naturally balde?

Answer. Because that according unto Aristotle, the eye has much moisture in
him, and that moisture which should pass through by the substance of the eyes,
does become a sufficient nutriment of the hair, and therefore they are seldom
bald.

Question. Why does the hair stand on end when men are afraid.

Answer. Because that in time of fear, the (...) does go from the outward
parts of the body un to the inward, to the intent to help the heart, and so
the pore, in which the hairs are fastened are shutvp, after which stopping and
shutting up of the pores, the standing up of the hair does follow, as it is
seen in brute beasts, as hogs, wild bore, (...).

Of the Head.
Question. Why ^.

Answer. Because that this figure (...), most fit to (...) any thing into it,
as (...) does (...) and the head does contain in him the ^ is also seen in a
material sphere.

Question. Why ^ hard?

Answer. Aristotle says because he does (...) in (...) the (...) part of the
(...) and also because the brain may be defended thereby as with a shield.

Question. Why is not the head absolutely (...), but somewhat (...).

Answer To the and that the three creekes or cells of the brain (...) be the
better distinguished, that is, the (...) in the fore head, the discoursing or
reasonable part in the middle and the memory in the (...) most.

Question. Why does a man list up his head toward the between ^?

Answer. Because the imagination is in the forepart of the head or brain, and
therefore it lifts up it self, that the creekes or cells of the imagination
may be opened, and that the spirits which rise in the heart, having their
concourse thither, may help the imagination.

Question. Why does a man when he museth, or think on things past, look down
toward the earth?

Answer. Because the cell or creek which is behind, is the creek or chamber
of memory, and therefore that looks toward heaven, when the head is bowed
down, and so that cell is opened, to the end that the spirits which perfect
the memory should enter in.

Question. Why is not the head fleshie like unto the other parts of the body?

Answer. Because that according unto Aristotle, the head would be too heavy,
and could not stand steadfastly, and therefore it is without flesh. Also a head
laden with flesh does betoken an evil complexion.

Question. Why is the head subject unto aches and griefs?

Answer. According unto Constant. by reason of evil humors, which proceed
from the stomach, and ascend unto the head, and disturb the brain, and so
cause the pain in the head. And sometime it proceeds of over much filling of
the stomach: because that according unto the opinion of Galen, two great
sinews pass from the brain to the mouth of the stomach, and therefore these
two parts do suffer grief always together. Sometime the ach does proceed of
drinking strong wine, or fuming meats, as garlike and onions, and sometime of
(...) in the stomach, whereof spung quotidian fevers.

Question. Why have women the headache more ostner then men?

Answer. Albertus says, that it is by reason of their monthly terms, which
men are not troubled with, and so a most unclean and venomous (...) dissolved,
the which (...) a passage upward, does cause the head to ache.

Question. Why ^ white?

Answer. There (...) answers. The (...), because it is cold. (...) in the
mother of white as the Philosopher does teach.

The (...), because it may receive the similitude and likeness of all colors,
which the white color can best do, because it is most simple.

Qusetion. Why are ^ in the head?

Answer. Because (as Albertus says) the brain is there, of what all (...) do
depend and are directed by ^ all the (...), and by and all the (...) are
governed.

Question Why ^ death, if the brain or (...)?

Answer. Because the heart and the brain are two of the ^ parts which (...)
and therefore ^ left for cure.

Question Why ^?

Answer. Because it may ^ impression, ^ peareth in ^ print of the seal.

Question. Why is the brain cold?

Answer. This is answered two ways. First, because that by his coldness it may
clear the understanding of man, and make it subtle. Secondly, that by the
coldness of the brain the heat of the heart may be tempered: and this is
Aristotle's intent, lib. de animal.

Of the Eyes.
Question. WHy have we one nose and two eyes?

Answer. Because the sight is more necessary for us then the smelling: and
therefore it does proceed of the goodness of nature, that if we receive any
hurt or loss of one eye, that yet the other should remain, and so we see
that the spirit, with which we see, called spiritus visiuus, is directed unto
one eye, as it is plain in the common perspectiue.

Question. Why have children in their youth great eyes, and why do they become
smaller and lesser in their age?

Answer. According unto Aristot. de generat it proceeds from the great
humiditie of the brain, and for the same cause children are very sleepie.

Question. Why do black eyes see well in the day time, and badly by night?

Answer. According unto the opinion of Aristotle, it proceeds from the want
of fire, and for the assembling and meeting together of light and humor in the
eyes, which are lightened by reason of the sun, and purged, and in his
absence darkened, which does lighten the eysie humor.

Question. Why does the bluish gray eye see badly in the day time and well by
night?

Answer Because (says Aristotle) grainesse is light and shining of it self,
and the spirits with which we see are weakened in the day time, and
strengthened in the night.

Question. Why be men's eyes of diverse sorts?

Answer. This proceeds; says Aristotle, by reason of the diversity of
humors. The eye therefore has four couerings, and three humors. The first is
called Consolidatiue, which is the outermost, which is strong and fat. The
second is called a hornie skin or covering, to the likeness of a horn, and
that is a clear covering. The third is called Vuea, of the likeness of a grape.
The fourth is called a Cobweb: but according unto the opinion of some, the eye
does consist of seven couerings or skins, and three humors. The first is
called Albugitieus, for the likeness unto the white of an egg. The second
Clacial, that is like unto ye. The third Vitreus, that is clear like a
glass. And that diversity of humors, causes the diversity of eyes.

Question. Why are men which have but one eye good Archers, and why do good
Archers commonly shut one eye, and why do such as behold the stars look
through a trunk with one eye?

Answer. This matter is handled in the perspectiue art, and the reason is, as
it does appear in the book of Causes, because that every virtue and strength
united and knit together, is stronger then it self dispersed and scattered.
Therefore all the force of seeing dispersed into two eyes, the one being shut,
is gathered unto the other, and so the sight is fortified in him, and by a
consequence he does see better and (...) with one eye, being shut, then both
being open.

Question. Why do such as drink much and laugh much, shed tears?

Answer. Because that whilst they drink, the air which is drawn in does not
pass out through the windpipe, and so with force is directed and sent to the
eyes, passing out by the eyes, and so does expel the humors of the eyes, the
which humors being so expulsed, do bring tears.

Question. Why do such as weep much, urine but little?

Answer. Because (says Aristotle) that the radical humiditie of a tear and
of urine, are of one and the same nature. And therefore where weeping does
increase, there urine does diminish. And that, they be of one nature it is
plain by the taste, because they are both salr.

Question. Why do some which have clear eyes, see nothing at all?

Answer. By reason of the opilation, and naughtines of the sinews with which
we see. For the temples being destroyed, the strength of the sight cannot be
carried from the brain unto the eye. As the Phisolopher does teach, lib. de
sens. and sensato.

Question. Why is the eye clear and smooth, like unto a glass?

Answer. Because the things which may be seen, are better beaten back from a
smooth thing then otherwise, that thereby the sight should be strengthened.

Secondly I answer, it is because the eye is very moist, above all the parts
of the body, and of a watrish nature. And as the water is clear and smooth, so
likewise the eye.

Question. Why do men which have their eyes deep in their (...) see well a
stir off, and quickly, and the (...) of other beasts?

Answer. Because (says Aristotle 2. de (...) animal.) the force and power by
which we see is not dispersed in them, (...) does go directly unto the thing
which (...) seen. And this is (...) by a similitude: because that when a man
does stand in a deep ditch, or well, he does see in the day time, standing
in those places the stars of the (...) as Aristotle does teach, in his (...)
(...) (...), because that then the power of the sight and the beams are not
(...).

Question. ^ their eyes far out, and not far out their head, see but (...)
(...) distance?

Answer. Because says Aristotle) the beams of the sight which pass from the
eye, are (...) on every side, and do not go directly unto the thing which is
seen, and therefore the sight is weakened.

Question. Why are many beasts, ^ whelps, and (...) whelps?

Answer. Because such beasts are not as yet of perfect (...) and (...), and the
court of nutriment does not work in them. And this is proved by a similitude
of the swallows, whose eyes if they be taken out when they are little ones in
the neast, will grow again. And this is plain in many other beasts, which
are brought forth before their time, as it were dead, as whelps, bears, and
this reason does belong rather unto the perspectiue, then the natural
Philosopher.

Question. Why does the eyes of a woman which has her flowers, stain a new
glass, as Aristotle says, De some. and vigil. And this is the like problem,
why does the Basilisque kill a man with his sight?

Answer. To the first, the answer is, that when the flowers do run from the
woman, then the most venemons air is dissolved in the, the which does ascend
unto the woman's head, and she having grief of her head, does cover it with
many vailes and kerchiefes: and because the eyes are full of small insensible
holes, which are called pores, there the air seeks a passage, and so does
infect the eyes, which are full of blood. And their eyes do also appear
dropping, and full of tears, by reason of the evil vapor which is in them,
and those vapors are euapourated and multiplied, until they come unto the
glass before them: and by reason that such a glass is very sound, clean, and
smooth, it does easily receive that which is unclean.

To the second it is answered, that the Basilisque is a very venomous and
infectious beast, and that there pass from his eyes venomous vapors, the
which are multiplied unto the thing which is seen by him, and cuen unto the eye
of man, the which venomous vapors or humors entering into the bodies, do
infect them, and so in the end the man dies. And this is also the reason why
the Basilisque looking upon a shield perfectly well made with fast clammy
pitch, or any hard smooth thing, does kill himself, because the humors are
beaten back from this smooth hard thing unto the Basilisque, by which beating
back he is killed. And the like is said of a woman when she has her monthly
disease. Where of it follows, that some old women do hurt themselves when
they look upon glasses, or other firm and solid things in the time of their
terms.

Question. Why is not the sparkeling of cats eyes and wolfes eyes seen in the
light, but in the dark?

Answer. Because that the greater light does darken the leiser, and therefore
in a greater light that sparkling cannot be seen: but the greater the darkness
is, the easlier it is seen, and is made more strong and shining, because it is
not then hindered by a greater external light, which might darken it.

Question. Why does a man beholding himself in a (...) presently forget his
own disposition?

Answer. The answer is made in lib. de formed (...) that the image seen by
the glass, does represent it self weakly and indirectly unto the power of the
sight: and because it is represented weakly, it is weakly also apprehended,
and by a consequence is not long retained.

Question. Why is the sight recreated and refreshed by a green color, as this
verse does show?

Fons, speculum, gramen, oculis (...) alleus (...).

Answer. Because the green color does meanly move the instrument of the
sight, and therefore does comfort the sight: but this does not black or white
color, because these colors do vehemently stir and alter the organe and
instrument of the sight, and therefore make the greater violence: but by how
much the more violent the thing is which is felt or seen, the more it does
destroy and weaken the sense: as Aristctle does teach, 2. de anima.

Of the Nose.
Question. WHy does the nose stand out further then the other parts of the head?

Answer. There are two answers. The first, because the nose is as it were the
sink of the brain, by the which the fleume of the brain is purged. And
therefore it does stand so forth, least the other part should be defiled.

The second, according unto Constable. is, because the nose is the beauty of the
face, and therefore it does show it self and shine. It does smell also and
adorn the face, as Boethius says, De discipl. schol.

Question. Why has man the worste smell of all other living creatures, as it
does appear, 2. de anima?

Answer. Because that man, as the Commentator says, in respect of his
quantity bath the most moystest brain of all creatures. And therefore by that
exceeding moystnes and coldness, the brain wants a good disposition, and by a
consequence the smelling, seeing the instrument is not good, as Aristotle and
Themist. do teach. Yea, some men there be which do not smell at all.

Question. Why does the Vultur or (...) smell very well, as the Commentator
does say?

Answer. Because they have a very dry brain, and therefore the air carrying
the smell, is not hindered by the humiditie of the brain, but does presently
touch his instrument. And therefore he says, that the Vultures, Tigers, and
other beasts, came 500. miles to the dead bodies after a battade in Greece.

Question, Why did nature make the (...).

Answer. For three commodities. First, because that the mouth being (...), we
draw breath in by the nosthrils to refresh the heart with. The second
commodity is, because that the air which proceeds from the mouth, does
favor badly because it does savor of the vapors which use from the stomach,
but that which we breathe from the nose is not so noisome. The third, because
the fleume which does proceed from the brain is purged by them.

Question. Why do men sneese?

Answer. Because that the expulsive virtue or power, and the sight should
thereby be purged, and the brain also from superfluities: because that as the
lungs are purged by coughing, so the sight and the brain by sneesing. And
those which sneese often, are said to have a strong brain: and thereupon the
Physicians do give sneesing medicaments to purge the brain. And such sick
persons as cannot sneese, dye quickly, because it is a sign that their brain
is wholly stuffed with evil humors which cannot be purged.

Question. Why cannot such as are apoplectikes, sneese, that is, such as are
subject easily to bleed?

Answer. Because the passage and ventricules of the brain are stopped in them,
and if they could sneese, their apoplexy would be loosed.

Question. Why does the heat of the sun provoke sneesing, and not the heat
of the fire?

Answer. Because the heat of the sun does only dissolve, and not consume,
and therefore the vapor dissolved is expelled by sneesing: but the heat of
the fire does dissolve and consume, and therefore does rather consume sneesing,
then provoke unto it.

Of the Ears.
Question. WHy do all beasts move their ears, and not man?

Answer. Because there is in man a certain muscule near unto the iawe, which
does hinder motion in the ears, and therefore that muscule being extended and
stretched, men do move their ears, as it has bin seen in diverse men: but
other beasts want that muscule or fleshy sinewe, and therefore does move their
ears.

Question. Why is rain prognosticated by the pricking up of the Asses ears?

Answer Because the Ass is a very melancholy beast, and it proceeds from
melancholy that he does foresee rain to come. In the time of rain all beasts
do prick up their ears, and therefore the Ass perceiving that it will
rain, does prick up his ears before it come.

Question. Why have small birds no ears?

Answer Aristotle does answer, and say, that nature does give unto every
thing that which is fit for it. But if she should have given birds ears, their
flying would have been hindered. Likewise fish do want ears, because they
would hinder their swimming, and have only certain little holes, through
which they do hear, as Aristotle does declare by the sea calfe.

Question. Why have Bats ears, seaing they do seem to be birds?

Answer. Because they are partly birds in nature in that they do fly, by
reason where of they have wings: and partly they are of the nature of four
footed beasts, and in that respect they are hairie, because they are mise, and
therefore nature as being wise, gave them ears.

Question. Why has only man round ears?

Answer. Because the shape of the whole and of the parts should be
proportionable, and especially in things of one nature: for as a drop of water
is round, so the whole water, as John de sacre Rosco does prove. And so
because man's head is round, the ears incline toward the same figure: but the
heads of other beasts are somewhat long, and so their ears are drawn into
length also.

Question. Why did nature give living creatures ears?

Answer. For two causes. First, because that with them they should hear.
Secondly, because that by the ears cholerike superfluity is purged: for as
the head is purged from fleugmatike superfluity by the nose, so from cholerike
by the ears.

Of the Mouth.
Question. WHy has the mouth lips to compass it?

Answer. According unto Constable. because the lips do cover and defend the teeth:
for it were unseemly that the teeth should always be seen. An other answer
is, that the teeth are of a cold nature, and would therefore be easily hurt,
if they were not covered with the lips. Another moral reason is, because a
man should not be too hasty in speech.

Question. Why has man two ears, and two eyes, and but one mouth?

Answer. Because a man should speak but little, and see and hear much. And
withal, Aristotle does say, that the hearing is the sense with which learning
is gotten. And he says, that the sight does show us the difference of many
things. And Senecae does agree unto this, affirming, that nature has environed
the tongue with a double cloister, the teeth and lips, and has made the ears
open and wide, and has given us but one mouth, to speak little, though we
hear much.

Question. Why has a man a mouth?

Answer. For many commodities. First, because the mouth is the gate and door
of the stomach. Secondly, because the meat is chewed in the mouth, and
prepared and made ready for the first digestion Although Autcen does hold that
the first digestion is made in the mouth. Thirdly, because that the air drawn
into the hollow of the mouth for the refreshing of the heart, is made more pure
and subtle. And for many other causes, which shall hereafter appear.

Question. Why are the lips moveable?

Answer. Because of forming the voice and words, which can not be perfectly
done with out them. For as without a, b, c, there is no writing, so without the
lips no voice can well be formed.

Question. Why do men gape?

Answer. The gloss upon the last part of Hippocrates Aphorisures says, that
it proceeds of wearisomnes, as when a man sits among such as he does not
know, whose company he could willingly want.

Secondly, gaping is caused of the thick fumes which fill the jaws, by the
expulsion of the which is caused the stretching out and extension of the jaws,
and opening of the mouth, and then a man does gape.

Question. Why does a man gape when he sees an other man gape?

Answer. This proceeds of the imagination. And this is proved by a
similitude: for an Ass is animal (...), by reason of his melancholy, because
he does retain his superstuitie a long time, and would never care (...) piss,
unless he should hear an other piss. And so a man does gape through
imagination, when an other man does gape.

Of the Teeth.
Question. WHy do the teeth only, among all other bones feel with the sense
of feeling?

Answer. Because, as Auicen and Galen does say, they might discern of heat
and cold which hurt them, which the other bones need not.

Question. Why have men more teeth then women?

Answer. By reason of the abundance of heat and blood, which is more in men
then in women.

Question. Why do the teeth grow until the end of our life, and not the
other bones?

Answer. Because they should otherwise be consumed with chewing and grinding.

Question. Why do teeth only come again when some fall, or be taken out, and
other bones taken away grow no more?

Answer. Because that, according unto Aristotle, all other bones are ingendered
of the humiditie which is called radical, and so they breed in the womb of
the mother: but the teeth are ingendered of nutritive humiditie, which is
renewed and increased from day to day.

Question. Why do the foreteeth fall in youths and grow again, and not the
cheek teeth?

Answer. This proceeds of the defect of matter and of the figure, because the
foreteeth are sharp, and the others broad. But according unto Aristotle, there
is another answer: that is, that it is the office of the foreteeth to cut the
meat, and therefore they are sharp: and the office of the others is to chew
the meat, and therefore they are broad in fashion, which is fittest for that
purpose.

Question. Why do the foreteeth grow soonest?

Answer. Because we want them sooner in cutting then the others in chewing.

Question Why do the teeth grow black in the old age of living creatures?

Answer. This proceeds of the corruption of the meat, and the corruption of
fleume, with a naughty cholerike humor.

Quest. Why are colts teeth yellow and of the color of saffron when they be
young, and wax white when they be old?

Answer. Aristotle says, that a horse has abundance of watrie humors in him,
the which in his youth are digested and converted into grosnes, but in old age
heat is diminished, and the watrie humors remain, whose proper color is
white.

Question. Why did nature give living creatures teeth?

Answer. Aristotle says, 2. de generat. animal. to some to fight with and for
the defense of their life, as unto woolues and boares: unto some to ear with,
as unto horse: unto some for the forming of their voice, as unto men, as it
appears by the Commentator in the books De animal.

Question. Why do horned beasts want then upper cheek teeth?

Answer. According unto Aristotle in his book de animal. horns and teeth are
caused of the self same matter, that is, of nutrimental humiditie, and
therefore the matter which passes into horns, turns not into teeth, and
therefore the upper teeth want. And such beasts, according unto Aristotle,
cannot chew well: whereupon for want of teeth they have two stomachs by a
consequence, and so do chew their meat twice: and they do first convey their
meat into their first stomach or belly, and then return it from whence it
came and chew it.

Question. Why are some beasts brought forth with teeth, as kids and lambs,
and some without, as men?

Answer. Nature does not want in things necessary, nor abound in things
superfluous: and therefore because these beasts not long after they are fallen
do need teeth, are fallen with teeth: but men are nourished with the mothers
dugge for a time and therefore for a time want teeth.

Question. Why have not birds teeth?

Answer. Because the matter of teeth passes into their beak, and therefore
there is their digestion: or else it is answered, that although they do not
chewe with teeth, yet they chewe with the instruments belonging unto them.

Of the Tongue.
Question. WHy is the tongue full of pores?

Answer. According unto Arist. 2. de anim. because the tongue is the mean
whereby we taste, and through the mouth into the pores of the tongue, the
taste does come unto the sense of tasting.

Otherwise it is answered, that a frothy spettle is sent unto the mouth by the
tongue from the lungs, moystening the meat, and making it ready for the first
digestion: and therefore the tongue is full of pores, because this spettle may
have passage through him.

Question. Why does the tongue of such as are sick of agues, judge all things
to be bitter?

Answer. Because the stomach of such persons is filled with cholerike humors,
and choler is very bitter, as it appears by the gall, and therefore this
bitter fume does infect the tongue, and so the tongue being full of these
taste, does judge them bitter, although the bitterness be not in the meats, but
in the tongue.

Question. Why does the tongue water when we hear sour and sharp things
named?

Answer. Because the imaginatiue virtue or power, is of greater force then the
power and faculty of tasting: and when we do imagine of any taste, we
conceive it by the power of tasting, as by a mean, because there is nothing
felt by taste, but by the mean of that spettle, and therefore then the tongue
does water.

Question. Why do some stammer and some lispe?

Answer. This happens for many causes. Sometimes through the moystnes of the
tongue and brain, as in children, which cannot speak plainly, nor pronounce
many letters. Sometime it happens by reason of the shrinking of certain
sinews which are corrupted with fleume: for such sinews there be which go
to the tongue, the which are corrupted.

Question. Why are the tongues of Serpents and mad dogs venomous?

Answer. Because of the malignitie and furnositie of the venomous humor which
does predominat in them.

Question. Why is a dogs tongue apt and fit for medicine, and contrariwise a
horse tongue pestiferous?

Answer. This is by reason of some secret property, or else it may be said,
that the tongue of a dog is full of many pores, and so does draw and take
away the viscositie of the wound. Some say that a dog has by nature some
humors in his tongue, with the which by licking he does heal, and the
contrary is in a horse.

Question. Why is spettle white?

Answer. By reason of the continual moving of the tongue, whereof heat is
ingendered, which does make white this superfluity which is spettle, as it is
seen in froth of water.

Question. Why is spettle unsavory, and without taste?

Answer. If it had a certain determinat taste, then the tongue should not
taste at all, but should only have the taste of spettle, and so could not
receive other tastes.

Question. Why does the spettle of one who is fasting, heal an impostume?

Answer. Because, according unto Auicen, it is well digested and made subtle.

Question. Why do some abound more in spettle then other some?

Answer. This does proceed of a fleugmadke complexion, which does predominate
in them: and therefore the Physicians do say, that such should take heeds of a
quotidian ague, which arises of the predomination of flume. The contrary is in
those which spet little, because heat does abound in them, which does consume
the humiditie of spettle, and so the defect of spettle is a sign of a fever.

Question. Why is the spettle of a man which is fasting, more subtle and
white, then of one who is full?

Answer. Because that that spettle is without the viscositie of meare, which is
wont to make the spettle of one who is full, gross and thick.

Question. From whence proceeds the spettle in man?

Answer. From the froth of the lungs, which according unto the Physicians, are
the seat of fleume.

Question. Why are such beasts which often go together for generation, very
full of foam and sroth?

Answer. Because that then the lights and the heart are in a great motion of
lust, and therefore there is ingendered in them much frothie matter.

Question. Why have not birds spettle?

Answer. Because they have very dry lungs, according unto Aristotle in his
book de animal.

Question. Why do such as are called Epilepti, that is, such as are
overwhelmed, and as it were drowned in their own blood, and are diseased,
savor badly and corruptly?

Answer. The answer, according unto the Physicians, is, because the peccant
matter lies in the head: but if he do vomit, then the matter is in the
stomach: but if they urine much, then the matter is in the passage of the
urine: but if they begin to have seed, then it is in the vessels of the seed,
and according unto this the Physicians do purge them.

Question. Why does the tongue loose sometime the use of speaking?

Ans. The answer is out of Hippoc. that this does happen through a palsy, or
apoplexy, that is, a sudde^ efffusio^ of blood, and of a gross humor. And
sometimes also by the infection spiritus animales, in the middle cel of the
brain, which does hinder that the spirit is not carried unto the tongue: and
this is Galens meaning, for by the expressing of the tongue, many actions of
diverse passions are made manifest.

Of the roof of the mouth.
Q. WHy are fruits, before they be ripe, of a naughty relish, or bitter, and
afterward sweet?

Ans. A naughty relish in taste proceeds of coldness and want of heat in
gross and thick humidity but a sweet taste proceeds of sufficient heat.
And therefore in ripe fruit the humiditie is subtle through the heat of the
sun, and therefore such fruits are commonly sweet: but before they be ripe
the humiditie is gross, and not subtle, for want of heat, and therefore then
the fruits are bitter and sour.

Quest. Why be we rather delighted with sweet tastes, then with bitter, or any
other?

Ans. Because nature is delighted with sweetness. The reason is, because a
sweet thing is hot and moist, and through his heat, it does dissolve
superfluous humidities, and by his humiditie the immu^dicitie is washed away:
but a sharp eger taste, by reason of the cold which does predominate in it,
does bind over much, and prick, and offends the parts of the body in purging.
And therefore we do not delight in that taste, because the Phisitio^s counsel
us to eat nothing which is bitter in the summer, not in a great heat: and the
reason is, because bitterness does breed heat: but we should eat bitter things
in winter only. And therefore Aristotle does say, that sweet things are
grateful unto nature and do greatly nourish.

Question. Why does a sour taste provoke appetite rather then any other?

Answer. Because it is cold and does cool. Now it is the nature of cold to
desire, and draw, and therefore is cause of appetite. Mark that there are nine
kinds of tastes, three which proceed from heat, three from cold, and three from
a temperate mean.

Q. Why do we draw more air, the^ we breathe out?

Ans. Aristotle and Albertus in his book de (...) cordis do answer, that much
air is drawn in, and is turned into a nutriment, and with the virall spirits
is contained in the lungs. And therefore a beast is not suffocated so long as he
receives air with the lu^gs, in which some part of the air remains also.

Question. Why does the air seem to be expelled and put forth seeing that
indeed the air is invisible by reason of his raritie and thinnes?

Answer. Because that the air which is received into us, is mingled with
vapors and fumosities of the heart, by reason whereof it is made thick and so
is seen. And this is proved by experience, because that in winter we see our
breath, because the coldness of the air does bind the breath mixed with
fumosities, and so it is thickened and made gross, and by a consequence it is
seen.

Question. Why have some men a stinking breath?

Answer. The answer is, according to the Physicians, because there does arise
evil fumes from the stomach: and sometime it proceeds of the corruption of
the spiritual parts of the body, as of the lungs. And the breath of leapers is
so infected, that it does poison the birds which are near unto them, because
their inward parts are very corrupt, as it appears by Constable. defin. because
that leprosy is a nourishment of all the parts of the body, together with the
corrupting of them: and it does begin in the blood, and end in the members of
the body.

Question. Why be leapers hoarse?

Answer. Because that in them the instruments vocal are corrupted, that is the
lights.

Question. Why do men become hoarse?

Answer. Because of a rheum desceding from the brain, filling the conduites
of the lights: or sometimes through some importumes in the throat or rheum
gathered in the neck.

Question. Why have all the femall of all living creatures the shrillest
voices, a cow only excepted, and a woman shriller then a man and smaller?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, by reason of the composition of the veins,
and vocal arteries, that is, where the air does enter in, by which veins and
arteries the voice is formed: as it appears by a similitude, because a small
pipe does sound shriller then a great. And so also in (...), because the
passage where the voice is founded, is made narrow and strait, by reason of
cold because it is the nature of cold to bind: but in men that passage is
open and wider through heat, because it is the property of hear to open and
dissolve. Also it proceeds in women through the moystnes of the lungs and
weakness of heat. Young men and diseased men have sharp and shrill voices for
the same cause. And that is the natural cause why a mar-child at his birth
time does cry a, i, which is a bigger sound, and the femalle, which is a
slenderer sound, as it pleases Laberintus, when he says, Masculus a proferr.

Question. Why does the voice change in men and women, in men at 14 in women
at 12. in men, when they begin to yield seed, in women when their breasts
begin to grow, as Aristotle does say, lib. de animal.

Answer. Because that then, says Aristotle, the beginning of the voice is
slackened and loosed: and he proves this by a similitude of a firing of an
instrument let down or (...), which gives a greater sound. And he proves it
another way, because that beasts which are gelded, as (...), Eunuchs, and
gelded men, have softer and slanderer voices then others, by reason they want
stories.

Question. Why do men become hoarse, by the looking of a woolfe?

Answer. The answer, according unto Aristotle is, because a wolse is a very
cold beast in the brain, and thereupon has a very heavy head. If then the
spirit of the sight or be ames be directed and go toward the wolf, it does
draw some coldness from him to the breast, and then of that coldness the breast
is straightened, where the instruments are, by which the voice is formed:
because a wolf can not send forth any other fumosities, and they are breathed
out into the air, that air next unto him is infected, and the next air by
that air, and so another air, until it come unto the man: then that air
being infected, is drawn in by man, and so does make him hoarse, by closing
the vocal artery or windpipe. And it has been already said that a woolfe is
a very ravenous and devouring beast, and does eat as much at once as will
serve him for three days, and therefore by opening his mouth does cast forth
raw and gross humors undigested, by the which the next air unto him is
infected, and so the next unto it, until it come unto the looker on, and so
does infect like the Basilisque, which does cast forth venomous airs, which
infect men by the eyes.

Question. Why is not a wolf hoarse when a man does look on him?

Answer. Because a man is not so cold as a wolf, nor of so malignant a
quality. And for the like reason this problem is moved.

Question. Why does a man which is stain, bleed when he is seen of him which
killed him?

Answer. This proceeds of a divine cause, and not of a natural, because his
blood does call for revenge against the murderer. But if there be any
natural cause of it, this is it. The committer of this wicked fact calling it
to mind, is very sorry for it and repents him of it, and is in anguisn of
mind, and in a great heat, through the strong imagination which he has
conceived, and by that means all his spirits do stir and boil and repair
unto the instruments of the sight, and so go out by the beams of the sight of
the eyes unto the wounds which are made, the which if they be fresh, do
presently fall a bleeding. Secondly, this is done by the help of the air
which is breathed in, the which being drawn from the wound, causes it to
bleed.

Question. Why do small birds sing more and louder then great ones, as it
appears in the Lark and Nightingale?

Ans. Because the spirits of small birds is lighter and greater then the
spirits of great birds, and therefore follow easily any desire, and so do sing
very often.

Question. Why do the male sing more then the female, as it appears in all
living things?

Answer. It proceeds from the desire of carnal copulation, because that then
the spirits are moved throughout all the body with the foresaid appetite and
desire. And speaking generally, the females are colder then the males.

Question. Why do Bees, Waspes, Flies, and Locusts, and many other such like
beasts, make a noise, seeing they have no lu^gs nor instruments of the voice?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, there is in them a certain small skin,
against the which when the air does strike, it causes that sound, and
therefore there is a strange sound.

Question. Why do not fish make a sound?

Answer. Because that according unto Aristotle, they have no lights, but only
gils, nor yet heart, and therefore they need not the drawing in of air, and by
a consequence they make no noise: because that as Aristotle does say, a voice
is a percussion of the air which is drawn.

Of the neck.
Question. WHy has a living creature a neck?

Answer. Because the neck is the supporter of the head, as Aristotle does
teach: and therefore the neck is the middle betwixt the head and the body, to
the intent that by it and by his sinews, as by certain means and ways,
motion and sense of the body might be conveyed through out all the body, and
that by the means of the neck, as it were by a distance, the heart which is
very hot might be separated from the brain.

Question. Why do some beasts want a neck, as Serpents, fishes?

Answer. Because such beasts want a heart, and therefore they do not want that
distance which we have spoken of: or else we answer, that they have a neck
in some inward part of them, but it is not distinguished from the heart and the
head.

Question. Why is the neck full of bones and joints?

Answer. Because it may bear and sustain the head the stronger. And also
because the back bone is joined to the brain in the neck, and from thence it
receives marrowe, which is of the same substance with the brain.

Question. Why have some beasts long necks, as Cranes, Storkes, and such like?

Answer. Because such beasts do seek their living in the bottom of the
water, and therefore do want such necks. And some beasts have short necks,
as Sparrow-hawkes, because such are ravenous beasts, and therefore for strength
want such short necks: as it does appear in an ox, which has a short
neck, and is therefore strong.

Question. Why is the neck hollow, and especially before about the tongue?

Answer. Because there be two passages, whereof the one does carry the meat
unto the nutritive instruments, as to the stomach and liver, and is called of
the Greeks Isophagus: the other is the windpipe.

Question. Why is the artery made like rings and circles?

Answer. The better to how, and to give a good sounding again.

Question. Why does a chicken move a great space after his head is off, and a
man beheaded never stirs?

Answer. Because a chicken and such like, have strait sinews, and therefore
the spirit of moving continues long after the head is off: but men and other
beasts have long and large sinews and veins, and therefore the motive
spirits does quickly depart from them, and by a consequent cannot move their
bodies.

Of the shoulders and arms.
Question. WHy has a man shoulders and arms?

Answer. To give and carry burdens, according unto Aristotle.

Question. Why are his arms round?

Answer. For the swifter and speedier work, because that that figure is fit to
move.

Question. Why are the arms thick?

Answer. Because they should be strong to lift and bear burdens, to thrust,
and give a strong blow: so their bones are thick, because they contain much
marrow, for fear least they should be easily corrupted and marred: but marrow
cannot so well be contained in small bones as in great.

Question. Why do such as are diseased and in grief, uncover and cover their
arms, and such also as are in an agony?

Answer. Because such are near unto death, and it is a sign of death, by
reason of great grief which causes that uncovering, as Hippocrat. does teach,
lib. prognost.

Question. Why do the arms become small and slender in some sickness, as in
mad men, and such as are sick of the dropsy?

Answer. Because all the parts of the body do suffer the one with the other,
and therefore one member being in grief, all the humors do concur there in
the foresaid griefs. For when the head does ache, all the humors of the arms
do run to the head, and therefore the arms become small and slender,
because they want their proper nouriture.

Question. Why have brute beasts no arms?

Answer. Their forefeete are in stead of arms, and in their place. Or else we
may answer more fitly, because all beasfs have some parts for their defense,
and to fight with, as the Woolfe the teeth, the Cow horns, a Horse the hinder
feet, birds the beak and wings: but only man has his arms.

Of the hands.
Question. WHy has a man hands, and an ape also which is like unto a man?

Answer. The hand is an instrument which a man does especially want, because
many things are done by the hands, and not by any other part, as Aristotle does
teach.

Question Why are some men ambidexters, that is, use the left hand as well as
the right?

Answer. By reason of the great heat of the heart, and for the hot blowing of
the same, and that makes a man as nimble of the left hand as in the right: and
without doubt such are of a good complexion.

Question. Why are not women ambidexters as well as men, as Hippocrates sauth,
vlt. part. Aphoris.

Answer. Because, as Galen says, a woman in health which is most hot, is
colder then the coldest man in health: I say in health, for if she have an
ague, she is accidentally hotter then a man.

Question. Why are the singers full of joints?

Answer. To be the more fit and apt to receive, and to keep the thing received.

Question. Why has every finger three joints, and the thumb but two?

Answer. The thumb has three, but the third is joined unto the arm, and
therefore is stronger then the other fingers, and is bigger in strength, seeing
he is also in quantity, and is called pollex a polleo, that is, to excel in
strength.

Question. Why are the fingers of the right hand more nimble, then the fingers
of the left, as Aegidius says?

Answer. It proceeds of the heat which does predominate in those parts,
which causes greater agilitie.

Question. Why are the fingers thicker before meat, then after, as Albertus
says.

Answer. According unto the Physicians, because a man which is fasting is full
of bad humors, and diverse fumosities, which puff up the parts of the body, and
the fingers also: but when those humors are expulsed through meat, the fingers
become more slender. And for the same reason, a man which is fasting is heavier
then when he has meat in his belly, as it is most plain in fasters. Another
reason may be given, that is, because that after meat, the heat departs from
the outward parts of the body unto the inward, to help digestion, and
therefore the outward and external parts become slender: but after the
digestion is made, the blood returns again to the exterior parts, and then
they become great again.

Question. Why are some men left handed?

Answer. Because the heart sends not heat unto the right side, but more unto
the left, and does also work a slendernes and subtlety in the left side.

Of the nails.
Question. FRom whence do the nails proceed?

Answer. Of fumosities and humors which are resolved, and do go into the
extremities of the fingers, and there are dried through the power of the
external air, and brought to the hardness of a horn.

Question. Why do the nails of old men grow black and pale?

Answer. Because the heat of their heart decays, the which decaying, their
beauty does decay also.

Question. Why are men judged to be of a good or evil complexion, by the
disposition of their nails?

Answer. Because they give witness of the goodness or badnes of the heart, and
therefore of the complexion: for if they be somewhat red, they betolten choler
well tempered: but if they be inclining with red somewhat to blacknes, they
betoken a sanguine complexion: but if they be yellowish or black, they
signify melancholy.

Question. Why do white spots appear in the nails?

Answer. Through the mixture of fleume with the nutriment.

Of the breast.
Question. WHy is the breast hollow?

Answer. Because there is the seat of the spiritual members, which are most
noble, as the heart and lights, and therefore because these might be kept from
hurt, it was necessary that the breast should be hollow.

Question. Why has a man the broadest breast of all living creatures?

Answer. Because the spirits of man are weak and subtle, and therefore do
require a spacious place, wherein they may be contained, as the breast is.

Question. Why are the breasts of birds round?

Answer. Because they be in continual motion, and that figure is fittest for
motion, as Aristotle does say, 4. Physic.

Question. Why do we draw those things which we love unto our breast?

Answer. Because the first and chiefest part of the heart is under the breast,
and therefore that which the heart does love we do draw to the breast, by
reason of the neighborhood it has with the heart, so applying the thing loved
unto the lover.

Question. Why have women narrower breasts then men?

Answer. Because there is heat in men, which does naturally move to the
uppermost part of the^, making those parts great and large. And therefore a
great breast is a token of courage, as Aristotle does say, declaring this to be
true by the Lion and the Bull: but in women cold does predominate, which
naturally does tend downward. And therefore Aristotle does say, that women do
often fall upon their tail, because those parts behind are gross and heavy,
by reason of the cold descending thither: but a man does commonly fall on his
breast, by reason of his greatness and thicknes.

Of the paps and dugs.
Question. WHy are the pappes placed upon the breast?

Answer. Because the breast is the seat of the heart which is most hot, and
therefore there the pappes do grow, to the end that the flowers being
conveyed thither, as being near unto the heat of the heart, should the sooner
be digested and perfected, and converted into the matter and substance of
milk.

Question. Why are the pappes below the breasts in other beasts, and above the
breast in women?

Answer. Because a woman has two legs only, and therefore if her dugges
should be below her breast, they would hinder her going: but other beasts
have four feet, and therefore they are not hindered in their going.

Question. Why have not men as great breasts or paps as women?

Answer. Because a man has no monthly terms, and therefore no vessel
deputed for them. And yet Aristotle does say, that men have small paps and
women little small stones.

Question. Which pappes are best for children to suck, great ones or small
ones, or the mean between both?

Answer. In the great ones the heat is dispersed, and there is no good
digestion of the milk: but in small ones the power and force is strong,
because a virtue united is strongest, and by a consequent there is a good
working and digesting of the milk: and therefore the small ones are better
then the great ones: but yet the mean ones are the best of all, because that
every mean is best.

Question. Why do the pappes of young women begin to grow great about 13. or
14. years of age, as Albertus does say?

Anwer. Because that then her terms begin to have course and to increase: and
as Aristotle does say, man's seed and women's flowers do begin to increase at
one age.

Question. Why do the pappes of such women at cast their child, wax soft, as
Hippocr. says, 2. part. Aphoris.

Answer. Because that there the flowers have no course to the teates, by the
which the young one is nourished, and therefore they wax soft.

Question. Why has a woman that is with child with a boy, the right pap harder
then the left?

Answer. Because the male-childe is conceived in the right side of the mother,
as Hippocrat. says, and therefore the flowers do run to the right pap and
make it hard.

Question. Why does it signify weakness in the child, when the milk does
drop out of the pappes before the woman be delivered?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, because the milk is the proper nouriture of
the child in the womb of the mother, and therefore if the milk run out it
is a (...) that the child is not nourished, and therefore is weak.

Question. Why does the hardness of the pappes betoken the health of the child
in the womb?

Answer. Because the flowers are converted into milk, and that milk does
sufficiently nourish the child, and thereby his strength is signified.

Question. Why has a woman but two pappes, and some brute be (...), or more?

Answer. Because that for the most part a woman has but one child either boy
or wench, and therefore one pap is sufficient or two: but beasts have many
young ones, and therefore so many teates.

Question. Why be women's pappes hard when they be with child, and soft at
other times?

Answer. They swell then and are puffed up, because that much moisture which
proceeds from their flowers does run unto the pappes, which at other
seasons do remain in the matrix or womb, and is expelled by the place
deputed to that end.

Question. By what means does the milk of the pappes come Sonto the matrix or
womb?

Answer According unto Hippocrates, because there is a certain knitting and
coupling of the pappes with the womb, and there are certain veins which the
Midwiues do cut at the time of the birth of a child, and by those veins the
milk does flow unto the navel of the children, and so they receive nouriture
by the navel. Some say, that the child in the womb is nourished at the mouth
but that is false, because that so he should avoid excrements also: but that
is false, because that that is not seen where.

Question. Why is it the sign of a male-child in the womb, when the milk
which runs out of the woman's breasts is thick, and not much, and of a
female when it is thin?

Answer. Because that a woman which goes with a boy has great heat in her,
which does perfect the milk, and make it thick: but such as go with a wench
have not so much heat, and therefore the milk is undigested and vnperfited,
and waterie and thin, and will swim above water if it be put into it.

Question. Why is the milk white, seeing the flowers are red, which it is
engendered of.

Answer. Because that blood well purged and concocted, becomes white, as it
appears in flesh, whose proper color is red, and being wellboyled is white.
Another answer is, because that every humor which is engendered in such a part
of the body, is made like unto that part in color where it is engendered, as
near as it can: but because the flesh of the pappes is white, therefore the
humor of milk is white.

Question. Why does a Cow give milk more abundantly then other beasts?

Answer. Because a Cow is a great eating beasts and where there is much monthly
superfluity engendered, there is much milk, because it is nothing else but that
blood (...) and (...) and because a Cow has much of this monthly blood she
has much milk.

Question. Why is (...) milk wholesome, as Hippocrates says ^.

Answer. According unto the opinion of Galen, for diverse reason (...) because
it does curde in the stomach, where of an evil breath (...) bred. But to
this Hippocrates gives a remedy, (...). If the third part of (...) with
running water, then it is not hurtful. Another reason is, because that
sometimes the milk does wax four in the stomach, and ^ dry whereof evil
humors are bred, which (...) infect the breath.

Question. Why is milk naught for such as have the headache?

Answer. Because milk is easily converted into great fumosities, and has much
terrestrial substance in it, the which fumosities ascending, does cause the
head to ache.

Question. Why is milk a fit nutriment for children and infants?

Answer. Because it is their natural and usual food, and because they were
nourished with the same in the womb of the mother, it is fit for them.

Question. Why are white meats made of a new melch Cow good?

Answer. Because the milk is at that time very spongie, and does expel many
fumosities, and does as it were purge at that time.

Question. Why is the milk naught for the child, if the woman do use carnal
copulation?

Answer. Because that in the time of carnal copulation, the subtilest and best
part of the milk goes to the vessels of the seed, and unto the womb, and
the worst remains in the pappes, which does hurt the child.

Question. Why is the milk of brown women better, then of white women?

Answer. Because that brown women are hotter then others, and because the
heat does purge the milk sufficiently, and so the milk is the better.

Question. Why do the Physicians forbid us to eat milk and fish at the same
meal?

Answer. Because they do dispose us to a leaprosie, and because they are both
fleugmatike.

Question. Why have not birds milk and paps?

Answer. Because pappes would hinder their flying: and fish also have neither
paps nor milk, as Aristotle does say: but in fishes the female does cast many
eggs, upon which the male does touch with a small gut, which causes their
kind to be infinite in succession.

Of backs.
Question. WHy have beasts backs?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, for three causes. First, because the back
should be the way and mean of the sinews, which are extended and spread
throughout all the body from the back bone, as it appears in such as are
hanged, because that when they are torn in pieces, or without flesh, the
sinews hang whole in the chine or back bone. The second, because it should be
a guard and defense for the soft parts of the body, as of the stomach, liver,
lights, and such like. The third, because it should be the foundation of all
the bones, because we see other bones, as the ribs, fastened in the back
bone.

Question. Why has a man above all creatures a broad back, which he can lie
upon, which no beast can do?

Ans. Because a broad back does answer a broad breast. If therefore a man
should have a sharp back like unto other beasts, that would be of an
unseemly shape, and therefore it is requisite that he have a broad back.

Question. Why has a man which lies on his back horrible visions?

Answer. Because then the passage or sinewe of the fantasy is open, which is
in the forepart of the brain, and so the fantasy is destroyed, and then those
visions follow. Another reason is, because that when a man does lve on his
back, the humors are disturbed, and moved upward where the fantasy is, which
is so by that means disturbed.

Question. Why is it naught to lie on the back?

Answer. Because, as the Physicians do say, that does dispose a man to a
leprosy, madness, and to an Intubus. Where you may note, that Mania or madness
is the hurt or disturba^ce of the forepart of the brain, with a taking away or
deprivation of the imagination: but Incubus, that is, the nightmare, is a
passion of the heart, when a man does think himself to be strangled in his
sleep, and some what lie heavy upon his stomach, which he would put off.

Question. Why has the back bone many joints and knuckles, called Spondylia
by the Physicians?

Answer. For the moving of the back, and bowing of him, without the which
joints that could not be done. And therefore they say amiss which say that
Elephants have no such joints: for without them he could not move.

Question. Why do fish dye presently when their back bone is burst?

Answer. Because that in fish the back bone is in steed of the heart. Now the
heart is the first thing which does live, and the last thing which does dye,
as it appears in the book de longit. and breuit. vitae, and therefore when
that bone is broleen, fish can live no longer.

Of the marrow.
Question. WHy does a man dye quickly after the marrow is hurt or perished?

Answer. Because the marrowe does proceed from the brain, which is a
principal part of man, as it appears in two reasons. First, because the
marrow is white like unto the brain. The^, because they have a small skin or
rind, which that which is called Nucha has not, which does somewhat differ
from the marrow, because that Nucha has two couerings like the brain, called
Ptamater, and Dura matter.

Of the Piles or flux of blood in the fundament.
Question. WHy have some men the piles? Answer. Because they are melancholic,
the which melancholy first passes to the spleen, which is the proper seat of
melancholy, and there cannot be retained through abundance of blood: and
therefore from thence it is carried to the back bone, where there are certain
veins which have their end in the back and in the neck. And when those veins
are very full of melancholy blood, then the ways and conduits of nature are
opened, and that blood issues our once a month like a woman's rearmes or
flowers. And those men which have this course of blood, are kept from many
infirmities, as the dropsy, plague, and such like.

Question. Why are the Jews subject unto this disease very much?

Ans. The Divines do say, because they cried at the death of Christ, Let his
bloudfall upon us and our children. And therefore it is said in the Psalm,
Percussit eos Deus in posterior a dorsi. Another reason is, because the Jews
do eat much fleugmatike and cold meats, which does breed mela^choly blood,
which is purged by this fiuxe of blood. Another reason is, because moving does
cause heat, and heat digestion, as 4. Meteor. but the Jews do not move nor
labor, nor converse with men. Also they live in great fear, lest we should
revenge the death of our Savior, which does also breed a coldness in them,
which does hinder digestion, which does breed much melancholy blood in them,
which is by this means purged.

Of the heart.
Question. WHy are the heart and the lungs called, truly parts of the body, in
Latin Spiritalia membra?

Answer. From this word Spiritus, which signifies breath, life, or soul, and
because the vital spirits are engendered in the heart: but that is no good
answer, for so the liver and the brain might be so called, which is false:
because the liver is a part which gives nouriture, and the brain sense and
life. And yet the consequence is clear, because the vital spirits are
ingendered in the liver, and the sensible or animal spirits in the brain. And
therefore the answer is, because that in the heart and in the lungs breath and
air is received, by which we live.

Question. Why are the lungs thin and spungie, light and full of small holes?

Answer. Because the air might be the better received in them, for the cooling
of the heart, and expelling of superfluous humors, because the lungs are the
fan of the heart. And as a pair of bellows is puffed up by taking in of the
air, and shrinketh by blowing out the air: so like wise the lights do draw
air when they cool the heart and cast it out, least through too much heat
the heart should be suffocated.

Question. Why is the flesh of the lungs white?

Answer. Because they be in continual motion.

Question. Why have those beasts only lungs which have hearts?

Answer. Because the lungs be no part for themselves, but for another, that is,
for the heart: and therefore it were superfluous for those beasts to have lungs
which have no heart: but nature does never want in things necessary, nor abound
in superfluities.

Question. Why do such beasts which have no lungs want a bladder?

Answer. Because such drink no water, to the end to make their meat to boil,
or to help digestion, but only for the tempering of their meat, and
therefore they want a bladder and urine, as it appears in such birds as do
not drink at all, as the Falcon, Sparrow hawke.

Question. Why is the heart in the midst of the body?

Answer. Because it should impart life unto all the parts of the body: and
therefore is compared unto the Sun, which is placed in the middle of the
planets, to power light unto them all. And therefore the Pythagorians calling
the Heaven a great living creature, say, that the Sun is the heart of him.

Question. Why only in man is the heart placed in the left side?

Answer. To the end that the heat of the heart should mitigate the coldness of
the spleen: for the spleen is the seat of melancholy, which is seated in the
left side likewise.

Q. Why is the heart first engendered? for according unto Aristotle, the heart
does first live and last dye.

Answer. Because, as Aristotle says, de invent. and senect the heart is the
beginning and origin of life, and of all the parts of the body, and without
him no part can live. Note, according unto the Philosophers, that of the seed
retained in the matrix or womb, there is first engendered a certain little
small skin, which does compass the seed, whereof first the heart is made of
the purest blood, then of a blood not so pure, the liver, and of a thick and
cold blood the marrow and the brain.

Question. Why are such beasts bold which have but a little heart, as the lion?

Answer. Because that in a little heart the heat is well united and vehement,
and the blood touching him does quickly heat him, and is speedily carried
unto the other parts of the body, which does give courage and boldness.

Question. Why are such beasts as have a great heart very fearful, as the Hare?

Answer. Because the heat is dispersed in such a one, and is not able to heat
the blood which comes to him, and so fear is bred.

Question. Why is the heart continually moved?

Answer. According unto Arist. de motu cordis, and Galen, because that in him
there is bred a certain spirit which is more subtle then the air, which by
reason of his great thinnes and rare faction, does seek a larger space,
filling the hollow room of the heart, whereof the dilating and opening of the
heart does follow. And because the heart is earthly, that thrusting and moving
(...), his parts are at rest, and tend downwards. And Galen gives an
experiment of an acorne, the which if he be put into the fire, the hear does
dissolve his humiditie into smoke, which is thinner and greater then the
humiditie, and therefore does occupy a greater place, and so cannot abide in
the rind, but does pusse it up, and cause it to fall into the fire. The like
is of the heart: and therefore note that the heart of a living creature is three
square after a sort, and has the least part toward the left side, and the
greatest toward the right, and does always open and shut in the least part,
and by that means is in continual moving. The first moving is called of the
Physicians Diastole, that is, the extending of the breast or heart. The second,
Sistole, that is, the shutting of the heart: and of these two mouings all the
mouings of the body do proceed, and the moving of the pulse which the
Physicians do seele.

Question. Why are great beasts lean?

Answer. Because the natural heat procceding from the heart, does consurne
the waterish humiditie, which should be converted into fat. And for the most
part women are fatter then men, because they have much humiditie in them, and
have a moyster heart then men.

Question. Why is the flesh of the heart so compact and thick together?

Answer. Because that in a thick compacted substance, heat is strongly
received and united, as it appears in other things. And because the heart with
his heat should moderate the coldness of the brain, it is made of that fast
flesh apt to keep a strong heat.

Question. Why is the heart the hottest part in all living creatures?

Answer Because it is so compacted, it receives heat best, and because it
should mitigate the coldness of the brain, as is said.

Question. Why is the heart the beginning of life?

Answer. Because that in him the vital spirit is bred, which is the seat of
life. And therefore according unto the opinion of August. de different. spirit.
and animae. the heart has two bellies or receptacles, that is, the right and
the left: the right has more blood then spirit, the which spirit is engendered
to give life, and to viuific at all the body.

Question. Why is the heart round, and of the figure of a pyramide, long and
sharp?

Answer. The round figure has no angles, and therefore the heart is round, for
fear least any noisome and hurtful matter should be kept and retained in
him. And also, as Aristotle does affirm, because the round figure is fittest
for motion.

Question. Why is the blood principally in the heart above all other parts?

Answer. Because the blood is in the heart as in his proper place, or in his
efficient place, which some do attribute unto the liver. And thereupon the
heart does not receive blood of any other part, but other parts of him.

Question. Why do some beasts want a heart?

Answer. Although they have no heart, yet they have somewhat which does answer
unto the heart, as it does appear in fish, and celes, which have the back
bone in steed of the heart.

Question. Why does the heart beat and live in some beasts when the head is
off, as it appears in birds and in hens?

Answer. Because the vital spirits do remain lo^gest in the heart, because
the heart is that which is first alive and last dead, as Aristotle does say,
and therefore the heart does beat more then other parts.

Question. Why do all beasts which want a heart, or somewhat proportionable
unto it, want blood also, as it appears in flies?

Ans. The heart is the beginning of blood, and therefore the cause sailing the
effect does fail.

Question. Why is the pulse of the heart more certainly judged in the right
side, then in the left?

Answer. Because the heat of the heart is more lively there then in the other
side, and therefore it is better felt there, then in the other side.

Question. Why does the heat of the heart fail sometimes on a sudden, as in
those which have the falling sickness?

Answer. This does proceed according unto Constant. through the defect of the
heart it self, and of small skins with the which it is covered, the which
being infected or corrupted, the heart fails on a sudden: and sometime it
does happen by reason of the parts next adjoining. And therefore when any
venomous humor does go out of the mouth of the stomach, that does hurt the
heart, and the parts adjoining, the which does also cause this fainting. Note
according unto Aristotle, that the disposition of the heart is known by the
pulse of the heart, because a swift great beating pulse, does give witness of
the heat of the heart and of a good complexion. A slow and weak pulse does
betoken the coldness of the heart and an evil complexion. And therefore a woman
which is in health has a slower and weaker pulse then a man, as it shall
appear hereafter.

Of the stomach.
Question. WHy is the stomach large and wide?

Answer. Because that in the stomach the meat is first concocted and
digested, as it were in a pot, to the end that that which is pure should be
separated from that which is impure, as Aristotle says: and therefore
according unto the quantity of meat the stomach is enlarged.

Question. Why is the stomach round?

Answer. Because that if it had angles and corners, as Constable. says, the meat
would remain in them, and a man should never want agues: the which humors
nevertheless are lifted up and consumed, and are not hidden in those corners,
by reason of the roundnes of the stomach.

Question. Why is the stomach full of sinews and feeling?

Answer. As Aristotle does say, because the sinews can be extended and
enlarged, and so the stomach is when it is full, and when it is hungry it is
drawn together, and therefore nature has provided those sinews.

Question. Why does the stomach digest?

Answer. By reason of the heat which is in him, the which heat comes from
the parts adjoining, that is, the liver and the heart. For we see that in
metals the heat of the fire does take away the rust and dross from the iron,
and silver from tin, and gold from copper: and so by digestion the pure is
separated from the impure. And that digestion is of four sorts, according unto
the Physicians.

Question. Why is the stomach joined unto the liver?

Answer. Because, says Constable the liver is very hot, and with his heat does
help digestion, and does compass the stomach.

Question. Why be we commonly colder after dinner then before?

Answer. Because that then all the heat goes to the stomach to further
digestion, and so the outward parts be cold, being deprived of heat.

Question. Why is it hurtful to study presently after dinner?

Answer. Because that when the heat does labor to help the imagination in
study, then it cease from digesting the meat, and so the meat remains
raw. And therefore according unto the Physicians a man should walk somewhat after
dinner.

Question. Why have women with child an inordinate appetite of eating coals,
ashes, and such like?

Answer. Because that such as are the humors in the stomach, such nutriment
they desire: and because women with child have corrupted humors, they desire
such things, because like does cover his like.

Question. Why does the stomach slowly digest very fat meat?

Answer. Because such meats do swim in the stomach. Now the best digestion
is in the bottom of the stomach, where fat meat comes not. And therefore
such as eat fat meat are very sleepie after the eating of it, because their
digestion is hindered.

Question. Why is all the body the worse when the stomach is ill at ease?

Answer. Because the stomach is knit with the brain, heart and liver, which
are the principal parts in man, and therefore when he is not well, the others
are euilly disposed. Another answer is, that if the first digestion be
hindered, the others are also hindered: for in the first digestion is the
beginning of the infirmity that is in the stomach.

Question. Why are young men sooner a hungered then old men?

Answer. Young men do digest for three causes. First for growing: then for
restoring of life: and lastly, for conservation of their life, as Hippocrates
and Galen does say. Else we answer, that young men are hotter then old men,
because young men are hot and dry, and therefore the heat does digest more, and
by a consequent they desire more.

Question. Why do Physicians prescribe that a man should eat when he has an
appetite?

Answer. Because much hunger and emptines does fill the stomach with naughty
rotten humors, which he does draw unto himself in steed of meat: which does
easily appear, because that if we fast over night, we have an appetite to
meat, but in the morning none. That is therefore a token that the stomach is
filled with naughty humors, and especially his mouth, which is no true
filling, but a deceitful. And therefore after we have eaten a little, our
stomach comes to us again. And therefore the common proverb is, that the
mouth is a deceiuer: for although he were corrupted with bad humors, yet after
meat the appetite comes again.

Question. Why do the Physicians prescribe, that we should not eat too much
at a time, but by little and a little?

Answer. Because that when the stomach is full, the meat does swim in him,
which is a dangerous thing. Another reason is, that as very green wood does
put out the fire, so does much meat choke the natural heat and put it out.
And therefore the best physic is to use temperancy in eating and drinking.

Question. Why do we desire change of meats, according unto the change of
times? as in winter, beef, porke, mutton: in summer, lighter meats, as veale,
lamb?

Answer. Because the complexion of the body is altered and changed, according
unto the time of the year. Another answer is, that this does proceed from
the quality of the season, because that the cold of the winter does cause a
better digestion, because the stomach and belly is hotter in winter, by reason
of the compassing cold, as Hippocrates and Aristotle does teach.

Question. Why should not the meat we eat be too hot, as Pepper, Ginger?

Answer. Because that hot meat does burn the blood, and does dispose unto a
leprosy. So contrariwise, meat too cold does mortify and congeale the
blood. Also our meat should not be over sharp, because it procures old age:
and over much sauce does burn the intrailes, and procures often drinking, as
raw meat does: and over sweet meats do constipate and clinge the veins
together.

Question. Why is it a good custom to eat cheese after dinner, and pears
after all meat?

Answer. Because that cheese, by reason of his earthlines and thicknes, tends
down toward the bottom of the stomach, and so puts down the meat: and
the like is of pears. Note that new cheese is better then old, and old dry
salt cheese is very naught, and procures the headache and stopping of the
liver, and the older the worser. Whereupon it is said, that cheese is naught,
and digesteth all things but it self.

Question. Why be nuttes good after fish: as the verse is:

After fish nuttes, after flesh cheese.

Answer. Because fish is of a hard digestion, and does easily putrify and
corrupt, and nuttes do help digestion, because they are somewhat hot. Also
fish is poison at some times, and nuttes are a remedy against poison. And note
that the fish should be of a clear stony water, and not of a cold standing
muddie water, and should be sod in wine with parsley, and so it does least hurt.

Question. Why is it unwholesome to stay long for one dish after another, and
eat of diverse kinds of meats?

Answer. Because it begins to digest when the last is eaten, and so the
digestion is not equally made, and therefore it is good to use but few dishes.
But yet this rule is to be noted touching the order of meats, that if there
be many dishes, whereof some are light in digestion, as chickens, kid, veale,
soft eggs, and such like, these meats should be first eaten: but the gross
meats, as venison, bacon, beef, roasted porke, hard eggs, and fried eggs,
should be eaten last. And the reason is, because that if they should be first
served and eaten, if they were digested, they would hinder the digestion of the
others: and the light meats not digested, should be corrupted in the stomach,
and be kept in the stomach violently. Whereof there would follow belching,
loathing, headache, belly-ach, and great thirst. And by a consequent it is very
hurtful to at the same meal, to eat milk, and drink wine, because they
dispose a man to a leprosy.

Question. Which is better for the stomach meat or drink?

Answer. Drink is sooner digested then meat, because meat is of greater
substance and more material then drink, and therefore meat is harder to
digest.

Question. Why is it good to drink at dinner?

Answer. Because the drink should make the meat readier to digest. For if a
pot be filled with flesh or fish without liquour, then both the meare and the
pot is marred. And the stomach is like unto a pot which does boil meat: and
therefore the Physicians do give counsel to drink at meals.

Question. Why is it good to forbear a late supper?

Answer. Because there is no moving nor stirring after supper, and so the meat
is not sent down to the bottom of the stomach, but remains undigested, and
so breeds hurt. And therefore a light and short supper is best, as the old
verse does.

Question. Why is it naught to drink wine fasting^?

Answer. Because it does greatly endanger the brain, and breeds the falling
sickness, and the apoplexy.

Question. Why is it hurtful to drink much cold water?

Answer. Because one contrary does expel and hinder another; but the water is
very cold, and therefore coming unto the stomach does hinder digestion, and
the heat which does digest.

Question. Why is it unwholesome to drink new wine, and why does it hurt the
stomach very much?

Answer. Because it cannot be digested: and therefore it does cause the belly
to swell, and so it does in sorne sort cause a bloody flixe: it does also
hinder making of water: but to drink good wine is wholesome.

Question. Why do the Physicians forbid us to labor presently after dinner?

Answer. For three causes. First, because moving does hurt the virtue and power
of digestion, and by that means the meare is expelled undigested. The second
is, because stirring immediately after dinner does cause the parts of the body
to draw the meat raw unto them, which does breed sickness. The third, because
moving does cause the meat to descend before it be digested: but after supper
it is good to stir and move, because we sleep not long after. And therefore
we should walk a little, because the meat may go to the bottom of the
stomach.

Question. Why is it good to walk in the morning before dinner?

Answer. Because it makes a man well disposed, and does fortify and
strengthen the natural heat, and causes the superfluity of the stomach to
desced. And therefore Auicen does say, that such as forgo this exercise, do
fall into the inflammation of the heart.

Question. Why is it wholesome to vomit, as diverse say?

Answer. Because it does purge the stomach of all naughty humors: for it
does expel green and blew humors, which would breed agues, if they should
remain in the stomach. And according unto Autcen, a vomit does purge the
eyes, the head, and make the brain clean.

Question. Why does sleep greatly strengthen the stomach and the digestive
virtue?

Answer. Because that in sleep the heat does draw inward, and does help
the digestion: but when we be awake, the heat does remain about the senses,
and is dispersed throughout all the body.

Question. Why do some men in some diseases, void their meat downward, in the
same quality and quantity, as they did receive it into the stomach?

Answer. By reason of the weakness of the natural virtue of the appetitiue
power, attractiue, digestive, retentiue, and expulsive, which disease is called
Lienteria.

Of the blood.
Quest. WHy is it necessary, that every living thing which has blood, have
also a liver?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, because the blood is first made in the
liver, because the liver is the seat of the blood, according unto other
Physicians, and is drawn from the stomach by certain principal veins, and
so engendered.

Question. Why is the blood red?

Answer Because it is like unto the part in which it is made, that is, unto the
liver, which is of a red color. And the blood is also sweet, because it is
well digested and concocted: but if it have a little earthly matter mixed with
it, it is a cause that it is somewhat salt, as it appears in Arist. lib.
meteor.

Quest. Why have women thicker blood then me^?

Anwer. By reason of the cold which does thicken, bind, and congeale, and
join together.

Question. Why does the blood come to all the parts of the body from the
liver, and by what means?

Answer. By the means of the principal veins, as the veins of the head, of
the liver, and such other, and to nourish all the body.

Of urine.
Question. HOw does the urine come unto the bladder, seeing the bladder is shut?

Answer. Some say by sweating, and it seems to be true: but some say, that it
comes by a small skin which is in the bladder, which does open and let in
the urine. Thenphilactus does say, that the urine is a certain and not a
deceitful messenger, of the health and infirmity of man. And Hippocrates does
say, that men have white urine in the morning, and before dinner red, and after
dinner pale, and likewise after supper: for there are diverse colors of the
urine, whereof we will not speak at this present.

Question. Why does the dropsy proceed from the liver?

Answer. Because that (says Constable.) the digestive power in the liver, cannot
convert the thick substance into the four humors, but is converted only into
water, the which does swell and puff up a man, and especially the belly.

Of the gall.
Question. WHy have living creatures a gall?

Answer. Because that cholerike humors are received in it, the which through
their sharpnes do help the guts to expel superfluities, it does also help the
stomach in digesting.

Question. Why does the iaundise proceed from the gall?

Answer. Because the humor of the gall is bluish and yellowe: and therefore
when the pores of the gall are stopped, then that humor cannot go into the
sack or bladder of the gall, but is mingled with the blood, wandering
throughout all the body, and infecting the skin.

Question. Why have not a Horse, a Mule, an Ass, and Crow a gall?

Answer. Aristotle says, that although those beasts have no gall in one place,
as in a purse or vessel, yet they have a gall dispersed by some small veins.

Of the spleen.
Question. WHy is the spleen black flesh?

Ans. Because it is caused of a terrestrial and earthly matter, that is, of a
black substance, as Aristotle does say. Now the effect is like unto the cause.
Another answer is according unto the Physicians, because the spleen is the
receptacle of melancholy, and melancholy is of a black color.

Question. Why is a man lean which has a great spleen?

Answer. Because the spleen does draw much matter unto himself, which should
go into fat. And therefore contratiwise, men which have but a small spleen
are fat.

Quest. Why does the spleen cause men to laugh? as Isidorus does say; we laugh
with the spleen, we be angry with the gall, we are wise with the heart, we
love with the liver, and we feel with the brain, and speak with the lungs:
that is, the cause of laughing, anger, love, wisdom, and speech, and feeling,
does proceed from the spleen, the gall the liver, the heart, the lungs, and
the brain?

Answer. The reason is, because the spleen does draw much melancholy unto it,
because it is his proper seat, the which melancholy is cause of sadness, and is
there consumed, and so the cause failing, the effect fails. And that
melancholy is cause of sadness, it appears in Arist. in Proem. de anima. and
therefore that being consumed, the contrary unto sadness does follow, that is,
joy and gladness. And for the same cause the gall causes anger: for cholerike
men are angry, because they have much gall. For the better understanding of
this, note that there be four humors in man, that is, blood, choler, fleume,
and melancholy: whereof each has a special receptacle and place where it is
received and kept. Of a dry and hot substance choler is engendered, which goes
unto the gall, as to his seat and place. But of a cold and dry humor
melancholy is engendered, which runs to the spleen as to his peculiar place
and receptacle. But of a cold and moist humor fleume is bred, which goes
unto the lungs, as unto his receptacle, or as the Physicians do say, unto the
spleen. But the blood which is the most noblest humor, is engendered in the
liver, and there his proper place does seem to be.

Of carnal copulation.
Question. WHy do living creatures use carnal copulation?

Answer. Because it is the most natural work which is in living creatures, to
beget the like unto themselves in kind, to continue the kind. For if carnal
copulation were not, all kind of living creatures had before this time
perished.

Question. What is this carnal copulation?

Answer. It is a mutual action of the male and female, with instruments
ordained and deputed for that act, to maintain the kind. And therefore the
Divines do say, that it is a sin to use that act for any end, but for begetting
his like in kind.

Question. Why is this action good in those to whom it is lawful, if it be
moderatly taken?

Answer. Because that according unto Auicen and Constable. it does ease and lighten
the body, cheer the mind, comfort the head and the sense, take away many
griefs of melancholy, because it does expel the fume of the seed from the
brain, and it does expel the matter of impostume. And therefore sometimes,
through the intermitting of this act, the darkness of the fight does ensue, and
a giddines in the head. And therefore the seed of a man retained above a due
time, is converted into some infectious humor.

Question. Why is immoderate carnal copulation hurtful?

Answer. Because it does destroy the fight, and dry the body: because that as
Aristotle says, 2 de genesis anim. lechery and in continency is the wasting of
the pure humiditie, and does consurne the brain: and it breeds sharp
fevers, as Auicen teaches, and as experience does show. And does shorten the
life of man, as Aristotle says, de longit. and breuit. vitae. And Albertus
does show this in the sparrowe, which by reason of his often coupling, does
live but three years.

Question. Why does carnal copulation very much hurt to melancholy men, and
choleric men, and generally to lean men?

Answer. Because it does dry the bones very much, which are dry of
themselves. And contrariwise, it is good for the fleugmatike and sanguine, as
Auicen says, because they abound with that substance, which by nature is
necessarily expelled. Although Aristotle does affirm, that every fat creature
has but small store of seed, because the substance of it does turn into
fatnes.

Quest. Why do not the female of brute beasts covet carnal coupling, after
they be great with young?

Answer. Because that then the womb or matrix is shut, and the flowers cease,
and therefore the desire unto the act does cease.

Question. Why should not this act be used when the body is full?

Answer. Because it does hinder digestion, as Aristotle says: likewise it is
not good for a hungry belly, because it does weaken him.

Question. Why is it not good after a bath?

Answer. Because that then the pores are open, and the heat dispersed
throughout all the body: and therefore carnal copulation following a bath,
does cool the body very much.

Question. Why is it not good after a vomit, or a loosenes of the belly?

Answer. Because it is very perilous to purge twice in one day, as Hippocrates
and Galen say: but so it is of this act of carnalitie, and loosenes in the
belly, because by this act the raines and kidneys are purged, and the guts by
the vomit.

Question. Why are wild beasts furious when they couple, as it does appear in
Hearts which bray, and Asses which are then almost mad, as Hippoc. says?

Answer. Because their blood is kindled with the desire of carnal act, and
nature also does labor to expel superfluities in them, which in the sense do
dispose unto anger and madness: and therefore after the act done they are tame
and gentle.

Question. Why is there such delight in the act of venerie?

Ans. Because this act is a base and contemptible thing in it self, naught and
unclean, so far that all beasts would naturally abhor it, if there should
be no pleasure in it, and so there should never be any carnal copulation, by
reason of the uncleanness of it. And therefore in this delight nature does
willingly practice it, to the end that the kinds of living things should be
maintained and kept.

Question. Why do such as use it often, take lesser delight in it, then such
which come to it seldom?

Answer. For three causes. First, because the passage of the seed is over
large and wide, and therefore the seed makes no stay there, by which stay the
delight is had. The second, because that through often going together, there is
but little seed left, and therefore gives no delight. The third, because that
such in steed of seed cast out blood undigested and raw, or some other
waterie substance, which is not hot, and therefore causes no delight.

Question. Why then does a woman and a mare desire carnal act after they be
great, as Arist, does affirm, lib. de animal.

Answer. Galen says, that the remembrance of it does further it in a woman:
and because she does remember the (...) past in the act, she does covet it
again. But it proceeds in a mare, because she is a ravenous beast, and has
many distempered fumosities in her, and therefore desires new seed, because
every like does desire his like.

Question. Whether can this carnal copulation be done by the mouth, so that
beasts may conceive thereby, as some do say of pigeons, which they say by
kissing do this act at the mouth and conceive. And some say this to be true in
the Weesell or ermine?

Answer. According unto Aristotle, that is untrue. For although pigeons do
play by the beak, yet they do not couple together this way not conceive. And
because the weesell does bear his young ones from place to place in his mouth
they are of that opinion. And therefore Aristotle does show it thus: Whatsoever
goes in at the mouth, that is consumed by digestion: but if the seed should
go in at the mouth, then it should also be consumed by digestion. The mayor
is plain, nor is no easy instance, and the conclusion does hold in Darij.

Of the seed of man or beast.
Question. WHereof comes the seed of man?

Answer. There are diverse opinions of Philosophers and Physicians in this
point: Some say that it is a superfluous humor of the fourth digestion. And
some say that the seed is pure blood, flowing from the brain, concocted and
made white in the stones. And some say that it is the superfluity of the
second or third digestion. But because sweat, urine, spettle, fleume and
choler are the like, Aristotle says, that the seed is always the
superfluity of the last nutriment, that is, of blood dispersed throughout all the body: but yet principally it comes from the principal parts, that is,
from the heart, liver, and brain. And an argument of this is, because that
those parts are greatly weakened in the casting out of seed: and thereof it
does appear, that carnal copulation is not profitable nor good. But some
think this to be true by over vehement practice in this act: for otherwise
moderatly taken it is good and wholesome, for the lightening and easing of the
body, as is said before.

Question. Why is the seed of a man white, and the seed of a woman red?

Answer. It is white in man, by reason of his great heat, and because it is
digested better, and made white in the stones, the flesh of which is white, as
the flesh of the pappes. But the seed of a woman is red, because it is the
superfluity of the second digestion, which is done in the liver, which is red.
Orels we may say, that it is because the flowers is corrupt undigested blood,
and therefore it has the color of blood.

Question. Whether does the seed of man come from the parts of the body, or
from the humors?

Answer. As some say, from the parts of the body: and that we prove, because
we see that a lame man does beget a lame child, and a father which has a
skarre, a child which has a skarre, as Aristotle reports, lib. de animal.
which could not be if the seed did not fall from the parts of the body. But
some say that it comes from the humors, because it is made of the last
nutriment, and the nutriment is no part but a humor But as for the lamenes and
skarre, that proceeds from the imagination of the mother at the time of
carnal copulation, as Aristotle says, 2. de generat animal.

Question. Wherefore does the imagination of the mother, which imagines of an
A Ethiopian or Blackamoore, cause the mother to bring forth a black child: As
Albertus Magnus reports of a Queen, who in the act of carnal copulation,
imagined of a Blackamoore which was painted before her, and so brought forth a
Blackamoore?

Answer. Auicen says, that an imagination of a fall, makes a man fall, and
the imagination of a leprosy makes a man a leaper. And so in this purpose the
imagination is above the forming power, and so the child borne follows the
imagination, and not the power of forming and shaping, because it is weaker
then the other.

Question. Whether does the seed of the man enter into the substance and
matter of the child?

Answer. The seed of the father and the mother does go into the substance of
the child in the womb: because that as cream does go into the substance of
cheese, so the seed of man into the fruit in the womb like unto the cream,
and the flowers of the woman does enter in like unto the milk. But this
opinion does not seem to be of force. And therefore according unto Aristotle,
and other Philosophers, we say that the seed does not go into the substance of
the child: and it is proved thus, because that of the matter and the efficient
cause should be all one, which is against the Philosopher. The consequence is
good, because the seed is the efficient beginning of the child, as the builder
is the efficient cause of the house, and therefore is not the material cause
of the child. It is proved another way, because there is the self same
material cause of nourishment and generation, 2. de anim. because we have our
being and our nourishment of the same matter: but the seed cannot be the
material cause of nourishment, according unto Auerrois, and therefore not of
being. But in truth this it is, both the seeds are shut and kept in the
womb: but the seed of the man does dispose and prepare the seed of the woman
to receive the form, perfection or soul, the which being done, it is
converted into humiditie, and is fumed and breathed out by the pores of the
matrix, which is manifest, because only the flowers of the woman are the
material cause of the young one.

Question. Why does the matrix or womb of a woman draw greedily the seed of
man? for as Auerrois does say, there was a maid in a bath, where some seed had
been (...), the which the maid drawing, did conceive with child, and was
delivered?

Answer. Auerrois does say, that the womb and nature do draw the seed, as
the Lodestone does iron, and the Agathe steel: but she does draw it for the
perfection of her self.

Of women's monthly terms.
Question. WHy have women monthly terms or flowers?

Answer. Because they are cold in respect of men: and because all their
nourishment cannot: be converted into blood, a great part of it is turned into
their flowers, the which in every month in every woman are expelled, I say of
every woman which is in health, and of a certain age, that is, after thirteen
years: for before they run not though she be in health, and some diseased
women have them not.

Question. Why do they run from women?

Answer. Because it is an infectious matter: for as Aristotle does say, if that
substance being young and flowing do touch a tree, or a green bough of a
tree, the tree does dye and not prosper: yea, Aristotle does say, that if a
dog should taste of it, he would run mad in three days. And therefore
nature would expel it every month, as being an enemy unto life. And if women
do detain it above their due time, according unto Aristotle, it does breed
great infirmities and diseases, as swouning.

Question. Why do they not run before thirteen years of age?

Answer. Because young women be hor, and so do digest all their nourishment:
and therefore they are not bred in them before that age, nor expelled, unless
the goodness or naughtines of their complexion do hinder it.

Question. Why have not women them after fifty years of age?

Answer. Some answer, that old women be barren, and therefore they cease. But a
better answer is, that then nature is weak in them, and therefore they cannot
expel them, by reason of over much weakness. And therefore there is great
store of immundicities bred in them in one whole lump, and they are by that
means so infectious, that they infect men with their breath, and then the
cough and other infirmities come upon them. And therefore according unto the
counsel of the Physicians, then men should abstain from them.

Question. Why do not such women corrupt and infect themselves?

Answer. Because poison does not work upon it self, but upon some other
object: or else it does not hurt themselves, because it is their nature.
Albertus reports of a certain maid which was brought unto him in Colen,
which did care spiders, which did her no hurt at all, but were good meat unto
her. And Aristosle in his book of the government of Princes to Alexander,
reports of a maid which in her youth was nourithed with poison. And some men
(...) done the like.

Question. Why have not women with child the flowers?

Ans. Because that them the flowers turn into milk, and into the nourishment
of the child: for if a woman with child have them, it is a sign of miscarying
with her child.

Question. Why do they run the first three months in women with child?

Answer. By reason of the smalnes of the child, which cannot take all that
matter and substance.

Question. Why have not the female of brute beasts, as of soul and fish, their
flowers?

Answer. Because as Aristotle and Albertus do say, in beasts which go with
feet, the flowers turn into hair, in fish into their skales, in birds into
their feathers. And therefore in beasts you may note that the female is more
hairy then the male, and the female of fishes fuller of skales, and the female
of birds fuller of feathers.

Quest. Why do the flowers receive their name menstrua, of this word Mensis
amoneth?

Answer. Because it is a space of time which does measure the Moon, because
the Moon does end her course in 29. days and 14. hours. Now the Moon has
dominion over moist things, and because the flowers are an humiditie, they take
their denomination of the month, and are called monthly terms: for moist
things do increase as the Moon does increase, and decrease as she does
decrease.

Question. Why do they run longer time in some, the in other some, as in
some six or seven days, and ordinarily in all three days?

Answer. The first are colder, and therefore they increase the more in them, and
by a consequent they are the longer in expelling. And other women are more hot,
and therefore they have the fewer, and are a shorter time in expelling them.

Question. Where are the flowers kept before they run?

Answer. Some say, in the matrix or womb. But Auerrois does mistike this, and
does say that the matrix is the place of generation, and that those flowers
further generation nothing at all. And therefore he does say, that there are
certain veins about the back bone which do keep them. And a sign of this
is, because that those women at that time have great grief in their back, by
reason of expelling the flowers.

Question. Whether are the flowers which are expelled, and the flowers which
the child is engendered of, all one?

Ans. No, because the one are unclean, and unfit for that purpose: but the
other very pure and clean, and therefore that blood is fit for generation.

Question. Why do women which are gotten with child when they have their
flowers, bring forth weak children, and leprous?

Ans. Because those flowers are venomous, yea a woman in her flowers is most
infectious. And so the cause does shine in the effect, as the Philosopher
does say, the effect does carry a likeness of the cause, and therefore such a
child is euilly disposed of body.

Question. Why have not women their flowers all at one time of the month, but
some in the new Moon, some in the full, and some in the waine?

Answer. By reason of their diverse complexions. And although all women in
respect of men be fleugmatike, yet of women among themselves, some are more
sanguine then others, some more cholerike. And as every month has his
quarters, so they have their complexions: the first is sanguine, the second
cholerike. A woman which is of a sanguine complexion, has her flowers in the
first quarter, a cholerike in the second, a melancholy in the third, and so in
the rest.

Question. Why have such women as are of a sanguine coplexion, their flowers in
the first quarter?

Answer. Because that as Galen does say, every such thing added unto such a
thing, does make it more such, and therefore the first quarter of the Moon
increasing blood in a sanguine complexio^, therefore she does then expel it.

Question. Why have women their flowers so often in the end of the month?

Answer. Because generally a women be fleugmatike, and the last quarter is
fleume Orels this does proceed of a defect, and therefore cold does work then
to multiply that matter, and the matter multiplied is then expelled.

Question. Why have women pain and grief in the running of their flowers?

Answer. Because it is like unto the pain of the strangurie, that is, making
of water drop by drop. For as the strangurie, by reason that the drink is
undigested, does offend the subtle passage of the urine, as it does happen
after a bath, so the flowers which are an undigested and earthly substance, do
hurt the passage by which they go.

Question. Why does a woman easily conceive after her flowers are run from
her?

Answer. Because she is better prepared unto conception, as being made clean
from her flowers.

Question. Why do women look pale when they purge their flowers?

Answer. Because then the heat goes from all the outward parts of the body to
the inward to help nature, and to expel the flowers, the which deprivation of
heat, does cause a palenes in the face. Or else it is, because that flux is
caused of raw humors, the which when they run, do make the face colourles,
and so by a consequence cause palenes.

Question. Why does a woman which has her flowers detest her meat?

Answer. Because nature does labor more to expel the flowers then to digest,
and therefore if she should eat meat, that meat would remain raw, which
careful nature does not admit.

Of barrennes.
Quest. WHy are some women barren and can not conceive?

Answer. According unto the Physicians, for diverse reasons. The first is,
because it proceeds sometime of the man, that is, when he is of a cold
nature, because then his seed is unfit for generation. The second, because his
seed is somewhat waterish, and therefore does not stay in the womb. The third,
because the seed of the man and the woman have not the same proportion, as if
the man be melancholy, and the woman sanguine: or if the man be cholerike, and
the woman very flaugmatike: because as it is evident in Philosophy, the agent
and the patie^t ought to have the same proportion, otherwise the action is
hindered.

Question. Why do fat women seldom conceive with child?

Answer Because they have a slipperie womb, out of which the seed slippeth,
and is not holden in. Or else because the mouth of their matrix is very strait,
that the seed cannot enter in: or if it do go in, it goes in very slowly, so
that the seed does wax cold in the mean time, and so is unfit for
generation, and is resolved into a fleshy substance.

Question. Why do women of a very hot complexion seldom conceive with child?

Answer. Because that the seed received in the^ is extinguished and put out, as
a little water cast into a great fire. And therefore we do see that women
which do vehemently desire the flesh, seldom conceive with child.

Question. Why are common women and whores never with child?

Answer. By reason of diverse seed which does corrupt and spill their
instruments of conception: for it makes them so slippery, that nature cannot
retain the seed. Or else it is because one seed does destroy another, and so
neither is good for generation. And note out of Albertus, that the best remedy
to help conception, is to take the matrix of a Hare beaten into powder, and
purified in drink, which works much to conception.

Of conception.
Question. WHy dos some women conceive a male child?

Answer. If the seed do fall into the rightside of the matrix or womb, then
a male-child is begotten, because that that side is hotter then the other, and
heat does principally work to the begetting of a male-child. And therefore
as Albertus does say, it the right side of the woman does swell, it is a sign
that she goes with a male-childe. But some dot give another reason, that is,
when the seed of the father has dominion over the seed of the woman, then a
male-childe is bagotten: if the woman's do (...), then it is a female.

Question. Why do some women conceive a female-child?

Answer. Because the seed is fallen unto the left side of the (...), which is
collar then the right, by reason of the spleen joining unto it, which helps
cold. And as Albertus does say, when the woman after the act of copulation
does lie on the right side, it is a boy: when on the left, it is a wench: for
the seed does run to that side on which the woman does lie, and then such a
child is formed.

Question. Why has a woman a womb?

Answer. Because it is the proper place of generation, and is placed in the
midst of the woman. For as all the immundicities of a city do run unto
the sink, so all their monthly rearmes run to the womb or matrix.

Question. Why have some women long and slonder children, and some short and
thick?

Answer. Because as Galen and Auerrois do say, the child is formed according
unto the quantity of the womb. And therefore because some women have a long
and a narrow womb, their children be long and stender: and some contrariwise
short and large, therefore their children be short and thick.

Question. Why does a woman sometimes conceive twins?

Answer. According unto Galen, because there are seven cells or receptacles of
seed in the womb, and therefore a woman may naturally have so many children at
once, as there does seed fall into those cells: for there are three in the
right side, and three in the left: in the right side boys are engendered, and
in the left wenches. And in the midst of those cells or chambers there is
another, where old writers do say a Hermaphrodite is engendered, that is, one
who has the secret parts of both sexes. And therefore if a woman should have
more then seven children at once, it should rather be miraculously then
naturally.

Question. Why are twins but halse men, and not so strong as other men?

Answer. Because the seed and substance which should have been for one man, is
divided into two, and therefore they be weak, and in truth they do not often
live long.

Of Hermaphrodites.
Question. HOw are Hermaphrodites begotten?

Ans. Because there are three principal cells in the womb, one in the right
side, another in the left, and the third in the middle, into the which when the
seed does fall, a Hermaphrodite is said to be begotten in this manner: because
nature does always tend unto that which is best, therefore she does always
intend to beget the male, and not the female, because that the female is only
for the males sake, and a monster in nature. Therefore the male is sometime
begotten in all principal parts, and yet through the evil disposition of the
womb, and object, and inequality of the seed, when nature cannot perfect and
end the male, she does bring forth the female, or Hermaphrodite. And therefore
the natural Philosophers do say, that a Hermaphrodite is impotent in the privy
part of man, as it does appear by experience.

Question. Why does not nature dispose in him two secret parts of a man, or two
of a woman, but one of a man and one of a woman?

Answer. Because then nature should make one of them in vain but that is
against the Philosophers, when they say, that God and nature do make nothing
in vain.

Question. Whether is a Hermaphrodite to be reckoned for a man or for a woman?

Answer. It is to be considered in which member she is fittest for the act of
carnal copulation: if he be fittest in the woman's act, then it is a woman: if
in the man's, he is a man.

Question. Whether should he be baptized in the name of a man, or of a woman?

Answer. In the name of a man, because names are given ad placitum, and
therefore he should be baptized according unto the worthiest name, because
every man is worthier then a woman, because every agent is worthier then his
patient, as Aristotle does say, 3. de anima.

Question. Whether shall he stand in judgment in the name of a man, or of a
woman?

Answer. According unto the rule of the law, he should first swear, before he
be admitted into judgment, which secret part he can use, and so is to be
admitted, according unto the use and power of that part.

Of Monsters.
Question. Does nature make any monsters?

Answer. She does, 2. Phis. for if she did not, she should then be deprived of
her end. For of things possible she does always purpose to bring forth that
which is most perfect and best: but in the end through the evil disposition of
the matter, and influence of some special constellation, not being able to
bring forth that which she intended, brings forth that which she can. As it
did happen in Albertus time, where in a certain village a cow brought forth a
calfe half a man: then the country men suspecting a shepherd, would have
burned him with the cow. But Albertus being skillful in Astronomy, said, that
this did proceed from some special constellation, and so delivered the
shepherd from their hands.

These are Albertus words:

We saw that their two bodies were joined in nothing but in the back, they had
two heads, four feet, four hands, and did go which way they lusted. And he
says, they reported unto us that there were two men joined in the back, and
were of a contrary complexion, the one furious, and the other meek: they lived
two years, and the one dyed, and the other lived long after, until the stink
of the other did kill him. I ask how can this be? It is answered thus:
because the seed is cast unto the cells or receptacles of the womb, which
seed was enough for two children, and then by chance it does sometime happen,
that the skin or distance betwixt the two cells or receptacles is broken, and
they knit and join in the back, and have two heads.

Question. Whether be they one or two?

Answer. Aristotle says, you must look unto the heart, and if there be two
hearts, there be two men.

Question. Why is a man borne sometime with a great head, or six fingers in
one hand, or with four?

Answer. Aristotle sayto it proceeds of superfluity and abundance in matter:
when there is too much matter, then he is borne with a great head, or six
fingers: but if there be want of matter, then there is some part too little, or
lesser then there ought to be.

Of Infants.
Question. WHy are some children altogether like the father, some the mother,
some to both, and some vnta neither?

Answer. If the seed of the father do fully overcome the seed of the mother,
the child does wholly resemble the father. but if the mothers seed
predominate, then he is like unto the mother: but if he be like neither, that
does happen for many causes: sometimes through the four first qualities:
sometime through the influence of some heavenly constellation. Allertus gives
an example, and says, that there was on a time a good constellation for the
begetting of hogs, and a man was then begotten and brought fooith which had a
face like unto a hooge. and according unto this, diverse sorts of monsters are
brought forth.

Question. Why are children of men like the father then the mother?

Answer. That proceeds of the imagination of the mother, which thinks of
the disposition of the father in the act of carnal copulation. And therefore
by reason of the strong imagination in the time of conception, the children get
the disposition of the father. As it appears before of the Queen which had
her imagination on a Blackamoore: and of an Ethiopian Queen which brought
forth a white child, because her imagination was upon a white color. And this
is seen in Jacob his skill in casting rods of diverse colors into the water,
when his sheep went to ram.

Question. Why do children sometime resemble more their grandfathers and great
grandfathers, then their parents?

Answer. Because the virtue and force of the grandfather is graffed in the
hearts of the begetters: and it may be said, that sometime it does proceed of
the similitude of the nouriture, and then the child is formed by the similitude
of the grandfathers.

Question. Why are the parts of a child's body of diverse quality, and some soft?

Answer. This proceeds of the predomination of diverse elements, because that
the bones are made of a terrestrial matter, and therefore are hard. But the
brain and the marrow are made of a more waterie matter, and therefore are more
soft: but the vital spirits and animal spirits are engendered of a more
aerious substance, and these vital spirits are principally in the liver and
the heart.

Question. Why do children, according unto the common course and use of
nature, come one of the mothers womb the ninth month?

Ans. Because the child is then fully perfect, or else it is because some
benign planet does reign, as Jupiter, who is a friend unto nature: for
according unto the Astronomers, he is hot and moist, and therefore does temper
the malice and naughtines of Saturn, which is cold and dry. And therefore for
the most part children borne the ninth month are healthy.

Question. Why do children borne in the eight months end, for the most part,
die quickly? and why are they called the children of the moon?

Answer. Because the Moon is a cold planet which has dominion over the
child, and therefore does bind the child with his coldness, which is cause of
his death.

Question. Why does a child cry as soon as he is borne?

Answer. Because of the sudden change from heat to cold, which cold does hurt
his tenderness. Another reason is, because the child's soft and tender body is
wringed and put together, coming out at the narrow and strait passage of the
matrix. And especially the brain being moist, and the head pressed and wringed
together, is cause that some humors do distill by the eyes, which are the
cause of tears and weeping. The Divines say, it is for the transgression of
our first fathers, and original (...).

Question. Why does a child put his finger to his mouth when he comes first
into the world?

Ans. Because that coming out of the womb, he comes out of a hot bath. And
therefore entering into the cold, puts his finger to his mouth for the want
of heat.

Question. How does a child come into the world out of the womb?

Answer. He comes forth with the head forward for if he should come with the
thighs or arms forward, he should kill himself and the mother.

Of the young one in the womb.
Question. How is the young one successively engendered in the womb?

Answer. The first six days the seed has the color of milk, but in six
days following a red color, which is near unto the disposition of flesh, and
then it is changed into a thick substance of blood, curded and thick not
running, like unto a mass of flesh: but in the twelve days following them,
this substance is made so thick and sound, that it is able to receive shape
and form: because that a fluid and running substance keeps no impression,
and so every day receives some other disposition until his birth. And how he
is governed every month by the planets, Boethius does teach else where.

Question. Whether does the child in the womb void any excrement, or make
water?

Answer No, and the reason is, because he has not the first digestion which is
in the stomach, because he receives no meat by the mouth, but it comes to
him at the navel: and therefore he makes not water, but does sweat, which
urine is but little in quantity, and is reserved in a small skin in the
matrix, and at his birth is cast out in abundance.

Question. Why does the child come out of the womb easily after seven, eight,
or nine months?

Answer. Because, says Galen, when the fruit is ripe, then the ligaments are
easily broken, and so it falls easily.

Of aborsment or untimely birth.
Question. WHy do women which eat vnhole some meats as rammish putrified
meats, easily miscarry?

Answer. Because it breeds purrified seed in them, which the mind
abhorring, does cast out of the field of nature, that is, out of the womb,
because it is unfit for the most noblest shape, that is, for man's form and
shape, which is apt to receive the soul.

Question. Why does wrestling and leaping cause the casting of the child, as
some crafty women do of purpose?

Answer. Because that by such leaping, the ligaments of the child are loosed,
and by a consequence there follows aborsment, because it can be no longer
kept in the womb.

Question. Why does the striking of thunder or lightening cause a woman to
mtscarrie?

Answer. Because that that vapor is burning, and does easily hurt the tender
substance of the child, entering in at the pores of the matrix or womb. Yea,
Albertus does say, that if the child were alive, lightening and thunder would
kill him.

Question. Why does thunder and lightening rather cause young women to
miscarrie then old?

Answer. Because the body of young women are fuller of pores, and more
slender, and therefore the vapor of lightening does sooner enter into their
body: but old women have a thick skin, and well compacted, and therefore the
vapor can not enter in and cause this abortment.

Question. Why does much joy cause a woman to miscarry with her burden?

Ans. Because that in time of joy the womb is destitute of heat, and by a
consequence miscarying does follow. The same reason does cause fear to breed
it, because then the heat runs to the heart to help him, and forsakes the
matrix.

Question. Why do women easily miscarry when they are newly with child, that
is, the first, second, and third month?

Answer. Galen says, that as apples or pears do easily fall in the
beginning, because the knots and ligaments are soft and weak: so it is of a
child in the womb.

Question. Wherefore is it hard to miscarry when they are gone the middle of
their time, that is, three, four, five, six months?

Answer. Because that then the ligaments are stronger and fortified, and
therefore are not easily broken.

Of diverse matters.
Question. WHy have some women greater griese then othersome in childbirth?

Answer. For three causes. Sometimes for the greatness of the child, or because
the Midwife is unskillful. Sometime because the child is dead, and then boweth
not, nor cannot be bowed in going forth. And for the contrary causes, some
have less pain.

Question. Why has not a man a tail like unto other beasts?

Answer. Because a man is a living creature, whose property is to (...) but
this is proper to no other beasts which has a tail.

Question. Why do such as keep baths or (...) houses, expel the heat out of
the furnace better with cold water then with hot?

Answer. Because they are contrary qualities, which work strongly the one
against the other, and therefore the heat is better expelled from the stones.

Question. Why does hot water rather freese then cold?

Answer. Because that that water is thinner, and by a conseqnence gives better
entrance to the cold.

Question. Why are men fatter about the belly, then in other places?

Answer. Because the greatest digestion is in the stomach, and therefore those
parts which are nearest unto the stomach, are greatest and fattest.

Question. Why is every living creature sad after carnal copulation?

Answer. Because the act is filthy and unclean, and so every living creature
does abhor it, and when men do think upon it, they are ashamed and sad.

Question. Why cannot drunken men judge of tastes as well as sober men?

Answer. Because the flesh of the tongue is full of pores, and spungie, and
receives great moisture in it, and more in drunken men then in sober. And
therefore their tongue through often drinking, is full of naughty humors, and
by reason that it is so full, the instrument of taste is made thick and
gross, because that taste is a vain of the tongue, a subtle thin flesh being
taken away. And therefore through the thickning of the mean, that is, of taste
it self, drink taken of drunkards is not perfectly felt, because that unto
due feeling, there is requisite to have a due proportion of the mean. And of
this it is also understood why drundards have not a perfect kind of speech.

Quest. Why have melancholy beasts long ears, and why are not men wise for the
most part, which have long ears, but such as have short, as Aristotle says in
lib. de animal?

Answer. The ears do proceed of a cold and dry substance, which is called a
gristle, which is apt to become a bone. And because melancholy beasts do
abound in this kind of substance, therefore they have such long ears.

Question. But why are the others half fools?

Answer. Because the minds and souls do follow the bodies: for if the senses
of the body be subtle, then the soul exercises subtle operatio, as well
active as speculatiue, and the contrary is in a gross body.

Question. Hory is the intellectual soul joined to the child in the womb of
the mother? whether does the father which begets him, make the matter apt
and fit to (...) the soul?

Answer. The answer is, as the Divines do say, that into a (...) or substance
sufficiently disposed and made fit, God does infuse the intellectual soul.
And (...) says the like: The soul in creating is infused, and infusing is
created.

Question. Why do Hares sleep with their eyes open?

Answer. Because they have their eyes standing out, and their eye lids thort,
and therefore they are hardly shut. Another reason is, because they are very
fearful beasts, and therefore for the safeguard of themselves, they sleep with
their eyes open.

Question. Why do not Crows give their young ones meat before they be nine
days old?

Answer. Because that seeing them of another color, they think that they are
of another kind, and in the mean space, almighty God does feed them with the
dew of heaven, as the Psalm does say: He who does give beasts their food, and
young crows which call upon him.

Question. Why are a sheep and a pigeon very mild beasts?

Answer. Because they want gall, and it is the gall which stirs unto anger.

Question. Why have birds their stones inward?

Answer. If they had them outward, they would hinder their flying and lightness.

Question. Why do not birds piss?

Answer. Because that that superfluity which should be converted into urine,
is turned into feathers: as it appears because there is much moistnes in the
feathers. Another reason is, because they are in continual moving, and
therefore much moisture in them is dried up by the air and wind.

Question. Why are long eggs a sign and cause of the male, and the flat short
eggs of the female?

Answer. Because that as it pleases Hippocrates, it is the condition and
property of heat, to send from the center, to the circumference of cold. And
therefore if there be any long eggs, it is a sign they have great heat, and
therefore they pass into the substance of the male: because that in every kind
of thing the male is hotter then the female, as the Philosopher does say. If
the eggs be short and flat, it is a sign that the heat is small, and
vndispersed, and therefore goes into the substance of the female.

Question. Why do we hear better in the night then in the day.

Answer. Because, as Aristotle does say, there is greater quietness in the night
then in the day, because the sun does not so well draw up vapors in the
night as in the day, and therefore the mean is more fit and ready, and the
mean being fit, the motion is better done by him, the which is said to be
done with a sound. Another reason is, because there are more motions of the
air and sound in the day then in the night, which do hinder one another. Also
in the night there is greater silence which is opposite unto sound, and things
opposite put one against the other, show the better.

Question. Why does a man laugh sooner if he be touched under the arme-pits,
then in any other part of his body?

Answer. Because there is in that place a meeting of many sinews, and because
the mean we touch by (which is the flesh) is more subtle there then in other
parts, and therefore a better feeling. And this is true, if that place be not
touched too hardly: for if you do so, then there is not that delight: and when
a man is moderatly and softly touched there, the spirits which are there, are
dispersed and run into the face, and then from thence are cause of laughter.

Question. Why is wood burned converted into coal, and a bone burned into a
white substance?

Answer. Because the wood before it was burned was reasonable moist, and so
after burning gets heat accidentally, and that heat is not able to consume
all the moisture of the wood, and therefore there remains some after the
burning, and is converted into a black substance, because that the humiditie
in the wood was slimie, and could not be altogether consumed by the fire. But
a bone of his own nature is cold and dry, having but small moisture in it,
which the burning does wholly consume, and so accidentally the moisture being
consumed the bone waxes white.

Question. Why do some women love white men, and some black?

Answer. There are two answers: Some women have a weak sight, and such delight
in black, because the white does hurt the sight more then black. The second
reason is, because like does delight in the like: but because some women are of
a hot nature, such are delighted with black, because blacknes does follow
heat. And some of them are of a cold nature, and those are delighted with
white, because cold is the mother of whitenes.

Question. Why do living creatures sleep?

Answer. For necessity, because the instruments of diverse actions are wearied,
and by rest which is in sleep, they are comforted, as Aristotle says.

Question. Why are students ready to sleep after dinner, if they go about to
study, and not if they solace themselves?

Answer. Because that when a man does apply his mind to study, the natural
heat goes from the outward parts of the body to the inward, and there is
strengthened, because there comes much together, and so causes a fume to
ascend from the meat to the head, which is the cause of sleep. Or else we may
answer, that when the power or virtue with which we live is strongest, the
natural power is weakened. But when a man does solace himself by his
pleasure, the natural heat is spread abroad, and suffers no vapor to ascend
unto the brain, and so he sleeps not, but is kept from sleep, by reason
that the heat is dispersed.

Question. Why do men willingly sleep after labor?

Ans. Because that through continual moving, the heat is dispersed to the
external parts of the body: the which after that the labor is past,
gathers together to the internal parts of digestio^, there to digest. And
from digestion vapors do rise from the heart to the brain, the which do stop
the passages, by which the natural heat should be dispersed to the external
parts: and then the external parts being cold and thick, by reason of the
coldness of the brain, sleep is procured. And by this it appears, that such as
eat much and drink much, do sleeps much and long, because great store of
humors and vapors are bred in such, which cannot be digested and consumed of
the natural heat.

Question. Why are such as sleep much evil disposed, and have an (...) color?

Answer. Because that in sleep much moisture is gathered together, which cannot
be consumed, which is expelled in waking: and so it does covet to go out
through the superficial parts of the body, and especially it coueteth to the
face, and so is cause of a bad colourias it appears in such as are
fleugmatike who desire more sleep then others.

Question. Why does it appear unto some in their sleep that they eat and
drink sweet things?

Answer. Because the fleume drawn up to the jaws, does (...) and drop to the
throat, and this fleume is after a sort sweet, and therefore that seems so
unto them.

Question. Why do some dream in their sleep that they be in the water, and
drowned, and some that they be in the water and not drowned: and this does
happen especially in such as are fleugmatike?

Answer. The reason is, as Aristotle says, because the fleugmatike substance
does run to the high parts of the body, and then they think that they are
in the water and drowned, and when that substance draws unto the internal
parts, then they think they escape. Another reason may be, over much repletion
and drunkenness: and therefore when a man is over much filled with meat, the
fumes and vapors ascend and gather together, and therefore they think that
they are drowned and strangled: but if they cannot ascend so high, then they
seem to escape.

Question. May any man procure a dream by an external cause?

Answer. Aristotle holds that it may be done. If a man do speak softly at a
man's ears, and awake him, then of this stirring of the spirits, there are
thundrings and buzzings in the head, and so a dream of that. And so some men
have dreams by divine revelation, when it pleases God to send any.

Question. How many humors be there in man's body?

Answer. Four: whereof every one has his proper place in man's body. The
first is choler, which the Physicians do call flaua bilis, and is placed in
the liver. The second is melancholy, called atrae bilis, whose seat is in the
spleen. The third is fleume, whose place is in the head. The fourth is blood,
whose place is in the heart.

Question. What conditions and qualities has a man of a sanguine complexion?

Answer. He is fair and beautiful, he has his hair for the most part
smooth, he is bold, he retains that which he has conceived, he is shamefast,
given to music, a lover of sciences, liberal, courteous, and desires not
revenge.

Question. What properties do follow a fleugmatike complexion?

Answer. They are of a dull wit, their hair never curle, are seldom very
thirsty, they are much given to sleep, they dream of things belonging to
water, they are fearful, covetous, and given to heap up riches, and are
weak in the act of venerie.

Question. What properties do follow the cholerike man?

Answer. He is furious and angry, quarrelsome, given to war, pale colored,
he is vnquier, drinks much, sleeps little, and desires much the company
of women.

Question. What properties do follow the melancholy man?

Answer. He is swarthie, brown of complexion, his veins hidden, he eats
little, and digesteth less: when he creameth, it is of dark confused things,
he is sad, fearful, exceeding covetous, and incontinent, unless he bridle
his affection.

Question. What dreams do follow these complexions?

Answer. Pleasant merry dreams do follow the sanguine complexion: fearful
dreams the melancholy: the cholerike dream of chiding, fighting, and fires
and the fleugmatike of water. And this is the reason why a man's complexion is
said to be known by his dreams.

Question. What is the reason that if you cover an egg over with salt, and let
him lie in it a few days, all the meaete within him is consumed?

Answer. The great drines of the salt does consume the substance of the egg:
but in sand some say they may be kept long, as Mariners do practice.

Question. Why is the melacholy complexion the worst of all complexions?

Answer. Because it is the dregs of the blood, which is an enemy to mirth,
and farthest off from the beginning of man's life, and brings old age and
death, because it is dry and cold.

Question. Why are the fleugmatike for the most part dull of wit?

Answer. Because that as the viuacitie of wit proceeds of heat, so of cold
the contrary, which they are subject unto.

Question. Whereof does it proceed that some men die with extreme joy, and
some with extreme grief?

Answer. Over great joy does over much cool the internal parts of the body,
and over much grief does drown and suffocate the heat, the which failing a
man dies.

Question. Why has man so much hair on his head?

Answer. The hair of the head does proceed of the vapors which rise from the
stomach, and ascend to the head, and also of the superfluities which are in
the brain: and these two passing through the pores of the head, are converted
into hair, by reason of the heat and drines of the head. And because man's
body is full of humors, and has more brain then other creatures, and also
more superstuitie in the brain, which the brain expels, it follows that
he has more hair then other lining creatures.

Question. How many ways is the brain purged, and other hidden parts in the
head?

Answer. The watery and gross humors are purged by the eyes, melancholy by
the ears, choler by the nose, and fleume by the hair.

Question. What is the reason that some blush and change color, when they
hear that which they would not?

Answer. Shamefastnes is a certain kind of anger and displeasure, and fear
joined together, when a man is offended against himself, or against another:
when we see or hear some thing to be discovered, which ourselves have done
naughtily, or would not have known, the anger which we conceive is greater
then the fear, and therefore the blood running to and fro in the end remains
in the highest part of the body, until the spirits be quiet and pacified, and
the passions gone.

Question. What is the reason that such as are very fat in their youth are in
danger to dye on the sudden?

Answer. Such have their veins very small and close, by reason of their
fatnes, that the air and breath can hardly have free course in them, and
thereupon the natural heat wanting some refreshing of the air, is put out, and
as it were quenched.

Question. Why do garlike and (...) grow when they are gathered?

Answer. It proceeds of the great humiditie which is in them.

Question. Why do men feel the cold sooner then women?

Answer. Because that men, being more hot then women, have their pores more
open, and therefore the cold does sooner enter into them, then into women.

Question. Why are not old men so much subject unto the plague, as young men and
children?

Answer. They are cold, and therefore their pores are shut up, and not so open
as in the youth, and therefore the infecting air does not penetrate so soon
as when they are open, as in youth, by reason of their heat.

Question. What is the reason that lime is set on fire, and on a greater heat,
by casting water on it?

Answer. Lime is hot of nature, and therefore when water is cast on it, it
flees from the cold, and by uniting his force, gathers a greater heat and
strength, and so is set on fire. And that is also the reason that a candle
does burn faster in the winter then in the summer: for then, by reason of the
compassing cold, the heat unites it self, and gathers the closer to the
(...) or wax, and so does consume it the faster.

Question. Why do we (...) water in a man's face which does (...)?

Answer. Because that through the coldness of the water the heat may (...) to
the heart, and so give strength.

Question. Why are those waters best and most delicate, which (...) toward the
sun rising?

Answer. Because (...) running toward the sun rising, they are soonest
sttooken with the sun beams, and made pure and subtle, because the sun
has thorn long under him, and by that means takes away their coldness, and
other gross vapors, which they take of the ground they run by.

Question. Why have women such weak small voices?

Answer. Because (...) instruments and organs of speaking, by reason they are
cold, are small and narrow: and therefore receiving but little air, causes
the voice (...) small and effeminate.

Question. Whereof with it proceed that want of sleep does weaken the body,
and the brain?

Answer. Much (...) does engender choler, the which being, (...), does dry up
and lessen the humors (...) the brain, and the head, and other parts of the
body.

Question. Whereof does it proceed that vinegar does starch (...)?

Answer It proceeds of his cold virtue and all cold naturally (...)
binding, and vinegar being cold, has the like (...).

Question. Why is the seawater salter in summer then in winter?

Answer. This does proceed from the heat of the sun, seeing by experience,
that a salt thing being heated becomes more bitter.

Question. Why is snake contrary unto the eyes?

Answer. Because that in the eyes there is a delicate and pure chrystalline
humer, and the eye is also cold, and without any color at all, and the smoke
is gross and hot, and by that means does pierce the (...) of the eyes and
hurt them. And if the eye had any color in him, all things set before him
would seenie to be of the same color. And because the eye is cold, and the
smoke hot, it does cause the vapors which are contained in the eyes, to drop
and distill, which is hurtful for the eyes.

Question. Why do men live longer in hot regions then in cold?

Answer. Because they are more dry, and by that means the natural heat is
better conserved in them, then in cold countries, because the cold does (...)
the heat.

Question. Why it well water seldom or never good?

Answer. All water which (...) still in his spring, and is never heared with
the sun beams, is (...) heavy, and has much (...) matter in it, and
therefore wanting the heat of the sun is (...).

Question. Why do we sleeps better, and more at our (...) on the right side,
than on the left?

Answer. Because that when we lie on the left side, the lungs do lie upon and
cover the heart which is on that side under the pappe. Now the heart being the
fountain of life being thus occupied (...) which the lungs, cannot exercise ^
over much heated with the lungs lying on (...), and therefore ^ which the lungs
^ of a pair of bellows (...) and (...): and lying on the right side, these
inconveniences are avoided.

Question. Whereof does it proceed, that the holding of the breath does cause
the yexing to go away?

Answer. Because the holding of the breath does heat the internal parts of
the body, and this heat chaseth away the yexe, being nothing else but a cold
air within the body.

Question. What is the reason that old men do sneese with difficulty?

Answer. Because that through their coldness, their arteries are very narrow and
close, and therefore the heat is not of force to expel the cold: for I think
that sneesing is like unto the combat in the air made by thunder, which is
caused of heat and cold

Question. Why does a drunken man thinks that all things do turn round about
him?

Answer. Because that the spirits which serve the sight, are mingled with
vapors and fumes of the wine: and then the over much heat causes the eyes to
be in a continual moving, and the eye being round, causes all things about
him to seem to go round.

Question. Whereof does it proceed that the bread which is made with salt, is
lighter then that which is made without it, considering that salt is very
heavy of it self?

Answer. Although bread be heavy of it self, yet the salt drying it, does
make it light, by reason of the heat which it has, which heat does dry: and
the more salt there is irrit, the better the bread is and the lighter, and the
more wholesome for the body.

Question. Why is not men (...) bread good for the (...)?

Answer. Because it is full of moistnes, and thick and hot vapors, which do
corrupt the blood: and hot bread is blacker then cold, because heat is the
mother of blacknes, and because the vapors are not gone out of it.

Question. Why does lettise cause a man to sleep?

Answer. Because they do engender gross vapors.

Question. Why does the dregs of wine and oil go to the bottom, and those
of honey swim (...)?

Answer. Because the dregs of wine and oil are earthly, and no way purged
before, and therefore being of the nature of earth, do go to the bottom. But
honey is a liquor, which comes from the stomach and belly of the Be, and
was there in some sort purified and made subtle, and by that means that which
remains is light and hoc, and therefore goes upward.

Question. Why do cattes eyes and woolfes eyes shine in the night, and not in
the day?

Answer. The eyes of these beasts are by nature more chrystalline, then the
eyes of other beasts, and therefore do shine as they do: but the brightness of
the sun does hinder them to be seen in the day time.

Question. What is the reason that some men, when they see others dance, do
the like with their head, or feet, or by some other gesture of their body?

Answer. The answer is, because that the sight having carried and represented
unto the mind that action, and judging the same to be pleasant and
delightful, and therefore desiring it, the imagination draws the likeness of
it in conceit, and so stirs up the body to those gestures.

Question. Why does much sleep cause some to grow fat, and some lean?

Answer. Those which are of a hot complexion, when they sleep, do consume and
digest the superstuities of that which they have eaten, and for that cause
become fat. But such as are of a cold complexion, when they sleep are more
cold, and so digestlesse.

Question. How or for what cause do we suffer hunger better then thirst?

Answer. When the stomach has nothing to consume, it consumes the fleume or
humors, which it finds most ready and most at hand, and therefore we
suffer hunger better then thirst, because the heat has nothing to be
refreshed withal.

Qu. Why does the hair fall after a great sickness?

Answer. When the sickness is long, or an ague, the humors of the head are dried
up, through over much heat, and therefore wanting nourishment, they fall.

Question. Why does the hair of the eye brows grow long in old men?

Answer. Because that through their age, the bones of the eyelids are thin,
by reason of want of heat, and therefore the hair does grow there, by reason
of the rheumes of the eyes. The like does (...) to such as imagine much,
because that with their heure they draw many humors to the forepart of the
head, (...) the imagination is placed.

Question. Whereof proceeds gaping?

Answer. Of gresse vapors which occupy the vital spirit of the head and the
(...), and are cold and make men ready to sleep.

Question. What is the (...) that some flowers do open ^ the ^?

Answer. (...) does close and shut, as has been said, and the (...) of the
(...) does open and enlarge. Some do compare the sun unto the soul in the
both (...) the soul gives life, and when it departs death follows for the
sun does give life and ^ and the cold brings death, and with (...), and
decaying of all things.

Question. Why does (...) men is grow old, and gray?

Answer. Age is nothing else but a drines and (...) of (...) in the body griese
then causing ^ heat, and heat drines, age follows immediately and graynes.

Question. Why are ^ then such which are not gelded?

Answer. Because they have less heat, and by that means less force and
strength.

MARCUS ANTONIUS ZIMARAS SANCTIPETRINAS PROBLEMES.
I.
WHy is it esteemed in the judgment of the most wise, the hardest thing of all
to know a man's selse?

Is it because nothing can be known, if his form and perfection cannot be
known To know the form and perfection of a man's self, as it seems unto the
Philosopher, is a matter hard enough. And a man by the authority of Plato,
either is nothing, or if he be any thing, is nothing else but his soul. Or is
this because it cannot be done but by a reflexed action? And to reflect and
look unto himself, is a tokers that we are separated from the flesh. For he
who would know himself, should be drawn from sensible affections, and (...)
hard this is, no man is ignorant. Or is it (...) a man (...) by understanding?
But the understanding of a man cannot conceive himself, but after the
understanding of another, and this is very hard.

II.
Why (...) esteemed the wisest of all Greece, by the (...) of (...), seeing
that by the opinion of (...), he (...) (...) and busied only about (...), and
nothing about nature.

Whether is it because it is more expedient for the common commodity and use
of man to live well, then to contemplate? or because as it seems to Plato,
(...) was usually (...) of him every where, I know this one thing, that I know
nothing.

III.
Why do men especially contend and strive in things of wit?

Is it because they think, that other things which are called goods, are in the
power of another? as the gifts of the body are natures, and external and
worldly goods are subject unto the rule of fortune: where of it (...) to pass,
that every man can easily suffer himself to be overcome in such things, as
things not happening through his fault or occasion. But they think wit to be in
our own power. Or is it because they think that the goods of the mind do
excel al other goods, and therefore do think it a thing most natural to
contend for that which is most excellent? Or is it, because it is a common
disease of all man, as it seems unto a certain wise man, that every man does
think himself more learned then he is, and therefore does desire to perform
that which he believes, without study and labor.

IIII.
What is the cause that few men take pains in attaining of sciences, seeing
that all men by nature do desire to know?

Whether is it because that the gods have put virtue to be gotten with sweat
and labor, as Hesiodus says? or because the pleasures of the body do draw a
man's mind from the searching out of the truth? It is requisite for him who
desires to live in mind, that he think and medicate on the death of the
body, as the divine Plato does think. Or is it because the nature of man is
forced to serve many ways, as it pleases Aristotle: whereof it falls out,
that when things necessary do fail, the natural desire is not brought into
action? for nature of her self is not sufficient to contemplate.

V.
Why do men say that Philosophy is naked?

Is it because truth is naked, and that there needs no color of words, when
we handle a matter of truth? for it belongs unto Sophisters to dispute of
terms, when the sincere truth is sought. Or is it because they do not play
the Philosophers well, which seek philosophy for gain and ambition, and not
for her self? Or is it because he should be void from all worldly affections,
who desires to endeavor himself in the study of philosophy? for as
Aristotle does say, The soul is made wise by rest and cuietnes. And it were
easy for Philosophers to become rich if they would, as it appears by the
example of Thales.

VI.
Why do men desire to be had in memory after their death? and therefore some
make pyramides, and statues, and images, and diverse other tokens and monuments
^ and (...) behind them?

Is it because all things, as it seems unto Aristotle, do (...) to (...) of
some perpetuity and divine (...) they can? And therefore if they can not (...)
in nature and being, yet they (...) at the least to continue in opinion and
conceit of men: or else has custom brought it in so, to (...) such as come
after, to the end they may not degenerate from their parents?

VII.
1. What is the cause why men's desires grow without ^

Is it because natural desires, as (...) says, have an end, and such desires
which proceed of a false opinion, have no where, where to end?

VIII.
Why do (...) (...) and appoint some wise man to be familiar with Princes? at
Homer does (...) with (...): Euripides (...) with (...). (...) prometheus with
Jupiter: and Mars (...) with AEneas?

Is it because that by the law of nature, as Place does say, wisdom and power
should direct their actions to one end, and affect the same thing, love it, and
seek it.

IX.
Why does Homer, when he makes mention of Ambassadors, talk (...) of the
(...) of a commander, in bare words?

Is it because it is the duty of Ambassadors to declare the (...) will of the
commander, and put his sentence in execution? and therefore it is certain that
he should add nothing nor take away. Or else is it because the commandment of
him who does rule, that is, of a wise man, is set in good order, and is
presumed to be most perfect? And therefore there should be nothing changed,
but his decrees and constitutions are to be judged absolute and perfect.

X.
Why does Aristotle use exceeding brevity in most hard matters?

Whether is it, because it is the custom of wise men to load their words with
sentences (...) or else to the end that he would be obscure, to fear and keep
offrude wits from the reading of his works, as it seems to the expositors? Or
whether is it because that in a hard matter, many words in a matter of truth
are suspected? because that truth does consist in a few words. Or is it
because that as it seems unto the wise man, in many words there is error
often committed?

XI.
Why do famous men in any science; when they (...) err in any matter, err
more dangerously them those which are less famous?

Is it because that such, trusting unto the skill of their own wit, are drawn
far from their senses, and therefore must needs be deceived? Auicen may
serve for a proof of this, who for all his fame in Philosophy, said, that a
man might naturally be brought forth of the earth. And that fumous great
Auerrois, who thought that a maid might conceive with child in a bath, without
knowledge of man.

OVT OF ARISTOTLE.
WHy is man, who is (...) with learning, the most (...) of all living
creatures?

Whether is it because with his wit and conceit, he is much given to pleasures?
and therefore he does seek out greatly and weigh what felicity is, which no
man can obtain but with injury.

XII.
Why do men desire rather to seem, then to be and not seem?

Is it because only man is participate of honor? whereby it comes to pass,
that every man desires to seem good, and yet naturally flees labor, and yet
we get no virtues but by labor. Or is it because the property of a Sophister
is rather to seem, then to be, and not seem? But there are very few which
truly attain unto virtue.

XIII.
Why do some in their youth beget girls, and in their middle age, or when
they begin to grow old, beget boys?

Whether is it because the seed waxes cold in such as use the act of carnal
copulation too often? And therefore in their middle age, or when they grow old,
not using it so much, their seed is hotter, which is the begetter of males.

XIIII.
Why have children and boys pleasure in the act of venerie, considering that
they do not cast forth any seed?

It is as the Philosopher faith, because that there is a certain tickling and
itching in the letting forth of the spirit, or breath, as it is in such as are
of age, by the casting out of seed.

XV.
Why have they lesser pleasure which use this act of copulation often?

Whether is it because that by often using carnal copulation, the spirit and
seed does decrease and wax cold? and therefore the seed is not so itching
nor so tickling, which is the cause of delight, as Philosophers affirm.

XVI.
Why does immoder are carnal copulation more hurt, then immoder are letting
of blood?

Whether is it because the seed is fuller of spirit, and a nutrimen better
disposed and prepared for the nature of the body then the blood? for as it
seems unto Galen, the seed is the substantial cause of the parts of the
body, and of it the body does grow, increase, and is nourished. And as he who
is a hungered, is hurt more by the taking away of bread then of flower, so the
body is more weakened by the taking away of seed, then by the euacuation of
blood.

XVII.
What is the reason that such as have a very long yard, cannot beget children?

Whether is it because the seed going a long distance, the spirit does breathe
out? and therefore is cold and unfit for generation.

XVIII.
Why do such as are corpulent cast forth little seed in the act of copulation,
and are often barren?

Is it because in such, the seed passes into the nourishment of the body?
and for the same reason corpulent women have but small store of flowers?

XIX.
Why are women apter to the act of venerie in summer time; and men in the
winter?

Whether is it, as it seems unto the Philosopher, because at that time their
stones hang downward, and are feebler then in the winter? seeing it is
necessary for him who will use carnalitie, to draw them up. Or is it because
hot natures do boylt and chase in summer and decay, and cold natures become
lively? for a man is hot and dry, a woman cold and moist. And therefore in
that season the strength of men does decay, and the strength of women grow
stronger and liuelier, through the benefit of a contrary quality. And for the
same cause, as Galen says, some beasts of a cold nature do almost dye in dens
and holes, through the excessive cold of the air, and receive little nouriture
at all, which revive again when heat comes.

XX.
Why is man the proudest of all living creatures?

Whether is it by reason of his great and strange knowledge? for as the
Philosopher says, all sensible things consist in sense, intelligible in the
understanding, what remains then which eacapeth his knowledge? Or is it
because he seems to be the knot and fastening together of God and the world?
for he is in the middle betwixt both. Or is it because he has rule over all
other creatures, and all things seem to be brought unto his arbitrament? Or
shall I answer, that the pride of men does proceed of the want of knowing
himself? for truly if he would remember that he is conceived like unto dung
and urine, if he would mark how he is brought naked into the world, if he
would weigh how he does lead his life in misery and toil, if he would think
deeply how he is bound to dye, he would not be proud at all.

XXI.
Why does man especially understand one thing, and do another?

Is it because there is the same science of contrary things? or because the
duty of the mind is to reach unto many things, and the appetite rendeth unto
one thing only? And a man for the most part does love by understanding and
reason, and beasts are lead with appetite, anger, and pleasure

OVT OF ARISTOTLE.
WHy is man the wisest of all living creatures?

Whether is it because he has a very little head, in respect of the proportion
of his body, as it seems unto the Philosopher in his problemes? Or is it
because he is of a most perfect nature, and therefore the (...) of virtues are
more excellent in him? Or whether is it because the blood of man is most
subtle, and pure, and clean? The blood is the nouriture, and that the last
nouriture, and therefore there is great difference whether it be cold or hot,
thin or thick, doubled or clear. Or is it by reason that through his own
(...), he has a most perfect sense of feeling, as experience does show in men?
for because they have soft flesh, they are endued with a sharp and quick wit:
and they whose flesh and skin is thicker and grosser, are dull and slow. And
therefore the temperature of a man seems most fit and apt for prudence and
wisdom. And that by reason, because that in a soft body and tender, the
first and motherly spirit of the soul is easlier infused, and does more
willingly and speedily discourse: and contrariwise, the hardness and thicknes
does stop, and therefore is a hinderance that the pure and clear blood be not
carried from place to place: for unto every man is given a certain portion of
spirit.

XXII.
Why is a woman's wit unapt in good things, and most prompt in naughty things?
as Euripides says in Medea?

Whether is it because of a privation, which seems to be coupled and joined
with her nature? for as it does appear unto a Philosopher, a woman is a man
hurt: and the condition of a privation is, always to go about hurt and intend
mischief.

XXIII.
Why do men say, that a woman's first counsel should be chosen?

Is it because as we see in things which want reason, their actions and motions
are guided and directed to their proper ends by a superior power? for I think
that to be most true which is said, that there was a providence which did cast
into an dishonest man the desire of honestic; and in a poor man the desire of
wealth, as far as is sufficient. So the understanding of a woman, although
they understand not the reason of good and evil, is sometime directed by an
infallible truth to take such things (...): the counsels which they go about,
through their own searching, are to be left of, as weak, and subject unto
many errors.

XXIIII.
Why do women desire rather to go trim, and deck themselves then men?

Is it because the nature of women is imperfect? and thereupon they endeavor to
supply the want of nature with the benefit of art? for by nature that which
is evil favored and unseemly, does covet and desire that which is fair and
honest-or is it because (...) wanting, the beauty of the mind they are forced
to study how to trim and deck their bodies.

XXV.
What is the cause that a tall man is seld me wise.

Is it because the largenes of his body does preceede of excess of heat, and
abundance of humiditie? But wise men do think, that the perfection,
accomplishment and goodness of our operations is perfected by drines, which
does always go on and increase, until it bring us unto our end. For the
constitution of the body, from his fast beginning did spring from the last
humiditie, but the vehemency and excess of heat does overthrow the judgment
and quietness of the mind.

XXVI.
Why is a multitude of princes or rulers naught, as Homer says?

Is it because that if the government should be turned into tyranny, it is
better to be under the yoke of one, the^ of many? Or because a multitude of
rulers do seldom look to the good of the Commonwealth? where of it
proceeds, that if one do disagree, great hurt is like to hang over the
comminaltie. It is easier for one man to be well given then many. In the
government of many there wants not strife, debate, and envy. And therefore
seeing that experience does teach, that a kingdom will not receive two, it is
most truly said of Aristotle, that a multitude of rulers is naught, and
therefore let there be but one prince.

XXVII.
Why have other beasts their hearts in the midst of their breast, and man
declining somewhat toward the left side?

Is it because it should moderate the cold of that side? for as Aristotle does
say, man only has the left side cold. Or is it as the Physicians do say,
because it should give place unto the liver, which is placed in the right side.

XXVIII.
Why does a woman love that man exceeding well, who had her maiden head?

Is it because that as the matter does covet a form or perfection, so does a
woman the male? or is it by reason of shamefastnes? for as that divine Plato
says, shamefastnes does follow love. It is reason that she love and esteem
of him who loosed the bonds of her credit and shame. Or is it because the
beginning of great pleasure, does bring a great alteration in the whole,
because the powers of the mind are greatly delighted, and stick and rest
immoueably in the same? And therefore Hesiodus gives counsel to marry a maid.

XXIX.
Why are the nights in the full Moon somewhat warm, seeing that according
unto the Mathematicians, the Moon is cold by nature?

Whether is it, because the opinion of the Peripatetikes is to be preferred,
which say, that every light does heat in that respect that it is reflected?

XXX.
Why are the nights in the Autumn colder, then in the spring?

Is it because the air is then very thin, and bodies which are rarefied are
very apt to receive heat or (...) it is easily seen in the water (...) water
heated does sooner freese then cold water, because it is rarefied with the
heat.

XXXI.
Why are our bodies sooner hurt with cold in the Autumn, then in the spring?

Is it because the bodies which are accustomed unto cold, do in the spring
time come to heat? and therefore the moving or mutation is natural and not
suddene but in Autumn they hasten from heat unto cold, not being accustomed,
and without any mean. And nature does not endure sudden changes, as Galen
says.

XXII.
Why are men full of hair prone and apt unto the lust of the flesh?

Whether is it because that in them, there is presumed to be great store of
excreme^ts, and of seed, as it seems unto the Philosopher?

XXXIII.
What is the reason that men which have a small head, are naturally angry and
testie?

Is it not because that when the head is little, and the brain by a
consequence, the heat of the heart cannot be moderated with the cold of the
brain as it ought to be? And anger does proceed of the boiling of the blood
about the heart, through the desire of some thing which does grieve and make
the heart sorry.

XXXIIII.
Why does a man hold fast together and close his fundament, after he has made
water?

Whether is it because the air does run presently to fill that which is
void? and therefore the parts of the body are altered immediately with the
coldness of the air, and do quake and tremble.

XXXV.
Why have some men dyed through grief and sadness, and some through joy, and
none for anger?

Is it because joy does cool the very inward guts? grief and sorrow does
suffocate and kill the inward parts, and cool the outward? anger does heat
both: whilst heat does remain, the life and nature remains, because the
soul is said to be life in natural heat.

XXXVI.
Why does the voice change in man and woman when they begin to have seed?

Is it because the heart is the beginning of the veins and of the blood, as
Aristotle says against the Physicians? and thereupon it rises, that because
the change of the excreme^t of seed is made in the highest part of the body,
the voice as being above does make it manifest. And thereupon it is that the
voices of both man and woman do change when they begin to have seed.

XXXVII.
What is the reason that when a pot full of boiling liquour is seething over,
yet the bottom is cold?

Is it because the hot vapors ascend upward? and therefore when the uppermost
water is hot, the bottom in mean space is cold, by reason of the coldness of
the water (...) next unto it.

XXXVIII.
Why do we find the grain which we find in ants holes and gathered in the
summer time, gnawne on one end?

It is because they are directed of nature, to gnaw and consume that end where
the virtue of seeding is, for fear it (...) again: truly, their labors
sprouting and growing, they should be deprived of their nouriture belonging
necessarily unto themselves.

XXXIX.
Why do the mothers love their children more (...) then the fathers?

Is it because they take greater pains with the^ (...) or because of the
greater certainty which they have of themselves (...) Aristotle says.

XL.
Why is not the father as well-beloved of the son, as the son is of the
father?

Is it as wise men say, because love does nor go backward, but always
forward? because that love does by nature serve such as love, to continue the
kind: where of it comes to pass, that our natural desire neglecting things
past; does look to things to come. Or is it, as the Philosopher does say,
because the father has somewhat of his in the son, the son nothing of his
in the father?

XLI.
Why do the children for the most part, resemble rather the mother then the
father, seeing that (as Aristotle does say) the matter does not concur
actiuely to the begetting of the child?

Whether is it because al similitudes and likeness in mankind and nature, are
virtually contained in the seed of the father? whereby it is that for the most
part the son is like neither, but the grandfather or great grandfather, and
sometime like none of all the family. Or is it because this does proceed of
a strong imagination? for such are wont wonderfully to love their wives. For as
Autcen does affirm, the body is sometime changed by affections, which are
called affect us animales: for they do print deep impressions in natural
things, as it does happen that the child does represent him, whose
pourtraiture and image was forconceaued in the act of carnal copulation of the
woman and of the man. But some of the vulgar sort, who know not the causes of
things, are not contented with this doctrine: but the wise agree and consent
unto it. And therefore it comes also to pass, that the blood runeth and
goes to the external parts in him, who casts conceits in his mind of red
things. And so some men's teeth are on edge, when they see another eat sour
things: and when we behold another diseased and grieved in any part, the same
part in us does languish and grieve. And often also the constitution of our
body is changed through excessive fear.

XLII.
Why are (...) more nimble, as the proverb is, when they are young, then in any
other time?

Whether is it because that their nature and constitution being melancholy from
the beginning, it is requisite there should be a temperature, with the
recompense of contrary qualities. For melancholy by nature is cold and dry:
but when they are young they are hot and moist. This we also see in melancholy
children, the which in their childhood are of great wit, and before it be
looked for, are of great wisdom so far forth, that you may hope and
promise any thing of them in time to come: whose wits nevertheless in
progress of time do decay and fade. Be therefore (says the Greek) naught,
to the end that thou may live for the nature of such is most short.

XLIII.
Why be there no (...) in Pontes and (...)?

Is it because their nature is most impatient of cold, as the Philosopher does
say?

XLIIII.
Why are (...) men and women most covetous?

Is it because the habit of virtue is bred of many actions? and therefore
seeing that priests do want wife and children, they are forced no ways to
spend their goods, and yet are accustomed as take and receive, and so become
covetous. For as the Philosopher does say: Such as every man's actions are, such
does he become. The nature of women, as we have often said, is imperfect, and
therefore they think it impossible, fully to satisfy themselves. And
therefore they gather together, and keep, that by that means they may help
their need, and by industry and art they covet to get, that which nature
does not give them. And for the same reason, I suppose old men give themselves
to covetousness: for wanting and being destitute of helps by age and nature,
they gape after the goods of fortune, that with them they may resist and oppose
themselves against all wants.

XLV.
Why do wounds grieve less in war, then out of war?

Is it because the powers of the soul bend another way? for as the Philosopher
does say, if our mind be strongly fixed upon other matters, we do not see
those things which are before our eyes. Or whether is it by reason of anger,
the which as wise men do say, does heat the internal and external parts?
And as Aristotle does affirm, with heat the soul does work all things.
And therefore it happens, that the angry man does grow cold but slowly
after his wound, and therefore also he does less grieve and late.

XLVI.
Why do we wonder at the eclipse of the sun and the Moon, and not at all at
the generation of plants and beasts by seed?

Whether is it because our admiration cease in things which are usual, and
our mind neglects to search out the truth in such things? But that which
happens seldom, does stir us up to wonder, and induces the understanding
to search out the causes of it.

XLVII.
Why does the headache, and (...) of the memory, and an evil disposition of
the imagination follow the long detayning of the seed?

Whether is it because it does hinder and make heavy the brain by excess of
seed? or else because the seed long kept, gets some venomous quality, and
therefore the furne and vapor of it does hurt the head?

XLVIII.
Why do Priests and Munkes fear and abhor death more then any men?

Is it because they are by nature cold and melancholy' or because they perceive
themselves to perish utterly? for when they are out of this world, they neither
continue in their own nature, nor in (...).

XLIX.
Why if trees fall their leaves, and beasts their hair and feathers they
receive them again? and if a man become bald, his hair comes no more?

Whether is it because the times of the year do bring that change of bodies
so, that in the first change there follows an interchangable course one after
another? and beasts receive again their feathers and hair, and trees their
leaves: but bald nes comes unto man through age, but nature gives no coming
again to age.

L.
Why does a summer end all diseases?

If force and nature be strong, it shall find an air most fit for
resolution, and digestion, and expulsion of superfluities if weak and
overthrown the heat does overthrow it (...) it does loose weak bodies,
and therefore there comes nothing unto the sick body but death.

LI.
Why, is a man do put his hands into the water in the summer, he is colder when
the water is moved, then when it stands stall?

Whether is it because the parts of the water which touch his hands, he hot by
the heat of his hands? for every agent which does communicate with the
patient, in the thing whereon it works, in doing does suffer again, and the
water being moved, it is necessary that the parts of it which are rarefied be
scattered abroad, and others more cold succeed them.

LII.
Why do some which have an evil complexion and constitution of body live
longer, then some others which are of a sanguine and better nature?

Whether is it through his bad government and order? or because there was some
hidden cause in those dispositions: for as Auerrois says, the number of the
elements is infinite in the works of nature, the which none besides the author
of nature does understand.

LIII.
What is the cause, as the Physicians do say, that the suffocation of the
matrix, which happens unto women through strife and contention, is more
dangerous, then the detayning of their flowers?

Whether is it, because that how much the more an excrement is perfect, as long
as it does continue in his natural disposition, by so much the more it is
worser, when it is removed from that, and drawn to a contrary quality? As it
is seen in vinegar, the which is sharpest which is made of best wine. And so
it happens, that the more men love the one the other, the more they hate,
when they fall at variance and discord.

LIIII.
Why does the land which stands still, seem to move unto such as says in
the sea?

Is it because the instrument of the sense of seeing is accidentally moved,
when the ship is moved? whereby the (...) and similitudes of things perceived
are received with the moving.

LV.
Why do we love (...) sight above other senses?

Whether is it, as Aristotle does say, because it does show us the diffrences
of things? or because his knowledge is more drawn from material substance? or
is it because the divine force of love is placed in that sense, as Plato says.

LVI.
Why do we not judge a staff to be broken in the water, seeing it does (...)
appear in the sense of the sight?

Whether is it, because we perceive by the sense of feeling and touching, that
the sight does err? or is it because we do not judge with the same power,
as we do imagine with. And an argument of this is, because the sun does
seem to be but a foot round And by a trick and moving of the fingers, one
thing does seem two, and yer we do nor yield that they be two.

LVII.
Why do we put our hand over our eyes when we will see anything a far off?

Is it because the sight should not be dispersed? and so Aristotle does say,
that those which have their eyes standing out, cannot see far: and contrary,
such as have them hollow in their head, can see far, because the moving of
the sight is not skattered.

LVIII.
Why can some see the object before their eyes far off, better then if it be
nearer their eyes?

Is it because things which may be seen cannot be seen, but by the mean of
the bright air? and weak eyes do want more plenty of light, then strong
eyes. But the object being put far off from the sense of the sight, in the
distace from the thing seen does require a greater light, then good eyes need:
and the further the object is, the more light there is in the distance betwixt
the object and the sight. Or else because the motion which proceeds from an
object far distant unto a weak sense, is weak, which the sense cannot
endure? And the motion which is hard by is strong, which also a weak eye cannot
suffer: which is easily seen in old men, the which by reason of their weakness
do see a far off, and can read small letters in the light of the sun, the
which notwithstanding, cannot hard by them read, nor see at the light of a
candle, or the Moon.

LIX.
Why can some see things hard by them, and can not see things further off?

Is it not through the weakness of their sight? for in such the power of seeing
is very weak, and not united together, and therefore they had need of a strong
moving as it is also in such as have their eyes stanging (...) which cannot see
far.

LX.
Why do such as (...) shoot aright, wink with one eye?

Is it because the power of the sight is then more and better (...), and
therefore is better able to perform his actions?

LXI.
Why be such as have been long in the dark, if on a sudden they come into a
great light, half blind?

Whether is it because nature cannot endure those sudden (...) because the
spirit of their sight (...) and weak, and therefore are glad of their (...) is
dissolved when they come into the light? Or else is it, because of the desire of
the light, which they wanted a long time, they do behold the light too
earnestly? And so their sight is weakened, as it happens in such as have a
long time (...), and therefore eating greedily, do take more then they can
digest, and so by that means (...).

LXII.
Why do such as see weakly, for the most part, write small letters? (...)
marvel that such as are purblinde, or have a weak sight, should do that
which does belong unto such as have a good sight?

Is it because that things hard by do seem great, and such are wont to write
with their eye hard by their paper? Or is it because they do write almost
wincking? For if they should write with the eyes wide open, their sight being
dispersed and skattered abroad, it would wax dim. And therefore wincking they
see more quicker: and therefore seeing that through their wincking, their
passage of seeing is narrow, they must of necessity make a small letter.

LXIII.
What is the reason that if a man will see far in the night, he shall do it
better if he bow his head near unto the ground, then if he stand upright?

Is it because the obscure vapors which made the air dark, are thicker above
in the air, then they are near unto the earth, and thereupon do more hinder
the sight far off in the air, then near unto the ground? or is it because
the light of the stars being dispersed through the air, causes a reflectio^
near unto the earth, although weakly, and so by that means does some what the
more make light upon the ouermost part of the earth?

LXIIII.
What is the cause, that if a man has committed any evil fact, he cannot
dissemble it in countenance, and in his eyes? and therefore the Poet does say;
O how hard it is not to bewray a fault with thy countenance.

Is it because the eye is the messenger of the heart, as a glass of the mind
wherein all things do shine? or is it because it is the weakest part of the
body, and the fullest of passages: and therefore all alteration which
begins in the heart, (which as the (...) do say, is the beginning of all
feeling and cogitation) goes directly unto the eyes.

LXV.
Why cannot such as gape, or put forth, or (...) air, heat well?

Whether is it because the end of the instrument of hearing, is (...) at some
spiritual part? where by it comes by pass, that it is shaken also and moved,
together with that spiritual or aerious (...), as (...) does move that air:
for it is moved when it does move. Or is it because much breath or air does
outwardly enter in at the ears, whilst (...), and therefore moving and sense
cannot be perceived for it does thrust at the ear. The (...) the air, or
some (...) of the air and the (...) when the air (...) the ear is weakened,
and the air outwardly does enter in, of (...) one does (...) other: and that
which is within does (...) out and expel that (...) come in.

LXVI.
Why can not (...) be the cause of ^ and (...)?

Is it because the (...) must be before (...) moved, and ^ the thing (...)
gendred, and (...) is impossible to be (...) himself.

XVII.
Why are women bodies looser and softer then men's bodies, and (...) why do
they want hair?

Is it by reason of their monthly (...) with them the (...) go away, whereof
hair should grow, and whereof the flesh should be filled, and therefore they
are lesser, and therefore also their veins are more hidden, then men's veins.

LXVIII.
What is the reason that when we think upon any horrible thing, we are stricken
into a fear?

Is it because, the conceit, thinking and understanding of things, have force
and virtue? for as Plato does say, the reasons of things, have some affinity
with the things themselves. For the image and representation of cold and heat,
is such as the nature of the things are, as the Philosopher has said. Or is it
because that when we comprehend any dreadful matter, the blood runs to the
internal parts, and thereof the external parts are cold, and shaken with
fear.

LXIX.
Why cannot a company or multitude of women be led under a captain without
tumult?

Is it because they are inconstant by nature? And for the same reason the
Philosopher would appoint no shepherd over goats, because they are instable
and unconstant by nature. Or is it because a woman is more prating, worser
tongued, and more backbiting? also complaining, despairing, and less wise, and
more lying then a man.

LXX.
Why does a radish root help digestion, and yet himself remains
undigested?

Whether is it because his substance does consist of diverse parts? for there is
some thin parts in him which is fit to digest meats, the which being
dissolved, there does remain some thick and close substance (...), which the
heat cannot digest.

LXXI.
Why do (...) wood, clean it easier in length, then (...)?

Whether (...) because that in wood there is some grain if it be cut at
length, as it is to follow the hair in cloth, which go on in length: whereby
in the very (...), one part draws another fast by it.

LXXII.
What is the reason of you strike a spear on the end, the sound comes sooner
to one which stands at the other end, then (...) one who stands nearer to
him which strikes?

Whether is it because that as it has been said, there is a (...) long grain
in wood (...) forward (...) with air, but (...) or on side there is none. And
therefore a beam or a spear strooken on (...) end, the air which is hidden
receives a sound in the foresaid grain, which serves for (...) the air. And
therefore seeing the sound cannot go easily out, it is carried unto the ear
of him who is opposite unto him, and those passages do not go from side to
side, and therefore the sound cannot be so distinctly hard.

LXXIII.
Why be there not famous men in every (...) in our age?

Is it because the nature of man decaieth in our age? and as (...) says,
succession being corrupted, the (...) of our age is worse by birth? Or is it
because (...) are not esteemed of (...) for take away (...) and due unto
virtue, and no man will embrace it. Or is it so ordained by nature, that men
do always complain of the present time?

LXXIIII.
Why are flatterers in great credit with Princes?

Is it, as Plutarke says by the authority of Plato, because they love
themselves? Too much immoderate love of themselves, causes them to admit
flatterers, and to give them credit. Or whether is it, as I think, because
they want the light of reason? For among birds, some through the corruption of
their nature, delight in stinking meats, and whom the day does blind, and the
night does lighten.

LXXV.
Why have Philosophers for the most part in these days evil conditions?

Is it because they are not esteemed of Princes? or is it because that for
philosophy it self they are accused of crimes, and think therefore they
receive such rewards, and therefore they are compelled to forsake virtue and
flee to vice? Or else deceived through error, they think they have challenged
all the garments of philosophy, when they have snatched unto themselves some
of her rags. And therefore they are by us rather called Sophisters then
Philosophers: for certainly a Philosopher should be of a stout courage in all
respects, and in all fortune for they reason badly that therefore they should
give themselves unto Philosophy, because they would be honored of Princes.
And their desire is not ruled by nature, but by error, and are thrust forward
with the stream of false (...).

LXXVI.
Why do such as (...) wax pale in the beginning, and afterward red?

Is it through the desire of revenge for that which grieueth, that the heat
and blood are called unto the heart, and therefore of necessity the external
parts are pale? when they have determined to put that in execution which they
desire, the heat and blood do run unto the outward parts, and then they are
greatly to be feared and to be taken heed of.

LXXVII.
Why do Serpents want a yard and stones?

Is it because they want thighs, and therefore do want a yard, and they want
stones, because of the length of their body.

LXXVIII.
Why can Serpents turn their heads backward and the rest of their body stand
still?

Whether is it because that like unto those beasts which are called Insecta,
they are made of a winding composition, and have their joints flexible and made
of (...) And this is the reason in Serpents, and also because they may avoid
those things which hurt them: for having no feet, and being long of body,
they cannot easily turn the^, whilst they bow against those things which are
behind them. (...) to no purpose to lift up their head, if they could not
exercise anger.

LXXIX.
Why is the (...) changed into diverse colors?

Whether is it, as it seems unto the Philosopher, because that he is the
slenderest of all footed beasts engendered of eggs; and is stark for want of
blood? The cause is to be referred unto the quality of the mind: through over
much coldness he is of so many colors: for it is the property of fear to bind
fast, through want of blood and heat.

LXXX.
Why are the thighs and calfe of the legs of men fleshie seeing the thighs
of other beasts are not so?

Is it because man only goes upright, and therefore have them so to sustain
the upper parts: and therefore nature has given the lower parts corpulencie,
and has taken it away from the upper: and therefore she has made the
buttockes, the thighs, and calfe of the legs fleshie.

LXXXI.
Why do very fat beasts wax old quickly, and soon dye?

Is it because they have but a little blood, seeing that much of it is drunken
up with the fat? And those which have but small store of blood are aptest to
dye: for death is a want of blood.

LXXXII.
Why does man only go upright?

Is it because he is most hot of nature? or is it because his substance is
divine? The part of divine things is to understand and be wise: which could
not easily be, if a man had a great massiue body: for heaviness does make the
understanding and the sense slow.

LXXXIII.
Why is the flesh nearest the bone sweetest?

Whether is it because it receives temperature through the equality of the
contrary? for the nature of flesh is hot and moist, and the nature of the bone
is cold and dry. And therefore of contrary extremes there must needs be a
mean.

LXXXIIII.
Why is it forbidden to talk whilst we eat?

Whether is it because, that before the wizard, by the which we eat and drink,
the artery is put, by the which air and breath goes unto the lungs, and this
artery is molested with meat or drink entering into it. Yet nature has
provided for this a little flappe, which does cover the artery, the which is
opened when we speak. And therefore meat can easily get into it, where of
follows choking, and coughes. Or whether is it because speaking does hinder
the chewing of the meat, and therefore the meat is not well digested?

LXXXV.
Why does wine mingled with water, after a sort make a man soonest drunk?

Whether is it because the water does cause the wine to run hither and
thither, and penetrate the more. And that is the reason that Must, as Auicen
does say, does sooner make a man drunk then wine, because that the water
mixed with it, does make it penetrate.

LXXXVI.
Why are Noble men, and such as are placed in high dignities, troubled with the
gowte?

Is it because they cramme in diverse sorts of meats eue^ to the fill And the
Phisitio^s do affirm that there is nothing worser then at one time to take
diverse sorts of meats, and then be a long time in eating and drinking of them:
for the first is half digested before the other come: and therefore such as
remain not long undigested, breed raw and naughty humors, which run unto
the joints. Or whether is it by reason of over much pure wine, and too much
idleness, and exercises done out of due season? Or is it through the over much
use of lechery, which wastes and kills digestio^? These things are greatly
to be feared, as Plotinus says, least we become stocks or brute beasts: for
like unto brute beasts they are given to gluttony and the belly.

LXXXVII.
Why are they taken with sudden death, which are laden with over much fat, and
especially when they be young?

Whether is it because their veins be strait, and therefore are stopped with
the fat, that the spirits cannot have free course? whereupon the heat which is
bred within them does kill them, because they cannot receive the cooling of the
air. And therefore as the Physicians do say, they should greatly fear least
their veins break, or their natural heat be suffocated.

LXXXVIII.
Why can such be hardly let blood which are very fat, and that with danger?

Whether is it because they have very slender veins, and they hidden? or else
because all fat is without blood, as it seems unto the Philosopher.

LXXXIX.
Why, as Aristotle does affirm, are the sensible powers in the heart, and yet
if the hinder part of the brain be hurt, the memory pays for it: if the
forepart, the imagination: if the middle, the cogitatiue power?

Whether is it because the brain is appointed by nature, to cool the heat of
the heart? whereof it is, that in diverse of his parts he serves the powers and
instruments in the heart: for every action of the soul does not proceed
from one measure of heace.

XC.
Why does it happen out for the most part, that children which are not
lawfully borne, are wittier and subtiler, and liker unto the parents, then
others?

Whether is it, because the powers of the mind of the parents are very
vehemently bent in the act of carnal copulation? such do love exceedingly,
and therefore seeing that their affections be not distracted, the child by
nature shall not vary from them. And that is most true, when they go together
with tranquillity of mind: for if it be with fear or griese, the children be
unlike.

XCI.
What is the reason, seeing that death is by nature, yet it is more terrible
unto man, then unto all other living creatures?

Whether is it because the nature of man, as the Philosopher says, has
purchased the mean, not only of living, but also of living well? for mankind
only, is partaker of supernatural things, other beasts have regard unto that
only which they see, wherein, as Pliny does say, the goodness of nature does
suffice, which is to be preferred before all other things: and therefore they
think not of glory, wealth, ambition, nor of death. Wherefore seeing that a
man is deprived of a more noble life when he dies, death is unto him above all
other most grievous. Or is it because other beasts regard only things present,
and man only foreseeth things to come.

XCII.
Why if death come by nature, is it judged the last of all terrible things?

Whether is it, as it seems unto the Philosopher, because it is the last, and
that nothing else does seem good or bad unto mortal men? Or is it because we
inueigh against nature, who is the beginning of necessity, and not the nature
of the form, or of the end, from which that which is good is derived, which
all things do desire? Or peradventure does death seem the most terriblest of
all things, because they meant so to live, that they thought to be immortal?
or does it strike a fear only into them which lived a naughty life? And unto
such as lived a virtuous life, death is not grievous, as the Poet says. Death
is the end of a prison obscure. Or be they grieved because they are seized on
with a violent and untimely death? for such as dye when they come unto old
age, do for the most part dye without fear and grief. For truly nature is,
as a candle ready to be put out. And as Plato does say: of all sorts of death,
that which by nature does come is most light, which happens rather with
pleasure then dolor.

XCIII.
Why, seeing that man is the end of nature, is he of so short a life, in
respect of other living things, as Poets do complain, by the example of the
crow?

Whether is it because that those our makers, consulting of our kind, the
perfection of frail things, is not measured at all by continuance of time? as
the Philosopher says: It is far better to be very joyful a short space, the^
a long time meanly or lightly glad. Or whether is it because that nature of
things possible, does always make that which is best? And it could not be
that the constitution of man's body, could be convenient and fit for long
continuance and the operations of the soul. For by the authority of the wise,
there is required another temperature first for life, and another for the
works of life. Whether should they make us of a long life and the worse, or of
a shorter and the better? It seemed good unto them, says Plato, to prefer a
short life and a good, before a long life and a bad.

XCIIII.
Why did nature bring forth man naked, and without defense?

Is it because nature does make nothing without reason or in vain? seeing that
a man is most wise, he can use many instruments. The hand is not one
instrument but many. And therefore they think amiss, as the Philosopher
affirms, which say that a man is the noblest of all creatures, and yet in
worser case then all, because he is naked and weaponles: yet other beasts keep
their common help, and cannot change it by any means, but man can change his
weapons at his pleasure: for the hand is a hoof, and horn, and spear, and
sword, and every other kind of weapon. Seeing then that a man is endued with
understanding, and has a hand given him by nature, he cannot complain of his
nakedness and condition. Whether was the excellency of the substance of which
mankind was made, fit and convenient for horns, and such like?

XCV.
Why is wine put into a vessel of water mingled with saltpeter, very cold?

Because saltpeter is presently actu cold, though it have power to be hot, and
the water mingled with it is colder then the wine. Now a thing which is more
cold, does make a thing less cold, more cold the^ it was: and therefore the
wine put into such a vessel is cooled the better. I have sometime answered,
that it proceeds of the Antiperistasis, that is, by a repulsion whereby heat
or cold is made strong, and every contrary by his contrary: but saltpeter is
not hot actu, but in posentia. And therefore having power only to be hot, and
is not hot indeed, it cannot work by that contrariety: for it is actu cold,
as the feeling can judge.

XCVI.
Why has Philosophy seemed a wonderful and a divine thing unto some?

Whether is it, because that as a medicine is the perfection of the body, so
philosophy is the perfection of the soul, as Themistius says? Or is it
because the study of Philosophy does increase and further us in our duty
toward God, and make our zeal more fervent? for those things being perfectly
known which God has done, he turns all men's hearts and minds to praise and
admire him. This admiration, charity, faith, and hope does follow. Or whether
is it because it does breed great pleasures and delights, through the
certainty of it and sincerenes? or because it does make us like unto God?

XCVII.
Why do (...) hate learned men?

Is it by reason of the unlikeness in manners? for so it has always been that
wisdom has been injured by evil manners. Or do they fear least they
should breed sedition and tumults in their cities with their doctrine and
authority? or because they do tax and reprehend their conditions? for as
Plato does say, Poets have great force and skill, either to praise or
dispraise, and every man who has a care of his fame, should take heed how he
offend a Poet.

ALEXANDER APHRODISEVS PROBLEMES.
I.
WHy did Homer call men Poliocrotaphus, of the hoarenes of the temples?

Because that for the most part there gray hairs begin, because the forepart
of the head has more moisture and fleume in it, then the hinder part.

II.
Why is only the forepart of the head bald?

Because it is loose and soft. And therefore seeing that the hair does want
nourishment, by reason of natural drines, it does easily fall in those (...)
does not stick as it does behind, where the head is drier and thicker.

III.
Baldnes proceeds of drines: and therefore such as have curled hair be
soonest bald, by reason of the drines of their head: and are gray haired very
late, by reason of the drines which consumes the superfluities of fleume. They
are watchful above others, because sleep comes of humiditie. Children do
show this because they are both moist and sleepie and full of excrements. Such
as have softer hair, as such be which have a moist head, are of a contrary
disposition: for they are very seldom or never bald. And sometime baldnes
happens by some defect of the kind, or stock, as the gowt, and some other
diseases. Such are sooner bald, and are sleepie, and have much superfluity.
The hoare hairs be whitest, because they follow the color of fleume, from
whence they proceed. They be sometimes almost yellowish, when the fleume is
mingled with burnt choler.

IIII.
Why are old men full of excrements, and watchful?

They are full of excrements, because they are cold and weak by nature, and
therefore digest badly, and so gather many excreme^ts by the pores and open
passages of the body. And seeing they be dry, they are also waking and
watchful, and also because their bodies be hard and stiff. And children
notwithstanding the interlacing of the pores, and soundnes of their bodies, are
moist.

V.
Why have children which are moist by nature, and full of excrements, no hoare
hairs?

Because they are moist and hot, and fleume is moist and cold, and have the
forepart of the head as it were fleshy and thin, whereby superfluities are
voyded: and that with age does grow hard, and bonie, and thick: and therefore
nature does afterward give it seames, by which superfluous vapors should
breathe out and euaporate.

VI.
Why do women and gelded men quickly grow hoare and gray?

Women because they are cold by nature, and have small exercise, do gather many
superfluities, and especially then when their flowers cease. And gelded men
because they yield no seed, but do yield superfluity which should breed
seed, the which with the blood does spread it self over all the body, and that
has the nature of fleume.

VII.
But why do they want hair?

Women because they be cold, and have thick passages in their bodies: for
cold does thicken, and therefore there is no way which way hair should
pass. Gelded men because they are moist, and above measure full of excrements,
and therefore in such moist places as no herbs can grow, so neither in dry
and stony, which follow baldnes.

VIII.
Why are gelded men for the most part crooked legged?

By reason of that superfluous humiditie, they have soft and wet bodies, and
therefore weak, and therefore seeing the thighs cannot be are the burden of
all the body, they are wrethed and crooked, as a bulrush does bend if a
weight be put on it: for that which is hard and dry is strong, and can resist:
and that which is soft and moist, is weak and cannot resist. This is declared
by wood, and osiers, and also men. And with baths and drink men are much
weakened: and with a moderate diet are dried, and become stronger unto any
action. Where of it arises, that gelded men are after a sort women, and weak,
and given to wine, and drunkenness, and full of fleume. For being cold, they
covet to induce the contrary quality, and wine by nature is hot. The
AEthiopians being of a drier nature, have curled hair, and are lean, and
strong to work.

IX.
But why have they a sharp shrill voice?

Again, abundgnce of humiditie filling up the artery, does make it strait,
and therefore the breath going by a narrow passage, does cause a sharpenes in
the voice. It is plain that they abound in humiditie, because they be light,
and their paps grow great like unto women, and have swelling eye lids, and have
soft white hair.

X.
Why do some gelded men after a sort covet women, and do sometime love the
act of venerie?

Because some are but imperfect gelded men, and some have a hot liver, and have
large vessels and conduits of seed. And therefore they imagine the use of
carnal copulation: they cannot perform that which they desire, and their
(...) want liuelines. For that spirit which does puff them up, does always
sail, and is weak: that spirit rising of the seed, through the passages of
the seed, is carried from those parts which are about the loins. But in
children those conduites of seed are closed up.

XI.
Why seeing there be but three simple uniform hamours, yet they do not
breed three simple diseases, but more?

There are double in every one, continual, or whole and broken. For the
difference of diseases do not proceed only of the humors, but also of the
places. A hot, thine and sharp humor does breed a sharp, and a short, and a
hot fever: a cold and a thick humor, a long and a dull one. So of wood, that
which is hot and dry, as bays, olive trees, cause a great flame, and are
quickly burned: green wet wood make a small smokie fire, and are long a
burning.

Again, if the place be large and spacious, it does sooner, and that greatly
inflame the humor, because that when it is heaped up together, then at once
being full rotten it is put on fire. But if the place be narrow and small,
seeing it cannot contain all the humor, but by peecemeale, and therefore
cannot ripen all together, it will stir up a small fever, but such a one as
shall burn long. Put then the nature of the humor unto the place, and so thou
shall find all the differences of agues, which rise of the corruption of the
humors. If yellow choler do putrify in great receptacles, as the veins and
arteries, seeing it is hot, it does kindle a most sharp, hot, and short ague,
which is called a burning, or heat. But if cold fleume do putrify in the small
veins and arteries which are about the flesh, it does cause a long and a
languishing ague, which they call a Cotidian. But if yellow choler do
corruptin small receptacles, it does cause a small and a short ague, but yet
sometime longer then a heat, which we call a Tertian or sharp ague. But if
fleume do purrifie in great places, it will cause a shorter ague then a
Cotidian. And likewise black choler, if it putrify in great veins, because
it is burned almost all at once, causes a short ague by fourths: if in small,
it breeds a longer quartaine: for there do concur a cold and a thick
humor not fit to alteration, and a narrow place, which will not suffer all the
melancholy and anger to be consumed at once.

XII.
Why do some when they are ashamed, sweat under the armepits?

Because the pores are thin in that place, nature, when any thing is worthy
of reverence and honor, does flee with the blood into the veins and arteries,
and they being full do distill. As it does happen to such as are merry, because
their body is made thin, and especially the armepits.

XIII.
Why do such as are (...) wax pale?

Because our nature, and that power which has a care of our body, will suffer
nothing done externally unto us. And as we do run within dootes to keep our
selves, so nature looking unto her safety, conueieth her self into the body
as much as she can, and carries the blood with her, whom she has for her
nourishment and wagon, and that blood also which is best: and that is the blood
which does dye our skin with a red purple color.

XIIII.
But why do they tremble also?

Because that virtue animalis, that is, certain spirits which rise about the
heart, with the consent of nature do forsake the sinews, which before they
kept: and it be they which keep the body from trembling: whereupon it
rises, that such are loose in the belly, and unawares do make water. For
those muscules and sinews which do stop the course of excrements, being
become weak then, give leave for superfluities to pass.

XV.
Why do such as are ashamed wax red?

Because that nature of her self, as it were with a certain conscience, like
unto a noble virgin, reuerencing that which is worthy of honor, moderatly
does draw her self into the secretest parts of the body. The blood is moved
with her, and powered abroad, and therefore the skin is dyed with the color
of blood. Others say that the blood is cast over them by nature, like unto a
veil, as we as it were admonished by nature, do put our hand before our face.

XVI.
Why are some dead with sear?

Because that the natural power fleeing above measure, and retiring it self
with the blood into the inward parts of the body, does choke and put out that
natural lively blood which is bred near the heart, and therefore does bring
death. By the same reason, when much oil is powered on a sudden into the flame
of a lamp, it does put out the flame. The blood which is in the heart is
compared unto the flame of the candle or lamp. Some for the same cause have
dyed with grief: as fire covered with a cover is put out, so the inward motion
of the natural heat is resolved.

XVII.
Why are some overcome and dismayed with drunkenness?

Because that abundance of wine does suffocate and choke with his heat our
natural and lively virtue. And it happens chiefly unto such whose natural
heat is weak and small. That which is strong and much can resist, and in
space of time can overcome and digest the abundance, as a great flame can
endure much oil to be powered on it.

XVIII.
Why do old men shake and tremble?

Because that the sinews of our natural virtues and forces, and the muscules
of the parts of the body, when they receive not sufficient motive virtue, do
not endeavor to be are the burden of the body. The shaking is, because the
weight of the body draws some part of the body downward, and another power
which is called animalis, upward: when this is done without intermission, and
one after another, it causes a quaking: then comes in bowing and stooping to
the ground, and so in steed of a rafter to uphold the building, they use the
help of a staff: and for the same cause they avoid their excrements and urine
on a sudden.

XIX.
Why do not pepper and mustard seed heat the belly, if they be swallowed
whole, but if they be broken they do?

Because that those things which have their qualities in power only, and not
in action, want some external help to bring their virtue and power into
action. And therefore being bruised and made small, and entering into the
passages of the body, do work his effect through their inherent heat. And
the like is of other qualities. There be some things which have their qualities
in action, as the water, tisan, and milk, are to be drunk presently: they are
moist and cold, nor want no other external help to cool and moyften, but do
work immediately. Likewise the salt and the earth, both virtually and presently
and in sight are dry. Line seed and bread are dry in imagination and in
sight, but moist in virtue and act. The sea also and brine and pickle, and
Aquavitae, are moist in imagination and in sight, but are dry in virtue and
actu, action.

XX.
Why do some see nothing in the night, and see in the day?

Because they have a thick spirit of seeing, and which cannot pearce the air,
unto the thing which is seen: and in the night it grows more thick, because
it is made more cold with the absence of the sun. Or else as others do say,
because that in the day time it is made fine and attenuated with the pure and
hot air, and is thickened in the night. The contrary unto this does happen in
a Cat, and an Owl, they see nothing in the day, and see very well in the
night: for they have a very clear and thin sight, the which when it does
somewhat thicken in the night time, is most fit to receive his object: in the
day time and in a clear light, being exceedingly attenuated and made thin,
is resolved and skattered. Whereupon Lions which are almost of the like
quality, cannot go in the sun, and if they see fire in the day time they
flee from it. A man may see the ball of their eye very bright, and they have
the moist of their eyes very clear.

XXI.
Why does a sudden vehement joy sometime dismay a man, and (...) him?

Because that when the vital virtue, and inward natural heat is immoderatly
carried to the outward parts, it is cast out and resolved and therefore such
sweat and grow red, because the blood is present. The natural heat, and fire,
both by reason of his hear, and also because it is out of his place, move
upward, and then for desire of food and nouriture down again. And when one
of these moving due perish and fail, the man perishes and falls also.

XXII.
Why do such as are in grief, and in love, and in anger, sigh very often?

Because that the soul and mind of such as are grieved, is turned unto the
cause of grief and sorrow, and the mind of such as covet, to that which they
do covet, and the mind of the angry, unto that which causes the anger. The
soul then being intentive upon that whither she moves, does after a sort
neglect and forget to give motive virtue and power unto the muscules of the
breast. Therefore the heart not receiving air by opening of the breast, and by
a conseque^t neither blowing nor cooling, nor yet casting forth, by shutting
and closing, any sighing superfluities, which are bred of the adustion of
blood, whilst it does fear suffocation, the heart, I say, does force the
mind and give her warning, that she would give more motion unto the muscules,
and cause greater breathing in and out, and that she would take more store of
cold air, and thrust out more excrements, and that often small breathings
would perform that that one great one may effect. And therefore men of
oldtime; called the word suspirio sighing, of the straitnes of the breast. They
do sigh long and often, because the mind is always upon that which causes
the passion. Nature does force the soul to send in by the heart more motive
virtue to the muscules of the breast. It is most evident that we do breathe in
and out by the arteries. Under the name of pulse, the opening and shutting, the
receiving and casting out breath is comprehended.

XXIII.
Why is a sausiege hardly digested?

Because that through his lightness, it does swim in the belly above the moist
meat, nor does not join with that meat where concoction is made, but
swimmeth at the gizzard where appetite is, and not digestion. If you cast him
into the water out of a man's body, it will not sink but swim above the
water. For whilst meat is minced in it, it receives a light air, which
causes it to swim above inoyst things: and therefore it is limber and
flaggie, because it is participant of air.

XXIIII.
Why do we make hot water before we go into the bath, and after that we
have been long in the bath, our Urine is cold?

And this is so in comparing it to some other. Urine is of a luke warm
quality, and moderatly hot: therefore out of the bath, because our body is
cold, the urine we make, as it were in comparison is hot, yet in the bath,
because the body is much hotter then the urine, therefore the urine does seem
cold, although it be hot after a sort. The which does appear by that, that
he who does go into a bath to get heat, if he only go into hot water, it
seems very hot, but if already heated he go into it, it does not seem so
hot.

XXV.
Why do we find sweet fresh water, when we dig more the sea.

Because that in the sea that water which is thinnest and purest is fresh, that
which is thicker is salt: the thin water therefore which runs through the
passages of the earth, is hidden in the earth, the which we find when we
dig. It is fresh, because that in winter it is drawn up into the air: the
thick and dried water does become salt, but in the seashores, because the
passages be broad and wide, salt water is found.

XXVI.
Why is well water warm in winter, and cold in summer?

Because that every thing does flee from his contrary as from his enemy. It is
manifest that cold is contrary unto beat, and does destroy it. And therefore
because that in summer heat does occupy the air, the cold does flee into the
bowels of the earth, and therefore causes the water to become cold. But in the
winter, because the cold has greater sway in the air, then the heat again
flees to the same place, and so does heat the water. For it is against the
law of nature, that contraries should dwell together in the same place and time.

XXVII.
Why are men of a small stature commonly wiser then the tall?

Because that in small men the soul is well joined and compacted together in
the whole body: in tall men it is extended in length. And therefore Homer does
describe Ulysses to be short and wise, and Atax tall and a fool.

XXVIII.
Why do we cast water into a man's face when he does swoune, to make him come
to himself again?

Because that through the coldness of the water, the heat may repair to the
heart to give strength.

XXIX.
Why do many fools beget wise and strong children?

Because that fools when they are in the act of copulation, yield very much
unto pleasure, and have their mind drowned in the body. Whereby it comes to
pass, that their seed being participant of great virtue, as well reasonable
as natural, does cause such as are begotten to be the wiser. But it happens
otherwise unto such as are wise and learned: for their seed wants much
natural virtue, and the force of wisdom makes them to think on some other
external cares, which weakeneth their intention in the act of venerie.

XXX.
Why does not the dung of wild beasts stink so much, as the excrements of men?

Because they use dry, and not superflucus meats, and have great exercise:
yea the dung of some beasts are of a good savor. But of all other the dung of
a man does sanour worst, because that men do use many moist meats out of
season, and more then is needful. Then they are less hot then other beasts,
and are not so much exercised. And therefore seeing that it is not fully
digested, nor euaporated, by reason of the abundance, but does corrupt,
therefore it is of a bad favor.

XXXI.
Why does mustard and such like sharp things, blister and exulcerate the
skin, if it be put on it, and when it is swallowed does not exulcerate the
belly?

Because they are dissolved with the moisture of the body, and because they
are changed and digested before they work: and upon the skin which is thin
they have more time to work.

XXXII.
Why does barley branne, seeing that it is cold, dissolve fleume?

Seeing that all cold does make thick, and hinder dissolution truly I think,
not because it does cool, therefore it does loose and dissolve, but because
it does cast out, it has a virtue of dividing and expelling humors. And
there are diverse such kinds which work contrary unto themselves,
accidentally and by chance not principally. As the nature of Bees which are
hot, do weaken an ague: not because they are hot, for the like does increase
his like: but because they do expel naughty humors from the veins, and
provoke urine. So flower-deluce, and hysope are good for the pleurisy:
although they be hot, yet they do cut those humors which do breed betwixt
the skin, and which girde the side. So the disease which is called Tetanus,
is cured with hot water powered on it, which is bred of cold humors: it does
heal it not principally, and of the own nature of water, but because it is
heated.

XXXIII.
Why do some men puff and blow when they make water?

Because the bladder when it is full of water does swell, and straiten the gut
which is called the right gut: and when it is emptied, a wind which is in the
gut desires passage out. Some think that there is an agreement in these parts
in the avoiding of the urine.

XXXIIII.
Why do some gape when they see other men to gape?

Because the nature of living creatures, and especially of such as want reason
has a likeness of consents, and affections. And therefore when one ass does
piffe, the others do stale likewise.

XXXV.
Why does one which is bleere eyed, infect one who is whole, and yet he who is
whole cannot heal the bleere eyed?

Because the eyes are soft and moist, and exposed unto affections: then health
receives an alteration of a small cause, and sickness of a great and vehement:
and that which is in a mean, is easlier changed of that which is vehement,
then contrariwise, the vehement and great of the temperate and mean. And
therefore bleerenes is a vehement and great disease, and so does easily turn
health, which is a temperate and moderate state of the body.

XXXVI.
Why do money and an apple seem greater in the water then they be?

Because the water does deceive the sight, and the water about them make them
seem of one color. So the Sun, and the Moon, and the Planets, when they
are seen near unto the point of the rising or falling, seem to be of a
greater bigness then at other times: for they alter the air about them with
their quality.

XXXVII.
Why when a man does give a blow with a staff far off we see the blow
presently, but we hear the sound after, although the sound and the blow go
together?

Because we have a sharper and quicker sight then hearing, and therefore the
sight does anticipate the stroke, and the hearing which is grosser, does hear
the sound slowlier. And by the same reason we may dissolve the doubt of
thundering and lightning: for we see the lightning before we hear the
thundering, although the thunder be first, or at the least together with the
lightning: and yet the sight being more subtle then the hearing, does see the
lightning before the ear does hear the thunder.

XXXVIII.
What is the reason seeing we be naked on our face, and clothed over all the
body, yet we can endure cold better on our face, then on the body?

Use is the cause of it.

XXXIX.
What is the reason that yellow choler, which all a man's life time is contained
in a place which is called the bladder of choler, does not eat out the same
bladder, seeing that it is subject unto many alterations, and yet if it fall
into a tooth but a small time, which is a body which cannot easily suffer, it
will presently eat him out?

Because nature has so wrought, that it should only remain in that body and
not hurt it. The name of nature is a great remedy against grief, as by many
examples it can be proved. The infant is in the womb of the mother nine
months, and gives no grief of heaft unto her: but if a light wind should
breed there, it would presently cause a sharp disease. The rough artery is
the only receptacle of wind: but if a crumme should go amiss in it, it
causes either choking or a vehement cough, which could not be so it nature had
not so prescribed.

XL.
Why do some men go into a bath a thirst, and come out without thirst, and
some contrariwise go in not a thirst, and come out a thirst?

Such as are dry, do wax moist in the bath, and quench their thirst: for
thirst comes of drines. But those which are moist, and not thirsty, if they
stay long in a hot air, are a thirst, because their moisture is dissolved and
spent with swear.

XLI.
Why do some belch vnsauerously after the eating of a radish, and (...) not?

They whose stomach and belly does not abound with naughty and superfluous
humors, tending unto fleume, they have a sweet breath: but they whose
stomach does abound, they have an unsavory breath. A radish is hot, and
does cut and attenuare the grosnes of humors, and does stir up a wind of
the humors, the which it does cast forth by belching. So dirt which is not
stirred does not savor at all, but if it be stirred, yields a strong stinch.
Those which think that a radish is of a stinking quality of himself because
it does stink out of the body if it beelong kept, without doubt are deceived.
For all men which do eat of them should have an unsavory breath, if that
were so.

XLII.
Why in very great cold do the singer and superficial parts of the (...) wax
black and decay?

Because that extreme cold does drive in the natural heat into the body,
and so the outward side of the body does first grow wanne, then black, and
almost like a corse. They do fall and decay, because that nature being
intentive in the other parts of the body, does join unto it self that which
is hot, and does drive away and cast out that which is decayed and naught. The
superficial parts are altered, because that they be not very fleshie, nor very
hot. For in trees, those leaves fall soonest in the winter, which are least hot
in nature, and therefore are weaker and thinner. Those which say, that the
natural heat does presently in the beginning flee from the cold, as it were
from an adversary, into the internal parts of the body, and then gather it
self again and strengthen it self, and as it were with a supply help those
parts which were altered: and so either because it was on a sudden, or because
great store of heat does run back again, and so burn the uttermost parts
of the body, because that staying there, there is much of it gathered
together, those I say without all doubt do think amiss which say this.

XLIII.
Why are such in great pain, which being very cold, do heat their fingers
ends, or uttermost parts of the body?

By reason of the sudden change of quality, much cold does change into much
heat. Whatsoever is suddenly done, does bring grief to nature. Whatsoever is
suddenly done agreeing unto nature, does delight nature: for man's body does
consist much in the manner of his disposition.

XLIIII.
Why do such as eat pepper, or great morsels of bread, yexe?

There is a proportion in them with those things which do outwardly ouercharge
us, or cause us to have pain. Pepper and choler have a proportion with
thorns: but fleume and bread with a heavy stone. Such as have a stomach, not
full of superfluities, nor hot and sensible, they are quickly bitten with the
sharpnes of pepper: they do stir up the stomach to avoid and cast out that
which grieueth, and so do yexe. But such as have a cold stomach, and full of
fleume, and feel not so well, they do not yexe so soon. The like does happen
unto them which do swallow great store and gobbets of bread, the stomach is
oppressed with the abundance and greatness of bread: and nature does not suffer
her parts to be idle, when she feels any thing that does hurt her. And
therefore pepper, with his biting quality, which has a proportion with
yellowe choler, and bread with the weight of his quantity, and also abundance
of fleume, oppressing us within, do cause yexing.

XLV.
Why do such pains as are in the nails grievously torment us?

Because that the sinews which are in the fingers, with a peculiar kind of
superfluity do breed the nails, as the teeth are in the gummes. Therefore
when the sensible virtue of the sinews goes to the extreme parts, and is
there gathered together, like water flowing into a valley, without all doubt,
the greater the alteration is, the greater grief is felt.

XLVI.
Why does a great deal of bread devoured hastily, by staying from breathing,
drive away the yexe?

Because that pressing the stomach, and driving it into a narrow room, it
causes that the meat which is hardened in it, to be pressed out into the
belly, and so being discharged, does stay the yexe.

XLVII.
Why do such as yexe, give up yexing when they hear of any sorrowful matter?

Because they are intentive upon that which sorrowful news brought, and
therefore neglect to move their breast. And again, seeing we do then hold
our breath, and so cause it to grow great in us, it does stay the yexe.

XLVIII.
Why do pictures to those which are near them, show their colors plain, and
unto those which stand a far off, show some hollow, and some bending and
hanging?

Because the force of seeing is dissolved and stretched in a long distance, and
therefore cannot see exactly the skill of colors, but does see the white
colors bending, and the black hollow. For the white does shine outwardly,
and moves it self unto that which is bright, but black as being dark,
inwardly.

XLIX.
Why if cold water be an enemy unto the sinews, is not hot water a friend and
good, but yet that is also hurtful?

For if such a thing be hurtful, the contrary is profitable: for contraries
cannnot work the same way, upon the same thing. But in truth hot as hot in
his own nature is not hurtful unto the sinews, but in that that it is hot and
moist. Such as have their sinews hurt, their sinews because they are of
quick feeling, want much fastening, and bending, for they are dry of their
own nature: but the moystnes which is contrary, does mollify them, and
slaken them, and putrify them. And so it is plain that heat of it self is
not hurtful by nature. A draught of hot oil is good, because it has a
binding nature.

L.
Why if apples be naught, because they be cold and moist, is not water so to
being of the (...) qualitse?

Because water is more subtle then apples, and sooner purged, and therefore it
does not hurt so much: yea, it does somewhat strengthen the body.

LI.
What is the reason that those things which have a hard concuction, and are of
a gross humor, are more easlier digested, as beef, then those which are of
an easier digestion, and not of so gross a humor, as fish?

Some attribute this unto custom: some think the cause to be in some secret
hidden quality of nature. Some say that by reason of exceeding heat, those
meats which are more digestive then is requisite, as being more mutable, are
burnt, and consumed through the great force of heat. And those meats which
are not apt to digest, as being hard to be changed, seeing they be not much
chaged, are only digested. So straw as being apt to be altered, with great
fine turns into ashes presently: but the like is not in oak which is orderly
burned.

LII.
Why are such as are sick and in pain, pale outwardly?

Because that nature, as we have said, does penetrate even unto the heart,
together with the blood. And it is the blood which does heat the superficial
parts, and make them thin and clear.

LIII.
Why does cold wine grow in Egypt, which is a hot country?

For the same reason. Again, the cold does flee to the roots of the vines,
and does make them cold: for the vines are more apt then other trees to
receive alteration.

LIIII.
Why does hot water cast into a well, cause the water to be very cold?

Because the cold which is in the well, does resist the heat: and because it
is greater then the heat, it does prosecute the heat by all means, and does
flow into the hot water very much, and so make it cold.

LV.
Why, when a small beast does flee into our eyes, do we shut the other eye
when we put him out?

Because that the spirit of seeing cannot go out by the eye which is shut: but
gathering it self together, goes with all abundance to the eye which is open,
and does fill it, and make it swell outward, and so that is driven out and
expelled that is in him.

LVI.
Why do such as are buffeted see fire?

Because that the spirit of seeing, being made thin and slender with the
blow, does wax fitie, and so going into the air, is seen as he is. The like
does happen when two stones, or two pieces of iron are stricken together: for
the air between both is greatly rarefied and made thin, and becomes fire.
The like also does happen in the clouds.

LVII.
Why is not fire made by the striking of all stones?

Because force of them do yield too much, and are too light, and as it were
full of holes. For all striking of the air does not make it thin alike, and
by reason of his lightness it does flee, and enter into every passage. And
therefore it is not all stricken at once, nor all wax fire. The like does
happen by striking of wood. And fire is made of the sun and water: for the
broken beams of the sun against a glass, do wax more and more fiery, and
do rebound upward again.

LVIII.
Why do such as itch, desire hot fervent things?

Because that fleume, through whose grosnes and cold itching does rise, does
dull the feeling of the skin.

LIX.
Why are they also glass of bath?

Because heat does disperse the fleume, and the nails also do dissolve it.

LX.
Why do the shoulders itck most?

Because they are colder then the soreparts, and therefore have more fleume in
them. And that is the reason, that old men which are cold, are much troubled
with the itch.

LXI.
Why is the coming down a ladder more easy, then the going up?

Because that in descending, the weight of the body does of his own nature
move downward: in ascending, the strength does labor in lifting upward the
weight of the body. So a stone is easier cast downwarde then upward: for that
which is heavy tends downward.

LXII.
Why do children cry when they are first borne?

Because their nature and senses, do as it were wander in a strange country:
for they come out of a warm soft body of the womb into the cold air. And
peradventure also they are afraid of the light.

LXIII.
Why do Bees, Emmots, and Flies, and such beasts as are called Insect a, dye
in oil?

Because their breathing hole is very narrow, which oil does stop, and
therefore they petish.

LXIIII.
Why do we cool hot things by blowing, and heat cold things?

Because that breathing being hot, going out does dissolve their quality. We
cool hot things, because we do move and resolve their hot quality.

LXV.
Why does flesh putrify in the night under the full Moon?

Because then the air is hot and moist, which disposition does especially
further putrefaction: whereof it rises that if the heat and moystnes be
small, co^coction is wrought: if great, consuming: if heat prevail, burning.
The Moon also has four dispositions: the middle does seem to be moist, and
after a sort hot: the full, hot after a manner and dry: in the wane, dry and
cold: when she is without light, cold and dry: for then she wants the sun
beams.

LXVI.
Why are such pale as are in pain and grief?

Because that nature remembering that which does vex her, flees with the blood
to the inward parts, which does paint the skin: and it happens less unto
those, then to such as fear.

LXVII.
Why are such red as are glad?

Because that nature does meet that which delights of her own accord, if it
be without, as we do our friends and children. The blood does follow nature,
which dies the flesh with a red color. Palenes comes by the contrary unto
this.

LXVIII.
What is the reason, that in a dead sleep in the night, when we open our eyes
suddenly, we see light?

Because that the force and spirit of seeing being gathered together in
sleeping, and increased, does rush our through the dark in great abundance,
and being bright himself, does see like unto the light.

LXIX.
Why do such as are ashamed, cast down their eyes?

Because the eyes are the glass of the mind: for we see the affections of the
mind by the eyes, as grief, anger, shame: because the mind cannot bear that
which is not worthy of honor, for conscience sake, it causes the muscules of
the eyes to be cast down, as it were hiding himself.

LXX.
Why can the care endure all moystnes, the water excepted?

Because that the water being cold, is presently carried unto the sinewe of
hearing: and all cold is hurtful unto the sinews. Again: Why before a great
wind, are there as it were some running stairs or lightnings going before to
foretell it, and especially in a dry clear element? Because that it began to
blow before, and yet it appeared not unto us, because we have gross thick
bodies of hard senses. And therefore blowing the upper air, which is more
thin and pure and heavenly, it does convert into fire, and therefore we see
some of his sparkles. When it has gotten a greater force, it moves this
grosser air which is about the earth, and so is hard and felt, and percciued.

LXXI.
Why cannot some see very great things a far off, yet see things which are
near unto them, although they be very small?

As such as we call purblinde, because they see best winking: truly I think
that the force and spirit of seeing is very thin and pure, and therefore when
it goes far is dissolved, and cannot reach unto the object which is seen.
It does skarse see things near by reason of his thinnes and pureness. There are
some which see very small things a far off, as certain old men. These
contrariwise, because they have a thick spirit of seeing and much, it does move
and reach a great distance off, and by that means is attenuated and made
thin, and apt and fit, to receive things visible. And so two contraries are
dissolved.

LXXII.
Why are dogs only above all other beasts, lined so together after they
couple?

Because the neck of the matrix has a narrow passage, and the dogs yard
does swell in coupling, and the seed is cleaving in them, which happens unto
them by reason of their drines. The drines does (...) the parts, and moisture
does make them thick.

LXXIII.
Why are dogs only mad in summer?

By reason of their dry disposition: they are very dry by nature, and most of
al in summer. And therefore when their humiditie is heated and dried, they are
set on fire, and so they are mad like unto frantic men. And therefore their
some at the mouth is most dry and venomous: for it is manifest that it is
inflamed either by often breathing, or by fiery eyes, or by gaping of their
mouth, which they have always open to take air, or else because their tail
grows crooked with drines, and falls away. They are most raging which are
most dry. Some say that the canicular star, through his influence, does cause
them to go mad.

LXXIIII.
Why are they less grieved which become blind on a sudden and against their
will, then they which by election?

Because that such as on the sudden suffer it, have their mind turned another
way. But those which by choice and election have their mind wholly upon the
thing which is cut, and know what they shall suffer, and therefore suffer
greater torment.

LXXV.
Why do such as carry burdens go singing?

Because the reasonable soul is delighted with music, and therefore turned
unto it, does feel the less weight. And in like manner answer, when the
question is asked, why in funerals, bells, drums and flutes are used: and why
multitudes of men resort unto such as mourn, or be sick, and use diverse
speeches unto them: for the mind being occupied and intentive to the words,
does seele the grief less. And therefore Comedies and stage plays were
invented in times past, to withdraw the mind.

LXXVI.
Why do the AEthtoptans for the most part die of anague, and why are those
which are bleere eyed vlcerated?

They are most hot and dry, and there is a kind of resolution of elements in
them, and that little moisture which is in them being consumed, it happens
that the other elements are dissolved. The heat goes away for want of meat,
the cold rises up through the absence of heat. Drines does reign through
the consumption of moistnes. And for that cause dead carcasses are cold and
dry. And therefore Honter did know, that in dead bodies two elements did see
away, that is the lightest, and thinnest, and two remained: there went away
fire and air, and there remained water and earth, that is, drines and coldness.
They are exulcerated and blistered in the bleerenes of their eyes, because that
the blood is made full of choler, by reason of inflammation, which does ear
the eyes (...) his sharpnes.

LXXVII.
Why are such always a thirst which have the dropsy?

Because that that moisture is salt, and passes not away, but does putrify,
and dry the mouth of the stomach, and they have small seuers withal. Further
look how much more the belly is puffed up, so much the more the rest of the
body is drier, seeing it is (...) nourished, and does wax feebler and
feebler. For much of the food turns into water and increases the disease.

LXXVIII.
Why do we in the beginning of a banks and before we be full sit close, and
before the end of the (...) we take more room, ^?

Because that in the beginning, ^ and have an appetite unto the ^ have an eye
unto that which is ^ and all do fall to it. But after they are ^ one boweth
one way, and another another, and (...) no care at all to that which is before
them: and by this means after meat we take more room.

LXXIX.
Why in whatsoever place we have hair, they wax gray, (...) under the
armepits?

Because that place is hot, because it is thick of arteries sinews and
veins, and is also thin, and therefore does always void the excrements of
fleume, and therefore do sweat always.

LXXX.
Wherefore if fleume be cold, and thick, and clammie, and likewise black
choler cold and thick, but much less then fleume, yet a quartaine ague is
longer then a quotidian?

Because that fleume, although it be cold, and much of it, yet it is moist,
and moystnes is easily altered and changed. Black choler or melancholy is cold
and dry, and therefore is hardly altered and changed. They deceive therefore
with the likeness of cold, and abundance of choler, and do hide some contrary
quality. Furthermore, fleume is more agreeable unto nature then melancholy:
and therefore when a man's health does perish with hunger, nature does turn
fleume into nouriture. And therefore in a quotidian ague, she turns all the
profitable fleume into nourishment, and that which is unprofitable putrifieth,
and kindles an ague.

LXXXI.
Seeing that there are four humors which do sometimes putrify, wherefore
are there only but three agues, and not four?

Because that blood naturally is a nutriment of the body. And when it does
abound, it causes a repletion only. If it be corrupted, it remains blood
no longer: for being heated, it is changed into yellow fleume. Therefore the
other humors abounding, breed diseases, and especially about the skin, as
serpentine ulcers, and cankers, two kinds of leprosy: and when they be
corrupted they breed agues.

LXXXII.
What is the reason that the external parts of the body of lovers are
sometimes cold, sometimes hot?

Because that when they conceive any grief or dolor against their well-beloved,
the natural hear posteth away with the blood into the internal parts of the
body: whereof it comes that the outward parts are cold, and for the same
cause they become pale and sad. But when they receive any good hope of their
lover, or be greatly angry, then the heat with the blood goes to the skin,
and becomes hot and ruddie. And for the self same cause painters do paint
love to be sometime sad and quiet, sometime fleeing and laughing, a very boy
and child, because that lust is vehement, but dureth not long. The affection in
lawful friends is durable, as in fathers toward their children, and wives
toward their husbands, but love does not last. And it happens often among such
as are unknown the one to the other. The other disposition and affection is
firm and stable: and immoderate love is vehement, and like unto a mad man.
They feign Love to have a firebrand, and wings, because that the minds of
lovers are in suspense, and hang doubtfully and are unconstant like birds: and
then their heat burns their heart with an incessant, and vehement care of
that which they love. He holds a sword in his right hand, and in his left a
quiver with many arrows, because that in the beginning love does rise from one
beam and glance of the eye: for he does see and desire at the self same time.
And as soon as he does desire, the lover sends continual beams of the eye
toward that which he loves. And those beams are like unto arrows, because
the lover does dart them into the body. There are arrows in the quiver,
because that those which love, send forth secret beams and glances of the
eyes. As the wind does kindle the fire, so custom does kindle love: for
properly love does not rise of custom. For if it were so, then of necessity
custom should always breed love: but the beginning of love is sudden. He is
naked, because that that desire happens without any mean. For no man loves
by by another, nor privily, nor whom he knows not. And therefore caruers do
sometime carue kings and gods naked for honors sake, thereby to show that
they have no hidden vice lurking in their breasts, but that their thoughts are
open and sincere. Love is not one but many, either because there are diverse
lovers of things, (for they love not alike: and Plato says, that love is a
beast with many heads) or else, because as the same Plato says, the same love
falls under many loves. Love has Venus for his mother, that is, sensuality
and lust: and by the image of Venus they feign unlawful desire. Love is said
to have been in love with Erinnys a fury of hell, because that many have loved
wickedly, and have been thrall to wicked affections: as I have declared in my
second book of Allegories, which I have made of those fained stories.

LXXXIII.
Why do some die in a plague and some not?

This proceeds of their disposition of (...). For if a man have a body full
of evil humors, him the air which is corrupted does enter into, and
corrupts that little good humor which is left in him: and so all their
humors being corrupted, they must needs perish. But if a man have not many
superstuities, and does abou^d with good humors, he is either not at all, or
not much offended with the plague. That the disposition of the body is the
cause of this effect, it does appear by the example of external things. The
oak is not easily subject unto alteration, not does not easily set on fire.
Reeds and rushes are much more apt to receive fire: and straw more then they.
But if you take wet straw, and green reeds, and very dry oak powdered over
with brimstone, you make that fit to burn which was not fit. By this example
you may dissolve another question, how it comes to pass, that (...) does
rather breed a cotidian ague, then that which breeds of purrefaction, or that
which is called Habitual: for we say that this does proceed from the
disposition of the body: for he had not any superstuous natural spirits, or
humors. All things which are sound and solid are dry. And the cause is in the
same, why the heat of the sun does procure sleep in some, and in othersome
not. For he in whom there was much fleume, that being dispersed, does moysten
the head, and then he is in a sleep: but such as have a dry head are kept
more awake, because they are made more dry.

LXXXIII.
Why does the sun make a man black, and make dirt white, and make wax soft,
and the dirt hard?

By reason of the disposition of the substances which do luffer. All humors,
fleume excepted, when they are heated above measure, do seem black about the
skin: but dirt being full either of saltpeter, or other salt liquour, when
the sun has consumed his dregs and filth, does become white. Again, when
the sun has drawn and stirred up the humiditie of the wax, it is softened:
but in dirt the sun does consume the humiditie, which is very much, and so
does dry it and make it hard.

LXXXIIII.
Why do not such as are sick of the idundise go to siege, and why is their
excrement white?

Because that yellowe choler is spread over all their body, as their eyes do
show, and their skin: for it does not flow into the inward parts, as by nature
it should, and by that reason their excrements is not colored, nor does not
provoke the^ to the stool with his sharpnes, which in the guts it should do.
And therefore Physic imitating nature, as all other arts do, when the
patient is in danger, does help the part affected.

LXXXV.
Why have such a very black skin for a time, which have a continual ague,
after the time of judgment, which the Physicians do call Crisis?

That does happen through continual yellowe choler, the which being burnt and
adust by the rigor of the disease, is turned into black choler. And so in
that time of judgment, being driven and repulsed by nature to the skin it
does dye it. As also the skin is white in leprosies: that color is hardly
dissolved, by reason of the thicknes of that humor.

LXXXVI.
Why does black choler coming unto the paps, or to the shanke, work a
cerrosion, or gnawing or wasting, and in those which are called melancholy, it
does not work she like, although it stow into their brain?

Because there are many great veins in the paps, by reason of ingendring of
milk, and therefore store of that humor does run thither. And likewise unto
the shanke, because it goes downward: but into the brain, because it is
above, and also because it has very small veins, small store of choler does
ascend, and which has only power and force to prick, and not to gnaw and
eat. Moreover, the brain is cold and moist, whereby it is after a sort
contrary unto the disposition of black choler, and does mollify it. That
therefore which is property called black choler, does breed an eating and
gnawing canker in the pappes: in the shanke, a byle or sore hard to be cured,
which of eating is called Nomades. In the brain it does breed a mad fierce
melancholy: but that which is not properly black choler, but a melancholy
humor, causes a swelling only which is like a canker, but does not gnawe
and eat, and does also breed a quiet and peaceable melancholy.

LXXXVII.
Why do those vessels which of the Greckes are called Baucalia, (a kind of
vessel or drinking glass with a narrow streit mouth) when they are filled
with water, make a certain noise proper unto themselves, and thereupon have
their name given them, as other fained names of sounds, as in the water,
Phloesbos, and such like?

Because that when such a vessel is without water, it is filled with air,
which is a most thin body. And therefore when water is on a sudden powered
into it, with his heaft it does follow and beat out the air which is thin,
and exclude it utterly. For they cannot both stay in the glass or vessel,
until it be full. For the Philosophers do show that two bodies cannot at one
time possess and occupy the same place. And therefore when the air is on a
sudden thrust upward through straites, a sound or noise is made of necessity,
and that not one but many, for then is as it were a fight betwixt both: for the
water does press down the air, and the air lifts up the water: and
although this be done successively, yet there is often times a noise.

LXXXVIII.
What is the reason that when we put our finger on the mouth of a watring
garden pot, the water will not run out at the bottom, and our finger being
taken away, it runs presently?

Because that when our finger is taken away from the mouth of the pot, the air
entering in does thrust down the water, which of his own nature does go
downward, and so it goes out at the bottom. And this is the reason of all
mechanical engines and instruments made by air and water, as clocks and hour
glasses made by water.

LXXXIX.
Why does both wine and water given out of season unto the siche of an ague
cause a great distemperature of the brain: for these two are contrary, for the
water is cold, and the wine hot?

I say then that the wine being apt to ascend, does burn the brain, at the
time that it is disturbed and distempered with the ague. And we see also many
which are in health, if they use much wine, to be skarse well in their wits.
But water does stop the passages of the body, by which the spirits (which are
the instruments of the soul) are dissolved, and so cause them to become more
thick and gross, and more corrupt and putrified, which breeds the ague. And
oftentimes water being overcome by the ague, becomes his nourishment. As we
see in a (...) forge, where a little water does kindle the fire, (...) make it
flame more.

XC.
Why have women and children and gelded men shrill and loud voices?

Because through abundance of humiditie, their artery is not stretched wide.
And therefore as a small flute or (...) a small slender sound, so the artery
in them which is (...) and narrow for it is the property of heat to make wide
and loose, and women and (...) be cold.

XCI.
Why are children strocken with a planet in the summer?

They are sick of a weak and lingering ague, and their eyes sink hollow in
their head, and they become weak and feeble, and sleep very little. And some
of them have a flixe, because children are tender and easily suffer, and have
great store of fleume in the head, as we have said. And therefore the fleume
being over much heated with great heates, and also putrified, does inflame an
ague. Whereupon the gristles of the brain are set on fire, and therefore they
sleep little: and that fire descending by the arteries to the heart, and
setting on fire the lively spirits, does kindle an ague without putrefaction.
And seeing that much choler rises of an ague, thereby it falls out, that
that choler gnawing and eating the belly and guts, the flixe, or running of the
belly arises. It is most plain, that the cause of that alteration is in the
brain, because that cooling medicines are applied unto the head, and such as
are good to quench that fire. And some of ripe years are sick of the same
disease, that is, such as have fleume or some choler heaped in the head, which
does putrify. By the very breathing therefore, and after a manner by the
fiery air, the spirits are set on fire.

XC II.
Why are round ulcers or byles hard to be cured?

Because they breed of sharp choler, and which has a force of eating and
gnawing. And because it does run dropping and gnawing, it does make a round
ulcer: and for that cause it requires medicaments which dry and burn. And
this the Physicians do speak. The natural Philosophers do say, it comes to
pass, because there is no beginning where that mischievous impostume does
begin. For in a circle there is neither beginning nor end, and when they are
burned by the Physician, then they take another shape.

XC III.
Why is honey sweet unto all men, and yet seems bitter unto such as have the
Eunuchs be cold.

Because they have much bitter choler over all the body, and which abounds
in the tongue. And therefore it happens when they do eat honey, that the
humor is (...): and the taste it self when it has felt the bitterness of
choler, breeds an imagination that the honey is bitter.

XC III I.
Why have very angry men fiery eyes?

Because the blood about his heart is feruens, and his spirits hot. And
therefore these spirits being very subtle and pure, are carried up ward, and
by the eyes which are clear, they shine and have bloody vapors ascending with
them. And thereupon their face appears red which Homer not being ignorant of
says: And his eyes were like a burning flame.

XC V.
Why does water cast upon Serpents cause them to flee?

Because they are cold by nature, and dry, and have but little blood, and
therefore they do flee from excessive coldness. And that they be of this
quality it appears, because they seek for dens and secret places of the
earth in winter, as being warm places. And at sun set, they flee the air
for the most part as cold: and again in summer, because the bowels of the
earth are cold, they flee from them, and go unto hot places.

XCVI.
Why does a negge break if he be roasted, and never break if he be sod in
water?

Because that when his moystnes comes near unto the fire, he does heat over
much, and is burned, and thereby does breed much wind, the which through the
straitnes of the place, does seek a way our, and so breaking the shell does
flee out. The like is in tubbes and earthen vessels when new wine does boil
in them. Also too much flame does break the shell of an egg in rosting:
which does also happen unto earthen pottes over much heated and burnt. And
therefore the common people do wet a negge which they purpose to roste. Hot
water through his softnes does separate the humiditie little and little, and
does dissolve it through the thinnes and passages which are in the shell.

XCVII.
Why do men in the act of carnal copulation after a sort wink, and suffer
such like alteration in the other senses?

Because they being overcome with the affect of that pleasure, they do
comprehend it the better, as it were winking with their eyes. They are not
lifted up, nor do not carry the mind abroad into the air with the senses,
whereby they should less feel those corporal affections.

XCVIII.
Why have some medicines of one kind contrary force, as experience does teach:
Mastick does expel, dissolve, and knit; Vinegar does both cool and heat?

Because there are some small indivisible bodies in the^, not by confusion, but
by interposition. As sand moystened does clod together, and seems to be but
one substance or body, but in truth there are many small bodies in the sand
if this be so it is not absurd, that contrary qualities and virtues should be
hidden in (...) in diverse parts of it, and not confounded with it, because that
nature has given that law unto those bodies.

XCIX.
Why does our (...) member sivell, when we hurt one of our toes?

Because that nature providing for those things which belong unto those die,
does speed to help those parts which are grieved. And because she has the
most profitable, and nourishing of all the humors for her wagon, it is requisite
when she does descend unto the toe, together with the blood, that those veins
be filled which are about the privy member, and those parts which are about
those vessels which are called Adenes of the Greeks, which are little round
kernels. Therefore an immoderate constipation does cause inflammation and
standing up: and that privy member is called Inguen, borrowing his
denomination of the place itself.

C.
Why has not nature given birds a bladder for a receptacle of urine and
kidneis?

Because they did want much moisture to give matter for feathers to grow, and
that also they do consume with the exercise of fleeing. Neither do they piss
at all: and when they drink, they void very moist dung.

CI.
Why have children grauel breeding in their bladder, and old men in the
kidneis and raines of the back?

Because children have strait passages in the kidneis: and an earthly and
thick humor is thrust with violence by the urine from the kidneis, and from
those receptacles which are made of the fashion of the Moon, even into the
bladder of the urine. The bladder having wide conduites and passages, gives
room to the urine to go out, and also place to the humor, whereof the
gravel is engendered, to wax thick and seat it self, as the custom of it
is. But in old men it is contrary: for they have large and wide passages of
the raines of the back and kidneis, whereof it comes pass, that the urine
may pass away, and the earthly humor congeale and sink down. The color of
the stone does show the humor whereof the stone does rise.

CII.
Why if the stone do congeale and wax hard through heat (children are hot)
and by the same reason it is done in old men: for there is not so much cold to
be granted as there is in ice or snow: for with extreme cold the kidneis
would perish, yet we do not use contrary things to dissolve the coldness, but
like things, that is, hot things, as persley, fennel, and such like?

They say then that it salleth out, that by exustion, parching and scorching,
the stone does crumble into small sand: As it is in earthen vessels, which
when they are over heated and tosted, they become sand. And by this means it
falls out, that small stones are voyded together with small sand in making of
water. And sometime it falls out that cold drinks do thrust out the stone,
the kidneis being stretched and casting it out, by a great lask, by virtue of
easing the belly of his burden. And besides this it falls out, that an
immoderate heat of the kidneis or raines of the back, by reason whereof the
stone does grow, is quenched with coldness.

CIII.
Why is the curing of an ulcer or byle very hardin the kidneis or bladder?

Because that the urine being sharp, does exulcerate the wound, which good and
fit (...) do cover and skin. Ulcers are harder to be cured in the bladder,
then in the kidneis, because the urine does stay in the bladder, and does
run away from the kidneis.

CIIII.
What is the reason that in bathing vessels the hot water when it is stirred,
does seem more hot unto us, and almost burn our bodies?

Because that when we go down into those baths, the water it self does
suffer, that is, when the water does heat our bodies, the water after a sort
is made cold by us. We have learned, that whatsoever does work in generation
and corruption, the self same without all doubt does (...). The water then
being in some sort cooled, does not heat a like, and we being accustomed unto
it, do not feel the heat as we did in the beginning, because that the
immoderate heat of it is diminished. If then stirring the hot water, more
fair hot water be added unto it, which neither has yet wrought, nor suffered
any thing of the body which is in the water, that will seem very hot and
skalding, in respect that working it does also suffer, and by little and
little lose his heat, as the first did.

CV.
How is it, if whatsoever be moved, is the hotter for it, and especial) in a
hot air and place, yet when the air is beaten and stirred, it does seem the
colder unto us, and especially in summer, when the heat of the sun is most
hot?

For this does seem contrary unto the other: for hot water did seem hotter
unto us by moving it, and here the hot air does seem colder when it is
stirred and moved. I say therefore that it is a common thing, that that which
is most and principallest in any thing, either in quality or virtue, does
overcome and change that which is lesser and weaker, and that which is the
stronger does somewhat suffer again in doing. Therefore the hot water when it
is very hot, sticking unto the hot body, is somewhat cooled, and does not keep
the same quality. The air then which does compass us about, being hot in
summer, like unto the water, compassing our bodies, is heated somewhat by us,
which are hot through the heat of the time of the year, and does likewise
again heat us: As linen garments do, the which being first cold then being
made hot by us, do then heat us again. When we do then stir the air,
that air which was before heated by us is driven away, and another which is
not as yet heated does succeed, which seems cold unto us.

CVI.
Why do those (...) which breed in the ball of the eye seem white, when they
have left growing and are old, and others ^ which grow out of the (...)

Because that through the ball of the eye only the spirit of seeing does go
out the which is bright and clear. Therefore in the white of the eye, when the
wound does make thick the passage of the covering of the eyes which is like a
horn, the spirit of sight cannot (...) out: whereof it comes to pasle, that
much of it being there gathered together, it does make the wound light and
clear, and show the wound white. And because that by reason of the thickening
of the sight the spirit cannot go out, it falls out that they cannot see.

CVII.
Why do chafe and straw keep hot water and cold snow, which are contraries
in quality?

Because the nature of chafe does want a manifest quality, and are said of
some to be without quality. Seeing therefore that of their own nature, they
can easily be mingled and confused with that which they are next unto, they
easily also take the same nature unto the^. And therefore being put unto hot
things, they are easily hot, and do heat again, and keep hot: and contrary
being made cold of the snow, and making the snow cold, do keep his
coldness. So Wax and Oil will easily be confused, and made one with another
thing, and are also without quality, and do help the quality of that which
is mingled with them, as being made one with them.

CVIII.
Why do the stars and heavens seem cleerest in the bright winter time?

Because the air, either which does compass us, or that which is higher, is
made thin and purged with winds and showers of rain, and by that means our
sight does see both further and cleerer. The like is manifestly seen in
running rivers: for such things as are in the^ are far better seen, then in
thick puddle standing water, where either nothing is seen, or confusedly.

CIX.
Why have we oftentimes a pain, and do quake in making of water?

Because that sharp choler issuing out, and pricking the bladder of urine,
does provoke and stir up the whole body to ease the part offended, and to
expel the humor moderatly. This does happen most of all unto children,
because they have most excrements, by reason of their often filling.

CX.
Wherefore are griefs greater in the night, then in the day?

Because the mind being then idle and at rest with himself, is neither busied
with the sight nor hearing, nor occupied with any other sense, and does nothing
at all, nor is not urged to any external action, and thereupon is much more
touched with the feeling of any trouble or grief. It is very plain that the
mind does less feel griefs of the body, when he is drawn abroad to
external works, seeing that in sickness and other such accidents, the company
and familiarity of friends, and communication and tales telling, do make
their troubles and griefs more light and tolerable. Men have marked that
nature does least work by day, in digestion of meats, in altring of humors,
in making of blood, in growing, and such like operations. But the mind is then
most occupied in his actions, as in the five senses, in motions of the parts of
the body, in imagination, in thought, in memory: and contrary in the night,
then nature works most, and the mind least.

CXI.
Why does a glass break in the winter, if you power any very hot liquour into
him?

Because that it is thoroughly affected and altered, by reason of the coldness of
the air which does compass it. And therefore when we power in very hot water
on a sudden, and not heat the glass before, the heat does fight and strive
with the cold which was in it: the cold with the air presently fleeing,
causes the breaking of the glass. It must be granted, that there be certain
small holes and passages in the glass, which do hold and receive the purest
and thinnest parts of the air, the which although we do not see with our
eyes, and with sense, yet we cannot deny but by nature there they be. Others
do say, that because the glass is very cold, then it is very dry also, and
therefore that which is the subtilest part in it, whether it be a humor or the
air, is thrust out, and does as it were vanish away, and so is made apt to
break. And so it is in very dry wood. And so Hippocrates did say, that the
veins were broken with cold. That therefore which is very hot, finding the
glass to be such, drying it more and more, does cause him to break. If it
had been before wet over, and heated a little, it would not have been hurt: as
we see wrastlers anointed before they go to wrestle. For when drines falls
into those passages and invisible holes, it flees quickly with the air, and
the softnes of the glass giving place unto the heat, does not easily break.
It is easily seen that grass has those passages, by earthen pottes, into
which if you power water, and dawbe them with pitch, yet the humor will woose
out. You may also see in winter time a smoke or fume break out of a glass,
when you cast water into him.

CXII.
Why are not children and especially infants, so easily shaken and put out of
joint, as men?

By reason of their softnes, yielding unto the earth, they do dissolve his
hardness, that it can work no further. Men therefore, having a hard body,
because they do resist the hardness of the earth or stone, they do increase
the vehemency of the blow, and do force the stone to work against
themselves, as being hard themselves. And for the same reason a sponge yielding
is not broken: but a glass, an earthen pot, or any such other hard body is
broken with a fall. And by this also we learn why a vehement blast of wind
does overthrow an oak, and not a reed, because that an oak being hard and
strong and great, does resist the wind, and so make his force more strong: but
the reed being light and soft and small, yielding hither and thither to the
wind, does break his force. So a wrastler striving against his companion
does increase his force, and yielding sometimes, and bowing with him, does
sooner break his vehemency.

CXIII.
Why do infants (...) the nurses singing, cease their crying, and sleep (...)
after?

Because that the (...) of music, as of science, and all other arts, is on
grassed naturally in the mind, as heat is in fire. As Plato does say, our
minds do remember (...) and not learn them. And therefore the mind hearing
such a song, in that that he does remember, causes the infant to be quiet,
and in that that he takes pleasure it does draw on sleep. For not being
infected with the company of the body, he perceives those sciences very
plainly, and being somewhat defiled in the body, falls into some oblivion of
of them.

CXIIII.
Why do nurses rock and move children when they would draw them to sleep?

To the end that the humors being skattered by moving, may move the brain: but
those of more years cannot endure this.

CXV.
Why do some (...) see double?

Because that the muscules of the eyes being more or less filled, and by the
self same means weak and seeble, do draw and wrest one eye upward, and the
other downward: So by that means the eye beams do not look one way at once,
but toward (...) places and bodies: and therefore each of the eyes using a
private office and duty of seeing, does cause a double sight.

CXVI.
Why are boys apt to change their voice about 14. years of age?

Because that then nature does cause a great and sudden change of age.
Experience proves this to be true: for at that time we may see that women's
pappes do grow great, to hold and gather milk, and also those places which are
about the hippes, in which the young fruits should remain. Likewise men's
breasts and shoulders which then bear great and heavy burdens. Also their
stones in which the seed may increase and abide: and his privy member, to let
out the seed with ease. Further, all the whole body is made bigger and
dilated, as the alteration and change of every part does testify. And the
harshnes of the voice and hoarsnes: for the rough artery or windpipe being
made wide in the beginning, and the exterior or outward part within, unequal
even to the throat, the air going out at that rough unequal and uneven pipe,
does become unequal and sharp, and after a sort hoarse. Like unto the voice
of a goat, whereof it has his name Branchus. The same does happen unto them
into whose rough artery any distillation does flow. It happens by reason of
the dropping humiditie, that a light small skin filled unequally, causes an
uneven going forth of the spirit and air. Understand that the windpipe of
goats is such, by reason of the abundance of humiditie. The like does happen
unto all such, as nature has given a rough artery, as unto Cranes. After the
years of fourteen they leave off that voice, because the artery is made
wider, and receives his natural euenes and equality.

CXVII.
Why does oil being drunk, cause us to vomit, and especially yellow choler?

Because that seeing it is light, and ascends upward, it provoke the
nurriment in the stomach, and lifts it up. And so the stomach being
grieved, summoneth the eiectiue virtue to vomire, and especially choler,
because that it is light, and consists of subtle parts, and therefore is the
sooner conveyed upward. And it is most plain that oil is light and carried
upward: for when it is mingled with any moist thing, it runs unto the
highest room.

CXVIII.
Why does not oil mingle with moist things?

Because that being pliant, soft, and constipat in it self, it cannot be
divided into parts, and so it can not be mingled. Neither if it be cast upon
the earth, can it quickly enter into it.

CXIX.
Why is water and oil frozen in cold; wine and vinegar not?

Because that oil being without al quality, and fit to be confounded with any
thing, is cold quickly, and so extremely, that it is most cold. Water being
cold of nature, does easily freeze, when it is made colder then his own
nature. Wine being hot and of subtle parts, is not so soon cold. But vinegar
being of most subtle parts, suffers no freezing.

CXX.
Why do contrary things in quality, bring forth the same effects?

That which is moist, is hardened and bound a like of heat and of cold: snow
and liquour do freeze with cold: a plaster and the gravel in the bladder,
are made hard with heat. That is so in deed, but by a diverse action. The
heat does consume and cate the abundance of moisture: but the cold stopping
and shutting, with his over much thicknes, does wring out the filthy
humiditie: like as a sponge, wrung with the hand, does cast out the water which
it has in his pores and small passages.

CXXI.
Why does a shaking or quiuering cease of tentimes, when any fearful matter
does chance, as a great noise or crack made, with a sudden downfall of water,
or great tree?

Because that oftentimes the humors being digested and consumed with time, and
made thin and weak, all the heat, vehemently and suddenly, and sharply
fleeing into the inward parts of the body, consuming the humor which causes
the disease, does dissolve it. Treacle has this effect and many such like,
which are hot and dry, when they are taken after concoction.

CXXII.
Why do such fall which turn round, and be not used to do it?

Because they do disturb the animal spirits which are in the brain, and
toss them up and down together with humidities. They then be made less apt
and fit to receive the sensible and motive power, and do not suffer any action
to go into the muscles and sinews: whereby it falls out, that the weight of
the body, as not being borne up nor supported by the soul, is thrown to the
earth: and for the same cause they see darkness, because the spirit of seeing is
disturbed and troubled, and can not work like unto the other senses. But this
does not happen unto such as are accustomed to turn moderatly, and by little
and little. Custom does breed this: for the soul and nature are not strangers
the one to the other, but in time are as it were reconciled. For that which is
done by little and by little, and without intercession, is hidden from the
sense. And after that it has often escaped, falls not as a strange thing
unto nature, who was wont to receive it.

CXXIII.
Why do steel glasses shine so clearly?

Because they are lined on the inside with white lead, whose (...) is shining,
the which being put to the glass which is also shining, does shine much more,
and casting his beams through the passages of the glass, does double that
which is in the superficial part of the glass, and without the body of the
glass, and by that means the glass is very shining and clear.

CXXIIII.
Why do we see our selves in glasses and clear waters?

Because that the quality of the sight passing unto clear bright bodies, by a
reflection, does return again by the beams of the eyes, to the image of him
who looks on it. That qualities do go forth and pass from the face, and that
it is not absurd, they do show, which remain near unto trees, because they
are wont to look green. For the green quality of green leaves, passes to
the face it self: likewise going into the running water, does make it to show
green.

CXXV.
Why do hard dens, and hollow places, and high places, send back the image
and sound of the voice?

Because that such places also, by a reflection, do send back the image of a
sound. For the voice does beat the air, the air the place, the which the
more it is beaten, the more it does beat, and thereby does cause the more
vehement sound of the voice. Moist places, and as it were soft, yielding unto
the stroke, and dissoluing it, give no sound again. For according unto the
quality and quantity of the stroke, the quality and quantity of the voice
is given, which is called an Echo. Some do idly sable that she is a goddess:
some say that Pan was in love with her, which without doubt is false. He was
some wise man who did first desire and search out the cause of that voice: and
as they which love and cannot enjoy their love are grieved, so in like manner
was he very sorry until he found out the solution of that cause. As Endymion
also who first found out the course of the Moon, watching nights, and
observing her course, and searching her motion, did sleep in the day time. And
therefore they do fable that he was beloved of the Moon, and that she came to
him when he was asleep, because she did give unto the Philosopher, the solution
of the cause of her self. They say also that he was a shepherd, because that
in deserts and high places he did mark the course of the Moon. And they give
him also a pipe, because that high places are blown with wind: or else because
he sought out the consonancie of figures. Prometheus also being a wise man,
sought out the cause of the star which is called the AEgle in the firmament,
his nature and place, and when he was as it were wasted away with the desire of
learning, then at the last he rested, when Hercules did dissolve unto him all
doubts with his wisdom.

CXXVI.
What is the reason that if you cast a stone unto a standing water which is on
the over most part of the earth, it makes many circles, and not if the water
be deep in the earth?

Because that the stone with vehemency of the cast, does pursue and follow the
water (...) part of it, until the stone come to the bottom. But if there be
(...) great vehemency in the throw, the circle is the greater, the stone
going down unto the earth and drawing down the water with it, causes many
circles. For first of (...) does drive the ouermost and (...) part of the water
into many parts, and so going down always unto the bottom, again dividing
the water, it makes another circle. And this is done successively, until the
stone rests. And because the vehemency of the stone is slackened still as he
goes down, of necessity the last circle is lesser then the first, because
that with the stone and also with the blow, the water is divided.

CXXVII.
Why do some think that laughter proceeds from the spleen, affirming that
it is not like, that they laugh not much, whose spleen is corrupted, as they
do whose spleen is sound, but say that such are very sad?

Truly I think that the cause of laughter is accidentally, and not properly
in the spleen: for if it be sound and perfect, it does draw from the liver
all melancholy humor. Whereof it proceeds, that when the pure blood without
any dregs does go both throughout all the body, and also into the brain, it
does delight both nature and the mind, and does make men merry like unto wine,
and bring men to a quietness and tranquillity, and so of that laughter is moved.

CXXVIII.
Why do not Mules bring forth young ones?

Because they do consist of a diverse kind of beasts, and so then the mixtion of
seed differing in quality and quantity, begetting a certain other thing
besides that which is first, does mar and abolish the nature of those things
which first were. As the mingling of white and black, abolishing the color of
the extremes, breeds another color which is dark and dunne, which is none
at all of the extremes. Therefore the ingendring quality is abolished, and the
aptnes of receiving forms.

CXXIX.
Why are such as are deaffe by nature dumme also?

Because they cannot speak, and express that which they never heard. Some
Physicians do say, that there is one knitting and uniting of sinews belonging
unto the tongue and to the ears, and therefore they are of the like
disposition. But such as are dumme by an accident, are not deaffe at all, for
there then rises a local passion.

CXXX.
Why are some stiff after meat which were long fasting?

Because they abound with choler, and so do heap up a sour sharp humor.
Therefore the parts of the body being nourished after meat, drive away from
them the choler unto the skin, and so that stiffenes does rise, that is, the
choler gnawing and biting those parts, and stirring them up to pursue himself.

CXXXI.
Why do not swine cry when they be carried with their snowt upward?

Because that above all other beasts they bend more the other to the earth.
They delight in filth, and that they seek: and therefore in that sudden change
of their face they be as it were strangers, and being amazed with so much
light, keep that silence. Some say that their windpipe does close together,
by reason of the straitnes of it, when they lie with their face upward.

CXXXII.
Why are swine delighted with dirt?

As the Physicians do say, they are naturally delighted with it, because they
have a great liner, in which desire is. Aristotle says, that the widenes of
his snowt is the cause: for he has a smelling which does dissolve it self,
and as it were stnuing with stinch.

CXXXIII.
Why does itching rise, when an ulcer does wax whole, and flueme (...)?

Because the part which is healed and made sound, does pursue the relics of
the humor, which remains there against nature, and which was the cause of
the boil: and so going out through the skin, and dissoluing it self, does
cause the itch.

CXXXIIII.
Why are those diseases or accidents longest and most grievous, which do molest
one eye only, and not both?

For two causes: because the running or fluxion is heaped up at one eye only:
for whatsoever is divided into many, is weaker then it self, and of lesser
strength: or else because that when the whole eye does move himself in his
actions, so ofthe does force the sick eye to move also: and the medicaments of
every diseased part does consist in quietness.

CXXXV.
Why does man sneeze more oftener, and more vehemently then other beasts?

Because he does use more meats and drinks, and of more diverse sorts, and
that more then is requisite, the which when he cannot digest as he would, it
does gather together much air and spirits, by reason of much humiditie: that
spirit then being very subtle, ascending unto the head, it forces a man often
to avoid it, and so causes sneezing. And it makes anoise, because a vehement
spirit or breath passes through the conduites of the (...), as a belching by
the stomach, or a fart from the belly, the voice by the throat, and a sound by
the care.

CXXXVI.
Why do dead mes hair and nules grow for a time?

Because that the flesh rotting, withering, and pining away, that flesh which
was hidden about the roots of the hair, does now appear and deceive, and
cause an imagination that the hair did grow. And some say that it grows in
very deed, because that dead carcasses are resolved in the beginning into many
excrements and superfluities, by reason of the putrefaction which comes unto
them. These going out to the ouermost part of the body, by some passages and
pores, do increase the growing of the forelayd hair.

CXXXVII.
Why have children rather then men certain white spots in the (...) of their
fingers, rather then in their toes?

Because they do breed of fleume, and children do abound with fleume more
then men, because they are fauer and greater eaters. And the feet by reason of
walking and motion, do dissolve superfluities more then the hands: and
therefore those spots do not appear in the nails of the feet.

CXXXVIII.
Why does not the hair in the feet quickly grow gray?

For the same reason, because that through great moving and walking they do
disperse and dissolve the superfluities of fleume, which does breed (...). And
the hair of the secret parts does grow gray very late, because of the heat
of that place, and because that in carnal copulation it does dissolve fleume
allo.

CXXXIX.
Why do very many beasts (...) then (...) they see their friends, and a lion
and a bull beat their side, when they are angry?

Because they have the marrowe of the back reaching unto the tail, which has
the force of moving in it. The imagination acknowledging that which is known
unto him, as it were with a hand, as it does happen in men, does force them to
move the tail, which does manifestly show some secret force to be within
them, which does acknowledge that which they ought. In the anger of lions and
bulls, nature does consent unto the mind, and does enforce it to be greatly
moved, as men do sometimes when they be angry, beat their hands or other
part. When the mind cannot revenge upon that which does hurt, it does
presently seek out some other solace, and does cure his affection with some
stroke or blow.

CXL.
Why if you do put dry burnt barley upon a horses sore, the hair which grows
on the sore is not white, but like the other hair?

Because it has the force of expelling, and does wipe away and dissolve the
excrement of fleume, and all unprofitable operation which is gathered together,
through the weakness of the part, or cruditie of the sore.

CXLI.
Why does hair never grow in ma^s ulcers or biles?

Because a man has a thick skin, as it is seen by the softnes and thinnes of
his hairs. And seeing the skarre is thicker then the skin it self, it does
stop up the passages, by which the hair should grow. Horses have thinner skins,
as it is seen by their thick hair, and therefore all passages are not
stopped in their wounds and fores. And after that the excrements which were
gathered together, have broken a passage through those small pores, the hair
does grow.

CXLII.
What is the reason that such as are bitten with a snake, being most
exceedingly a thirst, do quench their thirst, and not increase it, by drinking
of treacle, which is dry and hot?

I say then that it does not quench the thirst, by reason of his quality, but
by some mutual simpathie and consent and natural reason. That is a kind of
counterpoyson and preservative which is made of diverse sorts of herbs, which
have some kind of consent and agreement with all the parts of the body. As
Dictamum, Dettander, or garden ginger, has a property co^seruatiue of the
heart, Agrimonie or Liuerwort, with the liver, Stonewort or finger fern with
the spleen, Parsley with the mouth of the belly, Hyssope with the lungs,
Elicampane with the raines of the back, Rue with the neck, Bitterwort with
the brain, and ^ with the bladder of urine. Every one of these drawn as it
were with the sweetness of honey, does draw that which is best for his safety.
(...) all which, the flesh of some vipers is mingled, which has a certain
mutual affection, which we call Antipathiam, a contrariety of natural
qualities, against every venomous beast and corruptible virtue. These being
distributed into every part, they suffer not to work that effect, which does
threaten corruption. For they do resist like unto lawful soldiers, who have
taken arms for the defense of their country.

FINIS.

