THE Lieutenant of the Tower his Speech and Repentance, at the time of his
Death, who, was executed upon Tower Hill, on the 20. day of November. 1615.

Together with a Meditation and Vow of his that he made not long before dyed.

Mors mihi Lucrum. Printed by G. Ela for Na: Butter, and are to be sold at his
shop near Saint Austines gate.

To the Reader.
TO satisfy the World, which in a cause of this Nature, is commonly distracted
into various opinions, adding or detracting from the truth, according to the
humorous disposition with which it meets; And to do Right to the dead
Gentleman, who (albeit his offense was foul to GOD and Man, and hateful to
himself) deserved both love and pity, for the Christian end he made) have I
(Reader for thy sake) collected the substance

(...) many others of several dispositions. All you being thus assembled to
see me finish my days, the number of which is sum'd up, for the very minutes
of my life may now be reckoned. Your expectation is to have me say something,
to give satisfaction to the World, and I will do it so far as I can, albeit
in that speech of mine, I shall (as it was spoken unto me the last night) but
chatter like a Crow. But whatsoever I deliver, I beseech you to take from a
wounded bosom, for my purpose is to rip up my very heart, and to leave nothing
there which may prove any clogge to my Conscience.

Hither am I come to perform a work which of all others is to Man the most
easy and yet to Flesh and Blood is the hardest, and that is, To die. To hide
therefore any thing, for any worldly respect, were to leave a blot upon my own
Soul, which I trust shall be presented (through the mercies of my Maker, and
merits of my Savior) acceptable before GODS high Tribunal.

And first I will labor to satisfy some, who before my apprehension were well
conceipted of me, but since my Arraignment, as I understand, carried of me but
hard opinions, for that at the Bar I stood stiffly upon the Justice of my
Innocence; and this they impute as a great fault, being afterward that I was
found guilty of the Crime. To which I answer, that I did it ignorantly: Nay I
was so far from thinking my self foul in the Fact, that until these two
Gentlemen, (Doctor Felton and Doctor Whiting, the Physicians for my Soul) told
me how deeply I had imbrewed my hands in the blood of that gentleman, making
me by GODS law as guilty in the Concealing, as if I had been a personal
Actor in it: till then I say, I held my self so ignorant of the deed, and my
Conscience so clear, that I did never ask GOD forgiveness, nor once repent
me of the Fact, such was my blindness. So that it was not only an error, or
rather a horrible sin, in me to consent, but a worse, to deny it, so Bloody,
so Treacherous, so Foul, so Filthy a Fact as that was; for which I must
confess the King, and the State have dealt honorably, roundly, and justly,
with me, in condemning me unto this death. And thus have I labored and done
my best to clear this point, being willing by all good means to reduce your
first opinions of me; that as formerly your conceipted well of me, so you
would now with a charitable affection perform the last duty of your Christian
loves toward me, praying to GOD, both with me, and for me; to the intent
that this Cup, whereof I am to drink, may not be greiuous unto me, but that
it may be a joyful conueiance to a better and more blessed comfort.

Some perhaps will think it to be a Rigor of the State, or aggrauation of my
judgment, that I should die in this place, but this do I take as an honor
unto me, and herein do I acknowledge my self to stand much bound to the
State, in that I have this favor vouchsafed me to suffer Death in sight of my
Charge, even where I had sinned, on the Tower Hill, rather than in the place of
common Execution, where every base Malefactor dies.

Many do I see here whom I know well, and of whom I am likewise known: and
now am I a Spectacle for them to be looked on, whom in former times (and in all
men's accounts) they held never likely to come to such an end. But herein he
hold the justice of God, who is so opposed against sin, because that if we
forget to seek him whilst we may, he will find us out when we would not be
found of him.

It is expected I should say something of the fact which I have committed: And
hither am I come resolved to clear my conscience (before I depart this world)
of all matters which I either know, or can now remember. And so much I have
already delivered in writing to my Lo. Chief Justice:: and to prove that which
I wrote is true, I yesterday confirmed it with the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, wishing unto you all as much comfort by those holy Mysteries, as I
took by them: and I do here (though not with such a blood) yet with mine own
blood, seal that which I have written. For my self, I will hide nothing to
make my fault seem less, but will rip open this very heart of mine, and
confess before God mine own uncleanness.

I have sinned exceedingly against thee O my maker, and in this am I most
faulty, that I did not reveal to the King, so soon as I my self had
knowledge of the business. But (alas) fear to loose these worldly pleasures,
and the love to promotion, made me forget my duty to my Sovereign, and not to
regard my God, who is a swift auenger of blood: and would to heaven I had
trusted to his providence, and set the things of this world at naught, for
heavens sake, and a good conscience. You see, Gentlemen, promotion cannot
rescue us from the justice of God, which always pursues after sin: And
therefore I exhort you not to trust in men (how great soever) for they cannot
hide themselves when God is angry; neither can they protect you from shame,
when God will consume you: he that sits in heaven, will deride and scorn
their foolish Inventions. As for me, I will not spare to lay open my own
shame: Think you I care for the reputation of this world? No, I weigh it not.
This my soul shall receive more comfort from God in my upright dealing.

My sin, in this foul fact, was great, for upon me lay all the blood, shed,
and to be shed: I have made many children fatherles, many wives husbandles,
many parents childelesse: and I my self leave a comfortless wife and eight
children behind me for it too: for if I had revealed it when I might, I had
freed much blood from being spilt, in so much as I could wish (Gods Justice and
charity reserved) I might hang in chains, till I rotte away by peecemeale: nor
cared I what tortures my body were put unto, so I might expaite or free the
blood of so many, (some in one place, and some in another) which is both like
to be shed, and is already shed, and the Lord knows when it will have an end.

Concerning my self, I will aggrauate the crime, by speaking of every
circumstance I can remember. And now it comes into my mind, what trust that
gentleman put into me: he reputed me to be most faithful unto him; (Oh the
vildnesse of my heart!) I proved unfaithful, and was his deadly deceitful
friend.

And here (Gentlemen) I exhort you all that you would take notice of this, ever
to be faithful to those who put you in trust.

Sir Thomas O. trusted me, and I was unfaithful and treacherous to him, in
drawing tickets for him to his disadvantage. I promised him secrecy, yet
betrayed him, only to satisfy greatness: But God, who sees the secret
thoughts of man's heart, will disclose all vnuist actions at last: nay, I am
persuaded that whosoever they be that commit sin in their childhood, at one
time or other it will be revealed.

In this place it comes to my mind, that in my younger days (as well beyond
the Seas as here) I was much addicted to that idle vein of Gaming, I was
bewitched with it indeed: And I played not for little for final su^ms neither,
but for Great-ones, yet ever haunted with ill luck: And upon a time, being
much displeased at my loss, I said, not in a careless manner, Would I might be
hanged; But seriously, and advisedly (between God and my self) clapping my
hands upon my breast, I spoke thus, If ever I play again, then let me be hanged.
Now gentlemen here you may behold the ustice of God, paying me my wish and
imprecation home. Be careful therefore I exhort you, that you vow nothing but
that unto which you will give all diligence to perform: for the powerful God,
before whom you make such vows, will otherwise be auegned:

Jn this place Doctor VVhiting putting him in mind to satisfy the World
touching his Religion thus he went on.

THe matter you speak to me of, faith he, is well thought upon: for I hear
that abroad has been some murmuring and questions made about me for my
Religion; Some giving out that I was infected with Anabaptisme: A fond,
ridiculous, foolish and fantastical opinion, which I never affected but
rather despised.

Many may think that the manner of my death does much discourage me, that I
should dye in a halter: I would have you all to think that I scorn all such
worldly thoughts: I care not for it, I value not any earthly shame at all, so
as may have honor and glory anon in Heaven: and I make no doubt, but I shall
suddenly be more happy then you all, and that I shall see GOD face to face:
and if there be any point of innocence in me at all, I do utterly cast it
from me, and I do commit it wholly to GOD.

And for any matter of Glory, I do with the Saints of GOD expect it through
the merits of Christ, at the Resurrection: yea it is my glory to die thus. I
might have died in my Bed, or shooting the Bridge or else have fallen down
suddenly, in which death I should have wanted this space to repent, being the
sweet comfort and assured hope of Gods favor which of his mercy he has
vouchsafed me; So that it swalloweth up all fear of death or reproach of the
World: wishing unto all you (Gentlemen) who now behold me, that wheresoever
you shall dye, (either in your Beds or elsewhere howsoewer) you may feel
such comfort and resolution as God in his mercy has bestowed upon me and my
wounded Soul for this and the rest of my grievous Sins.

But me thinks I hear some of you conjecture and say, that I express no
great Arguments or signs of sorrow: You think my heart should rather dissolve
and melt into tears, then to appear so insensible of fear as I may seem:
but I must tell you, tears were never common in me: I may therefore fear
though I do not weep. I have been courageous both beyond the Seas and here in
mine own Country: but (Gentlemen) that was when there was no peril before
me. But now the stroke of death is upon me. It affrights me, and there is
cause to fear: yet notwithstanding, my heart seems unto you to be rather of
stone than of flesh. But I would have you understand, that this boldness does
not proceed from any manly fortitude, for I am a man, frail as you are, and
dare as little look death in the face as any other: there terors of death do as
much trouble my humane sense, as of any man whatsoever: but that which
swalloweth up all manner of fear in me, and makes me to glory and to rejoice
in, is, the full assurance which I conceive of the unspeakable love of God to
those who are his, of which number I persuade my self to be one, and that I
shall presently enjoy it.

I confess I have sinned exceedingly, against thee (oh God) many ways, in
profaning thy holy Sabaoths, in taking thy glorious name in vain, in my
concupiscence in turning all thy graces into wantonness, in my Riotous wasting
so many of thy good Creatures, as would have relieved many poor people, whose
prayers I might have had this day.

I have sinned against thee in my Childhood: but Childrens sins are
childishly performed: but I confirmed them in my manhood, there was my sin. I
am persuaded, there is no sin, that a man commits in his life, knowing it
to be a sin, and not repenting of it, but the Lord will judge it.

I admonish you therefore that are here assembled, to take good notice of your
sins, and let none escape you unrepented. And yet when you have done the best
you can, there will lie buried some one sin or other sufficent to condemn
you.

O Lord cleanse me from my secret sins, which are in me so rife. I abused the
tender education of my Parents. You perhaps that knew me will say no; I lived
in an honest form, and was not bad in my life.

But I know best my self what I was: and if I who was so esteemed of amongst
Men, shall scarcely be saved, what will become of those, whom you point at for
notorious lieuers?

The last night God put into my mind the remembrance of one sin of mine,
which here I will lay open, that others may take heed. I took a vain pride
in my pen, and some of my friends would tell me I had some induments and
special gift that way: (though I say nor so my self) but mark the judgment
of God in this; that Pen which I was so proud of, hatch struck me dead, and
like Absolons hair has hanged me: for there has dropped a word or two from my
Pen, in a letter of mine, which upon my Salvation I am not able to answer, or
to give any good account of. At my Arraignment I pleaded hard for life, and
protested my Innocence, but when my own Pen came against me, I was forthwith
not able to speak anything for my self: for I stood as one amazed, or that
had no Tongue.

See (Gentlemen) the just Judgment of GOD, who made that thing of which I was
most proud, to be my bane: take notice how strangely sin is punished, and
learn euery-one to strive against it.

I have heard the word of GOD, and often read it (but without use) for I must
tell you these two worthy, Gentlemen (to whom I am so much bounden, God reward
them for their love) even they begat me very lately, for I am not ashamed to
confess that I was to be begotten unto Christ within these three days: yea I
have often prayed against sin, and made many vows to forsake it, but upon
the next occasion, my foul heart has been ready to run with the wicked.

Had I learned but this one lesson in the 119. Psalm, (Depart from me ye
wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my God etc.) I had been likely to
have enjoyed many days here on eath: whereas now you all see me ready to be
cut short by reason of my sin.

But (O LORD) albeit thou slayest me, yet will I put my trust in thee: let the
LORD do to me what he will, I will dye upon this hand (of trusting in him) if
I fail many a soul has missed, but I have sure hope of mercy in him; he
has sufficed and succored me, I am sure, ever since the sentence of death
has passed upon me: such comfort flowing from the Godly indeauors of these
Gentlemen (the Divines) that neither the Reproach of this Death, nor the
Torment of it has any whit discouraged me; nay, let me tell you, the last
night when I heard the time was appointed, and saw the warrant in Master
Sheriffs hand for my death, it no whit daunted me: But what put this courage
into me? only the hope which I had in GODS mercies.

This Hope was a Seed, and this Seed must come from a Root; I looked upon my
self, and there was rather cause despair; and just cause, that I should not
approach GODS presence. Thus then I disputed with GOD: This Hope being a Seed
must have a Root, and this Root is not any thing in Man, no, it is
Praescientia (thy foreknowledge,) O God, who have elected me from eternity.

I will tell you, I received more comfort this morning, coming along the
streets, than ever I did in all my life. I saw much people gathered together,
all the way as I came, to see me brought to this shameful end: who with their
hearty prayers and well wishings gladded and comforted my very soul: insomuch
as I could wish that I had come from Westminster hither. I protest unto you, I
think I could never have dyed so happily in my bed.

But you will say, these are but speechees, and that I being so near death, my
heart cannot be so free, as I seem in my speech: I confess, there are in my
breast frailties, which do terrify, and will still be busy with me, but I
beseech you when I am at the stroke of death, that you would pray to GOD
(with me) that neither Satan's power, nor my weakness, may hinder my
confidence. And I beseech God that amongst all who this day hear me, some
may profit by my end: If I get but one Soul, I shall have much comfort in
that; for that one soul my beget another, and that other another.

I have held you too long, but I will draw to an end: entreating you all to
join in prayer to God for me.

The sum of his Prayer.
O Lord God omnipotent, who sit in Heaven, and see all things which are
done on earth: to whom are known all occasions of men; And who do deride and
laugh to scorn their Foolish inventions: thou (Lord) who art powerful to Save
at an instant, bow down the heavens, and behold Me (wretched sinner!)
unworthy to look up, or lift up my hands unto thee. Remember not (O Lord) the
sins which I have committed. Drive away this Mist which is before me; and
break those thick Clouds which my sins have made, and may let my request to
come into thy presence. Strengthen me in the midst of Death, in the
assurance of thy Mercies; and give me a joyful Passage into thy Heavenly
Rest, now and for ever. Amen.

After he had thus Prayed, he took his leave of all, with these words.

GEntlemen, I shall see your faces now no more: and pulling down his Cap in his
eyes, said some private prayer; in which time the Doctors prayed, and called to
him, that he would remember his assurance, and not be dismayed at the Cup,
that he was not drink of: He answered, I will drink it up, and never look
what is in it. And after a little time more spent in private prayer, he said,
Lord receive my Soul: And so yielded up the Ghost.

His Meditation and Vow. not long before his Death.
When I considered Herod's State, who though he heard John Baptist gladly, yet
was he entangled with Herodias: and how Agrippa liked so well of Paul as he
was persuaded almost to become a Christian, and how young man's will was good to
follow Chirst yet was there one thing wanting: meethought the state of sinful
man was not unlike. For also how the Angler though having caught a Fish but by
the the chaps accounts it as his own: the Bird taken but by the heel is a
prey unto the Fowler: the Iayler also holds his prisoner by one joint as safe,
as cast in iron chains: then did I think what do these motions good, if not
effected to the full? what though not notoriously evil? one sin sufficent to
condemn: and is he guilty of all that guilty is of one? then said I unto the
Lord I will freely cleanse my ways and wash my hands in innocence: I will take
heed that I offend not in my tongue. Lord let my thoughts be such as I may
al-waies say, try and examine me if there be any unrighteousness in me.

Sir Geruase Ellowis.

FINIS.

