E HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown R

AN EXHORTACION to all English Subjects, to join for the defense of Queen
ELZIABETH, and their native country.

Printed by Richard Iohnes.

AN EXHORTATION to al English Subjects.
AWake each English wight,
both high and low awake:
Fear not the froward boasting braggs,
that foreign foes do make,
Conspiring you to spoil,
for sticking to the troth:
And for reforming vile abuse,
of such as lived in sloth.
But way the rightful ground,
and state wherein you stand:
And mark th'accursed cruel case, that they do take in hand.
You do your sacred faith, and countries soil defend
T'abollish faith, and conquer you, they surely do intend:
Each cause of yours may cause your heart, great comfort take,
Each cause of theirs may justly cause, their coward heart to quake
They hope perhaps to have, some help within this I Will,
But sure I trust their firmest frinds, will justly them beguile.
For though they think that some do so digress from kind,
That subtle peevish practices, can change their English mind:
I trust if trial hap, they shall have their deserts,
Not traitors aid, but sharp revenge by trusty English hearts.
Think they we force so light the English soil,
Our native country so long kept, will we now lose with foil:
Our kindred and alies* our wives and children dear,
Shall we not seek to shield from death: shall we so vile appear.
I hope what ever cause may cause debates to be
The douht to lose life, lands and goods, will cause us to agree:
To join our willing minds, our goods and greatest force,
T'annoie our foes, to shield our self from bloody stained corse,
What should us daunt one jot: or make us be dismayed,
Let never threats of foreine foes, make English men afraid:
Look back to ancient writ of valiant enterprise:
And see with how great foiles their foes your elders did agrize,
The French have often found the force of English hearts,
The Spaniards (if they call to mind) have felt thereof their parts
The Scot can make no boast of many overthrows,
The stories tell in most attempts, these bare a way the blows.
We that have then so often, been used to victories,
Shall we now doubt for to subdue, such deadly enemies:
Nay rather think we sure, that such their plagues forepast,
To deal with us within this i will, will make them sore aghast.
I trust, as of one realm, even so they shall us see,
Of one allegiance, of one heart and firm fidelity:
Behold the woeful state, our neighbors stand still in,
By cloaked craft, and show of sooth, their sortowes did begin.
What trains by tyrants tried, what store of guiltless blood,
Even from the hearts of innocents, was shed with cruel mood
No faith, no truth, no law, nor natural love took place,
O cursed Caines, O cruel facts, O deadly woeful case.
Those that did nothing doubt, defended for to be,
Do now with bitter tears lament, their heavy haps you see:
Their land and riches great, confiscate to the spoil,
That they and theirs in many years, have won with painful toil
And shall we think to find, more courtesy then those,
If we permit and notwithstand, the force of foreign foes:
Nay rather this deceit may drive us for to dread,
And of such like most subtle slight, to take most careful heed,
Our foes like friends, will feign to come for our souls health,
But God does know their foul prentense: they shoot but at our wealth,
With loss of life to all, let each him self assure,
The protestant and papist both, like torment shall endure.
In histories we read (each wight take heed therefore,
The traitor to his country soil, is never trusted more:
No, not by such as wan the gole by his deceit,
Who rather cuts him off before, he work a second sleit.
Though some by fear be fled, for that they need not dreede,
And some again for want of wit, or want of better reed
When they shall wisely wey, what realms have run to wrack,
Where such as they with foreign foes, their own have sought to sack:
Though now they be abusde, yet God I hope will than,
So rule their hearts for countries cause, to change the^ every man,
To help the hope they have, for that we not agree,
(As they suppose for sacred writ) most justly forces me:
To call to mind th'aduise of Scorios host alone,
The Romans in dissension then, that he would set upon.
Not so, then Scorio said, I not allow your reed,
For that were even the nearest way, to make them soon agreede
For argument whereof, two Mastiues forth he brought,
And deadly foes he did them make, by cause right aptly sought:
A woolfe put forth in place, no sooner in their sight,
But they as friends their common foe, did set upon with spite.
Let then our foes forecast, in seeking us to sack,
That natural love in English hearts, shall not be seen to lack.
And lack we men to fight' nay were there ever more.
More active, or more firmly bent, to kill their common foe:
Munition wants not, nor ordinance for war,
Each storehouse stuffed, each private house, has furniture from fat
Our Queen has courage stout, her subjects to defend,
Her people have as willing minds, their goods and life to spend.
The cause is chiefly Gods, whom ever his elect,
Have found most ready from their foes, to shield them and protect,
Examples manifold for proof hereof most strong,
I might allege, but some perhaps, would think the work too long
Let this therefore suffice, and let us firmly trust,
God never did, nor never will, forget them that be just.
Let each repent in heart, and mend that is amiss,
Then God no doubt our chief defense, will take us to be his*
Who grant us all t'agree, our country to defend,
And to vouchsafe into our hearts, his holy spirit to send.
That we may grace obtain, by his most gracious will,
Let every well disposed wight, cry out unto him still:
Look Lord on Englands state, we humbly pray thee then,
And grant that each true English heart, consent to say, Amen.
FINIS.

