THE DIGNITY AND DVTY OF A CHRISTIAN.

PVBLISHED AND SET FORTH TO COMfort and encourage all those which be truly
Christ's, to continue in him, and to be faithful to the death.

By Mr. JOHN ABERNET^^R, Bishop of CATHNES in Scotland.

LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and Religious Lady, Dame Margaret Stuart, Lady
Ochiltrie, all happiness be multiplied.
AS many seem to themselves to be something, when they are nothing, deceiving
themselves in their own imagination: So many (out of an idle presumption, and
bare profession) dream to themselves that they are Christ's, when they are none
of his, under the veil of hypocrisy, having only a name that they are
living, when they are dead. If they had any spark of a true desire of their
own salvation, they should rather give all diligence to make their Calling and
Election sure, and carefully endeavor both to become, and to be assured that
they are Christ's; which is man's highest happiness: And to testify the same,
by crucifying of the flesh, with the affections and lusts; which is man's most
thankful duty. This little Treatise serves to give instruction herein, and to
comfort and encourage all those that are truly Christ's; to continue in him, and
to be faithful to the death. I delivered it in one of my ordinary Sermons,
whereof (Madam) you were then one of my accustomed hearers. It was immediately
penned, but it came not again into my hands till now. I have thought it good
to put it forth under your Ladyships name, worthy to be remembered. Your
Ladyship is the godly mother of many godly children: and in special, the
mother of that worthy and truly religious daughter, Dame Anna, Lady Ferniherst,
my faithful friend, who now rests in the Lord, and fully feels that she
was, and is Christ's. Your Ladyship has been always to all, a mirror of
sincere and constant godliness: and, for that respect was had of your true piety
and gravity; your Ladyship obtained once that honor, as the fittest Lady to
attend our late gracious Queen of worthy memory; and to have under your hand
this our most gracious Prince in his tender Infancy. But above all these, God
has honored you by his special and saving grace: and given you this dignity
with the rest of his Saints, to be verily one of Christ's, that you may
confidently say, and sing with the Church, My Beloved is mine, and I am his.
These considerations (amongst many other) have moved me to dedicate this
Manuell unto you. If by perusing it, you reap any comfort, as once you did
when you first heard it: and if it can benefit any other, it is all the gain
that I expect for my pains. And so wishing your La. all happiness in Christ
our Savior, I shall ever abide,

Your La. very affectionate friend, I. B. of Cathnes.

A CHRISTIAN, HIS DIGNITY and Duty.
Galat. 5.24. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and the lusts.


1. The dignity of a Christian.
THe Apostle in these words persuades the Galatians, that there is no law
against them that bring forth the fruits of the Spirit: because that such are
Christ's, who do crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts. So that the
fruitful in Christ the root, Revel. 22.16. are saved; not for the fruits
cause, but for the roots cause: For There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans
8.1.

These words contain our greatest dignity; which is, to be Christ's. And our
most necessary duty, to crucify the flesh, etc. This is the Christian dignity
of those Excellent ones, The Christian dignity.
Psa. 16.3. who in Christ have their Privilege to become the sons of God,
Ioh. 1.12. and a right to the tree of life, Revel. 22.14. and that because they
are Christ's. Wherein these things following are to be considered.

2. What is it to be Christ's?
THey yt are Christ's, A description of those that are Christ's.
are not only his in general, or by profession: but in special, by his
saving grace, as elected in him, before the foundation of the world: and in his
own time united to him by faith, into a most near fellowship, by the power of
the holy Spirit: that they may be so wholly his, and partakers of all his
blessings, that they may appertain to him more than to all others, and that he
may be also theirs, whereof they have a comfortable sense and feeling in this
life, and a full fruition in the life to come.

This description does spread it self into many branches, to be explaned as
follows.

Some are Christ's in general, some in special. For he has given to him of
his Father, power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many
as the Father has given him, Ioh. 17.2. To be Christ's in general by
subjection.
They that are Christ's in general, are his, as he is the Head of all
principality and power, Col. 1.18. Revel. 1.5. and 17.14. and 19.16. All power
is giver to him both in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18. In all things he has
the preeminence, Colos. 1.18. He is exalted above all things. Ephesians. 1.20.
Exalted highly above every name, Phil. 2.9. All things were created by him, and
for him: he is before all things, and in him all things do consist, Col.
1.16, 17. Ioh. 1.3. Bearing up all things by his mighty word, Heb. 1.3. He is
Lord over the quick and the dead: Judge over all, Romans 13.9, 10.

So all men are Christ's in general: and (with all other things) are put in
subjection under his feet, Ephesians. 1.20. Heb. 2.8. That at the name of Jesus,
every knee should bow, Phil. 2.9, 10. To be Christ's this way, All things are
Christ's in general.
is very common. All men are Christ's, as he is their Lord. All reprobates and
devils are Christ's, as he is their Judge. All the Regenerate are Christ's, as
he is their King. To be Christ's after this manner, is not the Saints
prerogative. We must therforegiue all diligence to go beyond the whole
creatures, Admonition.
in appertaining to Christ, and become Christ's in a nearer and more special
manner.

They that are Christ's in Special (here specially meant) are his: To be
Christ's in special by grace.
as he is the Prince of their salvation, Heb. 1.10. The head of his body which
is his Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.23. As a Son, he is over his
own house: whose house we are, Heb. 3.6. Their Redeemer, Ephesians. 1.7. The
Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. He has bought them for a price, 1. Cor.
6.20. He has purchased them with his own blood, Act. 20.28. He knits them to
himself: he furnishes them with his grace, and makes the^ increase with the
increasing of God, Col. 2.19.

Let us therefore have a special care to become Christ's in special. Admonition.
Many say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. But here is of all good
things the best, to be Christ's. And as Peter said to Christ at his
Transfiguration: It is good for us to be here, Luke 9.33. So we may all say
in our Regeneration, It is good to be Christ's. It is the most happy estate of
man: there is no solid nor constant comfort, but in it, and as David said, I
had rather be a doorekeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Tabernacles of wickedness, Psalm. 84.10.

So every one should say, I had rather be the least of those that are Christ's;
than to be the heir of ye greatest Monarch, without Christ, Gal. 3.29.

3. Who are not Christ's?
AS Christ said, Many are not Christ's.
He that is not with me, is against me, Math. 12.30. showing that there was
many both against him, and not with him. So does the Apostle here insinuate
that all are not Christ's. For all men have not faith, 2. These. 3.2. neither do
all crucify the flesh. It is therefore requisite that we know who are not
Christ's. The devils are not his: as that Legion cried, What have I to do with
thee, Jesus, the Son of the most high God? Mark. 5.7. A Reprobate shall never
become Christ's. An Atheist, an Epicure, an Impenitent, a swinish and worldly
Gadarene, Mark. 5.17. is not Christ's.

The Hypocrite is not his. Hypocrites are not Christ's.
Profession makes not one to be his; neither does external Vocation, nor
vulgar graces of the Spirit make any to be his. One may have the show and form
of godliness, The form of their hypocrisy.
2. Tim. 3.5. and yet not be his, because he wants the saving power of it.
Many have a name that they are alive, but in truth they are dead, Reu. 3.1.
Fruitless trees, shadowing only with leaves: who have the light of God, but
not the life of God. A dead faith, without works: sorrowing for sin, but not
sorrowing to repentance: mourning without amending. Their love of God is but
general and mercenary: a zeal without knowledge: a servile fear: restraining
sin, but not crucifying it: a taste of the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.4. frivolous
and superficial motions: fantastical and fleeting comforts and joys. These
things make not one to be Christ's. Admonition.
Let us therefore search our own hearts; let us examine our selves, and prove
our selves whether we have faith or not: let us know our selves, if Christ be
in us, and we his, except we be reprobates, 2. Cor. 13.5. that if as yet we be
not truly Christ's, we may study by all means (in this acceptable time) to
become his.

4. Who are Christ's?
THe Apostle positiuely sets down, Some are Christ's by Election only.
that they who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh. We must therefore know
who are Christ's. Some are Christ's only in Gods prescience and secret Decree,
and counsel: whereof some (as yet) are not borne, some are Infants, and some
(as yet) not called, and without Christ, and without God in the world, Ephesians.
2.12.

Some are Christ's improperly, Some are Christ's improperly.
only in appearance. The gross Hypocrite is Christ's, only in the worlds
appearance. The formal and temporizing Hypocrite is Christ's, both in the
worlds, and in his own appearance, and no further.

But some are Christ's most properly, Some are Christ's properly.
and truly to be counted his: as those that are united to him by a lively
faith, who apprehend him, and are apprehended of him, Phil. 3.12.

The Elect, who are regenerate, effectually called, justified, adopted,
sanctified, and are to be glorified, Romans 8.30. They are Christ's in their own
persuasion, and they are his also by profession before the world. They are his,
both in appearance, and in effect, both by Election and Vocation effectual.

But as there are many called, Admonition.
and few chosen, Mat. 22.14. so, many are not Christ's, and very few are his:
yet the Lord knows who are his: and let every one that calls on the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19.

The question may be moved concerning Infants, How Infants are Christ's.
if they be Christ's when they die in their infancy.

The answer is, If an Infant be a reprobate, in that case (because of his
natural pollution, whereof he is guilty) he is left to himself, and rejected
eternally. But if the Infant be a chosen child, he may be Christ's both
externally in the judgment of the Church, as one within the covenant of grace:
and internally also he is Christ's in a most secret and unspeakable manner;
being insert in Christ by the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 12.13. The Apostle in this
place speaks not of Infants; neither of their prerogative in Christ; but
only of those that are Christ's, and that crucify the flesh; who are come to
perfection of years, and endeavor to be perfect men in Christ. Admonition.
Be not therefore so curious to know who are Christ's; as careful, that thou
thy self may be truly his; that thou may find the vigor and quickening life
of him in thy heart, whereby thou may crucify the flesh, with the affections
and lusts thereof: and that thou may confidently say with the Spouse in the
Can. 7.10 I am my Well-beloueds, and his desire is toward me.

5. How are we Christ's?
Since that all are not Christ's, and those that are his, are few. And since none
are his by nature, but by grace only; it is needful therefore to understand
how we are Christ's.

We are his in a true, We are Christ's in a spiritual union.
pure, and spiritual union, by being one with him, Galat. 3.28. and build on
him, Ephesians. 2.20. By the unity of faith, Ephesians. 4.13. We abide in him, 1. Ioh.
2.27. He dwells in us, and we in him, 1. Ioh. 4.13, 16.

This union is not local, The manner of this union.
neither does distance of place impair it: it is not visible nor bodily: it is
not superficial nor fantastical: yet it is real and spiritual, Ioh. 17.20.

They that are united to Christ, must be first separated from the world, Ioh.
17.6. that is, from the condemnation and corruption that is in the world
through lust, 2. Pet. 1.4.

This union is wrought by the Application and Apprehension of Christ. In
Christ's application, the holy Spirit really exhibits and offers Christ unto us,
Ioh. 17.6, 9. and 10.29.
and us again to Christ, and gives either of us to other, This is called the
communion of the Spirit, Philip. 2.1. whereby we are all baptized into one
Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13.
and are al made to drink into one Spirit.

In Christ's apprehension, the holy Spirit likewise is effectual. He moves the
heart of the believer, by a most secret and unspeakable power, to embrace and
receive Christ: like as Christ receives and apprehends by the same holy
Spirit the believer, Phil. 3.12. and so is united to him, Ioh. 1.12. Romans
13.14. Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 3.20. and 1.19. Col. 2.6.

To be Christ's therefore is a work supernatural, divine, and from above; and
who are once his, are ever his thereafter. His sheep shall never be pulled
out of his hands, Ioh. 10.28. and that because of that omnipote^t Spirit, who
linketh them together.

Comfort.
Hereupon arises that unspeakable comfort to all those that are Christ's: so
far, as it is an inseparable union that causes them be so sure, and so
eternally his, Romans 8.38.

6. Wherein are we Christ's?
IF we be Christ's, The resemblance of our union and communion with Christ.
he must have some kindly and near respect and relation to us, and we to
him. It is needful therefore to be considered wherein we are Christ's, and
what is our communion with him.

There is no union in this world so near, and so strong, as is our conjunction
with Christ. Similitudes are borrowed, to resemble and represent unto us the
same: and yet the union is stricter, and more near and sure, than they can
declare, and is accompanied with a depending communion.

He is our head, and we are the members of his body, 1. Cor. 6.15. Ephesians.
5.30. we get life and motion from him, as the members do from the head.

We are Christ's as a Spouse to the husband, Cant. 4.9. Revel. 19.7. we are his
Love, Cant. 1.14. We are set on his heart as a Seal, and as a Signet upon his
arm, Cant. 8.6.

We are his brethren, and fellow-heires with him, Heb. 1.12. Romans 8.17. And he
is the first begotten amongst many brethren, Romans 8.29.

We are Christ's, as the branches of that holy and true Vine, Ioh. 15.1. We are
engrafted in the Vine by grace. We are his, and are vpholden by him, as the
tree does bear the branch, not the branch the tree. We get life and sap from
this Vine, and we must bear fruit, not of our selves, but because we abide in
the Vine: For without him we can do nothing, Ioh. 15.4, 5.

We are his Sheep, and he our chief Shepherd, 1. Pet. 5.4.

We are his lively Stones, and he the chief Cornerstone, on whom we must be
builded, and be made his spiritual house, 1. Pet. 2.5, 6. Heb. 3.6.

We are his, and are as dear to him as himself: he loved us, and gave
himself for us, Gal. 2.20. He loved his Church, and gave himself for it,
Ephesians. 5.25. He that touches us, touches the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.8.
Our troubles are his, Act. 9.4. his glory is ours, 2. These. 1.19. and he
thinks himself vncomplete, if he want us. Who would not strive now to become
Christ's? Admonition.
It is our greatest dignity, it is our final and full felicity to be his.
Christ entreats us to be his, he calls upon us: he cares not although we be
black and bruised, Cant. 1.5. and with sins weary and laden, Math. 12.20. and
11.28. If so be we come to be eased and washed by him.

He says to every one of us, Admonition.
as he said to his Spouse in Cant. 2.10. Arise my love, my fair one, and come
away: the winter is past, the rain is gone, the flowers appear, the birds do
sing. His delight is to be with the sons of men, Pro. 8.31. Say thou again
to Christ, as David said to the Lord, What am I, O Lord, that thou have brought
me to this? 2. Sam. 7.18. And with Mephibosheth, say thou to Christ, as he
said to David: What am I, that thou should look on me a dead dog as I am?
2. Sa. 9. Behold, Lord, thou shall have me, above, beyond, and before all. For
whom have I in the heaven beside thee? Psalm. 73.25. I shall count all things
but dung for the vantage of Christ, Phil. 3.8. And he shall be to me both in
life and death my only vantage, Phil. 1.21.

7. Who makes us Christ's?
IF nature did make us to be Christ's, then all should be Christ's, and all
should crucify the flesh: and to be Christ's should be both easy and common.
The causes of our union with Christ.
But since it is a matter divine, so high, and so holy, and proper only for
some; we must understand who do make us Christ's.

We are Gods workmanship, The Father
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. We are the children
which God has given to Christ, Heb. 2.13. And no man can come to Christ,
except the Father draw him, Ioh. 6.44. Of God we are in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor.
1.30. And he which stablisheth us in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, 2.
Cor. 1.21.

Christ gave himself for us, The Son.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us, to be a peculiar
people to himself, Tit. 2.14.

The Holy Spirit, The Spirit.
that Anointing, as it taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1. Ioh. 2.27. And
they shall be all taught of God, Ioh. 6.45. This is the communion of the
Spirit, Phil. 2.1.

As the Trinity does work internally: The Word.
So the Word and Ministry work externally. The weapons of the ministerial
warfare do bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2.
Cor. 10.5. The Sacraments.
By Baptism we are all baptized into Christ, and have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.

The Ministry trauelleth in birth as a The Ministry
woman, till Christ be formed in us. Gal. 4.19. The Ministers and Preachers of
the Word are given by Christ, for the repairing of the Saints, and edification
of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

We see therefore how that both God and man do concur to make us Christ's.
Admonition.
Man with the letter of the Word without; God and Christ, by the Spirit within.
We want no calling upon; we lack no laboring upon. God calls, and would
have all men to be saved, 1. Tim. 2.4. Christ stands at the door of our
hearts and knockes, to come in, Revel. 3.20. Shall we still resist the holy
Spirit? Shall we still pull back the shoulder and harden our hearts? Shall we
still stop our ears, as the Serpent does at the Enchanter? Shall we both
deprive our selves of Christ, and bring upon our selves swift judgment, and
everlasting wrath? Far be that from us all: yea rather, let us lift up the
ports of our soul, and let the King of glory enter in. Let us renounce our
selves, that we may be his: let us be led (by the Word, and by the Spirit)
captive to his obedience: let us be heartily content that he betroth us; and
most heartily suffer our selves to be cut off from the wild Olive, that we may
be ingraffed into the true Vine.

8. How far are we Christ's?
THe body is for the Lord, What part of us is Christ's, viz. our Body.
1. Cor. 6.13. It is a member of his body, Ibid. It is his in the grave; and is
never destitute of his Spirit, Romans 8.11. It waits for the Adoption, even the
redemption of the body, Romans 8.23. He shall change it (though never so vile)
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21.

The soul is Christ's: Our Soul.
it has salvation of him, 1. Pet. 1.9. He is the Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, 1. Pet. 2.25.

Both body and soul are his; he suffered for both; he ransomed both; he
sanctifies both, 1. These. 5.23. and shall glorify both.

Our sins and debts are his, Our sins.
by imputation; as he is a sufferer and satisfier for them. He did bear our
sins in his body on the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24. He suffered for our sins, the
just, for the unjust, 1. Pet. 3.18. He is the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. The Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, Isa. 59.6. He made him sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.21.

Our good works are Christ's, Our good works.
as he is the first author and worker of them in our hearts. For Without him we
can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. We are Gods workmanship, created in Jesus Christ,
unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.

He is also an accepter of our good works, as if they were all done to him. A
cup of cold water, given to one of his little ones, he accounts the same as
given to him, Math. 10.42. He claims the service of all our actions, as done
to himself, Ephesians. 6.5, 6. And whatsoever we do, we must do it heartily,
as unto the Lord, Col. 3.23.

Our sufferings are Christ's, Our sufferings.
in that he is a Sympathizer with us, Act. 9.4. He that touches us, touches
the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8.

He is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Our infirmities.
Hebr. 4.15. So all that we are, is his; and all that we have, is his. Of all
our evils he does ease, and empty us: with all his good he does fill us. He is
ours, as our all, in all things: so every one of us is his all, in all
respects. But in what degree we are Christ's, In what degree we are Christ's.
in the degree of Election: or in what degree we are Christ's, in Gods present
acceptance and estimation: or in what degree we are to be Christ's, in the life
to come, it is very hard to discuss; and more curious then profitable to
enquire. It may very well content, even the best of us, to be a dore-keeper in
the house of God, Psalm. 84.10.

Yet we should know in what degree we are Christ's, Admonition.
in our apprehension of him by faith: For according as is the measure of our
faith, more or less; a weak faith, or a strong faith: so, in that same
measure we find and feel our selves to be Christ's: and according to that
same degree of our faith and feeling, we do crucify the flesh more or less.
It is our part, more to know the measure and degrees of our faith, than to know
in what measure and degree we are his. It may suffice us very well, that now we
are the sons and daughters of God; although as yet it be not manifest what
we shall be, 1. Ioh. 3.2.

Let us strive to grow in grace and faith: let us stir up our gifts: and
forget that which is behind; and endeavor our felues unto that which is before
us, and follow hard toward the mache, for the prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. until we all mere together unto a perfect
man; and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.
And that we may daily increase with the increasing of God, Colos. 2.19.

9. Whereto are we Christ's?
THis so great a Dignity to be Christ's, The ends wherefore we must be Christ's.
with so great a task following thereupon, to crucify the flesh; must have
some special ends and purposes, unto the which, and for the which, we are made
Christ's. And what be those?

That we may be Gods, 1. Cor. 3.22, 23. and be made partakers of the divine
nature, 2. Pet. 1

That through Christ, we may have an entrance to the Father, by one Spirit,
Ephesians. 2.18.

That we may be no more strangers and forreiners, but Citizens with the Saints
and household of God, Ephesians. 2.18, 19.

That we may obtain this prerogative, to be the sons of God, Ioh 1.12. Gal.
3.27. and 4.6, 7. The heirs of God, and annexed heirs with Christ, Ro^. 8.17.
and be made unto God Kings and Priests, Revel. 1.6.

That we may get in him redemption through his blood, Colos. 1.14. even
reconciliation by the blood of that his Cross, Col. 1.20.

That we may eschew condemnation, Romans 8.1. and be delivered from the power of
darkness, Colos. 1.13. and that principalities may be spoiled, Col. 2.15.

That we may obtain mercy and peace, Gal. 5.16. and the remission of our
sins, Col. 1.14. and that the obligation of our debts may be rent, Col.
2.14. 1. Cor. 1.31.

That we may become new creatures, Gal. 6.15 2. Cor. 5.17.

That in him we may be complete, circumcised with his circumcision; buried with
him, quickened and raised, Col. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.

That we may walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh, Romans 8.

That all other things in this world may be ours, that is, for our benefit, 1.
Cor. 3.22. Romans 8.28.

That we may live and die to the Lord, Romans 13.8.

That whether we wake or sleep, we may live together with him, 1. These. 5.10.

That we may get participation of the Saints inheritance, and may be
translated unto his own glorious Kingdom, Col. 1.12, 13.

To conclude this point, the whole world do spend their life, and whole
actions, upon purposes and ends whereat they continually aim. Some intend
their fame, some their gain, and some their delights. But what are all these?
But shadows of far much more, even of spiritual and eternal blessings in
heavenly things, and places, that those get, that are Christ's.

What can thy heart desire or need, Comfort.
but if thou be Christ's, thou shall have it, even that same very thing thou
crauest, or else a far better thing? For if God spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us to death; how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Romans 8.32.

10. We are Christ's, and no others.
But fith we must be Christ's, We are Christ's, and the whole Trinities.
we should be his alone, and no others, Math. 10.37, 38, 39.

To be Christ's, does not hinder us to be his Fathers, but furthers us: neither
does it stay us from being the holy Spirits. For whosoever are Christ's, they
do appertain to the whole Trinity. By Christ we are the temple of God, and
of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19.

If we be Christ's, We are not our own.
we are no more our own, for we are bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6.19, 20.
We must forsake our selves, and follow Christ, Math. 16.25. We must no longer
employ our body and soul to the use of sensuality and vanity, or of fond
fashions of the world; neither to walk in our own ways.

We may belong to no others any more, We belong to no other, unless they be
subordinate to Christ.
unless they be subordinate to Christ. Yea rather, ere we be not Christ's,
we ought to leave father, mother, sons and daughters, and the whole world,
Math. 10.37. We may belong to father, mother, brethren, or children, so far as
they hinder us not from Christ: but if they would presume to draw us from
Christ, in that case we should forsake them, although they were never so dear
to us.

We may belong to none that are merely contrary, And not contrary to Christ.
or opposite to Christ.

We may be the subjects of ungodly and unchristian tyrants, and the sons and
daughters of ungodly parents, and the feruants of wicked masters; we are bound
to serve them, and obey them in all things lawful, and in God, 1. Pet. 2.18.
Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. These are not merely opposite to Christ; and the things wherein
we should obey them, do stand with the will of Christ.

We should not belong to sin, We must not be sins, nor Satan's, nor the
worlds.
neither to Satan; because these are merely opposite to Christ. If we be
Christ's, we must not let sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should
obey it in the lusts thereof Neither should we give our members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6.12. We may not walk according to the course
of the world, and after the prince that rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2. We must
not make the devil our father, in doing his lusts, Ioh. 8.44. For all these
sin within us, Because they are directly opposite to Christ.
which is our corruption; and sin without us, which is the wicked course of
the world; and Satan, with all his circumuentions and methodicke stratagems,
Ephesians. 6.11. wherewith he goes about to snare us, are merely and directly
opposite to Christ: so that none can both serve Christ, and Belial, 2. Cor.
6.15.

Wherefore it is our special dignity and selicity to be Christ's truly;
Admonition.
and his above all others: prefer none to him; adequate none with him; join
none to him, that is contrary to him: whatsoever estate thou art in, study to
be Christ's. If thy estate be high in the world, to be Christ's, will
sanctify and bless that estate to thee. If thy estate be low and abject, to
be Christ's, honors thy poor estate, and makes thee joyfully and heartily
content therewith.

Prease not to be Christ's, and Satan's too: serve not two opposite masters,
Math. 6.24. be not double-harted, Iam. 4.8. Carry not two faces; but be Christ's
sincerely, thoroughly, and constantly.

11. When, and where are we Christ's?
WE were once not Christ's, when we were unwise, disobedient, deceived,
serving lusts, etc. Tit. 3.3. when we were dead in trespasses and sins,
Ephesians. 2.1. Colos. 2.13. Gentiles in the flesh; once far off, without Christ,
Ephesians. 2.11.

We are then Christ's evidently, We are Christ's when we are called.
when we are effectually called. Some he takes to himself sooner, some
later: he has his own time in his own hand, in making us to become his own,
when, and where, and how it pleases him.

When we are made Christ's, We are Christ's in life, and after death.
then we are his in life, in death, and after death, Romans 13.8.

Our bodies cease not to be his when we are dead: he esteems the^ his own,
although they be resolved into dust and ashes, Romans 8.11. Our souls are his
when we are dead; which makes his Saints desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and in their death to commend their spirit into his
hands, Act. 7.59.

We are Christ's now, but as yet it does not appear what we shall be, 1. Ioh.
3.2. Here in this life we are his by grace; hereafter we shall be his in glory.
Here we are Christ's, and we must crucify the flesh: hereafter we shall be
his, and he shall glorify our flesh.

Let us not therefore be any longer Satan's vassals, sins slaves, Admonition.
nor the worlds drudges. But into whatsoever estate God has cast thy lot, be
thou Christ's above all; give him thy heart above all; that thou may have this
prerogative, to be his above all. Delay no longer to become his: come out of
Sodom: look not back with Lots wife: strive to be his quickly: put not off
till death; death gives no warning. Become his before thou die, and thou shall
be his eternally.

12. How is Christ ours?
But since that we are Christ's by a certain relation, and by a mutual union,
as is specified before: we cannot be his, unless he be as truly ours. It
would be therefore known how he is ours.

Christ is ours, How Christ is ours.
as the Spouse does make her claim, saying, I am my Well-beloueds, and my
Well-beloued is mine, Cant. 6.2.

He is ours, and our only and chief vantage, both in life and in death,
Phil. 1.21.

He is our Head, that quickens all the body, Ephesians. 5.30.

He is our Husband, most loving to his Spouse, Reu. 19.7.

He is our Cornerstone, on whom we are all builded, 1. Pet. 2.6.

He is that true Vine, into the which we are ingraft to bring forth fruit,
Ioh. 15.1.

He is our Food, to nourish our hungry souls. His flesh is meat indeed, and
his blood is drink indeed, Ioh. 6.55.

He is our garment, to be put on to cover us, that our filthy nakedness do
not appear, Gal. 3.2. Romans 1.3, 14. Revel. 3.

He is our eldest Brother, yea, the first begotten amongst many brethren, Romans
8.29.

He is our chief Shepherd, to rule and feed his wandering flock, Ioh. 11.14.
Heb. 13.20. 1. Pet. 2.25. and 5.4.

His Godhead is ours, All that Christ is, is ours.
that we may be partakers of the Divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4.

His Humanity is ours, that he might be like us, in all things except sin, Heb.
2.17. and 4.15.

His death is ours, to ransom us, 1. Tim. 2.6.

His merits are ours, to justify us, 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 3.24. and 5.9.

His life is ours, to quicken us, Colos. 3.3, 4.

His Spirit is ours, to comfort us, Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26.

His Kingdom is ours, to glorify us, Ioh. 17.22.

He is our Savior, 1. Tim. 4.10. our Mediator, 1. Tim. 2.5. our Advocate, 1.
Ioh. 2.1. our Redeemer, Col. 1.14. That we all may be one, as the Father is in
him, and he in the Father, that we may be all one in them; Christ in us, and
the Father in Christ, that we may be made perfect in one, that we may be
there even where he is; that we may behold that his glory, Ioh. 17.21, 23, 24.

He is our All in all things, Ephesians. 1.23. and 4.10. Col. 3.11.

He is all these things to us, because his Father has given him to us, Romans
8.32. And he is ours also out of his own super-aboundant kindness, and
unspeakable love, Tit. 2.14.

He had no need that we should be his; we had great need that he should be
ours. We are his by debt; he is ours by gift, Ioh. 4.10. He makes us his; we
are not able to make him ours.

If Christ be thine, Admonition.
say with thy self, I have the greatest gift, the gift of all gifts; and a
greater gift God cannot give: for the which cause I shall be his again, and
none but Christ shall have me.

13. To know that we are Christ's, and that he is ours.
TO be Christ's, and Christ to be thine, thou may think the comfort of all
comforts: and that it would not only give thee sound peace and contentme^t of
heart; but also move thee very much to crucify the flesh: if so be thou were
persuaded of the same, and have the certainty of it in thy heart. How shall it
therefore be known certainly that one is Christ's?

There is no doubt but the Lord knows who are his, 2. Timoth. 2.19. Romans 8.

There is also no doubt but one may know his neighbor to be Christ's, by a
charitable construction, beholding his good works.

And most necessary it is, that we all prove our selves, if Christ be in us,
except we be reprobates, 2. Cor. 13.5.

But how shall one know within himself if he be Christ's? It is known by the
persuasion of faith, and by the effects and fruits thereof. They that are
Christ's, Testimonies to know that we are Christ's.
have their own warrant within them.

As Christ set a mark on the foreheads of the mourners for sin, Ezech. 9.4.
So God has sealed those that are Christ's, and given the^ the earnest of the
Spirit in their hearts, 2. Cor. 1.22.

That as the servants of God are said to be marked in the forehead, with the
sign of the living God, Revel. 7.2. So in Christ they are sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise; which is the earnest of their inheritance unto the day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30.

They have received a new name that no man knows, but they who have received
it, Reu. 3.12

The Spirit of God gives them this certificate, The Spirit.
that they are both Christ's, and the sons of God, Romans 8.16. And if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his, Romans 8.9. Hereby we know
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1.
Ioh 4.13.

The fruits of the Spirit are also certificates to us yt we are Christ's,
Fruits of the Spirit.
if we have the spirit of prayer and deprecation, 2. Tim. 2.19. If the same
mind be in us, that was in Christ Jesus: to wit, that same mind of modesty,
humility, patience, and of other Christian virtues, Phil. 2.5. whereby we do
walk in the Spirit, Romans 8.1.

If we depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19. and do crucify the flesh. If thou
have these fruits in any true measure, and do therein continue and grow; thou
may be persuaded that thou art his. Of this persuasion that thou art
Christ's, thou may make great use. Hereby thou may be daily stirred and
provoked to thankfulness of Admonition.
heart, to crucify the flesh and mortify sin at the root. Thou may also reap
matter of unspeakable comfort and joy, and rejoice in the Lord always, Phil.
4.4. Thou may say, Who shall condemn me? Christ, whose I am, is dead for me;
or rather, risen again for me; who is at the right hand of God, and makes
request for me. Who shall separate me from the love of Christ? No creature
shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, Romans 8.34, 35, 39.

14. The estate of those that are not Christ's.
AS the godly know, They that are not Christ's, are miserable.
that they themselves are of God; so they understand likewise, that the rest of
the whole world lies in wickedness, 1. Ioh. 5.19. because they are not
Christ's, they are dead in sins; the children of disobedience: the devil
possesses and rules them: the worlds fashions and course does guide them: and
as they never once think of the crucifying of the flesh: so they ever fulfill
the will of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.1.

They are strangers from the covenant of grace; they have no hope, and are
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. They are by nature the children of wrath.

And when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from the heavens with his mighty
Angels, A Threatening.
in flaming fire, he shall render vengeance unto them, 2. These. 1.7, 8. Psalm.
110.

15. The happy estate of them that are Christ's.
IF thou be Christ's, Excellency.
thou art for excellency and dignity above all others in the world: like a
Lilly among the thorns, Cant. 2.1. Psalm. 16.3. He has made thee unto God one
of his Kings and Priests, Revel. 1.6.

Thou art very comely in his sight, Comelines.
as one of the fairest among women, Cant. 1.8. made beautiful by his merits
and spirit, without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. And with the joy of the
Bridegroom toward the Bride, shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa. 62.5. All
other beauty shall fade, but thine shall increase with the increasing of God,
Col. 2.19. And daily shall thou look forth as the morning, fair as the
Moon, pure as the Sun, Cant. 6.9.

The savor of the garments of thy conversation is most delicate, Acceptable
conversation.
as the Savor of Lebanon, Cant. 4.11. And all thy walkings are acceptable
before God: Thou art in his eyes, as one that finds peace, Ca^. 8.10

Thou art as a Garden enclosed, Protection.
as a spring shut up, and a fountain sealed up, Cant. 4.12.

He shall protect thee from outward injuries, and preserve thee from secret
corruptions. His love is spread into thy heart, which is like a banner over
thee, Cant. 2.4. to draw thee, to direct thee, and protect thee.

And because thou art dearly beloved; Comforts.
and art as a seal on his heart, and as a Signet on his arm, Cant. 8.6. in
all thy fears, troubles and terrors, thou shall delight under the shadow of
his presence. Cant. 2.3. In the sense of thy wants, his presence shall support
thee: he will stay thee with the Flaggons of his promises; and comfort thee
with the Apples of his graces, Cant. 2.5.

At the last Day thou shall arise like a pillar of smoke, Glorification.
perfumed with the Myrrha and Incense, and with all the chief spices of the
graces of perfect sanctification, Cant. 3.6. and shall be quickened and raised
together with Christ. Ephesians. 2.5. as one of the Congregation of the first
borne, Heb. 12.29. unto that eternal glory, where thou shall rest in a bed
better than Salomons, Cant. 3.7. and shall perfectly enjoy all those things
that God has prepared for them that love him. Which things eye has not seen,
no ear heard, neither have entered into the mind of man, 1. Cor. 2.9.

THE CHRISTIAN DVTIE.
To crucify the flesh.
16. The Christian dignity and duty are inseparable.
HItherto is set down the great dignity of those excellent and stately ones
That are Christ's. It is not an idle prerogative. It is that greatest benefit,
that binds all in an obligation of all duty. There is one duty here made
mention of: but many more are understood by a necessary consequent, as

In Christ to become new creatures, Duties of Christians.
2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.14, 15.

To walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh, Romans 8.1.

To abstain from fornication, 1. Cor. 6.13, 15

To rise with Christ, and seek those things that are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God, Colos. 3.1.

To glorify God in body and spirit, since we are not our own, but Christ's, 1.
Cor. 6.20.

All these things do they that have crucified the flesh, To crucify the
flesh, what a work.
with the affections and lusts. A task indeed great, and hard. Only proper to
those that are Christ's, and to none others: and they only fit for it, which no
other, but themselves can perform. A work both necessary and comfortable:
most displeasant to us, and impossible, by nature: yet by grace made easy and
delightful: and to God in Christ very acceptable.

The matter of this work is three-folde: 1. The flesh. 2. The affections. 3.
The lusts.

The form of the work, is to crucify.

17 The flesh visible.
THe flesh is either visible or invisible.

The visible flesh is that which is subject to senses, and may be felt and
seen: this is our body. Man is called flesh, Genesis 6.12. Why man and his
life are called Flesh.
And this present life is called flesh, 1. Cor. 7.28.

To resemble the life of man, as it is indeed ever in a flowing. Our flesh is
ever flowing in by nourishment, and flowing out by wasting and euaporation:
that what of it is emptied by this, if it be not restored with the other, it
must needs perish. Three notable things within our selves do continually warn
us, that our lives are changeable, that we be every moment ready to lay it
down.

Our waking and sleeping again, for restoring of our Animal spirits: Our
continual beating of heart and arteries by Systole and Diastole, for repairing
of our vital spirits, and our voiding, filling and feeding, for repairing of
our natural spirits, and sustaining of this mass of our flesh; do show unto
us, that we all must flit, and that this house of clay wherein we live, some
one day will fall down about our ears.

Flesh in the holy Scriptures, Diverse significations of flesh.
is often taken for that outward part of our person, the body, 2. Cor. 7.1.
Sometimes again it is taken for our mortality, imbecility, and misery, 1.
Tim. 3.16. 2. Cor. 10.2. Phil. 1.24. compared with Isa. 31.3.

It is taken other times for our whole humanity, and is attributed to Christ,
Ioh. 6.51. Act. 2.30. 1. Pet. 3.8.

Here by this visible and external flesh, is understood our body, our bodily
part of our person, which must be crucified; not with hands of man, but by the
hand of the holy Spirit: as shall hereafter be mentioned, Sect. 27.

18. The flesh invisible.
THe invisible flesh is not subject to the eye of the body, Our corruption is
called flesh, and why.
but to the eye of the soul, Romans 8.24. It is our natural corruption in sin,
which is called very often flesh: but improperly, and Metonymically: not so
much for that it is propagated through the flesh, or that it is nourished in the
flesh; or executed by the flesh, or increased with baiting of fleshly objects.
As for that, the chief end that this our corruption aims at, in all motions
and actions, is, the sensual delights of the flesh and body. For what do the
whole unregenerate in the world respect, in their sinful honors, profits, or
pleasures, 1. Ioh. 2.16. but only the body, and such things as concern the
same? Never a true thought, nor care, have they of the poor soul, nor of the
immortality and salvation thereof: They mind always earthly things, Phil.
3.19. Their wisdom is sensual and fleshly, Iam. 3.15.

This is yt flesh wherein dwells no good, The invisible flesh described by
other places of Scripture.
Romans 7.18.

This is the law in our members, rebelling against the law of our mind: and
leading us captive unto the law of sin, Romans 7.23.

This flesh makes me^ to savor the things of the flesh, Romans 8.5.

This flesh is that body of sin, Romans 6.6. That wisdom of the flesh, which
is death and enmity against God, Romans 8.6, 7.

They that are in this flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8.

The whole world by nature are poisoned with this Sinning Sin. Why this flesh
should be crucified.
It causes every one to become an auowed enemy against God. It is the
fountain of all wickedness: It tieth men to the earth, and makes the^ slaves
to their own sensuality: And finally brings every one to everlasting
perdition. And therefore most needful it is that it be crucified.

19. Affections holy.
AFfections, Affections threefold.
as they are merely natural, we cannot want them. As they are holy, we must
needs have them. As they are unholy, we must needs crucify them. Holy
affections.


As for Affections that are holy: they are always rightly moved: they exceed
neither in matter, nor in measure: they are stirred by their right and proper
objects: they intend ever a godly end: they are ruled by the Word, and
sanctified by the Spirit. They are only moved by that Good, that God calls
Good: and by that evil that God calls evil.

They embrace nothing but Good.

They reject nothing but evil.

They are good servants to the soul: and burning sparks of grace to kindle
piety.

20. Affections unholy.
Unholy affections are to be crucified. Unholy affections what they are.
These are the affections of Sins, Romans 7.5.

And those ungodly co^motions of the soul, accompanied ever with pleasure or
with pain. The soul of man is full of evil motions. For the imaginations of
the thoughts of his heart are evil continually, Genesis 6.5.

They are perturbations, and passions, stirred by our corruption, that do
tyrannize over the soul, to make it slauishly serve sensuality.

They are motions that move the soul to perpetrate sin: They have strange
force in our members; that is, The force of wicked affections.
amongst our faculties, Romans 7.5. whereby the soul is moved to swell with
ambition, to rise with presumption, to be dejected with desperation, to pine
with envy, to fret with anger, to rage with malice, to faint in doubt, to be
puffed up with prosperity, cast down with adversity, oppressed by battles,
betwixt joy and sorrow, hope and despair, fear and care, love and hatred, and
pity and rage. And ouerhaled in one instant with a tempest, and contrary tide,
in a sudden change of excessive passions: as of joy in a moment turned to
sorrow: of love to hatred: and of confidence to fear, etc.

The most part of those that do profess themselves to be Christ's, The evil
of wicked affections.
have their souls disquieted with affections, their wit is defaced, grace is
extinguished: they prove at last fools before the world: enemies to
themselves: and culpable before God. That unless they will most willingly
run from Christ, to their own perdition: it behooves them of necessity to
crucify their affections.

21. Lusts Spiritual.
LVsts are either Spiritual, Natural, Spiritual lusts what they are.
or Sinful.

Lusts Spiritual are such as are contrary to the flesh: as the flesh lusts
against them, Gal. 5.17.

They are sanctified desires. They are engendered by the Holy Spirit. They are
agreeable to Gods will. They are conversant about heavenly and holy objects.
They are not to be crucified, but entertained.

By them we have our conversation in heaven. By them we walk not after the
flesh: but after the Spirit. And by them we have our intestine battles and
victories against the lusts of the flesh.

22. Lusts natural.
LVsts natural, Lusts natural what they are.
are such as are common to all, both to those that are Christ's, and to those
that are not Christ's. And are such as merely nature prescribes, (nature I
understand in so far as it is not vitiate) as the lusting for things lawful,
necessary, moderate, they are more to be called natural desires then lusts:
and are in themselves indifferent. As those lusts are that concern the lawful
use of meat and drink, and such things as appertain to the necessity and
honesty of this life. These lusts are not to be crucified, but moderate.

23. Lusts sinful.
LVsts spiritual are proper to those that are Christ's. Lusts sinful are
proper to those that are not Christ's.

Lusts sinful, are those, that they that are Christ's have crucified.

Lust is taken sometimes generally, Sinful lust twofold.
for original sin and natural corruption; and then it is all one with the
flesh. Sometimes it is taken more specially, for those sinful desires that do
spring from our flesh and corruption; and are stirred up, and set forward by
wicked affections; and are practiced by the members of the body. James the
Apostle, Epist. 1.14. sets down six particular points in the process of
humane tentations, The process of humane tentations.
whereof Concupiscence is the ground; and is that same, that flesh is in this
place. The drawing and baiting of the heart by alluring objects, are two
sinful affections. The conceiving of sin, and traveling therewith, are the
twofold rage of reigning lusts, and here are to be understood, and by those
that are Christ's to be crucified. The finishing of sin, and bringing forth of
death, are all those external evils both culpae and paenae that do fall, and
follow upon the flesh, the affections and lusts, if they be not in time
crucified.

24. The nature of these wicked lusts.
THey are called the lusts of the flesh, 1. Sinful lusts, what they are.
Ioh. 2.6. Ephesians. 2.3. Gal. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.11.

They are called the lusts of the world, Tit. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.4.

They are called men's own proper lusts, 2. Pet. 3.3. 2. Tim. 4.5.

They are also called the lusts of uncleanness, 2. Pet. 2.10. the lusts of the
eyes, 1. Ioh. 2.16. the lusts of corruption, 2. Pet. 1.4. the lusts of men, 1.
Pet. 4.2. evil lusts, Colos. 3.5. deceiving lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. The force of
wicked lusts.


These are the lusts which fight against the soul, 1. Pet. 2.11. A reprobate
mind is given up to these lusts, Romans 1.24. The wicked give obedience to these
lusts, Romans 6.12. and are led with many noisome and foolish lusts, 1. Tim. 6.9.

This does declare in what danger they live and die in, that crucify not their
lusts, and are not Christ's.

25. What is it to crucify the Flesh.
TO crucify the flesh, and to mortify the flesh, Sanctification has two
parts.
are all one. It is the former part of our sanctification; as vivification or
resurrection to a new life, is the other part thereof, Ephesians. 4.23. Tit. 2.12.

To crucify the flesh, To crucify, what it is.
is a metaphorical phrase, alluding unto the crucifying of the body of any one
that is condemned to die, by that form of death of malefactors: or because it
must be according to the similitude of Christ's crucifying, Romans 6.5. Or most
of all, because it must be done by that virtue that is in the Cross of Christ,
and communicated to us by the Spirit. For if we be planted with him unto the
similitude of his death: even so shall we be unto the similitude of his
resurrection: knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin,
Romans 6.5, 6.

The very proper meaning of this crucifying of the flesh is this, What is meant
by crucifying.
according to the Apostles counsel.

Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, Romans 6.12.

Let not sin have dominion over you, verse. 14. Let sin be subdued and
destroyed, verse. 6. Serve sin no longer, verse. 16. Become free of sin,
verse. 18. Cease from sin, 1. Pet. 4.1. and do all this by the only virtue and
power of Christ's death and Cross, Romans 6.1, etc. and by a true conformity
therewith, Phil. 3.10.

This crucifying of the flesh imports necessarily the other part of our
Sanctification, The crucifying of the flesh is inseparable from a new life.
to wit, a rising to a newness of life, without the which, the other cannot be
a true and a right crucifying, Col. 3.9, 10. so as they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh: even so likewise they have risen to a newness of life,
Romans 6.5, 11, 18.

26. How the internal flesh, affections and lusts, are to be crucified.
THe crucifying of the flesh depends upon our union with Christ: The crucifying
of the flesh depends on Christ's union with us:
our union with Christ, is by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. By faith he is ours, and we are
his. By faith we apprehe^d in Christ's death and Cross, both merit and virtue.
By the merit of his Cross we are justified: by the virtue of his Cross we
do crucify our flesh. And on the power of his Cross.
The power of his Cross is effectual in us, by the secret operation of his
holy Spirit: so that our old man is crucified with Christ, Romans 6.6. We are
crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20.

The holy Spirit stirs up the faith of those that are Christ's, How Christ's
Cross works in us.
by a considering or judging with themselves, 2. Cor. 5.14 and conceiving a
disdainfulnesse at sin; Hatred of sin, how wrought in us.
and a thankfulness to Christ.

A disdainfulnesse at sin, is conceived in the consideration of Christ's
Cross: when as we think earnestly upon Christ, so innocent, and so great in
dignity, etc. and upon his Cross so cursed, so shameful, and so painful;
accompanied with the most horrible sense of Gods anger; we conceive a
detestation and hatred at sin, being so infinite and great an evil in it
self, that it could no otherwise be expiated, but by the facred blood of the
most High God, Act. 20.28. And hereupon we are moved more and more, both to
disdain it, and to dis-haunt it; yea, by time to kill it, and to bury it, that
it have no more power in us to reign in our mortal bodies.

A great point of thankfulness to Christ is likewise conceived, Thankfulness
how wrought.
in the right meditation of Christ's Cross. We see in Christ's Cross the most
excellent benefit of our redemption, the greatest beneficence of the greatest
Benefactor: even that bountifulness of that love of God our Savior, Tit. 3.4.
when we were of no strength, he died for the ungodly, Romans 5.6. He loved us,
and washed us in his blood, from our sins, Revel. 1.5. There is no greater
love, than this his love, whereby he gave his life for us, Ioh. 15.13. It
passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.

It pleases God by his holy Spirit, to shed abroad this love in our hearts,
Romans 5.5. which when we feel, it constrains us, 2. Cor. 5.14.

That we henceforth live not unto our selves, but unto him that died for us,
and rose again, 2. Cor. 5.15.

Arraigne therefore with expedition, An admonition alluding to the Cross of
Christ.
thy flesh, thy affections and lusts, unto the consistory of thy conscience:
try and judge them by the Word: convince and condemn them most justly to be
crucified with Christ.

Lead them forth without the Camp of thy heart, unto the vilest Golgotha,
there to suffer.

Strip them naked of all their false external vestures of profit, pleasure and
honor, with all their deceitfulness; that their filthy nakedness may
appear, to their further detestation.

Crucify thy affections, and fix them by faith upon the Cross of Christ; who
is that tree of life, Revel. 22. which gives death unto sin, but life and
health to his own.

Curse them from thy heart, and hate them with a most deadly hatred.

Give them to drink the bitterest Aloes of a contrite heart.

Cease not from crucifying, them till they be fully dead.

Then bury them with Christ, until they be thoroughly wasted and consumed.

At last lift up thy heart and head with joy, unto thy Redeemer, and say
confidently, Now I know that my Well-beloued is mine, and I am his: he feeds
among the Lillies, Cant. 2.16. For I hate them that hate thee (chiefly sin
and Satan) with an unfeigned hatred, as they were my utter enemies, Psalm.
139.22. and for thy sake I have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts. And because I delight and rejoice in nothing so much as in thy Cross: I
am likewise crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me. As the
world despises me for thy Cross sake; so by the virtue and power of that same
Cross, I despise the world, Galat. 4.16. yea, for thy sake I count my greatest
vantage to be loss, and do esteem all things but dung to gain thee, Phil.
3.8. And all ye that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. And let us all
walk worthy of the Lord, Colos. 1.10. and of that great vocation and estate
wherein we are called to be his, Ephesians. 4.1. And let us, with those ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousand thousand of Angels, say with our
hearts, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise, Revel. 5.11, 12, 13.

27. How the external flesh, and body is to be crucified?
TO crucify the flesh, What it is to crucify the body.
is not to put violent hands into the body; as did Achitophel and Judas.
Neither is it, to plague it with needless and superstitious austerities; of
watchings, fastings, nakedness, pilgrimages, scurgings, etc. As parts of that
Papisticall penall-satisfaction for appeasing of divine wrath: which things
have indeed a show of wisdom, in a voluntary religion, and humbleness of
mind, and in not sparing the body, Col. 2.23. But to crucify the bodily flesh,
is to abstain from all things, so far as it may serve to obtain that
incorruptible crown: To beat down the body, and to bring it to subjection, 1.
Cor. 9.25, 27. If we give the body too much, we feed a foe: if too little,
we kill a friend. The necessity of the body (not the superfluity) is to be
regarded. It must serve and not command: The servant must not be preferred to
the Master. It is a shame to any to be a slave to his own body. Every one
should say with himself: Mayor sum, and ad maiora genitus, quam vt sim
mancipium corporis mei, Senec. epist. 66. I am greater, and borne to a greater
estate, then I should become a slave to my body.

We should always be conversant with our best and divine part: Admonition.
but with that querulous and fragill part, seldom: and only upon necessity.
What needs the prisoner have such care of his prison? Whilst thou live in
the body, live not for the body: Hold it under obedience. If it be pampered, it
will repine: delicately to entertain it, is to quench fire with gunpowder. By
external abstinence and exercises, fit it for internal mortification.

Accustom thy self to command thy delights. Shun all that are unlawful In
those that are lawful, keep a measure. Sustain and abstain. Give thy body
nothing, that thy conscience bids withhold. Be not so like Martha, to the body,
as like Mary, for the soul.

28. To crucify the flesh, etc. is with difficulty and pain.
THe word it self (crucify) shows that this work cannot be without
difficulty and pain. And as it is not done in one moment, so it is not done
with a wish. There must be a labor, a business, a travel in the dolours of
the new birth.

Such two old entire friends, as is the Flesh, The crucifyng of the flesh
begins at sorrow for sin.
and the Spirit, cannot part company, without tears. The old man cannot be
mortified, without the sorrow of a contrite spirit. The fore-skinne of our
flesh cannot be circumcised, without some sense of secret grief.

We cannot be delivered of our false conception of that body of sin, without
some manifest dolor.

If thou would therefore rightly attempt the crucifying of the flesh,
Admonition.
etc. thou must begin at a humbled heart: thou must sow in tears, that thou
may reap in joy: Psalm. 126.5. Thou must not think to fly the wrestlings,
without a wounded conscience. Thou must sorrow to Godward: and suffer some
secret pangs of the sense of thy own sins, and Gods wrath: and of battles
betwixt the flesh and the Spirit.

Thou must lament before the Lord; that thou have been so long in beginning to
crucify the flesh. Thou will find many secret perplexities in parting with thy
domesticke gods, thy fond affections and lusts.

Whosoever have not found within themselves, these secret terrors, dolours and
battles, as yet they have not known, nor felt what it is to crucify the
flesh, etc.

But here is thy comfort; Comfort.
If thou have crucified that old man, thy sorrow shall be turned to joy, thy
battles to peace: and thy terrors to comforts, which are unspeakable and
glorious.

29. Who do crucify the flesh?
SOme do cherish their flesh, Only they that are true Christians do crucify
the flesh.
affections and lusts, as the Epicure. Some do cross a little their flesh and
affections, as the Moralist. Some do curse them, as the desperate.

The Hypocrite may cover or color his flesh and affections, but he cannot
crucify them. But none do crucify them, but they that are Christ's.

It is one thing to restrain or bridle ye flesh and the lusts, and another
thing to crucify them. Only a true Christian, who is Christ's indeed, does
truly crucify his corruption and lusts. It may be said to him, as the Angel
said to Gedeon: The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man, Judge. 6.12. The sword
of the Lord and of Gedeon against Jericho, Judge. 7.20. So, The sword of the
Spirit, and of a Christian against sin, to crucify the flesh and the lusts,
etc.

Many points of our fleshly corruption; many lusts and affections may lie long
hid and sleeping within men; because they want occasion of objects and
tentations to stir them and awake them. But this sleeping of affections, is not
the crucifying of affections. Only those that are Christ's, do crucify the
flesh, with the affections and lusts.

30. Who crucify them not? They that are not Christ's cannot crucify the flesh.

Whosoever are not Christ's they cannot crucify the flesh; they have neither
seeing eyes, nor feeling hearts, to perceive their flesh and affections.
Without Christ, they can do nothing: without Christ, they are merely natural,
sensual, carnal, and in great confederacy with their lusts and flesh. Their
amity and wisdom, is enmity against God: the body cannot live without the
head: the branch cannot bear fruit without the tree: the house cannot stand
without the cornerstone: no more can they that are without Christ, crucify
their flesh, affections and lusts. They are enemies of Christ's Cross, whose
end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame;
which mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19.

They that are without Christ, To restrain sin, is not to crucify sin.
may hide sin and restrain sin: but cannot crucify sin. Many corruptions
may be lurking within them, and as yet not awaked. Many I have seen walking,
eating, drinking, going abroad, attending their affairs, their mirth, and
their pastime: and yet having within their body with many secret sleeping
obstructions, corruptions, shirrouses, malignities, ready to be impregnat and
stirred up, and to become most painful, dangerous and deadly diseases. So may
those that are without Christ have their flesh, affections and lusts in many
points, lying in a drowsinesse, and brought asleep for a time: this is not to
have the flesh in any wise crucified.

They may have their flesh and affections restrained: their office, education,
imitation, affection, fear, ingenuity of nature, infancy, age, sex, moral
virtues, and the general and common repressing gifts of the Spirit, may bridle
their flesh and lusts in many degrees: and yet never a whit truly crucified.
Admonition.


Let us not therefore think our selves the more happy, or the more to be
Christ's: for all our simple restraint of sin, conformity of Christian
ma^ners, stopping of grosser sins, civil or moral carriage, fair and
seemly fashions, unless by the virtue of Christ's Cross we do mortify sin
at the root: and except we find sensible, that nothing in this whole world
moves us more to crucify sin, and beat down any corruption or lust in us; as
the special consideration of the power of Christ's cross.

31. How far can the flesh, etc. be crucified?
THe body may most of all be easily crucified, It is easier to crucify the
body, than the lusts: and the lusts, than the affections.
by beating it down, and holding it under some obedience of abstinence and
austerity, and weaning it from many delights.

Lusts again are more easily crucified than affections; because they are more
near the external body, and actions thereof: affections again hardlier are
crucified than lusts. But the flesh it self, The internal flesh is most
hardly crucified.
that body of death, and sin, most hardly of all: for it is the strong root,
out of the which the rest does spring up. And yet none of all these can be
truly crucified, unless they al be crucified in some true measure and degree.

Many branches of our lusts have been cut, and yet spring again: many
quenched, yet kindled again: many affections subdued, yet rebelling again:
because the root (the flesh) has yet never bin rightly rooted out.

The flesh can never be fully and perfectly crucified, The flesh cannot be
perfectly crucified.
so long as we are in this tabernacle of clay. They that are Christ's, must not
be tried by perfect sanctification. Sin will remain, though not reign. We
must see and feel our corruption, but not walk after it: yet while we are
disclaiming it, it will be disquieting us; and while we are mourning for it,
it will still be marring us.

And although Sarah and Hagar be dwelling in the house of Abraham, Hagar must
be subject to Sarah; or else both Hagar and her children must be cast out,
Genesis 16.6.

32. When do we crucify the flesh, etc?
IT is once truly begun, Our whole life should be a crucifying of sin.
but never in this life fully finished. For as the inward man is renewed daily,
2. Cor. 4.16. So the outward man (the flesh) is crucified daily. And although
the Apostle uses the praeterit time, whereby he understands the true
beginning of this work: yet so long as we live, the continual practice of it
remains, and shall not be finished until death.

The mortified Romans are still exhorted to mortify the lusts of the body,
Romans 8. The renewed Ephesians and Colossians are willed to do the same, Ephesians.
4.22. Col. 3.8. We must still be doing this work, we must crucify the flesh,
and crucify it again. Admonition.
Let us be doing this ever without intermission. There will ever remain some
parts of the root of sin; out of the which, some new and noisome branches
will spring out, unless we be still crucifying: until the time we see God face
to face, we will ever see another law in our members, repugning against the law
of our mind, Romans 7.23. Against the which we must have a continual battle;
which also by the power of Gods Spirit we must be still crucifying; and
continually we must endeavor, Our imperfection.
that as the flesh and the Spirit (our unregenerate and regenerate parts) are
never fully sundred: they both concur in place and action: they are mixed
through all, and in all our natural faculties and actions; whereby all our
best works are imperfect. So I say, we should endeavor so to crucify the
flesh, that the Spirit may have the preeminence in all things; although with
some opposition, and contagion of the flesh, 1. Ioh. 5.45.

Hereof it follows, that both we, and all our best works are but imperfectly
good; Our perfection.
yet we are acceptable before God, through Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5. All our
perfection is but either comparatiue, being compared with the ungodly; or
imputative, being ours in Christ; or inchoatiue, being begun by the Spirit: or
affectiue, more in the affection, than effectiue in action.

33. Why must the flesh, etc. be crucified?
But what? may we not be Christ's, and do as we please? what need is there, to
those that are Christ's, to crucify the flesh? May we not turn the grace of
God to wantonness? may we not sin, that grace may abound? Is there such a
necessity that we must crucify the flesh?

Truly a necessity lies upon us, To crucify the flesh, etc. a thing most
necessary.
to crucify the flesh; for unless we kill sin, it will kill us.

The flesh lusts against the Spirit, Galat. 5.17. we must crucify the flesh,
that we may live in the Spirit. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God,
Romans 8.8. Carnal men walk as men in the works of the flesh, 1. Cor. 3.3. If
we live after the flesh, we shall dye. Romans 8.13. Fleshly lusts do fight
against the soul, 1. Pet. 2.

They that sow to the flesh, of the flesh shall reap corruption, Gal. 6. And
they that do not crucify the flesh, and the works thereof, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 21.

It stands us therefore upon the peril of condemnation, Admonition.
if we do not crucify truly the flesh. Who can live with a deadly foe, from
whom they cannot fly, unless they make battle to overthrow him? Who can
willingly keep a Scorpion in their bosom, and not kill it? Our flesh and
affections and lusts, must either bring on us an eternal curse, or else we
must in time crucify them. We must consume all those, which the Lord our God
does give us to consume: Deuteronomy. 7.16. compared with 13.6. And if our dearest
friend (which is as our own soul) entice us secretly to sin, our eye should
not pity him, but even kill him. This was an ordinance to the people of
Israel, to save the^ from offending of God. This same in effect should we do
with our intestine enemies, the fleshly affections and lusts, our greatest
seducers to offend God. Agag and the Amalekites of our flesh, even our
affections, whom God commands to be killed, must not be spared, 1. Sa^. 15.3.
Let us show herein our greatest obedience to God, and the most allowed zeal of
Phineas, in killing and crucifying the vilest Zimri and Cozbi of our lusts,
Numb. 25.

34 A conclusion for those that are Christ's.
HEre is the dignity and duty of a Christian described. His dignity, is to
be Christ's. His duty is, to crucify the flesh. Many sorts of false
Christians.
As for ye Christian dignity: Many carry the name of a Christian to their
condemnation; because they will not be truly Christ's to their own salvation.
Many have the face and the mouth of a Christian; but neither the heart nor hand
of a Christian. Some are enemies to Christ, open or secret. Some are Christ's,
only in show; but not in substance: in appearance only, and not so in effect.
Some are but almost his, with Agrippa, Act. 26.28. and not far from the
kingdom of God, with the discreet Scribe, Mark. 12.34. Some intend to become
Christ's: and are only his in a naked purpose, but not in practice. The false
Christian described.
Some would be Christ's, but not peremptorily: only with reseruations, and
certain conditions: To crucify their flesh or to deny themselves, they would
have excepted: If, to forsake the worlds vanities, customs, abuses, and
sinful fashions were permitted: and if to shun all crosses, and become a
temporizer, were things tolerable and indifferent. They would be Christ's, if
the word, repentance, faith, conscience, and all piety, were subordinate to
their humor; or might stand without prejudice of their fleshly affections, and
lusts. All, almost will do violence to the kingdom of God, and will be
Christ's, until it come to the swine of their lusts, with the Gadarenes, Luke
8.37. then he must depart. The sacrilegious, the adulterers, the envious,
ambitious, malicious, auaricious, etc. will be Christ's, they will serve two
masters, erect two opposite Kingdoms within them, Gods and Satan's.

They will have their light to have a communion with darkness: And Christ to
be in concord with Belial, 2. Cor. 6.14.

But (alas) are not all these strongly deluded? They deceive themselves in
their own imagination: thinking with themselves to be something, when they are
nothing, and worse then nothing, Gal. 6.3. And many (if they had the occasion
and means) with all the nerves of their heart, would aspire to become great in
the world: But who does take thought to attain to the greatest good, Very few
are true Christians.
and best greatness, to be Christ's? We see our calling, how that not many
wise, not many mighty, not many noble (yet some) are called. But God has
chosen the worlds foolish, weak, vile, and naughty things, to confound the
wise, mighty, precious and worthy things thereof, 1. Cor. 1.26. Earthly
prerogatives are in price: worldly dignities are hunted after. But who does
regard that most excellent prerogative; To be the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12? And
that their right may be in the tree of life, Revel. 22.14? The most part
therefore see not their misery, and fear not that condemnation that hangs
above their heads.

Let us above al things endeavor to become Christ's truly and constantly. An
exhortation that men may become true Christians.
Let us esteem it the highest dignity, the greatest felicity, the sweetest
contentment, the surest peace, and the most unspeakable and glorious joy to be
Christ's. Without him, thy blessings are curses; thy light is darknesses; thy
glory is but shame; thy life is but a death; and all thy hope is perdition. But
if thou be Christ's, thou thy self and all that thou have, is blessed: thy
crosses are for thy good; all things are thine, and for thy comfort. With a
cheerful heart (filled with the joy of the holy Spirit) thou may look down
to thy sins, as pardoned: look up to God, as reconciled: look into thy self,
as the heir of God: and look up to heaven, as thy dwelling place and endless
paradise: and finally, delight thy self more in this, that thou art Christ's,
the^ in a thousandworlds beside. So hear, that thou may be his: so strive,
that thou may be his: so live, that thou may be his: and so die, that thou
may be his.

35. A conclusion for the crucifying the flesh, etc.
AS for the duty of a Christian (the crucifying of the flesh) the most part are
far from Impedime^ts that stay the crucifying of the flesh.
this point. They are so sunk deep in rebellion, Isa. 31.6. so accustomed to
evil, that they can do no good: they cannot change their Morian blackness,
nor Leopard spots, Ier. 13.23. They are past feeling, and senselesly do boil
in their lusts and affections, Ephesians. 4.18. They are like the wild Ass used to
the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind by occasion at her pleasure, etc. Ier.
2.24.

Some do hide and cover their flesh, Diuerssorts of the false crucifying of
the flesh, etc.
affections and lusts, under hypocrisy. Some do restrain them at times by
some occasions and respects. Some do entertain them within, and keep them in,
from breaking forth into capital and groser impieties: as into murder,
adultery, incest, theft, etc. yet they permit them to have a full vent unto
lesser sins: as unto anger, envy, The flesh does crucify us to our damnation.
contempt, backbiting, forged cauillation, private injuries, etc. We ca^ suffer
nothing yt touches our name, our goods, or persons; no delightful objects are
refrained; no tentations are resisted. It is a shame to see what slaves we are
to our selves, and what obedience we give to sin unto death, Romans 6.16. and
how far the flesh, affections and lusts do crucify us, and we not them.
Beside that, our affections and lusts breed us many incurable and dangerous
diseases, and make much disquietnes to the mind; they produce the greatest
wickednesses unnatural cruelties and vileness, and procure endless wrath to
themselves: whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory
is to their shame, which mind earthly things, An exhortation to crucify the
flesh.
Phil. 3.19.

If we be therefore Christ's, or would become Christ's: Let us condemn our
selves, that we have walked so unworthy of him, and for that we have preferred
our flesh and lusts to him, and given too great a testimony that we are not
Christ's. If we be Christ's, let us account him dear to us, as we are to him.
Let us apply his death and cross to our hearts; that as by the merit thereof
we get our sins pardoned; so by the virtue of the same we may have the^ also
mortified. Look upon him whom thou have pierced, and lament for him, as one
mourns for his only son; and be sorry for him, as one is for his first
borne, Zach. 12.10. And so detest sin to the death: fear Gods wrath, rejoice
greatly in thy ransom, and in nothing more; and let this joy stir up thy heart
both to crucify thy flesh, and the world to thy self, and thy self to them,
Gal. 6.14. Let his love sharpen thy love: Cos amoris amor, Pro. 8.17. His love
is without paragon. It ever stands in the Zenith. He loved us unto the
death. Greater love than this has no man, when any man bestows his life on
his friends, Ioh. 15.13. He is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. His love passes all
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. It is everlasting, and inseparable from us, and we from
it, Ier. 31.3. Romans 8.35. It is neither hid, neither treasured up only in his
Word; but shed abroad into our hearts by the Spirit, Romans 5.5. We must know
it, and sensibly feel it, Ephesians. 3.19. That by these cords of man, and bands of
love, Hos. 11.4. he may draw us to himself, and that we may come to him both
weeping, Ier. 31.9. and rejoicing with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet.
1.8. even rejoicing in trembling, Psalm. 2.11. because of that great consolation
in Christ, and comfort of love, Phil. 3.1. And having our hearts constrained by
his love, 2. Cor. 5.14. that we may crucify these both his and our most deadly
enemies. God of his superabundant mercy grant, yt we may once truly become
Christ's, and that both in him, and by him, and for him, we may crucify the
flesh, the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

FINIS.

