A Decree between Churchyard and Camel.
A decree upon the dream made by Dauy Dicar,
With answer to Camel, whose tau^tes be more quicker.
Where Dicar has dreamed of things out of frame,
And Churchyard by writing affirms the same,
And Camel contendeth, the same to deface,
And therefore has put his doings in place.
Sithe both of those twain has set forth in myter
The words of the Author, the skyl of the wryghter
And run in this race, still chaffyng the bytte
I think in this case much more then is fytte.
I myndyng as much as lies in me
To make them both* as in one to agree
Have taken in hand the dream to defend
And so to recite their race to the end.
Not so to approve my learning or skyll
But only because it becomes them ill
From rymyng to raylyng so often to dygresse,
Whereas reason and wit does will nothing less.
As Dicar has dreamed so time out of mind, Dicars Dream.

Some things were amys, that some men did find,
If al things were well, as I would God they were,
We should not be plaged from year unto year,
If all men do right, what needs the law,
What need any justice to hang and to draw,
If no man be wronged nor wydowe oppressed,
Then needs no care to have it redressed,
If no man will venture to rob or to steal,
O England thou have a good common weal.
If no man do hurde nor hydeth in store,
Then England shall have no dearth any more
If no man offend by way of excess.
Then grace does abound, the fault is the less,
If the lusts of the flesh be put out of ure
The world is amended the people be pure.
If the poor and the nedye be daily relyued,
What man is so mad, thereat to be grieved?
If no man do slander nor stir up debate,
Then Dicar I think has dreamed to late.
If no man do flatter, nor fawn for a gain,
Then may it appear this dream is but vain.
If all thing be well, and in the right way,
Why do they not use good laws to obey.
If no man defraude in bying nor sellyng
Then happy is England, for there is best dwelling.
If faith he unfeigned, and words do once bind,
The dream is all false, and so ye may find.
If truth do take place and in all things encreasse,
Dream no more Dicar, but let thy dream cease.
If this be not so then Camel to you,
I fear me this dream will prove to be true.
For it is not so geeson with us for to hear,
But the effect of the dream does daily appear.
And every man is now in such taking,
It passes, a dream, they find it out wakyng.
If you be such a one as never had peer,
Then are you fauty in none of this geere.
But seeing your writing does seem somewhat quycke,
You seem that ye smarted because ye did kycke.
Yet when the dream was to pryntyng dyrected,
I thyncke of the dreamer ye were not suspected.
And where as you contend it does not belong,
For Dicar to dream of right or of wrong.
In deed you do well if you have done amys,
To show him his fault and say thus it is.
And if you so well know what does Dycar behoue,
Then ought you to show the same to approve.
But me thyncketh you want a friendly good will,
To deface a good matter though the author were ill.
And certes of you both indifferently to tell
I cannot in your raylynges commend your doyngs well.
And both of you twain are yet to me unknown,
yet can I aid your doings, as if they were mine own.
ye pass from your purpose in such unworthy sort,
ye make of your doings a very laughyng sport.
ye close and ye gloss, in sekyng to be fine,
ye taunt and retaunt almost in every line.
ye affirm ye have red both Terence and Cato,
ye count ye do but flatter, ye well resemble Gnato.
And look how much dyffers a Fox from a fool,
So much do you dyffer from Cato and his school,
For Cato does affirm there is no greater shame,
Then to reprove a vice, and your selves to do the same.
And because I will not seem your fancy to embrace,
As touching your debate* I answer in this case:
Me thinks in writing ye both have such skyll*
ye mar a good matter and make it very ill.
Whereby to say the truth it appears well unto me,
your names and your wits innumerable be.
Therefore do not think that ye can be forborne,
But such as be readers shall laugh you to scorn.
And when that your doings be thoroughly perused,
Then by the same deeds ye shall be accused.
Cease now in season cast all contempt away,
Be subject unto reason, and make no more delay.
And either of you twain do not refuse to know,
As Cato does enstructe you but straight embrace it so
which though my skill be small, here thought I to rehearse
The text and sense with all of every kind of verce
Contra uerbosos noli contendere uerbis,
Sermo datur cunctis animii sapiencia paucis,
Cum recte uiuas ne curas uerba malorum
Arbitrii nostri non est quid quisque loquatur.
To strive with men of many words, refrain I the advice
It is not given to every man that he shall be godly wise
If thou live well do not regard what wicked men do say
For why? it lies not in us such wicked tounges to stay,
This is it that ye have read which if you list to know
He will aswage your sturdi storms which you have reised so
Take this in worth good Reder now expound it to ye best
For I have said to their deuyce, now harken to the rest
The judgment of the Author.
Some thing is a mys and ever shall be so,
Scripture writes this as learned men do know.
And some men have the gift thereof to speak and write,
Which fall yet at a lift to frail and fond delight.
It does behoue us all so justly as we can,
To do right well in deed, and eke to write it thanne
How be it in him I judge much greater fault there is,
Which naught can say nor do, but that which is a mys.
The best may be amended, and that is very true
The more that have offended, the more we ought to rue.
If any fall from grace gentelly him assail,
Burden him with charity, no rygour can prevail,
For why, if that the shepherde do wander from the way,
No marvel if the sheep thereafter go astraye
Some men perhappe there be will take me to the wourst
I pray you judge of me, as I spoke it at the furst
For it becomes ill in wryttyng to contend,
Without wit or skyll to make a raylyng end
Take me to the best, as one to you unknown
Whose worthy wyts I do commend and would with you be one.
Not mindyng so assuredly to spend and waste the day,
To make the people laugh at me, and here I make a stay,
Finis
quod W. Ilderton.

Imprinted at London by Rychard Haruy, dwelling in Fosterlane.


