LIBER VIARVM DEI.
THIS IS the book of the wais of god which was showed from the Angel of god
almighti, most high unto Elizabeth the hand maiden of Christ, and of the
living God, in the fyft year of the visitation of her, In the which year the
spirit of our Lord has visited her, to the health of all them which
perceive and take the fatherlye monicions or warnynges of our lord god with a
thankful blessyng and benediction. And it was in the year of our Lords
incarnation a thousand, a hundred fyftye and six.

The first Chapter.
IT was done in the beginning of the fyfte year of my visitation, then
drawing nere the feast of Pentecoste, called whit sontyde, I Elizabeth in the
vision of my spirit have seen a high hylle, lightened in the top of that
hill, with ple^tuous light. And as three wais set or stretched from the foot or
roof of that hill unto the height thereof. And of those three ways one which was
the middell way set and put right against me, that way had the semyng or
likelyhode of the clear heaven, or of the stone Iacynctyne. And that way
which was on the right parts to me appeared grene. And that wai which was on
the left parts was pourple.

There stood forsooth a certain noble man in the top of that hill, against
the mydle way, and he was clad with a iacinetyne cote, and gyrt at the raynes,
with a white broad gyrdle, and his face shinynge as the son. His eyes trewly
bryghtly glitterynge in manner of sterres. And the hears of his head as woull
most white. He had forsoothe in his mouth a swerd of either part sharp. And
in his right hand he had a key. In his left hand trewelye he had as
though tt were a kings steptre.

The second vision. The.ii. Chapter.
IN the solempnite of Penthecost called whitsontide I did see again in the
height of the said hyl on the left parts of the said man next unto the ways of
the first vision, other three ways having such variety or difference as
follows. One forsothe of those three ways which appeared next unto the green
way, was fair or pleasant, but on every part thereof so walled and covered
with thick brembles that they which walked by that way must needs be pricked
with those br^^les without or except they diligently streygned together, and
bowed down might go that way. There appeared also a certain pathe
delectable, very strait, and as but littell trodden or used, and that way had
no brembles, but was of either part walled with pleasant grass, and
plentuousely with flowers of diverse kinds. Forsoothe the myddell way between
those two ways was one way, having more breadthe than the other ways: and
it was plain or smoothe, and as it were having a pauemente of readde tyles:
which way when I diligently had looked on, the angel of the Lord which was
assistant to me, said: Thou look on this way, and it semethe to thee fair
and proufitable to walk in it: But it is perilous, and they that walk by it
sone or easily do fall.

The third Vision. The.iii. Chapter.
Again in the Vtas of Pentecoste called Whitesontide, in the time of the
midday rest, sodeynely the eyes of my heart were opened without vexing of my
flesh, as and in the foresaid visions, and I did see again all that I did se
before in the visions before rehearsed, And beside those ways which I did see
before, our Lord did show to me other four wais next the.iii. ways of the
first vision on the right parts of the man which stood on the top of that
hylle. One of those wais which was next to the purple way seemed to have
greatte difficulte unto the mids of the hill, because of the thicknes of
brembles, with which that way was set on both sides. The other part truly
of that way unto the top of the hylle was pleasant with flowers, and free
without lettynge or impedimente, but it was narrow or strait and it appeared
but a littel trodden or used. The way which was next to that seemed to be dry
and in manner of a field eared, sharp with great cloddes and very comberous to
them that go or walk therein. And I was thynkyng to my self of these two ways
how hard the goinges therein was: And the angel which stood by me answeryng,
said: If any do walk by these ways, let him beware that he offend not, nor
hurt his foot: He forsothe that does offend and has fallen, if he do not
rise again, but bideth in his fall, he shall not see the everlasting light.
Truly the other two ways which together with these wais did appear, they
were plain, and spedye to walk, and fair to the syghte having bryghtnes as
the ground well used or trodden in the high way. And when I began to look
on those ways, I heard again the angel, saiing: The way of rightwise me^
is made right, and the iurney of saints is made ready.

The Interpretacion of the first vision. The fourth chapter.
THis is the Interpretacion of the first visyon, as by thangel I have learned.
The high hill is the altitude or heighte of the heavenly blissfulness. The
light in the top of the hill is the clerenes of everlasting life. The diverse
ways in the hill, they be the diverse and varyable ascencio^s of them which
be chosen, wherewith they ascend to the kingdom of clerenes. The Iacinctine
way, is the study of the divine contemplacion: they walk in that way which
with busye meditacion, and holy desire, make sure or fast the eye of their mind
in heavenly things. The green way longs or pertayneth to them which study
to be perfect and irreprehensible in the active life, going forth in all the
co^mandementes of our lord without quarrel, and they in all their works take
no head to transitory things, but attend and set the goynges of their mind
in the grene way to attain to the high and everlasting gift of the high and
great reward of everlasting life. The purple wai is the asce^ding of the
blessed martirs, who workyng in the Justice of god by patience in the torments
of their passions in the purple of their blud, they conte^de to pass and to go
to the divine or godly light. The noble man upon the hill is Christ, the
shinyng of his chere or face is the sign of his divine or godly clearenes. His
eyes with bemes glittering, is his pleasant lokes or aspectes upon his elects or
chose^. His hears like white wol shewth him to be old of dais, although he was
borne after his manhood in the last days. The two edged swoorde in his
mouth is the sentence of his tetrrible judgment, to proceed from his mouth
strikynge them that be reproved with double contrition of body and soul. The
keye in his right hand has appeared, for why, he it is which only opens
the gate of life, and no man shuts it: and he shuts, and none can open
it. He it is also, which also to whom he will, shows and opens the
profounde and secret things of the mysteries of God, and there is none can
shet it. And he signeth or shuts, and none can lose or open that sign or
shutting. The scepter in his left hand, is his kyngly or royal power, which
he him self bears witness, that he has received and taken that power,
according to his manlye nature, saying: There is given to me all power in
heaven and in earth. The Iacinctine coat shows the virtue of heavenly
contemplation, which perfectely possessed all the whole mind of our savior.
Forsothe he took not the spirit to measure, as other men do. For in him all
fulness of the godheade dwells and abidethe in him corporally. The broad white
gyrdle betokenethe in him the beautye or bryghtenes of inviolable innoce^cie.
He did appear in the way which signifies the Contemplation of his
divinity or godhed: for why, so he will have that way abide for ever, where
as the other ways shall not be ever permanent and abidynge. He did not
appear in all the wais, and nevertheless he was in every of those ways. For
why each one of them betokens syngular virtues, by the which just or
rightuous men come to that high hill, where they receive for syngular virtues
syngular rewards. And in alwais of truth God almighty is to be had in
contemplation.

The Interpretation of the second vision. The fyfte Chapter
THe misterye of the second vysion is of this manner.

Three ways which have appeared of the left parts of the man standing in the
hill next to the grene way, they express ye propretie of.iii. orders in the
church, yt is to say, of the^ yt be married, of them that lives chaste or
continent, and of prelates and governors. The way walled with brembles, is the
way of them which be married. This way appears pleasant, for that this life
from the beginning was institute or ordained of God.

And if laufullye it be observed or kept, it is fair and well pleasyng in
the sight of our lord. And they which walk so in it, without doubt they
ascend into the hill of the lord. but infinite thorns and pricks of secular
cures and business comes on of every part, with the which the walkers or
goers in that way must needs be pricked, except that with scarcelye living
all manner ways they constrayne theymselues, and always humbling themself
before god and men, they must go as it were bowed down. The way which is free
from bre^bles, and walled about every where with pleasant flowers, is the way
of them which lives continente and chaste. Forsoothe the propretie of them is
to withdraw their mind from all cares and busynesses of this present life,
and to think what their duty is to our Lord, that they may be holy both
in body and soul: Strayte or narrow is this way: For why that laufullye and
wyselye this way may be observed and kept, it is necessary to set
straightely the goinges of them which walk in this way in the custody of
great discipline or correction, lest perauenture they living after their own
will, may fall into fornication, or else be deputed with folish virgins, or
with delicate wydowes, which here living are dead. This way is but a little
trodden or used: for in respect of other, few there be which enter by this
way: and fewer there be which abides or continues in it. That way is
walled about very pleasauntly with flowers of diverse kinds. For why all kind
of virtues adornethe or beautifyeth the lives of them which live in continency
and chastity. The myddell way between those two ways is broader than they
be, and that is the way of the prelates and rulers. Forsothe where as that
way is instituted or ordained to govern the way of them that be married, or
the way of them that live chaste or continent, or of both, therefore the less
they be restreigned or coarcted, the more freelyer they may use or exercise
their own will And by that the goynges of them which do walk in that way
may easylye slyppe or slide in it, and that the playnnesse of that way aptely
doothe signify. And therefore that way is said to be perilous, for so manny
there be which falls in it, so in that way very few be found stable or
sure. Forsoothe because that way seems to have a pauement of read tyles,
which are sodden or roasted in the earth with fyres: That signifies the
busynes and charge of Prelates, wherewith it is necessary their minds busily to
be occupied, and or as it were soden among their subjects, to whom they owe
procuration both of soul and of body.

The Interpretacion of the third vision. The.vi. chap.
When I asked of the angel mine instructour the Interpretacion of the third
vision, he said to me: Lo thou haste begone the books of the wais of god, as
it was promised to thee: therefore the angel said so: for in the year before on
a certain day, when I was in spirit, he led me as into a certain medowe,
in which me dowe there was a tent fixed and set up. And we entered thereinto
it. And the Aungelle showed to me a great heap of books there laid, and he
said: Seeste thou these books? All these are yet to be made before the day of
Judgment. And forsoothe, he lyftynge up one of those books, said: This is
the book of the Ways of God, which is to be showed by thee, when thou shalt
visyte thy sister Hyldegarde, and shall have heard her. And so forsoothe it
began continually to be fulfilled when I went again from her.

The declaration of the.iiii. ways. Cap. vii.
THis is the signification of the four ways which were showed in the third
vysion. The first which was next to the purple way in the nether or lower
part was sharp with thorns, and in the upper part forsoothe it was speedy
and flourishynge, it signifies the life of them which laufully living in the
world, do make half their days in cares or business of world lie things. And
from thensefoorthe go forth to the flouryshynge and speedy way of them,
which lives continent and chaste. They with their rule constrainyng them
selves ascend together with them into the hylle of god.

The dry way, and sharp with cloddes, that is the hardest kind of life, in
that way goes forth holy heremites, and manny other having their
conversation in company or felowshyppe of men.

These men make their flesh leave beyond all measure of man, and dry it up
with fastings, watchynges, knelynges, scourges, hear and with manny most
grievous afflictions.

All such things be as most sharp cloddes. Much vigilaunt and good
discretion is necessary to them, which do walk in that way, lest
peradventure with to much sharpness of such things they may offend, and
fall more greuousely then other men Of the two ways which appeared with those
ways which before are written or described: One of them as it was said, seemed
to be more used or more trodden, and also more spedy. Of that way the aungelle
mine instructour spoke saying: By this way go forth the holy souls of
infantes, which are sanctified in the holy baptsme, and go from this life
within seven years, for why they which do not expert nor know the malice of
the world they with most free and with spedy goinges come to the kingdom of
god. Truly of the other way the angel said: this is the way of young men
adolescence, which more slowlyer than the other go forth. And therefore their
way apperith less spedy and less used or trodden. Lo these be the visions and
the interpretacions of them. Without doubt he which has opened mine eyes, yt
I might se the visions of god he by his angel as it pleased him thoose
visions to be understand in this manner as is before written have showed.

An other vision. The.viii. Chapter.
IT ws done in the feast of saint James, when I was in spirit, and did see
the vision or sight of the wais of god, I was take up and as it were nere to
the top in the hylle of god and I beheld. And lo that great light which
occupied or spread the top of the hill it seemed to be cut or departed in the
mids, and I looked in by it and did se a multitude of saints the number of
them could not be esteemed. And the aungelle my leader said unto me.

Look and see and consider all these, which thou now see. Here thou see
Martyrs, holy bishops and confessors of our Lord, virgins, religious
persons of both kinds, widows and secular, married persons, and noble
persons, and them that were not noble, all these reignyng with Christ. All
these have walked the ways of our lord, the holy ways which thou have seen,
and they have come to, and have attained and received the everlasting glory
of Christ our Lord with his aungelles.

Now therefore every one ought to consider his way: And he which has
walked vnrightousely or not truly, he must or ought to correct himself with
humilite charity and obedience, and so dress his way, and if he perfectly
comes to, he shall receive everlasting reward.

Of the way of contemplative living. The first Sermon.
AFter this, I was restyng in my little bed, but yet I took no sleep: And
sodeynely the spirit of our lord did visit me, and fulfilled my mouth with
this sermon as follows. Take heed now therefore you, which have forsaken and
renou^ced worldly desires and have chosen to follow the steps of him which
has called you into his meruaillous light: and also he has named you his
elect children to him, and has ordained you in the end of the world to judge
the children of Israel. Think to your self how you may live with lowlynes or
meekness, and with obedyence, and with charity, without grudge, and without
detraction, and without envy, and without pride, and from all other vices
absteyne your selves.

Love you each one together with brotherlye love that your heavenly Father be
not blasphemed in you, and so he to be displeased: and then you may perisshe
from the right way, that is from the way of contemplation of him. Then the
aungelle of the Lord prosecuted setting to this sermon in this manner: if
forsothe there be among you strives and discensions detractions, grudgynges,
wrath, hate, envy, extollyng of eyes, appetyte of vaynglory, vayn speeches,
scurrilities, which is ill behauior in their deeds, fyllyng of the bealy,
sluggyshnesse or sleapynge, uncleanness of the flesh, ydelnes, and such other
like vices, in which do walk the children of this world, what place to the
divine or Godly contemplation shall there be in you? And be reiterent to
angels: And the pure and clean things of the sacraments of Christ which
ought to be worshipped, they dyshonor with their vnreuerent ministry and with
unlawful heart: who so reprove them, they laugh him to scorn: and him they make
heavy with cursyng and persecution. They which seem to be best of that sort,
they be abominable before the lord. They walk in clothes of humility, but
their heart is far from it: they multiply prayers, but what profitteth that
while in their hertes they speak against god, while brotherly charity they
neglect or forsake: one enuieth an other and back biteth, and for prelacye they
strive. They profess the despising of the world, but those things which
beelonge to the world, they do worship, and those they without shame cover and
desire: And they be born about with every wynd of their own will. They cast away
the ordinances of the ancient holy fathers. They set themselves gredily into
the cares or busynes of the world, and they fulfill the church with sclaunders.
And lo for ye cause religion suffers despisyng, and faith suffers division
or cutting asunder. And what shall I add to them more says our lord: Lo I cry
after them, and they will not hear nor harken. The voice of my warning they
put and strike it away as it were with their hele or foot. I visit them by
such my graces which have not ben hard of before, and their visitation they
will not know. And more over they do laughe it to scorn. I smite them and they
recke not, nor be sorry therefore: I cast them hedling down, and they are not
afraid: The woe of them is an woe horrible, it is reposed to me. Lo it shall come
anon, and as a soden flowing and ragyng water, it shall fall upon them, and
shall wynd them into pardition or loss incurable: those which he finds
without fear. You therefore my people not people of fained religion, you which
have determined in your minds to fight against the world, and to bear heaven
in your mind: You (I say) go away from them which be of that sort before
rehearsed, and be you not partetakers of them. Stand in the way of the
vysion which you have chosen, and make clean the eyes of your heart, that you
may lift them up into the contemplation of the light, in the which dwells
life, and your redemption. Forsothe these be th^se things which makes cleave
the eyes of your hearts, that they may be lifted up to the true light. The
castyng away of worldly business, affliction of the flesh, contrition of the
heart, often and privy confession of syn, and the washing or lauer of wepi^g
for the offense of sin. And wha^ all uncleanness or foulness is sent out or
put quite away: then these things be those, which extol or set up the eyes of
your heart. The meditation of ye marvelous essence of god, and the inspectio^
or inwardly loking on the chaste or pure truth. A strong and clean prayer. The
ioyfulnes of ye praise or laud of god, and the burning desire in god. Half
you these things, and be you still in these, and run you toward the
viuifical light, which light offreth him self to you as to his children, and
wilfully sets himself into your minds. Withdraw your hertes from your
selves, and give the^ into those things which you have now herd. and your
hertes shall be fulfilled with godly sple^dour or shinynge, and you shall be ye
children of light and as the aungelles of god, which angels cesse not
desirously to draw in toward the lord maker, and again to shede or to pour in
ye stre^gth^ of their contemplation into his original. O you children of Adam,
seems it unto you but a small thing to be made the children of god? And whi
turn you awei your face from ye conte^platio^ of his there, or from the
pleasant look of him which has given such power to men to you singularly
which have chosen to be pesible in this world and in the earth to be
conformable to angels. You are the lanternes burning which the lord has
ordained in his holy hylle to lighten or to give light with your words, and
with your examples ye darknesses of the world. Se and take you head that the
light which is in you, be not made void or taken away with the wynd of
pride or of covetousness, which wynd blew out the light of your first parents
in Paradise: bow away your ear from the cries of this world, and give
silence to the spirit the which speaks in you. Make perpetual holyday^ of
our Lord in your hearts, and the peace of God shall rest upon you, which
ouercommethe and is above all wit or knoweledge, and you shall delighte in
the multitude of the sweetness of him.

Be not moved nor let not your minds be troubled all though the world
despise you, and esteem you to be as dead and barayne: be not sorye or
heavy all though with sorrows, throws, and with poverty your life be made
thin, nor bow not away your eyes from the sight of the light of him which
is before your face. Lo forsoothe it is nere and at hand, that this world
shall vanysshe away, and the flower thereof must dye, and you shall judge the
lovers thereof, and you shall tread the necks of them which wax proud.
And they seeing shall stonny fearfully upon your glory, when your richesses
shall be showed forth the which you have treasured to your self in heaven:
and then that which is imperfect of your contemplation shall be made void.
And the face of euerlastinglight shall take the eyes of his Egles, and as the
flood ouerflowynge, so shall redound his lightnyng or shinynge in the hearts
of men, which have sought him in truth. The angel had not yet ended these
words which he by times spoke to me, when there tell to me a certain doubt of
the distinction of ye ways of God which were described. And I asked him,
saying, My lord, Are not we Cenobites, that is, religious persons in the way
of conte^plation, where as we be in the way of continency, may it be so that
we may be in both ways? and the angel said: The way of contemplation is
common to you with them of the clergy, as ye way of co^tinency is common to
the^ of the clergy with you, know thou nevertheless, that many be in the way of
continency, which are not in the way of contemplation. And there be many of
the clergy which neither walk in the way of co^templation, nor in the way of
continency, and those be unhappy. Never the les they suppose the^ selves to
be in the way of contemplation when they are not so in deed. And again I asked
more, saying: What shall we say of the bishops and other great prelates of the
church? And the angel answered to me these words: Pride reigns in the
hertes of prelates and of them which be greatte persons, and they thruste god
back from their hertes, and he will not rest but upon him which is lowly or
meke, and upon him that is quiet, and upon him which dreadeth his words.
Forsooth ons our savior commanded his disciples, saying: They which receive not
you, go forth from them, and smite the dust from your fete into the testimony
of them And what think yt of god, savior and maker of all creatures, when he
shall com, what shall he do to them which will not receive him, but put him back
from them Without dout he shall send them into everlasting fire, where shall be
weping of eyes, and gnasshynge of teethe. What shall profit tha^ to them pride
and riches? And all these sermons or words performed in ye day which we had
the memory of saint Michael: the angel again presented him to me, and I
spoke to him, saying: My lord may we surely affirm al these words or sermons
to proceed from thee? Therefore this I said, for in part he spoke these
words, never the less so that I could not see his face, and truly these
words in part were pronounced by my mouth in spyryte.

The angel therefore with great severity or sharpenes lookyng on me, said:
Believe with all thy heart all these words which be described or before
rehearsed, have proceeded from my mouth: Blessed is he which shall read and shall
here the words of this book: for why, they be true, nor never they decline from
truth.

Of the way of active living or lyuers.
ANd by and by the angel began an other sermon with these words, saying: I
warn them which be oppressed in worldly business and cares sometime: or at
one time or other to think and to remember what be ye precepts of life, that
is to love god above al thing, and their neighbor as themselves not to flea or
kill, not to do theft or felony, nor to covet any other men's goods. These and
other things which are written in the laws of the lord, to keep and observe
with all diligence, and so they may know yt they may enter ye kingdom of god. If
they be not able to lift or to raise up theimselues to the health of
contemplatio^: They must study to fulfill the office of laufull deeds: They
must and ought to have always in their minds, the dread and fear of the lord,
and he shall dress al their works and their doings. They ought often to
come to ye house of prayer, which is the church, and that with great
reverence. And with their faculties or goods when need is, they must
honorably help it: They ought to worship the sacraments of ye lord in faith
and i^ humilite, and they must gladly give ere to here the word of god: They
ought to esteem ye sanctified mynisters of god worthy of all honor: and they
must be co^senting and agree with mekenes to their discipline. They ought to give
peasibly to every man yt is his right or duty, nor they may give to none any
occasion of quarrel. And if any wrong be don to them, they must suffer, leauyng
the reuengeme^t thereof to ye judge of al men. They ought and must speak
constantly the word or sermon of truth, when time serves: nor they may not
refuse to take labor on them selves for Justice sake. They must defend a
fatherless child and a widow, and them that have no help when theibe
oppressed, and with pity to comfort the^ in there anguishes or troubles. They
ought to refreshe him which is hungry and thirsty, they must cloth the naked,
they ought to gather into them such persons as lacks lodging they must
visit them which be in prison or diseased with sickness: they should live
gratis, that is without reward, and intend to do all works of mercy and
equity. They which are wise and have knowledge ought to teach and instruct
them which be vntaughte: they ought to call them again to truth which do err:
or those which walk shrewdly out of the way: they must set neighbors that
strive at a concord: they ought to flee from drunkenness, and from much eating,
and from uncleanness of the flesh: they must leave and fle from vain plays and
sins of words and ydelnes and arrogance of gaie clothes and thorns of
cares, as the word of god commands, setting all their busynes find mind
toward god, nor they may not forget the affliction of ye flesh^. I sai to them
that serve to works of necessity: work you in your works with a good and a
simple heart without grudgyng, and without vain speech, and that none be
grieved by you, and that you may help him that suffers nedynesse. Beware of all
avarice or covetousness. Forsooth that causes yt all your works may be
deceitful, and you shall lie and defraude or deceue your neighbors, and so
forswear the name of our lord, and gather together riches wickedly, which
drowneth to death them that possess them. You which be in high authority do
not proudely or sternely to them which be about you, nor oppress them not
wickedlye, but rather defend them, and in all benignity keep them, and make
fyrme and sure peace among you. For therefore you ar set up of our Lord.

This is the way of the Lord right and fair, the way of holy deeds. He
that walkethe in this way unto the end, he shall find life, and shall also
rest in the holy h^lle of god, and his chance or lotte is with the chylderne
of light.

Of the way of Martyrs. A Sermon.
A Feastful day was in hand, and we were assistyng in office of divine
service, where as of custom the angel appeared to my syghte, When before him I
accused and blamed my self of my faults or sins, thinking them to be the
cause why he tarried longer then he was wont to do, and I said unto him: My
lord, it may plese the now that thou will tell to us the discipline of the
third way which is of holy martirs, n^r be not refrained from this thy
benignity because of my faults. Then he openyng his mouth spoke, saying:
Christ the la^be goth before his holy martyrs, and they follow him with psalms
and crounes ioyeng together to him with a noble triumph. And Christ him self
appears in them as a glass and example, and as a glorious beautyfulnes. Much
and many are the passions by the which it behooves the children of God to be
crowned, and none shall be crouned, but he yt laufully has fought. Hear you
these things, and with your heart perceive you that suffer persecution for
justice, go you ioying by the noble way, by the way of the men of war of
our Lord, made purple with the bloudde of Saynctes, and of the lamb. Wayle
not you, nor let no grudge asce^d into your heart against our lord, as though
you were of him forsaken, and as some new thing might chance to you. Read you
in the scriptures of the holy ghost, and think again on the old days. All
they as many as have been before you which have walked in this way each one have
plesed god in their labors, and by many anguishes or pains they have gone
into the broad liberty of the glory of the children of god. The first which
ran before the lamb was Abell, which did shede his blood in the earth
before the lord under the hand of his wicked brother, in testimony of
innocence, faithful Abraham father of faithful people was stired of wicked
people to do idolatry, and he did those rather to be dissolved with fire, than
to syn in his and our lord god, and by the hand of ye lord he was brought out
from the fire of the Caldeis. Joseph where he was a lover of innoce^cie, and he
accused the fauit or crime of his brethren to his father, he was sold to
aliens. And again where he would not consent or agree to the wickedness of ye
harlot the aduouterer, he therefore suffered prisonment a long time with a
pleasant mind. The servants of truth, the prophets of the Lord have fought
unto death against the preuaricatours of the law, and by many passions have
been consumed. The children of the lord in Babylon did speak gaynst the
commandment of ye proud king whom all the earth feared, and they chose rather
to be given to horrible fyres, than to the contumely of our lord and creator,
to bow their knees before a made creature. Daniell loved of god for that he
gave honor to the lord god of his fathers, he was given to the teeth of
lio^s. Plentuous is the number of saints, which before the coming of our
savior have given examples of worthy passions and suffrynges laudable, and
with their death have prevented the death of our lord. Last of all was innocent.
Baptist, a greatter than he did not rise among the children of women, and he
for testimony of truth lost his head, and was given to a maiden in price of a
skyp or leap, so it was comely to be done, and it was pleasyng before the
lord, that not only the blood of lambs and of wethers and of other beasts,
should be sent forth before in figure to the blood of the lamb which was to be
offered for the health of the world, but that also the blod of the chi^dren of
god, which were to be redeemed should be shed in the coming against him.
Forsothe in the last days was sent from the secret of the father the offered
lamb tarried and abiden for from the beginning of the world whom Cherubin and
Seraphin and all the multitude of angels do worship to cleanse the sin of the
world, and they whom he came to save, have done in him what they would. Books
be full of his labors, and of his anguishes, and you read his passions, and
you do not perceive them with heart and mind. O you children of men how long
will you be hard herted? The earth which has no sense or feelyng took the
drops of his blood from the wounds of our savior, and could not sustain
the majesty thereof, but was moved and trembled, and stones most hard were cut
asunder. And lo by scriptures ye manyfolde passions of the son of god for you
slain, droppeth on ye hertes of you which have reason, and may you then
conteyne your selves from waylyng weeping and fears? You here vanities which
perteyn not unto you, and you can not conteyn from laughing And again after
these, he laid to more, and said: You which go by the way of the tribulation
of the lord Jesus, take heed and se if there be any sorrow like as is his
sorrow. He has not sinned, he only was borne without sin upon the earth, and
they fulfilled his soul with sorrows of them which were sinners or ill doers,
and all these things which follows did not stir to sharpnes ye meekness of
the la^be, ye bonds of the wicked wherewith they bound him, their lieng*
fautes which untruly they laid to his charge, their naughti mocking, their
making of him naked, their scourgyngs, their smitinges and claps, their filthy
spittings, ye thorn pricking his forhed and head, the cross, the nails and
the spear, and the shedding out of his innocent blood. But in althynges his
pacyence did overcome, and had the victory, and he diynge brake asunder the
prick of death. You yt be children of the cross, take heed with your mind
the way of the lamb and walk surely, and with a ferme mind after the steps of
his blud. He is ye leader of your journey, and cries to you, saying: Be of good
chere and trust well, I have overcome ye world. and why are your afraid of the
face and fearyng of men, you having such a leader or capitayn which can not be
ouercom, and also so many thousand of his folowers going before you with a
marvelous victory. Lo forsooth eue^ a little before your time, innumerable
fightynges of the servants of god is made and done both of thapostles and of
martyrs, and of perfect virgins, and they have given pleasant spectacles or
lokyng on to ye companies of heaven in their victories, and they loved god more
tha^ their own souls, and for his name they have set forth their souls to
all kinds of death: and as cley which is trodden of every one, so they have
suffered to be trodden and suppressed: and the lovers of the world in their
common places and counselles have laughed to skorne the nakedness of saints:
and they have be full fed with the mocking of the confusion of them, and they
have been merye in the drawyng away of there f^eshe as a beast is merry wha^ he
deuoureth his pray, and they have dispersed the Innocent blood by tormentries,
and by words by fires and by gurgettes of waters, by iron nails, by teeth of
beasts, and all kind of tormentrie, which the cruelnesse of wicked me^, by
their mind could imagynde or devise, that was assayd in the mortification or
kyllyng of them. And the knights of god joy in their confraction or
torments, as though they had been in great delires or pleasures: and they
delited in the chalice of bitterness, as they which joy in many pleasures and
delectatio^s. Then was the patience of saints found faithful in their
examination, and strong above the strength of kings and princes of this
world. Therefore lo they be brought out in refreshyng of consolation or
comfort, and they rest in the halsing of the right arm of god and of his holy
angels, because they have borne his ignominy before the dwellers of the earth.
O thou man, which art weak hearted to these things, take heed, and with a
vigilant mind draw thy self to the sufferynges of the passion of Christ: take
thy contemplation of the joy and myrthe which is enuyronned all about with
Martyrs of the lord, and thou shall not dread nor dout to make thy self common
or part taker to the sorrows and anguished of the^. But first is, that thou
must have the substance of this world under thy feet, and to esteem the
glory thereof to be nothing, nor of any valu: which this day is, and to morrow
it appears not. Forsothe if thou love those things, than shall flee from the
strength in time of pressure and despection. And now I say, let not thy life
be precious in thy eyes, but esteem it all vile and worthy to be despised.
Forsooth they which love themselves and in their own mind to them self be
great, they may not sustain or endure any pain or treading down in
persecution, and to the fight of saints, they be not mete or apt, a happy
change with great gain is set forth to the: Deny or cast away this life of a
small time, and of miserable condition, and thou shalt receive again therefore
a life, which knows no fault nor no disease or molestyng: and that life is
full of glory and joy which no tongue can tell. O thou man of dark
understanding, lift up thine eyes, and behold in time to come the blisfull
reformation of thy body, which shall come to the from thy savior when he shall
pull away and root out from thy body the thorn of Adam, and shall configure it
to the clerenesse of his body, and thus it is shall or may be done that with
myrthe and quickness thou shalt make haste to shed out, or to set out thy
life or soul into all peril, in the feruencie of the charity of him, and so
thou shall esteem the state of this thy life, as a drop of water smitten out of
a bucket into the ground O thou manne of god, why art thou yet in anguyshe or
aferde of the face of thy persecutour? Be of good comfort, be of good chere,
Christ is with the in persecution and his angels ar with she in thy fight, and
they nu^bre al thy labors, and they susteyn thy werynesse. And also for thee,
they fight thoroughly against thine enemies: remember the words which the
lord said to his servants: He that touches you, he touches the balle of
mine eye. O thou servant of God, what shalt thou give to thy savior which
has so joined thee to him that without wrong be done to him thou can not be
hurt. Ones he has suffered for the, and yet every day in the, and in thy
fellows his servants, he suffers, and is had to open scorn. If thou be
sorye or heavy, not for thy hurt or wrong be sorry, but for his hurt or wrong,
be thou sorrowful or heavy, therefore for thy self joy and be merry, for by
trouble thou art preparid or made ready to glory and to everlasting joy. Thou
art the gold of the lord by fire he examineth thee, that thus thou being
proved he may receive the into his treasours. And forsoothe before the angel
which spoke with me had ended these words, it was so, that there came on the
feast of the blessed virgins Vrsula and her fellows the eleven thousand. And
tha^ was in the service of matens these goodlye words of scripture, which is
thus in latin: Reddet Deus mercedem laborum sanctorum suorum et deducet eos in
via mirabili, and in english thus: God shall yield or give the hier or reward
of the labors of his saints, and he shall lead them forth in a marvelous
way: and thereof I taking occasion when the angel mine instrucctor apered to me
in the secrets of Mass time (as mostly his custom was) I asked him saying:
My lord, Show to me what is that way marvelous, whereof ye scripture makes
mention, saye^g: And he shall lead them forth in a marvelous way. And
straight wais the angel answered, saying: That is the way of holy martires. And
again I asked saying? And why is it called meruaylous? And he said, it may well
be called marvelous. It is not forsooth merueylous in the eyes of men, that
god so inflamethe the mind of a man which is frail or weak that through the
bigness of love wherewith he bournethe inwardly toward god, he forgets his
own life, in so much that he is made as it were insensible or not feeling the
most grievous torments, and without any care for him self, gladly he suffers
all things for his name. This may thou see in these holy virgins, whose
feast of martyrdom you celebrate this day, they were frail both in kind and in
age, nor they ne had any defender: and nevertheless they neither feared the
tyrants nor their swords, but with all constance offered their tender members
and bodies into death for our lords sake, and for cause they were comforted with
the burning of the love of god in their spirit, so that death outwardely they
felt not. And certainly that was much marvelous in the eyes of men, but not
in the eyes of our lord, to whom all thing is possible. And have not thou
seen this way marvelous in spirit, and it was fayrer and more notable than
any of the other ways: and so know thou that the retribution or reward of
martyrs is more excellent than any gift or reward, and to the glory of
them, there is nothing to be compared. After these whenne the feast of saint
Martin was come about mydnyght before the vigil of Matins, sodeynely I was
afraid, and the sleep fled from mine eyes. And lo the angel of the lord
stood before me, and I spoke to him, saying: My lord I pray the now that thou will fulfill the exhortation of thy sermon of holy martyrs, and conclude with
a competent end: and when he had caused me to be in contemplation, and to see
certain high things in heavenly places, of whose sight I was unworthy, he
fulfilled my petition, saying: Again I said to thee, and I warn you the
children of god, that more diligentely you attend to your antecessoures or
goers before, which are before to you in this present sermon how they did
bourne in the charity of Christ. Run and be confirmed or made sure, and
think not before. Lo forsoothe there watches upon you the soonne of peace
which may receive and reward you above any man's estimation, that spirit of
burning and of charity of Christ, which ouerrometh all fraylenesse he might
vouchsafe to grant to you, which in perfect trinity lives and reigns
very god by the infinite world of worlds. Amen.

Of the way of them that are married. A sermon.
I Was in prayer, and as it was the customed manner, my lord the angel appeared
to me, and I asked of him the discipline of that way, which perteyned to the
order of them which be married: and by and by he assented to my petition, and
thus he began: Lo I say and I warn you seculers that be married, absteyne you
from your shreude works, wherewith you are defiled, and the earth is defiled,
or made foul of your most noughty wickedness, which are avarice, lechery,
fornication adultery, maslaughter, pride, wrath, hate, envy blasphemye and
drunke^nes. Take heed therefore and look upon your wai how you may walk by it:
for why, it is impossible to you with such vices to enter into it, and this
spoken he went his way. And when he appeared again, I prayed him that he would
prosecute or follow on the exhortation of his sermon begun. And he said: But
for cause the lord god is benign and merciful, else he might be brought into
irksomeness or weariness, for that he warns so many ways the dwellers of
this world. And truly they take his warnynges for nothing, nor no ways they
take heed or remember the love, wherewith they ought to be kyndled toward him,
and his fatherlye monytions or warnynges, they turn them to indignation and
despise them, and to his messages they disdain to take heed, if it were
possible any trouble to be in him, for that certain he might be troubled, that
so many wais this world is raised against him, for which he was borne and
suffered passion, and has wroughte many miracles, and yet daily do work,
although they take no heed thereto. And lo, he commaundethe his warnynges also
to them which in this world all manner of ways are set against him for his
thankful benignity, and also for the love of them, which although they be
conuersaunt in the world, yet never the less they love and serve him, but woe,
of them are few in number: forsothe more abundantly he would do this, and
show his grace, if with a better devotion, they would take heed to his
warnyngs. After these he opened his mouth. and spoke, saying: O generation
lackyng wit and combrous or grievous to your lord god, wherefore with so great
study love you those things, which your heavenly father hates, and you are not afraid to provoke the lord of heavens, in whose eye sight or look all the
multitude of angels do tremble, tell me what fruit or proufitte they have
gotten in these shreude noughty things, which I have before numbered to you,
all they which from the beginning of the world have be found to walk in those
vices, if they have not plesed again the face of our lord with penance doing
before their departing, what have al they which bear witness to truth showed unto
you of them. If you have forgotten it, lo again I will tell and show to you
before the living god that heaven is shut from them with an eternal and
indissoluble shuttyng, and the pleasant and desirous face of our lord god is
and shall be hidden from them, and they be alienated from the feast of the
everlasting mirth of saints, and those saints have ever abhorred their
wicked wais: And lo those sinners are made the fellows of the most hard and
cruel devil, and of his unhappy angels, which without mercy, and without
ceassyng are scurged, and they tread the necks of them, which necks they have
reised up against their lord maker, and they be fed in the most bitter plages
of them. And because they have shut their eyes that should not see the light
of the knowledge of god and of his holy iustifications, and they have loved the
works of darkness, therefore they are deputed to the horrible roryng or
swalowynge of darkenesses, which have none outgate, nor it can not be
lightened never with no light. They have despised to have ye holy dread of god
in their minds, and they have provoked him in the myrthe of their
voluptuousnes or lust: and they have kindeled in themselves the unlawful
bournynges of lust and of wrath, and of insatiable avarice, therefore there
abides upon the^ dredeful horror and heaviness with out comfort, and a bitynge
indignation, and they be made the coals of everlasting fire, which can never
be quenched nor consumed with any bournynge. Hear these things you which be
prouokers of god and while you have time of correction, forsake and go away
from the wais and works of them that are lost, and turn again to the way
undefiled, which god has prepared to you from the beginning: take heed how
you may walk with the dread and fere of god in that way forsooth your
honorable marriage is not of the inuencion of man, but it was instituted in
paradise of innocencye of him that is lord maker of all things wha^ he made or
created your first parents male and female, and he spoke in ye tongue of Ada^,
who was first made: Seeing for yt a man shall forsake father and mother, and draw
to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. O you man and woman give honor
to your order, which the lord vouchsafe to make honorable, and se that you
set nor bring no spot nor division or cuttyng to your copulation. The law of
the lord might ioyn and halow you: and there must be to you both one house,
one table, one common substance, one bed, and one soul, which is one mind and
one will, and give place to the dread and fear of the lord in the mids of
you. For soth the dread and fear of our lord is ye fair beautyfulnes of the
chaumber of them which be married, and he which is void from the dread and
fear of our lord, is reputed of our lord to be unclean and accursed. And
there his lust shall overcome himself which know the no stay nor good or
wholesome form, and also such works there shall be exercised yt are not worthy to
be spoken of, which nature has not ordained, nor it is not belonging nor
perteining to generation They which work that which is ylle before our lord, I
would they might here and understand, and that they might take away ye filthy
spot from their conches, therefore the dread and fear of our lord must bind
your hearts, that you may set a bridle to your selves in that work to you
granted, so that not like in facion of beasts, you shall not follow every
bru^t of your desire. You ought to honor by continence or chastity feast full
days, and days of fasting ordained by the law, and times of purgation, and if
you add more thereto, our lord shall add and give grace to you and to your
generation. Forsooth they which will not make no difference between day and
day, between time and time, to keep themselves in continence or chastity, they
shall feel the vengeance of the lord in themselves, and in their sede what hour
or time they shall think least thereof. Each one of you must exhort other to
co^tinence or to chastity, and each one of you pray for other, and also pray
together that you may co^teyne, and that the spirit of uncleanness may flee from
you. Forsothe when infirmity prevails, with remedy granted, it ought to be
expurged, lest it fall to yt thing which is not lauful, as ye doctor of the
gentiles writes. A man has no power of his own body but ye woman, and ye woman
has no power of her body but the man: and you may not deny together duty.
But this truly you must know, that ye pri^cipal cause of your mutual
conjunction is to bring forth a child, and if any other cause therbe, it
pertains to infirmity, and if it have moderation of the dread and fear of
our lord, and with remedy of alms to obtein pardon. The man of the woman, and
the woman of the man must support and bear one another infirmity with
patience and compassion: nor you may not one despise an other, but rather
study to give reverence one to an other. Stryuyng or bitter words may never
be herd betwixt you but reprove your excesses or fautes together with a soft
spirit, and with good severity or streitnes. The woman must be obedient to the
man, and as to her superior she ought to give place, and to him ministration
of service, as our lord maker of them both has ordained from the beginning.
Also the woman must suffer the manners or doing of ye husband although they be
shreud and she must forgive his fautes or wikednes, she must preuente ye face
of our lord in alms and prayer. Honest and comely garments, softenes of word
and speech and demurenes of her goings and lokes ought to testify outewardely
the inward pureness and clennes of her mind. Her eye should not look in an other
man's face, but with ai care she must avoid the occasion of all suspicion and ill
saying. He that has a witty and a timorous wife, should not dishonor her with
a foul or bitter word but he ought to honor her as the vessel of the glory of
god, and must yield himself consenting in fellowship to her, and he ought to
give thanks to our lord god of heaven, which has blessed him with such a
marriage. Here me yt now speak to the, and bewail or lament the children of
men. Men of these dais in a great nu^bre have declined unto ye folishnes of
women, and ar made stark fools in consentyng to ye madness of them. The
arrogance of clothes or garments which thou hastsene, and thou did detest or
abhor it in the women and daughters of this world which came to the, that is
increased out of mesure in ye lands, and ye women ar mad therein, and they
bring the wrath of god i^to ye world and they glory or joy to walk trym in
trippyng and dancyng goinges in ye multitude of their gay and new facion
clothes, and they study to consume unprofitably those things which be
necessary to the uses of them that are nedy. O unhappiness O most miserable
blindness: that thing which was gotten with much swette and labor they
commit it to dirt, to draw the eyes of aduouterers to look on them and that
wherewith they might get the kingdom of heaven, therewith they bye ye fire of
hell. O you men take away that ill from the eyes of our lord, and joy you not
in the vanities of your wynes, but rather have disdayn, and be displeased
therewith: for why they dress them selves after the manner and facion of
harlots. This superfluity of clothes and the streitenesse of their garment is
to nothing profitable, but strangle their co^ceiuinges of children, and the
arroganye of the coueryng and showing of their hear, and many such like
facions are the inue^cious of women that will setforth and sell them selves, and
such things do not pertayn to lauful matrons. My cry from the lord to you
which have put away the gravity of manhod, and have put on the molichenes or
faint softness of women. O you fools and most vain, why have you forsaken
the earnest good manners of old and ancient rightuous men, which were your
predecessors, and you are declined into vanities and into madness of ye devils
invention, which profit to you nothing, but to the increacyng of your pain and
burning. Woe to you which wax proud in your gaye or bright clothings and
superfluous and delicately made or facioned: and that which was dearly gotten,
you joy or are glad to bring it to nothing. Woe be to you which be lascivious
or take delight in the braidyng of women's hear, and are not ashamed to make
foul the form of a man in your selfs. Woe to you which in vain plais, and
woe to you which spend your time in much eating and dronke^nes. Woe to you
which have a busy tongue to scorns and detractions, and to talk of that thing
which profits not, and to imagine deceites, and to subuerte the cause of an
innocent. Woe to you which have your words or tale in counsel to sell, and joy
to fulfill your bealy of the anguishes and loseses of them which be oppressed.
Woe to you which be striving and fearful among citisens. Woe to you raueners
and deep in heart for to multiplye the substance of the world which vanishes
away with you. Suppose you not that he, which has planted an ear, shall not
hear? or he which has fained or compouned an eye, can not consider? O you
children be in peace, and leave prouokyng of our lord: for it is at hand that
he will awake and devour them in the fire of his zele, which has provoked him.
Again I say to you, which are under ye yoke of marriage, dread you and fear
god, and keep together your faith immaculate and undefiled. Norish your sons
and daughters and your family in the dread and fear of our lord with
chastity. You may not keep with you unpaid ye tenth or tithe of our lord nor
the wages of the hired man or labourer, nor you may not forget your good
doings to a poor man, and all other things which I have showed and charged
you to keep, in the sermon of holy and wholesome deeds, which priuylye he
defiles his neighbors wife: and again, the wife takes on her the husband of
an other woman: And this is most great wyckednes or iniquite, and most is the
number of them which offends therein. Forsooth the world is full with the
uncleanness of fornication, as though there were a thyrsty have unto it, and
scante there is to be foundeth that does not cast down him self into the
pit or dyke.

When they burn in concupiscence, they scantely may abide till they have
brought about and done the deed: and when that they have fulfilled their
noughty and worst desires, they rest not, but again and again they go and do
the same, and they suppose themselves never to be saciate, or to have inoughe:
ye and before they be ripe, and or they can exercise this shreude noughtines,
many wais they defyle their innocence. Forsothe therefore in blaming the
fautes of them that are married, I put to the name of fornication, for why, they
also before they take the law of matrimonye on them, they defyle them selfs
out of measure, and provoke the wrath of God on them. Thereof it is, that
sum which are married, have no fruit of childerne, and they marvel how
that so chances to them, not knowing the cause of their bareynnesse.
Forsoothe they of that sort which have have generation, either, in their
children, orels in other things or ways, they are stryken with punishment by
the divine judgment, and all things chances to them unhappily, or not
luckilye. Again when I asked him of the name of blasphemye, he answered, I
have said, that because of them which dishoneste their neighbors with
foul tauntes and rebukes. Also I asked of him what were the doubtynges, which
he seemed to reprove in this sermon. And to that he thus answered: There be many
in the church, having the form of christen men, and yet they are doubtful
of the christen faith, and they be openly conuersaunt with them which are
catholic, they enter into the house of prayer, they receive with other the
sacraments perteynynge to the faith, and yet they give no faith thereto, nor
esteem them to be any thing profitable to their health: that forsothe they
openly prove by their ill works which they do. Forsooth if in them were true
faith, they would absteyn from many iniquities which they work: and he said
more: Many heresies be in these days privily, and many heretics priuilydo
impugn and ar against the catholic faith, and they turn many from the true
faith. Then I asked him, saying: My lord, what say thou of them which are
called catharis, for they fully reprove the life of them which are married? and
he answered, saying: There live of them, of whom thou ask this question is
abominable before the lord: and they can not blame or rebuke the life of them
which laufully do marye, and dwell together according to the law of the
lord, keeping in the dread and fear of god holy feriall days or feries and
feasts, and geuynge their mercy to the needs of them which are poor.
Forsothe again I spoke to him, saying: Lord as I have herd sum of them
affirm, that there is nor can be lawful marriage but between them which on
both parties have kept their virginitye unto the time of there lawful
copulacion, what say thou to that? And he answered saying: where such marriage
is or may be, that is very pleasant and thankful to our lord, but that
chances very rare or selde, nevertheless of them which have not contained
them selves, the marriages be acceptable before our lord which walk in the
commandments of our lord, or else the number of the people of god should be
into a great skarsenes, and these of whom thou speak, they have nothing a
do to reprove any thing in the church of god: for by the way they themselves
are worthy to be reproved. And thou shall know for certain, that they be the
ministers of Sathanas, whose shrowed works they do exercise, and he is the
leder of them, and he goes before the^, with all examples of wyckednes, and
they follow him in all things, with most noughtye works. And I said: Lord
what manner of faith have they, and what is their life? And he answered?
Shrewed and noughtye is their faith, and their works are worsse. And again I
said, they seem though to be ryghteous or just in the sight of men, and they
be praised as though they were doers of good works, and he said, so it is,
they make a sembla^ce of their outward face, as though they were of a right
and innocent life, and thereby they draw many to the^ and disceiue them,
forsooth inwardlye they are full of most worst and rotten poison.

Of them the which lives in continencye or chastitye A sermon.
WE celebratynge the solemnity of blessed John the Euangeliste, I was
intendyng to prayer, after the vigil of matens, and with a strong and hearty
intent of mind or heart I prayed the lord, that according to his customed
benignity, it would please him to vouchsafe to open to me the discipline of the
the way of them which live in continency or in chastytie. And also I prayed
the holy evangelist, and the angel my leader, that they thereto be my helpers,
and when I was weary of prayeng, I did set mine eyes to sleep, and after a little
while I was afraid, and lo the angel standing by me, began with these words
the sermon which I desired. I say to you, O you the children of God, O you the
children of light, look and behold your way, how it florysheth, and how
delectable it is to run in it, run therefore, and haste you redily to mete
with your spouse, which abides and tarieth for you. Love you chastity, and
keep to him the integritee of your virginity. A virgin araied or adorned with
chastity and charity, with prudence and with humylytye runs well. And when
he had said these, he than spoke no more: trewly the next day following when
the office of the mass of the blissed innoce^tes was in doing, I taking
occasion of the lesson of the Apocalipse, which than was read. I prayed my
Lord the angel which again stood by me, saying. Lord if I have found grace
before the, I beseech the to tell me, what manner a song is that song, which
these holy martyrs do sing before the sete of God and of the lamb, as this
present lesson testifyeth, or how follow they the lamb, wheresoever he goes.
And he answering said. What do thou ask me, no tongue on the earth has
known that tongue, nor I will tell the nothing thereof. Forsooth of that thou
asked me, what is that they followed the lamb wheresoever he goth, this is that
they follow him in all virtues, which may be considered in the lamb they follow
him in virginity which is in them without any spotte, even as that holy
lamb is without spot, they were meke and simple without disceyte, even as the
lamb was, they had pacyence in their martyrdom in the likeness of the lamb,
which never showed any impacience in his passion, whereby he quenched the sin
of the world: There be not virgins nor any martyrs, which so properly or
nerely follow the steps of the lamb as these do, except our queen, which
first kept her virginity to the lord clean, and not defiled. That noble
virgin and these blessed martyrs are a glass to all holy virgins, and many
have followed them, which have shed their bloudde for their vyrgynitie, and
therefore they be crowned and glorified in the sight of the Lord. All virgins
ought to look on these virgins, and to consider with what holiness they are
gone aforsoth felt heat in my hand. Thereof he said: It is hot, and the
more hotter it be, the more labor it must have to be washed away, and so the
more a man defiles or makes himself foul in uncleanness of concupiscence,
the more labor he must have to purify him self thereof. Never the less he
may be made in sorrow of holsomme penance, and with weeping tears, and with
good works, so that he may be made more acceptable to god than he was. Is not
thy hand clean and fair inwardly: so is virginity as long as the uncleanness
of the ill work or deed come not to the inward part thereof, then it may be
made clean, fo that the integrity thereof shall suffer no hurt, in like form
as thy hand easily may be made clean when it is only outwardly defiled. But
forsothe if the uncleanness comes to the inward parts to ye effect of the
deed, it shall be impossyble to make it then so clean that it may come again
to his first beauty or holiness: nevertheless they are many, which although they
bring not their lust to the deed of co^mixtio^ or mingling, yet they never the
less many wais defile the integrity of their virginity, and they take no
head nor put not to their mind or heart, that they may be made clean fullye
with remedy of penance, and that they may satisfye to god, and so they abide
and tarry unto thend: the virginity of them is not acceptable to god, and their
mede or reward is taken away from them: When the angel had said these, I was
afraid lest peradventure the order of his words should fall from my mind,
therefore I asked of him, that he might speak them again, and in that gently
he herd me Forsothe when in the vtas of saint John, he presented himself again
to me he prevented my words thus meryly speaking to me: Thou wylt ask me some
thing: ask, and I shall answer the. And I said as I was before warned of him
that taught me: Lord that which is written, Vo^^ntas pro facto reputabitur,
which is in english, The will shall be reputed for the deed, may that be
against thy saying next before rehearsed by the. And he answered Not one
whitte: Also he said more. True certainly is that thou say is written: Look
what work a man has will to perform, so that he will needs perform in deed
that which by his will does couete, and so he intends abidyng in that will or
mind unto thend, that is reputed before god as though it were done. And if any
ill there be that a man desires to do, that ill may be put away by the
virtue of true penance what soever a man shall do with thought or will it may
be so anulled before God, as though it never had been. Remember what I said to
thee the second time, that thou should put thy hand again in the mire or
durte, and then I affirmed, that it was to thee more hard to make thy hand
clean again: so first a man is polluted only with thought, and then after
also with will, and than it is more difficile or hard for him to be made
clean, and yet nevertheless the integrity of his maidenhod or virginity
remains hole. And then he brought forth a scripture, whereof I thought to
ask him saying: It is written: Qui viderit mulierem ad concupiscendam eam, iam
mechatus est in cord suo and that is in englisshe thus: He that shall se a
woman to covet her, even now he has done lechery in his heart, that is so if
a man be permanent or abides in will and mind to exercise his lust, and will
not nor does not go from his desire, but as much as in him is, does to bring
it to effect, and that shreude will he put not away with the fruit of penance,
though the integrite abides, yet it is unprofitable, nor no fruit he shall get
thereof. Again I joined to more, saying Lord, there ar some which in tentacio^
against their will have experience of the pricks of the flesh, and ar sorry
therefore, and bear co^brousely the burning which is aduersant to the cleannes
of their body, nor by no repugnyng can eschew it, shall that be reputed to
the^ for sin? And he said: If they suffer that against their will, nor with
their mind consent not thereto with a lyghter penance, they shall get forgiveness
of their fault, which thereby they draw to them, and shall obtain a great
reward. And he showed to me of a person familiar in Christ, whether it were man
or woman, god knows, and that person suffered of ye adversary great impugning
and temptacion against his chastity, and therefore he scourged his soul with many
huge molestes or doyngs, and the angel said: Show thou to him comfort, and
say to him that he may spare some of his affliction, and tell to him yt he may
call to his mind that which is written of the electes of the lord: Tanqua aurum
in furnace probauit eos. That is in english: As gold in a furnace he has
proved them, and joy be to him, nevertheless his joy is not without heaviness,
for that which our lord, has vouchsafed to put upon him some such thing,
whereby he is made ready to a great reward, and yet not without heuines, for
that in that temptation, sin is not therein fully eschued. And I said, lord,
by what means may he resist the adversary, and with what armor shall he
ouercom him. And the angel said: He must fight with prayer and with confession,
and with scourgyng of the flesh, and thus he shall ouercom: also he may not
cesse to prai to our lord, that he may be delivered from yt prick, and he
must pray this prayer, yt our lord may have mercy on him in time of tentacion,
if he shall be in secret place, he mustknele on his knees.iii. times before our
lord, forsothe if there lack the opportunity of place, he then shall sign his
heart three times with the sign of the cross, and must thus say: Saluator mundi
salua nos, qui per cruce^ and sanguine^ tuu^ redemisti nos, auxiliare nobis te
deprecamur deus noster and in english it is thus. O savior of the world, save
thou us, which by the cross and by thy blood haste redeemed us, we beseech the
which art our god to help us. After these, one dai he reised up his tongue into
these words: O you virgins behold the divine voice cries to you, the voice of
your spouse knocks and calls at your ears, open to him, and lead him
into the palace of your heart, and halse him, for he is fair and more amiable
then any creature. And again he said: The lord of majesty, the only begotten
of him which is most high, the king of goodly companies or hosts, fulfyllyng
heaven and earth with his magnificall glory, great and dredeful in all his
mighty strength and power, sweet and amiable in his incomparable benignity,
and fully and al wholly to be desired in the clerenesse of his perfect
beauty, in whose amiable cheer visage or face, Cherubin and Seraphyn, and all
their fellowship or company delight to look upon with an incessable desire. O
virgins, this is he which coueteth your beauty, he calls and byddeth you to
his chaste halsynges, he asks of you the glorious lylies of your virginite,
that with them he may dress and adorn his chamber, that chamber knows no
spotte of uncleanness, and any thing which is corrupt, enters not there, the
precious flowers of virginity there do not dry away, nor there they fall not
away, but they abide still in incorruptible and perfect beauty, and the
immaculate la^be gladly coucheth in them, and they breath to him an odor or
smell of swetenes, holy virgins so shine in the chamber of their spouse as
precious stone and perle desyrable to syghte, he the most specious virgin
which has washed them in the blood of his side, and has signed the face of
them: he is glad in the lokynge of them, and the mysteries of his beauty and
clerenes he shows to them which be to him most dear: there sounds the
organes of election, the concordance of peace in spirit, and a song is song
desirous to the ear a song of singular mirth which only is to be song of
vyrgines, and of the high spirits familiars of the chamber, the spouse
leads the quyer in a clear and excellent voice and in thousands of them
which sing, there is not one can be like to him. The voice of him is a sweet
voice in the fullness of grace, which fulfyllethe all heavens with mirth:
blessed are they which hear that voice, and hyghly they are blessed which
sing together to him, among the which the virgyne Theothocos our princess
has obtained the primacye, to her only is given to exalt her voice above all
the voices or tunes of angels. O you daughters take heed of the words of my
ministry, and mark them in the hid place of your mind, if your heart be to
the especial and noble spouse. and he is worthy to be beloved, why aryou
negligent, and wherefore do you tarry to extend your selves with all virtue in
him most specious whom nothing is more clear, nothing more amiable in heaven or
in earth: and if you love glory, what thing is more glorious tha^ to have such a
spouse and to possess al things in him, if you covet to have delites and
joys, make you haste to the chamber of pleasure and myrthe which is made redye
for you, to whose pleasure and sweetness, all that eye has seen, or ear
has herd, or that which has ascended into the heart of man can not be
compared thereto, and wha^ he had said these, I did remember the words which
he spoke of the virgins song, and asked him, saying: My lord, is it so that
also angels sing that song, and whether not also all virgins? And he said,
truly angels sing that song, and every one which from this life without
spotte or defilyng comme to the kyngedome of heavens. And again, I said: How
is than that scripture understand, which says: That none might say that
song but those fortye and four thousand? are al virgins under that number
compreprehended? and he said, so it is that noumbre is perfect, and it
signifies the perfection of them, which have kept theimselues immaculate or
undefiled, as the infancy of the innocents is without spotte, and what he
said more of that number, the weakness of my wit or senses could not bear
it away. Again he taking the word of exhortation spoke, saying: O you virgins,
go and bye to you marriage clothes, and enter with him to marriage, and lest
peradventure you may be deputed with them which be reproved, think you
now with all business of mind, how you may please your spouse when he
shall come, orelles it shall be said unto you, How have you entered hither,
not having marriage clothes. Wake or watch you therefore, lest he find you
slepers with the folyshe virgins, and again he said: Here you therefore O you
virgins and open the ears of your heart, and understand how your spouse
stireth and calls you, if that you knew how fair and how amiable he is
whom all the heavenly multitude beeholdethe, without doubt with all defyre you
would alwais despise the world with all the ornament thereof, and all the glory
of this world you would cast behyde you, and you would put al your study
fully to love your holy spouse Christ our lord, and you would be alwais busye
to keep to him your heart and your body clean and immaculate: and after these
I asked him, saying: Lord which be those marriage clothes, of which thou have
spoken. And he answered: Virgins ought to go to the inward parts of their
hertes, and there to bye three kinds of ornaments: one clothyng or orname^t,
it behooves them to have which is white and undefiled that is innocence of the
flesh and it is necessary for them a coueryng or ma^tel, wherewith they must be
cladde round about, which is charity, and therewith Christ their spouse of
them ought to be beeloued. The third ornament of them is in latyne called
Torques aurea, in english, a wrethe braided of gold for their neck, which in
latin is called Pudicitia, in english, maidenly behauior, wherewith a virgin
ought to constrayne her self, that she should be shamfaste to speak, to
hear, to laugh, or to do any thing which is not pure or honest, that is the
sign, whereof it is said: He has put a sign in my face, he said that as I
suppose, for that in the feast of saint Agnet I asked of that word, and than he
gave none answer to me thereof: again I said, Lord with what price these
ornaments are to be bought to these virgins. And he said: With chastifyng of
their own bodies, and with one penny, which is the Contemplacyon of the
pureness of the spouse, which they ought to put in the minds of their
heart, that penny is signed with the kings image: for why he is king of al
kings, blessed in the worlds.

Again I asked him, saying: Lord remember of that godly word, which thou
dydst say: A virgin araied or dressed with chastity, charity prudence, and
humility runs weil: therefore there thou made distinction of four
ornaments: and now forsooth in this later distinction, the two first thou
forsooth have assigned, truly thou seem to let go or owytte. And he said:
Thou may be called a person of desires, that so diligently inquireth this.
Then he answered to my question, saying: The two which to thee seem to be left
or omitted, are comprehended under the name of Torques, in latin, in english, a
wreath braided, forsooth it requires great prudence or wysedom, that a virgin
should constrain her heart against al thing which is not pure or uncomely. And if
there be true prudence, there must needs be humility. And again after certain
days, I asked an other question: Lord, seeing there are no vrgins which shall
enter with the spouse in marriage which shall be found without marriage
clothing: with what reason may it be said to the^ How have you entered he there,
not having marriage clothes. To that he answered, saying: this word perteyneth
to the last judgment, there shall be gathered to gether before the face of
Christ his elect spouses, al they araied in marriage clothes, according to the
just works which they have don in this world. There shall be also those,
which are reproved, having no beautyfulnes perteynyng to the marriage, by cause
they have neglected to work or to do any good things in their life therefore
the spouse shall say to them: Go you accursed into everlasting fire: In that
voice they shall receive yt blaming or rebuke, How have you entered hither not
having marriage clothes. Again forsooth he made exhortation, saying: Herke^ to,
and bow thy heart to me thou simple virgin and amyable of the lord, follow not
ye mayde^s and daughters of ye world which go prosperously in their delites,
and they seek to please in the eyes of men and not of god they study to be
tri^med and dressed all about yt they may have praise of the mouths of them
which looks on them, and that they may be made in snare and subversion of
many. And as ye word of them which praise them, so the farrenesse of them is
lastyng but of one momente, as the frooth of water is easily dyssolued, and as
a spark risyng from fire, is sone out, so sone is quenched the beautye of
flesh, and all his glory, and it is as a flower of a tree, which in one hour
appears, and straight ways is it smytte^ away with the mouynge or blaste of
the wind: but forsoothe ye daughter, set thy heart yt thou may be trimed or
dressed to walk spectable i^ the sight of thy co^tyne^t lover, our ki^ge,
which looks on ye from heaven, and nu^breth all thy ways: take to ye that
beauty, which nether with sore, sycknesse, nor with age, can not decay nor
perish, nor ye nedinesse of this worldelye perysshyng substance does make it
foul, the fairer ye art in face, thou must take heed to be the more fair and
specious in mid, a disceiuyng grace is of the face, thy glory must be
inwardly, that thou please thy spouse, which looks on thy heart. Behold the
way of chastity, and take heed it have pleasant grenenesse of gre^e on both
parts, and outwardly beautyfulnes, give thou place to chastity, not only in
flesh, but in spirit, for why, vain is the chastity of the flesh, where as
reigns the incontinency of the spirit, and any other things which defiles
ye soul, take heed what I say: As a la^pe can not show light without
nouryshyng of fatnes, so can not ye chastity of the flesh shine before the
heavenly spouse without the chastity of the spirit. And I set to these words
this question: Lord? in the vision our way apered narow or strait: and what is
that which the scripture speaks. And I walked in breadthe, because I sought
thy commandementes, what is that brodenes? and how can I consider that breadth
or brodenes i^ that way? To this he thus answered, That brodenesse or breadth is
the strong intent of the heart, and the burning charity inwardly wherewith the
chaste fowls do bourne to their spouse Christ the lord, which is the breadth
or brodenes, and plentuousnes of all the ways of god, consider the liberty of
this way, that it is without thorns or lettes, that is the effect of
charity which he works most in virgins, where he sends forth the
thorns of charges, and of all malice, that they may be vacant, and think
those things, which belongs to god, and how they may plese him whom they
love above all things. And wha^ again I asked him of the narownes of the way,
he said: That is yt virgins should constrayn them self, yt in nothing should
excede from them selves, and to him I said: Lord may they excede from them
selves? And he said. they might, and I said: What things be those, by which
they may excede from them selves? And he said: Those be ydeines, fabulation,
that is telling of tales, and all things which takes away their heavenly
spouse from their minds. And he said more: The narownesse of the way and of
the torquis which before I told to you, they show under one signification. that
they must walk to christ their spouse always in narrowness in those things
the which perteyne to this world.

And when these words ware completed, in the second sunday of the holy feast
of lent in ye feastfull day of sayncte Mathy apostle in the time of dyuine
office or sacrifyce, the holy blyssed angel of the lord appeared to me. And I
said to him. I beseech the my lord, if it be now time, if it pleases the,
now to set an end to thy sermon, which hitherto ye haste prosecuted and
followed on to the virgins of the lord: ska^te I had fulfilled my prayer, and
by and by he opened his mouth with these words. Lo I shall set to more over to
admonysshe or warn you most beloved children to the lord.

Absteyne you from the noughty lusts or delites of vices, which fyghteth
against the spirit cast the thoughts of your hearts on the lord, and he
shall norishe you, as it shall be pleasynge to him, and he shall bring you into
the feasts of everlasting life, which he may vouchesaue to grant to you,
Jesus Christ the son of the living god, which with the holy ghost lives
and reygneth lord god by all world of worlds. Amen.

Of the wave of prelates. A Sermon.
THe sermon before written brought to an end, the angel of the lord differred
his coming to visit me longer time thanne he was wont to do, and that I did
impute unto my sins, and I was anguished in my self, and I gave my self
more diligently, with weeping tears and prayers, and our couente help me with
their common prayer. and when seuentene days were past from that the said other
sermon was ended, about the third hour of the day I stood alone in the
oratory, she dyng my heart before the lord, and saying. Not by my merits lord
thou haste looked in all these things which ye haste wroughte with me, but in
thy me^ye thou haste done all these, therefore I beseech the not to be
refreygned for my sins or fautes, or for the sins of any other, but that it
may please the of thy goodness to bring to end those things which hitherto
thou haste begone with me. Of the way of the gouerners of thy church, which
thou haste showed to me in mystery, it may please the to wytsafe to show to
us a congruent discipline or teaching, of the which some fruit of correction
may comme, as thou know it to be necessary to thy people. Yet I speaking
these and other like words in prayer, lo the aungel of my desire, suddenly
appeared before me, and with these words he began, saying: Thus says the
lord: Behold, I send mine angel that he may show to you which are set in
high power, and you are prouokers: forsothe I say to you, that the wickedness
of the earth which you have hidden for gold and silver ascendethe before me,
as smoke from fire: Are souls think you no better then gold or silver? and
them you stra^gle in everlasting fire for your avarice. Therefore your own
religion accuses you before me: lo forsothe you have made your sanctification
to stynke in the sight of the people, and it is turned to me in abomination:
you have occupied the principate of my saynctes, and I knew it not: you have
defiled my bed, and I have hold my peace, and said nothing: What is a do
with me and with you, which are the exasperatours or sharpers of my mekenes:
From whens are your ascended to trouble my flock, and to aggrauate my heart upon
my children, which I have begotten in the bitterness of my soul in the day of
my labor and of mine anguishes. And again the angel set to speak more to me,
saying: Are not my shepardes obdurate or made hard, as it were in a grievous
sleep, and how shall I make them to awake upon my flocks, which are dispersed
as sheep be when they are fed ingrene pastures: my people are made vagant, every
one follows his own mind and in the bront of their heart, they run about
each one after their concupiscence, and there is neither voice nor wit with
my shepeherdes, to blame and to gather together them which are dissipate, to
me they are dombe says the lord, to me they are made foles, forsothe to
theimselues they are wise and ware or subtle, their mouth is open, and their
tongue is versatile or sharp to gather the grape or vine, in the which they
have not labored, swifte is their foot, and they run in tumulte or in great
noise to root up and to suppe up the carnal things of my people, to who^ they
do minister no spiritual things, they are so slow that they will not move there
fi^ger to teach my sowles from wyckednes, for who^ I have tasted death: they are not afraid to persecute me as a people which knows not my name, they walk
under my name, and they make heavy ye heart of my people, with unlawful exaction,
and they mind not to take away from mine eyes, the wyckednes of ye adulterer,
and of the fornicator, and of the smyter, and of him that is violent in his
neighbor, and of a thief, and of an ill doer, and of him that is forsworn, and
of an usurer and of him that disceyueth in weight and measure, and of him
which polluteth my saboth dais in plais of filthynes, and of him which
depriueth the covenant of sanctimonie, and of him which is vncircuncised,
dishonoring mine altar, not deming or iudgyng that which is clean or pure,
and most clean or most pure, and of him which sells and bieth my
sanctification, and exercisynge pride in the heritage of my sanctuary: these
and other things which with my laws I have forbidden, waste my house as a
flame of desolationi, and they make me yrke or weary upon the children of me^
and my shepeherdes are dombe in their manners, and rest in the desires of their
soul, they go well their gates after their plantacion: and our lord says:
that thereafter their goynges shall find a woorthye retribution or reward: The
angel thus prosecutynge, which spoke to me by diverse times: I said unto
him, Lord, what is that waking which our lord has thretned to his
shepeherdes? and thereto he taking again the word, as in anger of
threatnynge, said: You which sleep in my blamynges, and your heart is blinded
in your sleep, I shall make you to wake: when old death shall comme on you,
and that inueterate serpente, and he shall devour you with a great brunte or
violence: for why you have treasured to you treasures in the pains of hell, O
you unhappy and insensate or unwise: Open your eyes, and read scriptures, and
remember with what religion your antecessors have gone before you: again after a
little while or time, the angel added, saying: Behold and see the great
bishop and high above all things our lord Jesus Christ, how he walked in his
days in the mids of his dysciples, not in heighte as of bearing lordshyp,
but in humble lowelynesse, as he that does ministration of service, as a meke
or pituous follower of his flock unto the consummation of death for them. Look
upon his sede, which is blessed, the ministers of his calling his blessed
apostles, and their successors, in who^e companies you glory to be, and you
feed the will of your heart in their labors: are your wais as their ways
has been, think not so, their ways were fair and right ways, forsoothe
your ways are defiled, and there is none order in them, they have not walkid
in highness of their spirit or mind, nor in the tumult or noise of a proud
company following, not in covetousness of gettyng, not in magnif^cence of
rich twa-thynge, nor in dissolution of heart, not in much eating, drynkyng
and foul spots of the flesh, not in vanity of them which play, nor
their running was not afterdogge nor bird. Forsooth they drue toward the
steps of the great shepard or pastoure in sincerity and pureness, waking and
watchyng faithful watchinges upon the flock of our lord both day and night,
in labors and in throws, in penury of necessity, and as patient in
anguisshe they have fulfilled their ministry, sufferyng abiection and
contumelye of men, and persecutions more then any man can noumbre, and they
have given their souls to death for that they might fulfill the earth with
the gospel of god, and that they might wyn or get the souls of the electes.
We halowynge the feast of Easter in time of sacrifice, after ye readyng of the
gospel, there appeared to me the angel of the lord standing before me, and
when I asked of him that he would vouchsafe to procure that no negligence
should chance in that holy communion, which we tarried for: and I prayed him
further, that he would vouchsafe to follow on the sermon, which he had begun of
the rulers of the Church. Whereunto he gave me a short answer, saying: If
they were worthy, our lord would show many great things of them. And that
spoken, he went straight ways to the altar, and stood with two angels,
which came in the beginning of Mass, with great diligence till that we were
all houseled: the next day about the same time coming, thus he began,
saying: The head of the church cries, and his members are dead: for why the
apostolical seat is obsessed with pride, and it is tylled with avarice, and it
is fulfilled with iniquity and wickedness, and they sclaunder my sheep, which
they ought to keep and govern, the word is with the lord with his power.
Shall my right hand forgette this, no without doubt, except they shall be
converted, and shall correct their noughtye worste ways. I the Lord shall
break them asunder. Again, an other day, he added thereto saying: These says
our Lord to the great prelate^ of the church. Remember you what account you
shall yield in my dreadefull judgment of my sheep, which you have taken to
govern and to keep, when you have apprised the spiritual gifts of my people
with the price of unhappiness, trow therefore I send to you fatherly monitions
or warnynges: see that you be not judged, but be you converted from your most
ill vices, and make clean your consciences, and I shall be reconciled to you,
or else I the Lord shall put away your memory from the land of them which
lives: after these he as in spirit of softnes showing the word of god,
said: I the Lord cry and warn my shepardes, and why here they not the voice
of my admonition or warnyng: I stand and knock at the door of their heart,
and they will not open to me: Hear harken and understand the words of my
warning, and delight you in my love, for why, I warn the shepardes and my sheep
with a fatherly warning: for soth there be among my shepeherdes, which are
seue to me good and peasyble, to how few of them there be, and other many
ylle and perverse or froward which provoke me to anger, therefore it behooves to
warn the good to profit into better, and forsoothe to warn the ylle and the
perverse froward, that they may be converted, that they perysh not from the
right way. And again when he did visit me, he joined more words to: Lo our
lord has yet set to his sheep herdes, saying: With all business of mind take
heed your way be the right way and err not therein. Wake or watch you, and
keep the vigils of the night upon my flock, as good folowers lest peradventure
there may come over you a flock of goats, which be malignaunt spirits, of
the which the flocks of my sheep are dispersed: Joy you with gladness, you
which are peasible says the lord, and remember my words which you have
found in this present sermon, and keep you from the vnlaufulle. things of
this world, and love my warnyng: forsooth I am to be beloved for such
warning, and if that you love me, and give honor to my name. for of me you
have received that honor, I shall honor you before my holy aungelles. As yet
the holy angelle speaking to me these words of the pastors or shepards of the
church. it was seen or some behorable that I should ask for them which are
doubtefull, and take occasion of their error, I asked therefore not as
doubti^g in fa^the but as coueti^g our faith to be made ferme, of the angels
authorite, and I said, Lord, have the offices of those bishopes which
wrongfully and not after god have e^tred to their bisshopprickes, like truth
in the sacraments of the church, as of those bishops whose entree is good. And
he answeryng, said: Many when they fear the such things so depely ar rather
made thereof worse, than better, and thereby not amended, and the lord would
show such things, if they would not the more frelyer offend, they to whom
such things do perteine. and these spoken, straight ways he was taken from
mine eyes. Forsooth the next day when he came again to me, I asked him,
repetyng the same words, and he said, they have like virtue, but it is more
pleasyng to god in the offices of them which have well entered. And again I
said: My lord is it not so that priests ordained of them whose enter is not
good have the same power to consecrate in the altar the body and bloudde of
our Lord, as they which are ordained of them which laufullye have entered.
And he said: Let never that doubt hereof ascend into thy heart, but know for
certain, that all they which have taken priesthood in the ordinance of the
church have the same power in the consecration of the lords sacrament whether
they, which have ordained them, have entered well or ill, those dyuyne words
which in the holy canon are said, are of such virtue before the lord, that
trewely in the pronunciation of those words, there is the body and blood of
our lord of what so ever priest they be pronounced: for so the neither by the
merits of them that be good it is made, nor by nor by the sins of the^
that be ill is let that consecration, forsooth although there be no
insufficient efficacy in the divine sacraments as well the priests as
ordinaries, never the less for their ill they be damnable, and hereafter shall
be punisshed with more grievous damnation. By cause all this sermon seemed to
pertain to our spiritual fathers, having Judgments in the church, I
prayed the angel of the lord, saying: Lord I pray the that as thou have
ministered hitherto words of admonition or of warnyng to the spiritual
gouernoures, so it may please the to show from the lord to them which have
authority of secular judgments, some admonitions or warnynges, whereby they
may be corrected. And he straight wais giving consent to my petition with
these words began a sermon perteynyng to them, saying: Lo our Lord has
ordained upon his people princes and Judges that they should do judgment
and justice, and confirm truth and peace betwixt man and man, that all the
people should be well pleasyng before the lynynge God. Now forsoothe sayeeth
our Lord: My Princes and judges ar as a horse or a mule, in whom there is no
understanding: They walk before me with the neck extended, and blown with
pride, not geuyng glory to god, of whom is all power in heaven and in earth,
but they glory in their virtues. I have exalted them and made them honorable
on the earth: and lo they despise to know that, and to give me the glory.
Forsooth if they knew my name, which is great, and to be feared, and my strong
right hand, which I have stretched upon them, peradventure they should be
made low and meke under hand, and should withdraw again to them selves their
neck which they have erected into the contumely or displeasure of me, and
should bow down their there into the earth from whens I took them and their
fathers: I say to you kings of the earth, which are lyfted up in heighte, and
the cry of your iniquite ascends into heaven before me, hear you the voice
of my blaming, and I shall discept or with strife dispute with you in the ears
of my people. Know you not that all the kingdoms of the world are mine, and all
the glory of them, and that I have power to give them to whom I will, and
again what hour I will to take them away? Do you not know, that al things living
stand under the co^ma^deme^t of my mouth, and that my word is mighti to
divide between your spirit and fleshein the twinkling of an eye: and why is
your heart set up in pride in these things which by my ordynance you have
taken, and not rather you to be busy to minister to me in ye degree of your
height, and to give thanks to me for the multitude of my benefits: go again
to your heart, and see what I have done to you, and what you have yealded again
to me. I the lord your dominatour have found you without me rite of thanks
giving before me, and nevertheless I have taken you up, as I will of all the number
of much people, and I will lift you up above the heigh of princes, and of
Judges of the earth, and I have shed on you unction of my holiness, and I
have put the diadem of glory on your head, and I have porrected or reched unto
you the rod of the kingdom to your right hand: and I have girt you with the
swerd of my vengeance, and I have glorified you before all my people in riches,
in high power, and I have given to you great strength to rend asunder the virtue
or strength of the rebellers against you, and I have dilated and set abroad the
fame of your name, according to the breadth of therth. I ye lord have done to
your al these, to ye intent yt you should magnifi ye praise of my name upon the
earth, and that you should exercise my justice or laws in them which I have
made subject to you, as well to high as to the low, to ye more as to the less,
and that you should set at one all my people in the bands of peace and of
equity, and that you should faithfully give your selves to be a refuge or
helper to every one which is oppressed, or to him which suffers wrong, and
that you should be my de^gers against the^, which break or violate peace or
justice and yt you should make the earth to rest from the^ which troubles it,
and make it desolate with sword and fire, and with violent pray deuoureth other
men's labors, and make ye tillers of the earth to be vagant and beggars, and
they dishonor my holy name, wherwt I have signed and marked them, and I have
disseuerde the^ in heritage to me. This was ye yoke of my thraldom or service,
which I have put upon you in the day yt I did exalt you over the^ which ar
most high above my people: you forsothe have smitten away that yoke from your
necks, and for all ye glory which I have given to you, you have yielded again
not dread and honor, but despit and provoking, and you shut the eyes of your
mind that you should not look to your judge which is in heuens, and you have
subverted that which is right for ye avarice and pride of your heart, and you
have confirmed wickedness in the earth, and have set that up in high place where
you walk abroad on the earth: I here weeping and wailyng after you, and a great
and much quarrel accuses your pride, for your company of horsemen is
intolerable and it is beyond number, the iniquity of the^ which walk in the
circuit of you: you ar combrous and chargeable to my people, and that to you
seems but a trifle, but also to your lord god, you are grievous and
abominable of the defilyng or filthynes of your shamful uncleanness, wherwt you
are not afraid to provoke me to indignation, and you have dishonored the holy
oil, wherwt I have anointed you, and you have polluted my honorable name,
which I have put on you, and have made it to be blasphemed in the multitude
of people for the insaciable sin which has lordeshyp in you: therefore
says ye lord, I have sworn in ye strength of my right hand: for why, lo nere
at hand I shall yield my most hard vengeance on your heads, and as you have
myghtyly fynned, so I shall make you myghtilye to be tourmented, and to be
trodden down together of ill and unclean spirits, to whom you have
mynistred, and the scourge shall not go from you in this time, except you
shall do penance, and go away from your wicked wais, wherewith you have
brought my wrath into your kyngdeomes. Do penance therefore and tarry not, and
study with all vigilance to fulfill your ministerye, to which I have called
you and I shall remember my ancient mercies in you, and shall have mercy of
your manyfold wickednesses, and I shall magnify you after the magnitude of my
servants kings, which have been before you, and I shall set unto you the crown
of glory in my kingdom which shall not perish-fro^ your head into everlasting.
Behold all you princes and my judges these my words, you which bear the
wickedness of your kings, and correct your shrewed ways in my blamyngs in
which I have chyde^ them, and go you from auaryce and dysceytfulnes you
which do suffocate or strangle my Justice, for rewards and favor of men, and
you lift up the hertes of my people, that one may noye another, trusting in
your unrighteousness. I the lord have made subject my people to your
dominacyon, that you should be to them in defense, from the face of the
violente, and of the robber, and lo your heart is lyfted up in pride, and as
dyrte in the street, you tread them down, by whom you ar glorious and as
ravenous wolfes you exercise madness in your propre flock. I have likened you
to my principates, which are over the knighthode or chyualrye of heaven, and
you would not understand your own honor and you have clad your selfs with the
similitud of the princes of hell, in the multitude of malice wherwt you skourge
my people in the boldenes of your spirit, and in the spots of your
Intemperaunce, wherewithe you have dishonored my face, which lokethe on you
from heaven therefore the lord says, I live, and the strength of my right
hand lyuethe, if you will not here of my warning, and be turned again to me,
I shall draw you down from your height, which you have ylle used into the
depenes of hell, and you shall be fellows of them to who^ you have made your
selfs like, in quick bournynge fire everlasting. In the holy day of
Penthecoste, called Whitsontide in the first hour before the celebration of the
divine office when I was in prayer, the angel appeared before me, and setting
hereto with the adding of these words, fulfilled this sermon. Thus says the
lord, king of kings, and lord of them which have lordeshyppe over all the
earth: Here you, and understand you the words of my mouth, and amend your
ways in my eye syghte, for if you study to please and to appease me, the more
higher you are in this, the more higher place I shall give to you named in my
kingdom that you may live and reign with me without end. Amen.

Of the way of them that are wydowers or widows. The.vii. sermon.
IN the feast of saint Martin betwixt the silence of the Mass, I spoke to
the angel, saying: Lord it please the now that thou may exhibit to us a
convenient discipline of that way, whereof one part is occupied with brembles,
and truly the other part is pleasant and fruitful with flowers, and narow,
having nothing of brembles and of lettynges or impedimentes. Scante I fulfilled
the words of my petition, and straight wais he said: Lo I say to you, which
in this world be wydowes living in flesh, in labors and in many anguishes
absteyn you from the vices of this world, and walk you in the way of
continency or of chastity, which way is pleasantly dressed, and so living
according to the spirit, go out from the mids of thorns, which are in
the circuit of you. for lo your snare is dissolved wherewith you were bound to
this world, and as captyues you were led to serve to the will of an other, and
you were not your own wha^ you did or performed the will of the flesh, after all
the desires of the heart, you took than excuse of the necessite of marriage.
And if you will again obey to the flesh, what excuse shall you have? Wherefore
couete you to please again to ye sight of man in a proud clothing, in the
ornamente or dressing of your face? to whom more now do you bye or set your
flesh partly dead in the delites of this world, and in those desires which
be aduersant against the spirit?, and you heap to your selves vain and
superuacante business more then is expedient. Hear you rather godly counsel,
and go away from the voluptuousnes of this life: for they are disceyuable,
lest peradventure you be before occupied with them, and your last doings
be worse tha^ the first, take to you quietness of mind and spiritual delites
which god offers to you, do the residue of your days in obsecrations and
in vigils, and in chastisyng of your flesh, and in works of pity. And in the
vigile of the apostles, he set to more, saying: and what shall I more add to
warn or admonisshe you: Lo I have showed you the way, I have instructed you
with doctrine, feel here and there, consider the words, reteyn the examples:
Love chastity and run to the clerenes of god, and of our lord Jesus Christ,
which he may witsaufe to grant to you, which lives and reigns by all
world of worlds. Amen. In the day of the translation of saint Benet, I did
covet to take ye beginning of the.viii. sermon, but that day my prayers were
let with the presence of gestes, and my des^re was translated unto the next
day. Then forsothe I standing in prayer after the hour of the chapter, the
angel of our lord presented himself to me, and I asked that he might
begin the sermon to them, whose life in vision appeared to be occupied as
with cloddes, and straight ways he opened his mouth, and spoke these words.

Of the way of heremites, and of them which live solitarily or alone. A sermon.
TAke heed you yt have chose^ to dwell in wilderness what discrecyon you may
have. Forsoothe discretion is mother of al virtues, the sharp clodde is your
way, for the hardness of life, se you lest peradventure your foot may
offend, and if it offend, beware that the light which is in you be made
void or extincted: forsothe therefore it is necessary for you to have
discretion, that you may not follow to soon every brunt of your zele or desire,
which impelleth you to the height of perfection, nor go not over the measure
of your virtue or strength with immoderate labors, many walkyng in the
presumption of their spirit, with to much affliction, have quenched their
life, and they have parished in their inuencion, many exceedynge their measure
have subverted man's understanding in themselves, and have been made unprofitable
like iument beasts, sauoryng no wit or knowledge: many by immoderate
fatigatio^s have been brought into irkesomnes, and the virtue thereof has waxed
sick or weary, and they went away backward, and are reuolued again to carnal
or fleshely voluptuousnes, and they are made a laughyng to scorn to wicked
spirits: good is the vexatio^ or punisshement of the flesh, because it is
aduersant against the concupiscence of uncleanness, but if it exceed measure,
it is unprofitable because it suffocateth or strangleth the devotion of
contemplation, and quenches the light thereof. O thou man, have thou mind
therefore of thy fraylenes, that thou may go warely in the hard way, which
thou have entered into, and do patiently in thy hasting or festination, lest you
suffer ruin or decay, dress al thy labors in the councils of wise me^ and not
in thyn own wit or mind and thou shall not be co^fou^ded in thyn outgate,
tempt not the lord of heaven, as they which not taking head, outwardly cast
away the charge and cure of themselfes, and they have trust that the power of
our lord shall be made marvelous in them after as in the ancient dais. To
these take to thee the eruditio^ and discipline of co^te^plation which I have
showed from the lord and comfort in that thine abiection. We sittyng together
in ye chapterhous to hear a lesson of the rule in the feast of saint Mary
Magdalen, my lord the angel stood before me, and fulfilled this present sermon
with a convenient end saying: O man now take heed, you which have chosen to lead
thy life alone, and thou haste renounced or forsaken ye voluptnousnesse of ye
world, what fruit thou bring forth. Truly there ar some men which love more to
be a lone for the liberty of their own will, than for fruit of good work, but
if thou persevere or abide in goodness, the lord shall give to thee the thing
which the eye has not seen nor ye ear has not heard nor has not ascended
into the heart of man, which he might vouchsafe to grant to you, which
lives and reigns god by the infinite world of worlds. Amen. Wha^ the feast
of saint James the apostle was in hand in the first even song the angel of the
lord appeared before me, and I did as the writer of these sermons enticed me,
and I asked of the aungelle that he would please or vouchesafe to pronounce the
title which was to be written in the beginning of this book. And by and by he
assented to my petition, and said: This is the book of the ways of god, which
was sheweo of the angel of god, most high to Elizabeth the handmayd of Christ
the living God, in the fyft year of her visitation in the which year the
spirit of the lord has visited her, to the health of all them which take
and perceive these fatherly monitio^s or warninges with a thankful blessyng.
and it was the year of our lords incarnation, a thousand, a hundred fifty and
six.

Of the way of adolescence, that is of them which be young, and above seven
years. A sermon.
IN the month of August the.v. day of that month, in the morning after
matens, when I was couched in my little bed, nor as yet I took no sleep,
sodeinly appeared before me the angel of our lord and began thenyneth sermon of
this present book with these words. Lo or behold I have somewhat to say to you,
which are put or set in youth as a lyly which before ye son risyng or
springing was close or shette, and when the son shined in his virtue, then he
opens him self and deliteth in the ardure or heat of ye son, so is a man,
and so his flesh flourishes in his youth or young age, and he many ways
touched deliteth his mind, and is resolved of the soft glosyng or flatteryng
of his natural heat: here you therefore chylderne, and in the words of my
ministry perceive the calling of your most best father from heaven, which
shall give to you a place of most sweet amenitie or pleasure before ye seat of
his glory, if you will chose to walk in his counsels: learn first to dread or
fear ye lord of heaven, and often custom your selves to be bowed down under
the yoke of his dread or fear from the beginnynge of your youth. Lo he has
prepared in the cruel hell fire and brymstone, and hugely many scourges and most
bitter bitings of the horrible spirits, doing ill to small and to great, and
spares none age: therefore I say to you, learn to conteyne your selves from
all ill works, and keep your innocence as chosen gold, whose price in
beautifulness as yet you know not, forsothe when your understanding shall
grow in age, than you shall know, and you shall taste thereof the fruit of
mirth which no man knows, but he that takes it, O you little children, the
counsel of our lord is that which I say, lo there is in your bosom a
treasure desyrable and precious above all the richesse of the world, that is
the precious stone of your virginity, you shall be blessed if you will keep
it, cast not that thing so precious in ye mire, nor change it not for a vile
delectation, which is but of one moment, for ones cast away, it can no more
be found again that is the propre sign of our fraternity in heaven, and
therefore singularly we delight in them in the earth which we find or see
signed with our title, and if it please your soul or mind to keep it, take
heed to your selves, that you defyle it not with the negligence of your
lightness, decline with the fear of your heart from the prouokinges of
uncleanness, and flee from the confabulations and collusyons of young weuches,
and keep you no felowshyppe with the corrupters of them.

Keep your mouth from unclean or foul words or talking, and bow away your
ear from it, and absteyne your eyes and your hands from all foul
fylthynesse.

Hear you and understand the scripture of a wise manne, which says, Happy
is she which has not known the bed in sin, she shall have fruit in
respect of holy souls: and he which is gelded, and has not wrought by his
hands iniquity, there shall be given to him the chosen gift of faith, and
the most acceptable lotte or chance in the temple of the lord. Wha^ I
required of him of that scripture whose it should be, he said: The holy
ghost spoke it by the mouth of a wise man. And straight ways he was taken
from mine eyes, nor he would not more suffer no question to be asked of him.
After these again he set to and said: Yet I shall add to speak to my
brethren and fellow servants, the warnyngs or admonicions of the father of
them. O you children bring it in custom to you, the manners of holiness in your
floryshinge age, which you may exercise in the time of your rypenesse, sharp
your manners therein, that you may be abashed from ill, meke and sobre, lowly and
mercyful, and be pacyent to correction, love you and search the doctrine of
wisemen and fle from lying words, and from words of malice, and theft or
stealing, much eating, and strives, and such plays or gamyng, which avarice
has found, and fle from them which give occasion of unclean voluptuousnes:
it is expediente also to you to intend to often prayer, for why a prayer
procedyng from an undefiled conscience, is in heaven as ince^se of swetnes,
make supplication to your maker which has created you, that he may keep you
undefiled from this world, and trust not in the length of this life present:
for your end from hens is uncertain: this is the beauty and fayrenes of your
way. O you adolescentes and young persons immaculate, walk therein, and you
shall be children amiable to our lord, and like to the aungelles of god in
heaven, to whose fellowship our lord Jesus Christ may vouchesafe to bring you,
and he is blessed and laudable with the father, and with the holy ghost in
everlasting worlds. Amen.

Of the way of Infantes. A sermon.
IN the vigill of the assumption of our Lady, when the sermon before rehearsed,
was completed by the angel, in the same feast full day, in the time of divine
office, the angel visited me again, and said: Lo yet I will say and make an
end of my sermons, for there is yet place, and I have some what shortly to say
to infantes, which can not keep them self for ignorance, therefore it
behooves to admonyshe or warn their mothers, that they may keep the^ with the
dread or fear of god chaste and immaculate, that by chance they perish not.
And to that I asked and said: Lord what is that which thou have said (chaste
and immaculate) what can infantes do whereof they may defile their chastity,
and if they do any thing amysse, does not ignorance excuse them. And he
said: They defyle oftentimes their chastity with unclean words, and with
works, such as they may perform, and although they may do it by ignorance,
yet they be not without fault, for that they were not therefore chastised of
any body, nor they knew not of them selves how to do penance for their
faut, therefore they ought to be chastised of their parents for their fautes,
for as they are accustomed or used to do ill: so should they learn to do
well, if they were nourished thereto by chastity: In that I said, Immaculate,
I said it for them, which when they a little be paste seven years, then
the more they defyle them selves with yuell works: for why they than know to
think more of evil, for also they as much as they may, work the works
of uncleanness, so that they which be joined in kynrede, are often coupled,
not knowing what they do: Therefore such if when they dye from this world,
they suffer great peynes till they may be made pure, for why, no spotte may
enter into the kingdom of heaven, that therefore is their peryshyng, whereof I
said before, and the less they be helped with prayer and alms of their
friends, forsoothe the more grievous and more longer they are punished, for that
they believe that they need no healpe of prayer or alms to be done for
them. I say to you their parents, and to you which have keepynge of young
little children, look unto how you may keep them with much cautele or
being ware of them, for in you redoundethe their fautes, if you be neglygent
of them: all flesh by him self is ready to noughtynesse or to ill: and
therefore norishe not them in your vanities, nor incline them not to dronkennes
and to vain and shreude talkyng or tales telling, nor induce not the^ by
delicate educatio^ to pride: forbid them from conuitious and unclean or foul
words, and from sylthy songs, and from ill plays, and from strife, and
from unware vagatio^ laugh not at their fautes, but make the^ afraid with words
of correction and with ye rod of mekenes: for they will be stout bold and
sturdye, if they be left to their own will. Begin therefore in the morning of
their age, to bow them to the dread and fear of our lord, and take you
charge to still into their ears, and to teach them the articles of they holy
faith and prayers to god, and al thing which perteynethe to good manners.
Forsothe the angel made an end of this sermon in the vtas of the Assumption of
our Lady, with the setting to of these words: Now forsooth you most dear
chylderne, how fair is your way, run in it. O how amyable is your father?
How precious is your reward, and the kingdom of heaven, which he may
please, and vouchesaue to grant to you, ye soonne with the holy ghost i^
worlds of worlds. Amen.

The protestacion of ye angel of the showing of the book of ye ways of god.
WHEN al these sermons war allmooste consu^mated or fynished, to the feast of
the apostles of Peter and Paul, before the hour of the dyuyne office* I was
prayeng in secret place and there appeared in my sight the angel of the lord,
and I herynge him, he spoke these words. To the bishop of Treuerense, and to
the bishops of Colayn and of Maguncies, it must be showed to you, from the
lord god great and to be fered, and from the angel of the testament of this
book, that you may show these words which you shall find in this present
book, so the Church of Rome and to all the p^^^te, and to all the ^^^rche of
god, amend your selfs, and be you converted from your errors, and take
not disdaynfully this holy and divine monicion or warnyng, for they be not of
man's Inuencyon, truly I speak to you by name, for that in this province, you
have the name of religion, read and here these dyuyne monicions, or warnynges,
and take them with a pleasant mind and suppose not them to be fygmentes, or
faynynges of women, for they be not so, but they be of god the father
almighty, who is the well and spring, and beginning of al goodness: for sooth
that I say to you, I say to all other.

This is the adiuracion of him, that wrote these sermons or book. I adjure by
ye lord and by his angel every one that shall transwrite this book, that
diligently he may amend it, and that he may write this adiuracion to this book.

Laus deo.
HIC est liber via rum dei, qui annunciarus est ab angelo dei altissimi
Elizabeth ancillae Christi and dei viui, in quinto anno visitationis eius, in
quovisitauit eam spiritus ad salutem omnium qui paternas admonitiones Dei
gratia benedictio^e percipiu^t. Et erat in anno dominice incarnationis,
Millesimo ce^tesimo quinquagesimo sexto.

Capitulo. 1.
FACTVM est in exordio qui^ti anni visitationis meae ia^ appropinqua^te die
festo Pe^tecostes. Ego Elizaibeth vidi in visione spiritus mei, montem excelsum
copioso lumine in summo illustratu^. Et quasi vias tres a radice eius ad
cacume^ vsque porrectas. Quarum vna quae media erat in directu^ mihi posita^:
speciem habebat sereni coeli sieve lapidis Hyacincthini, quae vero a de^tris
mihi erat, viridis apparebat: and quae a sinistris purpurea. Stabat autem in
vertice montis co^tra viam mediam vir quidam in signis tunica Hyacinthina
indutus, and praecinctus ad renes baltheo candido, facies sple^dida erat vt
sol. Oculi vero in modu^ stellaru^ radiantes, Et capilli eius ta^qua^ lana
candidisma. Habebat aute^ in ore gladiu^ ex vtraque perte acutu^, et i^ manu
dextri clauim, in sinistra vero quasi scep^tu^ regi^^.

Visio secu^da. Capitulo. 2.
VIdi rursus alia visione in solennitate Penthecostes in ascensu mo^tis eiusdem
a sinistris praefati secus vias prioris visionis, alias tres vias varietate^
habentes huiusmodi. Vna earum quae vie viridi propinquior apparebat: amoena
quidem erat, sed ita ex omni part vepribus conde^sis vallata erat and obtecta:
vt ab eis pungi necesse esset ambula^tes per eam, nisi dilige^ter co^stricti
and inclinati incederent. Apparuit and semita quaeda^ delectabilis arcta, and
quasi modicu^ trita nihil habe^s v^ prium, sed ex vtraque partcio cundo gramine
and floribus diuersi generis copioseval ^ata. Media a^te^ inter has duas vna
erat a^pliore^ caeteris habe^s latitudinem, plana and quasi pauime^tu^ habe^s
ex lateribus rubeis, qua^ cu^ dilige^tius aspicere^: Angelus De^i qui mihi
assistebat, dixit: Via^ ha^c intuetis, and pulchra tibi uidetur et commoda ad
ambula^du^ in ea: sed periculosa est, and facile labuntur incede^tes per ea^.

Visio tertia. Capit. 3.
RVrsus in octaua-Penthecostes in te^pore meridiane quietis: subito apertes u^t
oculi cordis mei sine carnis vexatio^e, cut and in praefa^is visionibus et uidi
iterum ^uae praedicta sunt oi^a. A die cit aute^ dominus ostendere mihi preter
eas quasvi dera^, alias quatuorse cus tres vias primae visionis a dextris
virique stabat in cacumine montis. Vna earu^ quae proxima erat viae purpureae
vsque ad medium mo^tis difficultate^ magna^ habere videbatur a ve prium
de^sitate quibus ex vtroque latere obsitaerat. Reliqua vero pers eius vsque ad
su^mu^ floribus a moena, and ab i^pedime^tis libera, sed arcta and modicu^
trita apparuit.

Quae erat proxima huic, arida videbatur, and i^ modu^ ca^pi a rati glebis
inge^tibus aspera et viatoribus suis plurimu^ onerosa. Etam aute^ cogitans apud
me de his duabus viis: quod difficilem haberent incessum, and respo^dens
angelus qui mihi assistebat, ait: Si quis ambulauerit per vias istas, cave at
ne offendat pedem suum: qui aute^ offenderit et ceciderit, si non surrexerit,
sed permanet: non vi debit lume^ aeternu^: relic vero duae quae pariter cu^
his appareba^t: pla^e (...) expedite erant, and aspectu pulchraca^ dore^
habe^tes, quasi terre been trire in strata publica. Cu^que hererem in aspectu
earu^. Audiui rursus angelu^ dicente^ via iustoru^ recta facta est: and iter
sa^ctoru^ praeparatu^ est.

Visionis prime interpraetatio. Cap. 4.
VIsionis primae sicut per a^gelu^ accepi interpraetatio est haec. Mo^s
excelsus altitudo celestis beatitudinis est. Lux in vertice mo^tis, claritas
est vitae aeternae.

Viae diuersae in monte, electoru^ variae ascensiones su^t, quibus ad regnu^
claritatis asce^du^t. Via Hiacincthina diuinae co^templacionis studiu^ est.
Ambula^t in ea, qui iugi meditatio^e and desiderio, in deo et in coele stibus
me^tis oculum figunt. Via viridis eorum est: qui in actiua vita perfecti et
irrep^heti sibiles esse studet, incede^tes in oi^bus ma^datis dn^i sineque
rela, qui dum tra^sitoria, sed i^marcessibile brauiu^ superne retributio^is in
cunctis operibus suis non attendunt. gressus mentis in viridi figunt.

Via purpurea ascensus beatorum Martyrum est, qui in tormentis passionum in
iustitiam De per patie^tiam operantes: in purpurea sanguins suis sui ad diuinu^
lume^ tra^sire co^te^du^t. Vir insignis supra mo^te^, Christus est. Sple^dor
vultus eius diuinae claritatis eius est signu^: Oculi radia^tes, serenus
aspectus eius super electos Capilli lane al be similes, antiquum dieru^ esse
pronunc a^t, licet in nouissimis diebus secu^dum carnem sit natus. Cladius
anceps in ore eius, terribilis iuditii sententia est, de ore eius processura
ferie^s reprobos duplici contritio^e corporis and animae. Clauis dextera eius
apparuit, qm^ ipse est qui solus aperit ianua^ vitae, and nemo claudit:
claudit, and nemo a perit. Ipse quoque est, qui profu^da mysterioru^ dei cui
vult reserat, and non estqui claudat Signat, and no^ ^st qui signaculu^ soluat.
Sceptru^ in sinistra eius, potestas regia est. quoniam and secu^dum humana^
naturam se accepisse testatus est, dice^s: Data est mihi omnis potestas in
coelo and in terra. Tunica hiacinthina virtute^ indicat coelestis
contemplationis, quae tota^ perfect possi debat me^te^ saluatoris. No^ enim
vtcaeteri hoi^m admensura^ spiritu^ acceperat: in quo habitat oi^s plenitudo
diuinitatis corporaliter. Baltheus ca^didus inuiolabilis i^nocentiae ca^dore^
in eo designat. Apparuit i^ via quae diuinitatis suae co^templationem
significat, quia sic ea^ vult manner in aeternu^ cu^ caeterae per mansurae non
sint. No^ apparuit in omnibus, and tamen erat in omnibus, quia singulae
significa^t virtutes, per quas iusti homines veniu^t ad monte^ excelsu^, vbi
recipiu^t pro singulis virtutibus singulas mer^edes, and in omnibus viis
veritatis co^templandus est Deus.

Visionis secu^dae interpraetatio. Cap. 5.
VIsionis secu^de mysterium huiuscemodiest. Tres viae quae a sinistris viri
sta^tis in mo^te secus via^ viride^ apparueru^t, proprietate^ exprimu^t triu^
ordinu^ in ecclesia, videlicet, co^iugatoru^, contine^tium and rectoru^. Via
vopribus vallata, vita est co^iugatoru^. A moena aparuit via haec qa abi^itio
i^stituta e^ a deo haec vita. Et si legitime obseruetur, pulchra et been
placens est in conspectu domini, et ambulantes in ea, procul dubio in montem
dei ascendunt. Sed infinite secularium curarum sentes huic ex omni perte
imminent, quibus pungi necesse est viato res eius, nisi et parce viue^do sese
omnibus modis co^stringa^t, and coram Deo and hominibus se humiliando semper
veluti inclinati incedant. Via a vepribus libera et iocu^dis floribus, vtrinque
vallata, via continentium est. Horu^ etenim proprium est a curis and
solicitudinibus vitae praesentis mentem abstrahere. and sola quae domini sunt
cogitare, vt sint sa^cti corpore and spiritu. Arcta est via haec: quia vt
legittime and sapienter obseruetur magnae disciplinae custodia coarctari
necesse est gressus ambulantium in ea, ne forte secundu^ arbitriu^ proprium
viuentes, aut in fornicatio^em labantur, aut cu^ fatuis virginibus sieve viduis
delicatis quae viuentes mortuae sunt deputentur. Modicum trita est: quia
respectu aliorum pauci sunt qui ingrediu^tur per ea^, pauciores qui perseuera^t
in ea. Floribus diuersi generis delectabiliter vndique vallata est. qui a omnia
virtutum genera contine^tium vita^ adorna^t. Via media inter duas praedictas
latior illis: Via Rectorum est. Ea enim cum sit instituta ad regendam vitam
coniugatorum siuo contne^tium, sieve vtrorum que minus illis coarctatur and
liberius arbitrium habet propriam voluntatem exerce^di, ac per hoc facilius in
ea, lubricant gressus ambulantiu^ per ea^. quod and ipsa eius planicies apt
significat. Propter quoth and periculosa dicta est: quia ta^ multi in ea labu^tur,
vt in ipsa paucissimi stabiles inueniantur Quia autem quasi pauime^ tu^ habere
visa est ex lateribus rubeis, quae su^t in terra ignibus cocta; solicitudine^
^^gn^ficat praela^o^um, quae circa subditos mentis eorum iugit^r decoqui
necesse est, quibus animae and corporis procuratione^ debe^t Visionistertiae
interpretatio.

Cap. 6.
VIsionis tertiae i^terpraetationem cu^ ab angelo instructore meo suscitaretur:
dixit ad me. Ecce, incepisti librum via rum dei, sicut propositu^ tibi fuerat.
Haec id circo dicebat: quonia^ in anno priore die quadam cum esse^ in spiritu
duxerat me quasi in pratu^ quoddam, in quo fixu^ erat tentorium, and
intro^uimus illuc. Et oste^dit mihi co^gerie^ magna^ libroru^ illuc
depositoru^, and ait: Vides libros istos? Omnes adhuc ante diem iudicii
dicta^di su^t. Eleuans aute^ vuu^ ex eis, dixit: Hic est liber viaru^ dei: qui
per te reuelandus est, qua^do visitaueris sororem Hildegardu^, and audieris
eam. Et ita quide^ impleti coepit co^tinuo, cu^ ab ea rediissem.

Declaratio quatuor viaru^ dei quae sint. Capitulo. vii.
EST aute^ quatuor viarum, quae i^ tertia visione mo^stratae sunt, significatio
haec: Prima, quae erat viciniorvi ae purpureae, i^ infetiori part dimetis
aspera: In superiori aute^ expedita and florida, vita^ significat e oru^ qui
legitime in seculo viue^tes, in curis rerum mu^danarum dies suos dimidia^t ac
dei^de ad florida^ and expeditam co^tine^ciu^ transeunt vita^ Eotu^que regula
se constringe^tes: pariter cu^ illis in monte^ dei ascendu^t. Via arida and
glebis aspera: durissimum illud genus vitae est, quo incedunt sancti he remite,
and no^nulli i^ societate hoi^m co^uersatione^ habe^tes. qui carne^ suam supra
humanu^ modum macera^t, and ex sicca^t ieiuniis vigiliis, genuflexionibus
flagellis, cilicio and grauissimis quibuslibet afflictio^ibus. Omnia huiusmodi
quasi glebe asperrime su^t: et multo conatu ac vigila^tia opus est ambulantibus
per via^ ha^c, ne forte i^ nimia eius asperitate offe^da^t, and grauius
caeteris corrua^t. Duaru^ viarum quae simul cu^ his quae descriptae su^t
appareba^t, vna vt dictu^ est, magis irita and expeditior visa est, de qua
locutus est i^structor meus, dice^s: Per ha^c via^ incedu^t sa^ctae animae
infa^tiu^ quae in sacro baptismate sanctificate sunt: and infra septe^niu^e
vita discedu^t. Qui qm^ saeculi malitiam experti no^ sunt: expedito and
liberrimo gressu ad regnu^ dei per ueniu^t. De altera vero ait: Adolescenciu^
via est haec qui paulo tardius illis i^cedu^t, and idcirco minus trita and
expedita apparet illorum via. Ecce sunt visio^es et interpraetationes earu^.
qui a peruit oculos meos, vt videre^ visio^es dei: ipse proculdubio pangelum
suu^ sicut placitum fuit ante ipsum in hunc modum intellige^das esse
demo^strauit.

Alia visio. Ca. viii.
FActu^ est aute^ in festo beati Iacobi cu^ esse^ in spiritu and videre^
visionem viaru^ dei: rapta su^ i^ sublime and quasi in vicino mo^te dei
conte^plata su^. Et ecce lux illa i^mensa quae mo^tis vertice^ occupabat: per
medium scindi visa est: and introspexi per ea^: and vidi sanctorum
multitudinem, cui aestimari no^ poterat numerus. Et ait ductor meus ad me:
Co^spice and vide, et co^sidera oe^s quos vides. Hic vides martyrs sanctos
ep^os and co^fessores dn^i virgins cenobitas vtriusque sexus viduas and
seculares co^iugatos and contine^tes nobiles ignobiles oe^s regna^tes cum
Chr^o. Hi ambulaueru^t vias dn^i vias sa^ctas quas vidisti, et perueneru^t and
perceperu^tim marcessibile^ a Christo dn^o cu^ angelis eius. Co^sideret nu^c
vnusquisque viam suam: quod si i^iuste ambulauerit, corrigat seipsum cu^
humilitate and charitate and obedientia and dirigat via^ sua^ quia si
peruenerit, recipiet praemiu^ aeternu^.

De via conte^platiuoru^. Sermo. i. ca. 8.
ERa^ post haec quiesce^s in lectulo meo nec adhuc somnu^ cepera^, repe^te
visitauit me spu^s dn^i, and repleuit os meu^ sermon huiuscemodi. attendite
nu^c ergo vos qui renu^ciastis secularibus daesideriis, and elegistis vt
sequamini vestigi^ eius, qui vos vocauit in admirabile lumen suu^, qui and ipse
vos nominauit sibi filios electos: and co^stituit vos i^ fine saeculoru^
iudicare filios Israel. Cogitate apud vos, quomodo viuatis cu^ humilitate and
obedientia and charitate sine murmuratione and sine detractione and inuidia,
and sine superbia, and ab aliis vitiis abstinere vos. Diligite vos inuice^, vt
no^ blashemetur pater vester celestis in vobis, and irritetur, and pereatis de
via iusta Id est, de via co^te^plationis eius. Tu^c prosecutus est angelus dn^i
sermone^ in hu^c modu^ adiicie^s Si enim su^t inter vos lites et dissensiones,
detractiones, murmurationes, ira, odiu^, inuidia, extolle^tia oculoru^
appetitus inanis glory, vaniloquia, scurrilitates ve^tris i^gluuies,
somnolentia, carnis immunditia, ociositas, and similia: inquibus a^bula^t filii
huius seculi quis locus erit diuinae co^temra^ las sacrame^ rorum Christi
mu^ditias irreuere^ti ministerio and illicito cord exhonora^t: argue^tem
irride^t, maledicto and persecutio^e contrista^t. Qui meliores su^t in eis:
abhominabiles sunt and ipsi cora^ domino In vestitu humilitatis ambula^t: sed
coreor eoru^ long est ab ea. Oratio^es multiplicant: sed haec quid prosunt du^
in cordibus suis deo co^tra dicu^t, dum fraterna^ chari tate^ negligu^t
alterutru^ i^uide^t and detrahu^t and de praelatione contendunt. Mundi
contemptum profitentur: sed ea quae sunt mundi venerantur and impudenter
ambiunt, and omni vento proprie volu^tatis circumferuntur. Patrum instituta
abiiciunt: negotiis saeculi se ingeru^t, et sca^dalis ecclesia^ reple^t Propter
hoc ecce contemptum patitur religio, and fides scissuram. Et quid adda^ facere
eis dicit dominus: Ecce clamo post illos, and non ^uscultant.

Vocem commonitionis meae quasi calce repellunt. Visito illosper inauditam
gratiam and visitationem suam non agnoscu^t insuper and irride^t. Percutio eos:
and no^ dolent: praecipito eos, and no^ ex: pauescunt. Ve illoru^ vae horribile
repositu^ est apud me. Ecce veniet cito, and quasi repentinus torrens irruet
super eos: and deuoluet in perditione^, quos absque pauore inuenerit. Vos ergo
populus meus populus non fictae religio^is qui posuistis i^ cord vestro mundu^
expugnate coelum mente gerere vos inqua^ declinate ab is qui eiusmodi sunt, and
ne sitis participes eoru^. State in via visionis quam elegistis, and mundate
oculos cordis vt subleuare eos valeatis in co^templatio^em lucis quam in
habitat vita et redemptio vestra. Quae aute^ oculos cordis emu^dant, vt ad
veru^ lumen subleuari possint: haec su^t. Secularis curae abiectio Carnis
afflictio, cordis contritio, frequens and pura delicti co^fessio, and lauaciu^
fletus: and cum for as missa fuerit omnis immunditia: sursum ista eos extollunt:
meditatio admirabilis essentiae dei and cast veritatis inspectio, oration munda
and valida, iubilus laudis, and desiderium ardens in deu^. Amplectimini haec,
and in his estote, and occurrite viuifico lumini quod ta^quam filiis vobis se
offert, et mentibus vestris se vltro ingerit. Abstrahite corda vestra a
vobismetipsis, and date ea i^ haec quae audistis: and implebuntur splendore
deifico, and eritis filii lucis ei tanquam angeli dei qui non cessant inhiate
creatori suo and co^templationis vigorem in suam resundere originem. Filii Adam
nu^ paru^ vobis videtur filios dei fieri? Et quare faciem vestram auertitis a
contemplatione vultus eius, qui dedit potestate^ tale^ hominibus, vobis
singulariter qui pacifici esse elegistis in mu^do, and co^formari angelis in
terra. Vos estis lucerne arde^tes quas co^stituit dn^s in monte sa^cto suo
illuminare verbis and exe^plis vestris tenebras mu^di. Videte ne lume^ quod in
vobis est, euacuetur a ve^to superbiae and cupiditatis q pare^tu^ vestroru^
lume^ in paradiso exufflauit. Declinate aurem vestra^ filii pacis a clamoribus
mu^di, and date sile^tiu^ spiritui qui loquitur in vobis. Sabbatu^ pere^ne
domini in cordibus vestris agite: et requiescet super vos pax dei, quam
exuperat omnem sensum, and delectabimini in multitudine suauitatis eius. Nolite
co^moueri neque co^cidatme^s vestra: si spernit vos mu^dus, and tanqua^ mortuos
et steriles vos aestimat. Si doloribus and aerumnis and paupertate, attenuatur
vita vestra: ne contristemmi, neque deflectatis oculos ab aspectu eius luminis
quoth est a^te facie^ vestra^ Ecce eni^ prope est vt euanescat hic mu^dus and flos
eius intereat and vos iudicabitis amatores eius and superboru^ colla
calcabitis. Vide^tes obstupe sce^t super gloria vestra: cum reuelabuntur
diuitiae vestrae quas thesaurizatis vobis in coelo: tu^c euacuabitur quod
imperfectu^ est co^templatio^is vestrae: and suscipiet oculos aquilaru^ suaru^
facies lucis aeternae, and tanquam flume^ redunda^s sic redu^dabit fulgor eius
in cordahomi nu^ qui exquisi erunt ea^ in veritate. Nondu^ verba haec fini erat
angelus qui per vices mihi loquebatur cu^ i^cidit mihi dubitatio quaeda^ de
distinctio^e viaru^ dei quae descriptae sunt Et i^terrogaui eu^ dice^s: Nun
quid dn^e mi, nos cenobitae sumus in via co^te^plationis cu^ sumus in via
co^tine^tiae An esse potest vt simus in vtraque? Et ait. Coi^s est vobis via
co^te^platio^is cu^ clericis, sicut illis eo i^s est vobiscu^ viae
co^tine^tiae. Scito tu^ quod multi sunt in via co^tinent^ae, qui in via
conte^plationis no^ sunt. Et sunt multi clericoru^ qui neque in via
contemplationis neque in via co^tinentiae ambulant, and hi infelices sunt.
Arbitrantur in via contemplationis se esse cum non sunt. Rursus adieci, dice^s:
Et quid dicemus de ponti ficibus and praepositis and huiusmodi magnis ecclesiae
praelatis? Et respo^dit mihi in hec verba. Superbia regnat in cordibus
praelatorum and magnoru^: and repellu^t deum a cordibus suisqui no^ vult
quiescere nisi super humile^ and quietu^ and trementem verba sua. Praecept enim
oli^ saluator discipulis suis dice^s: Qui vos no^ receperunt, exit^ and
excutite puluerem de pedibus vestris in eorum testimoniu^. Et quid putas de deo
saluatore and conditore vniuersae creaturae qui ei^ no^ recipiu^t, sed
repel^unt a se, quid facturus sit illis cu^ adhuc venerit? Procul dubio mittet
eos in igne^ aeternu^, vbi erit fletus oculoru^ and ^^ridor dentiu^. Quid
proderit tu^c eis superbia et diuitiae? Et co^sumatis omnibus sermonibus his:
in die qua beati Michaelis memoria^ agebamus: iteru^ se mihi praesentauit, and
allocuta sum eu^, dicens: Nunquid dn^e mi secure affirmare poterimus oe^s hos
sermones ex te processisse? Haec id circo dicebam: quia ex perte ver ha ista
protulerat, ita tn^ vt facie^ eius non viderem, ex part vero per os meu^ in
spu^ fuera^t pronu^ciata. Ille igitur cu^ magna seueritate me intue^s, ait:
Creed ex toto cord tuo verba haec quae descripta su^t, de ore meo
processeru^t. Beatus qui legerit and audierit verba libri huius: quia vera sunt
and a veritate nunquam declinant.

De via actiuoru^ sermo.
ALiu^ quoque sermone^ continuo inchoauit his verbis, dice^s Ammoneo eos qui in
secularibus curis oppressi sunt: aliquando cogita re quae sunt praecepta vitae,
idest diligere deu^ et proximu^ sicut seipsum: non occidere, non furtum facere,
aliena non co^cupiscere Haec and alia quae in Lege Domini scripta sunt: cum
omni diligentia obseruare, and scire possunt se regnum dei posse intrare. Si ad
altitudinem co^templationis se non valent erigere: legitimarum actionum officia
studeant adimplere: In mente habeant timorem domini semper, and ipse diriget
vniuersa opera eorum. Domum orationis cum reuerenti^ frequentet: and cum
oportuerit de facultatibus suis honorent. Sacrame^ta domini in fide and
humilitate venerentur: and verbo dei libenter aurem accommodent Sanctificatos
Dei ministros omni honor dignos existiment, and disciplinae eorum cum mansuetu
dine acquiescant. Vnicuique quod iure debent, pacifice exhibeant: nomini dantes
vllam occasione^ querele: et cum iniuriati fuerint, tollerent servants
vindictam iudici vniuersorum. Sermonem veritatis in tempore suo constanter
loquantur: and pro iustitia laborem subire non recusent. Pupillam and viduam
and eum cui non est adiutor: in oppressione defendant, and angustiis eorum pia
consolatione occurrant.

Esurientem and sitientem reficiant, nudum operiant, hospitem colligant:
Infirmu^ and incarceratum visitent.

Dent multum gratis, and quaecunque sunt miserationis* etc equitatis opera
sectentur.

Prudentiores, in soctos erudiant, errantes and praue ambulantes, ad veritatem
and iustitiam reuocent, and discordias inter fratres ccompesant.

Fugiant ebrietatem and crapulam, and carnis immunditiam: iocos vanos, and
peccata sermonum and ociosilatem, and vestimsntorum arrogantiam, and spinas
curarum, sicut iubet sermo Diuinus, omnem sollicitudinem pro^icientes in deum,
and carnis afflictione^ non negligu^t. Dico ante^ iis qui operibus necessitatis
inseruiu^t: Operimini opera vr^a cord bono and si^plici, sine mur mu^atio^e,
sine vaniloquio, and ne quis graue^ per vos, and vtne cessitatem pacienti
subuenire possitis. Cauere aute^ ab omni auaritia. Haec enim agit vt dolosa
sint opera vestra, and vt defraudetis proxi mos vestros and mentiamini and
periuretis nomen domini, and congregatis pecunias i^iquas quae mergu^t in
interitu^ possidente^ eas. Vos qui in sublimitate estis, nolite superbe agere
in eos qui eiuscemodi sunt, neque opprimatis eos inique, sed magis defendite,
and in omni benignitate custodite and pacem inter vos firm^te, quia in hoc
positi estis a domino Haec est via domini recta and pulchra via actionu^
sanctaru^. Qui ambulauerit in ea vsque ad fine^ vitam inueniet, et requiescet
in monte sancto dei, and forseius cu^ filiis lucis.

De via martyru^. Sermo.
DIes festus agebatur and eramus assistentes diuino officio: cum ex
consuetudine apparuit angelus in conspectu meo. Cuque de mora eius solito
lo^giore delicta mea cora^ ipso culpassem: dixi ad eu^: Placeat nu^c domine mi,
vt and tertiae illius v^e quae est sa^ctoru^ martyru^ disciplina^ nobis
insumes: neque ab hac tua benignitate propter aliqua mea delicta compescaris.
Tunc aperiens os suu^' locutus est dice^s: Agnus Christus procedit cora^
sanctis martyribus: and ipsi s^quuntur eum cum psalmis and coronis co^gau detes
ei cu^ triu^pho nobili. Et ipse Christus apparet in eis qua si speculu^ and
exemplar and decor gloriosus. Multe p^ssio^es sunt: per quas oportet filios dei
coronari, et nemo corona bitur, nisi legitime certauerit Audite hac and cord
percipite qui persecutionem parimini propter iustitia^ ltc gande^tes per viam
nobilem, viam bellatoru^ domini purpurata^ cruore sanctoru^ and agni. Nolite i^
gemiscere, neque asce^dat in cor vestrum murmur co^tra dominu^, quasi der^licti
sitis ab eo, and ta^qua^ nouum aliquid accidat vobis. Legite scripturas spu^s
sancti: and recogitate dies a^tiquos. Oe^s quotquot fueru^t ante vos in via hac
qua ambulatis: deo placueru^t in laboribus suis, and per multas angustias
tra^sieru^t in latitudine^ libertatis gloriae filioru^ dei. Primus agni praecut
sor Abel, sub manu fratrisini qui, sanguinem suu^ fudit in terra^, cora^ domino
testimoniu^ innocentiae fidelis Abraham pater fidelis populi, deidololatria
solicitatus est a genre iniqua, et elegit^ dissolui ince^dio magis quam peccare
in suum deu^, and per manu^ domini eductus est de Hut Caldaeoru^. Joseph cu^
esset amator innoce^tiae and accusaret crime^ fratium apud patre^, venditus est
alienigenis. Et iteru^cu^ nollet consentire iniquitati adulterae, carcerem
longi temporis placita mente sustinuit. Serui veritatis prophetae domini,
contra praeuaricatores legis vsque admortem dimicaueru^t, and per passiones
multas consumati sunt. Pueri domini in Babylone, superbi imperio, quem tremebat
oi^s terra cum fiducia co^tradixerunt: and dari ignibus horrendis elegeru^t
magisquam ad contumeliam creatoris genua curuate ante creaturam. Daniel deo
amabilisco quod dedisset honorem deo patru^suoru^, l^onu^ de^tibus traditus
est. Copiosus est sanctoru^ numerus, qui ante saluatoris adue^rum laudabilis
sufferentiae exe^pla dederu^t, and morte sua morte^ domini praecurrerunt.
Vltimus omniu^ erat innocens Baptista, quo mayor inter natos mulieru^ non
surrerit, qui and ipse pro testimonio veritatis capite minoratus est, and datus
puelle in precio faltus ita decebat fire: and placitu^ erat ante dominu^: vt
no^ tantu^ sanguis agnoru^ and a^etu^ and aliori animalium sanguini agni qui
pro salute murdi immolandus erat, in figura premitteretur, sed and filiorum dei
qui redime^di erant sanguis in occursum eius funderetur. In nouissimis aute^
diebus missus est a secreto patris, expectatus ab origin mundi, agnus
immolatus, que^ adorant Cherubin and seraphin and omnis multitudo angeloru^, vt
expiaret peccatum mu^di, and fecerunt in eo quaecu^que volueru^t: et ipsi quos
saluare veniebat. Pleni sunt libri laboribus and angustiis eius and legitis
passiones eius, and no^ percipitis cord. Vsque quo duti esti^ filii hoi^m?
Terra quae se^su no^ habet: suscepit guttas sanguinis de vulneribus saluatoris
and sustinere no^ potuit maiestate^ ^i^s sed comn^ota est and contremuit, and
scis^ sunt petrae durissim^^: and ecce per s^r^pturas stillat super corda
vestra ratione^ habe^tia, multiplex passio filit dei provobis occisi and
continere potestis a gemitibus and a lachrymis^ Auditis vanitates quae non
pertinent ad vos: and no^ continetis a r^fe. Rursus posi haec a^iecit, and
dixit: Vos qui transitis per via^ tribulatio^is Jesus, at^endite and ^idere si
est dolor sicut dolor eius.

Non peccauit solus sine peccato natus est super te^ram, repleuerunt animam
eius doloribus sceleratorum, and non exasperarunt mansuetudinem agni, vincula
implorum, criminatio mendax, illusio nequam, denudatio, flagellum, colaphus,
alapa, and sputum, and spina verticem eius pungens, cruae and claui, and
innoxii cruoris effusio.

Sed in his omnibus superauit patientia eius: and contriuit moriens aculeum
mortis. Animad-uertite filii crucis viam agni, and ambulate co^fide^ter post
vestigia sanguinis eius, dux itineris vestri, ipse est, and clamat ad vos,
dicens: Confidite, ego vinci mundum, and quare trepidatis a facie terroris
humani ducem habentes inuictum: and tam multa milia imitatorium eius
praeeuntium vos cu^ victoria mirabili? Ecce enim modicum ante vos innumerabiles
pugne seruorum Dei fact sunt apostolorum and martyrum and inuictarum virginum,
and dederunt leta spectacula cu^ctis exercitibus coeli in victoriis suis:
dilexerunt Deum magisquam animas suas: and propter nomen eius exposuerunt eas
cunctis generibus mortis and quasi lutum ab omnibus conculcari sustinuerunt:
riserunt in theatris and conciliis, amatores mundi nuditatem sanctorum: and
saturati sunt illusione confusionis eorum, sicut letatur bestia eum deuorat
praedam: and disperserunt sa^guinem innocentem per cruces and gladios, ignes
and gurgites aquarum vngues ferreos, et fauces bestiarum, and quicquid
tormentorum excogitate potuit crudelitas impiorum: hoc in eorum mortificatione
tentatum est. Et exultauerunt quasi in epulia athlete Dei in confractionibus
suis: and delictari sunt in calice amaritudinis, qua si qui letantur in
delitiis multis. Tucinuenta est patientia sanctoru^ fidelis in examinatione
sua: et fortis supra fortitudinem regu^ et principu^ mundi. Propte rea ecce
educti sunt in refrigerium consolationis, and requiescunt in ample xu dexterae
dei, et sanctoru^ angelorum, quia portauerunt ignominiam eius coram
habitantibus terrae. Haec atte^de, et vigili mente retracta O homo qui pusillus
es cord adsustinentiam passionu^ Christi, co^templare gloriam, et letitiam
quae circundedit martyrs Domini: et non timebis communicare doloribus and
angustiis eotum. Sed primum est, vt habeas sub pedibus substantiam huius mu^di,
and gloriam eius quae est hodie and cras non comparet. Si enim haec amas:
fugiet a te fortitudo in tempore pressure et despectionis. Etiam dico, non sit
preciosa in oculis tuis vita tua, sed vilem atque despicabilem sem per
arbitrare. Qui enim seipsos amant, and magni sunt apud set conculcationem in
persecutione sustinere no^ possunt, and ad certamen sactorum idonei no^ sunt:
felix commutatio tibi proposita est. Abnega vitam exigui temporis et misere
conditionis, and accipies pro ea vita^ quae nescit defectum aut molestiam,
plenam gloria, and exultatione, qua^ lingua nesciteffari. O homo tenebrosi
intellectus: leua oculos tuos, and prospice in futuru^, et intuere beata^
reformatio^em corporis tui, quae veniet tibi saluatore tun, quando euellet a
corpore tuo spinam Adae, et configurabit eam claritati cor poris sui: ita fiet
vt festines cum alacritati effundere animam tuam in omne periculum, in feruore
charitatis ipsius: and sic aestimabis ditionem vitae tuae, quasi stille de
situla excusse in terra^. Quid adhuc anxiaris O homo dei, a facie perseque^tis?
Consortare, co^solare, tecum est Christus in persecutione. Tccu^ angeli eius
funt in certamine: qui in omnes labores tuos dinumerant, and lassitudinem tuam
sustentant, nam and pro te inimicos tuos expugnant. Memento sermonis quem dixit
ad seruos suos. Qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam oculi mei. Serve dei, quid
tribues saluator tuo, qui ita sibi te coniunxit, vt sine ipsius iniuria, ledi
non possis? Semel pro te passus est: and ad huc quotidie in te and conseruis
tuis patitur, and ostentui habetur. Si mestuses, non de tua, sed illius
iniuluria dole pro te ergo gaude and letare, quia per tribulatio^e^ prae
pararis ad gloriam, et gaudium sempiternu^: Aurum dn^i es per igne^ te
examinat, vt in thesauros suos probatu^ te recipiat.

Factum est autem prius quam vaer ba haec terminasset angelus qui mecum loque
batur, vt superueniret festiuitas beatarum virginum Vrsulae and sociaru^ cius
vndecim millium, Tunc decantabatur in vigilia matutina sermo ille diuinus, quo
dicitur: Reddet deu^ mercede^ laborum suorum, and deducet illos in via
mirabili: vnde ego sumpta occasion interrogaui instructorem meum ^^m inter
silentia miss michi more suo apparuisset, dicens: Domine, demonstra michi
quaenam est via illa mitabilis, cuius meminit scriptura, dicens: and deducet
illos in via mirabili. Qui continuo respondens, ait: Via sanctorum Martyrum
haec est. Rursus interrogaui, dicens: Et quare vocatur mirabilis: Been, inquit,
mirabilis appellari potest Nunquid enim non est mirabile in oculis hominum,
quod mentem fragilis hominis ita Deus inflammat, vt prae amoris magnitudine,
quo intus erga eum estuat: and propriae vitae obliuiscatur, in tantum vt ad
grauissimos quos libet cruciatus, velut insensibilis fiet, and sine sui cura
libenter omnia pronomine eius sustineat. Hoc in tueri potes in sacris illis
virginibus, quarum hodie martyrum celebratis. Fragilis erant and sexu and
aetate, neque aliquem habeba^t defensorem: and tamen non timuerunt tyrannos nec
gladios eorum, sed cum omni constantie obtulerunt tenera me^bra sua in mortem
pro dn^o, qa diuini amoris incendio co^fortaba^t in spu^ vt eam foris no^
sentire^t. Et hoc quide^ veheme^t^r erat mirabile in oculis hominum: non ante^
in oculis domini cui possibilia su^t oi^a. Et hoc quidem veheme^tererat
mirabile^ in spiritu vidisti, and erat pulchrior et no tabilior caeteris
omnibus? ita scito quod retributio martyru^ omni retributione excellentior est
and gloriae illoru^ nichil comparatur. Post haec cu adesset festiuitas sancti
Martini: circa medium noctis ante vigilia^ matutinam, subito expergefacta sum
et fugit somnus ex oculis meis* Et ecce angelus domini stabat cora^ me: and
allocuta sum eu^, dicens: Oro mi domine vt exhortatione^ sermonis tui de
sanctis martyr^^bus iam co^pleas, and compete^ ti fine concludas, qui cu^ me
contemplari fecisset sublimia ^uaedam in coelestibus, quoru^ aspectu era^
indigna: petitionem m^am impleuit, dicens: Iteru^ dico tibi, and a^moneo vos O
filu dei: vt diligentius attendatis antecessores vestros, qui praenomi^ati su^t
in praesenti sermon quomodo arserunt in charitate Christi. Currite and
confirmamini, and nolite praemeditari. Ecce enim vigilat super vos filius pacis
qui vos recipiat et remuneret supra humana^ aestimatione^ illu^ spiritu^
ardoris and charitatis Christi, qui superet omne fragilitate^ vobis praestare
dignetur: qui in trinitate perfecta viuit and regnat deusverus per infinita
secula seculoru^. Ame^.

De via coniugatoru^. Sermo.
FVI in oratione et apparuit mihi solito more dominus meus and postulaui ab eo
disciplinam viae illius quae ad ordinem co^iugatorum pertinere dicta est,
statimque assensit petitio^i meae sicque orsus est. Ecce dico, and ammoneo
sec^lares co^iugatos abstinete vos a prauis operibus vestris, quibus co^quinati
estis, et contaminata est terra ab iniquitatibus vestiis pessimis, quae sunt
auaritia, luxuria, fornicatio, adulteriu^, homicidiu^ superbia, ira, odiu^,
inuidia, blasphemy, ebrietates. Atte^ dite ergo et intuemi ni via^ vestram,
quomodo ambuletis per eam, ^m^ impossible est vobis cu^ talibus vitris intrare
per illa^. His dictis abscessit: Et cum iteru^ apparuisset, rogaui vt
prosequeretur i^cepti sermonis exhortatione^. Qui ait: Nisi quia benignus and
misericors dn^s est: in tediu^ posset adduci, pro eo quod tot modis habitatores
mundi admonet: ipsi vero pro nichilo ducunt monita eius: neque v^latenus
animaduertu^r dilectione^, qua debebe^t accaedi erga paternas admonitio^es eius
in i^dignatione^ conuertunt and spernu^t eas: and ad legatio^es eius attendere
dedignantur, si possibile esset in ipso esse perturbationem: ex hoc vtique
posset turbari, quod tot modis hic mu^d^u^ aduersus ipsum erigitur* pro quo and
natus est and passus, and multa miracula est operatus, et adhuc licet non
atte^dant: operatur. Et ecce admonitio^es suas ma^dat etia^ iis qui in seculo
omnibus modis se illi opponnu^t pro sua gratuita benignitate, et pro eoru^
dilectio^e, qui quamuis in seculo co^uersa^tur: ipsum tame^ diligunt ac
seruiunt ei, quoru^ heu paruus est numerus abundantius autem hoc faceret, si
meliori deuotione monitis eius intendere velle^t. Post haec aperiens os suu^
locutus est, dicens: O generatio insensata and onerosa domino deo vr^o: vt quid
ta^to studio diligetis, quae odit patei vester coelestis, and dominu^ coeloru^
irritate no^ timetis, in conspectu cuius omniu^ angeloru^ mult^tudo
contremiscit? Dicite mihi que^ fructum consecut^ sunt in his prauitaribus quas
enumeraui vobis: omnes qui ab initio saeculi inuenti su^t ambulantes in eis,
and no^ apposuerunt placare faciem dei nostr remediis penitentiae? quid vobis
annu^ciauerunt de his vniuersi testes veritatis? Si obliti estis, ecce iteru^
annu^cio vobis coram deo viue^te, quia clausum est eis coelu^ aeterna and
indissolubili clausura: and abscondita erit ab eis desiderabilis facies dei
nostri, and alieni facti sunt a conuiuio sempiternae letitiae sanctoru^ qui
abhominati su^t vias illoru^ iniquas. Et ecce consortes facti sunt durissimi
diaboli and infeliciu^ angeloru^ eius, qui absque misericordia and sine
cessatione affliguntur, and calcant ceruice^ eoru^ quam aduersus factore^ suum
erexeru^t, and pascuntur in amarissimis plagis eoru^. Et qa clauserunt oculos
suos ne viderent lume^ agnitionis dei and sanctaru^ iustificationu^ eius, et
dilexerunt opera tenebrarum, deputati su^t voragini horre^dae caliginis, quae
exitum non habet neque illustrari poterit ab vllo lumine imperpetuum. Timorem
domini sa^ctum habere despexerunt, et irritauerunt eu^ in letitia voluptatis
suae, and succenderuut in seipsis illicitos ardores libidinis, and irae, and
insaciabilis auaritiae, propterea manet super eos timor plenus horrore and
inconsolabilis tristitia, and mordax indignatio, and facti sunt carbones
sempiterni incendii, qui extingui non poterunt in aeternum, neque vlla
adustione consumi.

Audite haec irritatores Dei, and discedite a viis perditorumdum tempus
correctionis habetis: and redire ad viam immaculatam quam praeparauit vobis
deus ab initio, and videte modo cum timore Dei ambuletis in ea. Non enim est ab
inuentione hominis honorabile Coniugium vestrum: sed ab ipso conditore
vniuersitatis in Paradiso innocentiae institutum est quando masculum and
foeminam creauit parents vestros, and locutus est in lingua protoplasti,
dicens: Propter hoc relinquet homo patrem and matrem, and adhaerebit vxori
suae, and erunt duo in carne vna. Date ergo O vir and mulier honorem ordini
vestro, que^ deus honorare dignatus est, and nolite inducere scissuram and
maculam copulae vestrae. Lex domini iungat vos et sanctificet, and sit vobis
domus vna, mensa vna, substantia co^munis, vnus thorus and anima vna, and dato
locum tim^ri domini in medio vestri.

Decus enim thalami coniugalis, est timor domini, and qui ab eo vacuus fuerit,
maledictus and immundus reputabitur a Domino. Ibi dominabitur libido quae modum
nescit, and exercetur opus etiam sermon indignum, quod natura non ordinauit,
and non pertinet ad generationem. Audiant and intelligant qui operantur quod
malum est coram domino: and tollant maculam de cubilibus suis, propter hoc
liget corda vestra timor Domini vt in operae vobis concesso frenum vobis ipsis
imponatis, and non more bestiarum omnem imperum desiderii vestri sequamini.

Dies Festos and dies legitime abstinentiae, and tempora purgationis per
contmentiam honorate: and si quid superaddideritis, addet Dominus gratiam vobis
and generationi vestri: qui enim inter diem and diem and inter tempus and
tempus continendo non distinguunt: vindictam Domini in seipsis, and in semine
suo, qua hora non putauerint sentient. Exhortamini alterutrum ad continentiam:
and orate pro inuicem vt continere valeatis, and vt spiritus immunditiae fugiat
a vobis.

Cum autem praeualuerit infirmitas, concesso remedio expianda est, vt illicita
no^ labatur, ficut scribit Doctor Gentium.

Vir proprii corporis potestatem non habet, sed mulier: and mulier proprii
corporis potestatem non habet, sed vir, and propterea debitum inuicem negare
no^ potestis.

Illud autem scitote quod mutuae coniunctionis vestrae praecipua causa esse
debet, propagatio prolis, si qua alia est: ad infirmitatem pertinet: and habet
indulgentiam si timoris Domini moderationem habnerit, and elemosinarum
remedium. Vir mulieris, and mulier viri infirmitates cu^ patientia and
co^passione supporte^t, and nolite spernere inuicem, sed magis honorem
alterutrum exhibere studete.

Sermo litigiosus and amarus nunquam oriatur inter vos: sed in spiritu
lenitatis and bone seueritatis inuicem excessus vestros arguite. Sit obediens
vito mulier, and tanquam superiori in omnibus cedat and ministret, sicut
ordinauit ab initio plasmator vtriusque.

Mores viri etiam prauos toleret, and propicietur iniquitatibus eius, faciemque
Domini in eleemosyna and oratione praeueniat.

Pudicitiam interiorem foris potesturi debet per modestiam vestimenti, and
sermonum, and gressuum, and aspectus.

Non haerebit oculus eius in facie aliena, and cum omni solicitudine
suspitionis and maledicti occasionem abscindat. Vir qui sensata^ et timoratam
sortitus est vxorem, non ea^ in honoret tu^pi and amaro sermon: sed tan^uam
vas glory dei honoret, and consentaneum se illi praebeat, and gratias agat Deo
coeli: qui beatificauit eum coniugio tali. Audi me and ingemisee super malis
filiorum hominum quae loquor ad te: Viri dierum istorum in numero magno
declinauerunt corda sua in insipientiam mulierum, and stulti facti sunt,
co^sentiendo insanie illarum.

Arrogantia vestimentoru^ qua^ vidisti, and detestata es in filiabus saeculi
quae venerunt ad te, increuit supra modum in terra: and insaniunt in ea, and
inducunt iram dei in mundum, gloriantur ambulare compositis gressibus in
multitudine pannorum suorum: and inutiliter consumere student quae indigentium
vsibus necessaria essent. O infelicitas, O miserrima caecitas, rem multo sudore
conquisitam luto commendunt, vt post se trahant oculos adulterorum: and vnde
regnum Dei co^parare poterant gehenne incendium mercantur. Auf^rie viri malum
hoc ab oculis domini: and nolite glorirari in vanitatibus vxorum vestrarum, sed
magis indignationem habete: quia scortantium similitudinem induerunt. Pannorum
ista superfluitas and strictura vestimenti, ad nihilum vtilis est, nisi ad
s^ffocandos partus, and arrogantia crinalis operiment^, and multa hic fimilia,
venaliu^ mulierum adinuentiones sunt, et non pertinent ad legales Matronas.

Clamor meus a domino ad vos qui deposita virili grauitate, mollieiem
foeminarum induistis. O stulti and vanissimi, Vt quid dereliquistis serios
mores iustorum senum qui vos praecesse runt, and declinastis in vanitates and
insanias diabolicae adinuentionis, quae non proderunt vobis nisi ad augmentum
incendii vestri. Vae qui superbitis in pompa vestimenti splendidi and superflui
and delicate compositi: and quod auare quaesitum est ad nichilum deducere
gloriamini. Vae qui lasciuitis in capillatura muliebri: and formam viri in
vobis deturpare non erubescitis. Vae qui in ludis vanis, vae in comessationibus
et ebrietatibus te^pus infructuose deducitis. Vae qui linguati^ estis ad
irrisiones and detractiones, and ad fabulandum quod non prodest, et ad
co^cinnandos dolos, et ad subuer tendam causam innocentis. Vae qui venalem
habetis sermonem in consilio, et ex angustiis oppressorum ventrem adimplere
gaudetis. Vae qui litigiosi et tumidi estis inter ciues. Vae vob^s rapacibus
and profundis cord ad multiplicandam substantia^ mundi, quae vobiscu^
euanescit. Nunquid qui planta uit aure^ non audiet? aut qui finxit oculum non
co^siderat? Quiescite filii hominu^ ab irritatione domini, quia in proximo est
vt euigilet, et in igni zeli sui irritatatores suos deuoret. Iterum dico vobis
qui sub iugo matrimonii estis: deu^ timete, fide^ et dilectione^ immaculatam
inuice^ custodite. Filios vestros and filias et familiam vestram in timor^
domini et castimonia enutr^te. Decima domini et merces mercenarii non moretur
apud vos, beneficentie in pauperes nolite obli^isci, et caetera quae in sermon
salubriu^ actionum a domino obseruare curate. Haec est viae vestrae habet,
occulte vxore^ proximi polluit, and versa vice mulier alterius maritu^ suo
superducit: Haec est iniqtas maxima et maximus est eoru^ numerus qui offendunt
in ea, fornicationis autem immu^ditia plenus est mundus, omnes quasi scientes
festinant ad eam, and vix i^uenitur qui^ no^ se praecipitet in foueam cius. Cum
exarserint in concupiscentia expectatione^ vix sustinent, vt in opus eam
perducant, and cum impleuerint dosideria pessima^ non quiescant, sed iterum
atque iterum redeunt in idipsum, and nun quam saturati se posse arbitrantur,
sed and priusquam maturescant, vt exercere possint prauitatem ha^c: pluribus
modis innoce^tiam sua^ commaculant, propter hoc autem in increpatione
coniugatorum, fornicationis nome^ adieci, quia and ipsi antequam coniugri legem
assumant super modumin ea fedantur, et prouocant iram Dei in se. Hinc est quam
ad matrimonia legittima accedentes: fructu generationis priuantur a domino, and
mirantur vnde accidat eis, ignora^tes sterilitatis suae causam. Quibus aute^
generatio co^ceditur, aut in ipsa prole, aut in aliis rebus necessariis,
pluribus modis diuino iuditio feriuntur, et omnia eis infoeliciter proueniu^t.
Rursus cu^ de nomine blasphemy interrogasse^ ait: Hoc dixi, propter eos qui
turpibus conuitiis proximos suos dehonestant: Sed and hoc sciscitata sum
quaena^ essent dubietates, quas in eode^ sermon repraehendere videbatur: Ad
quod ita respo^dit. Multi su^t i^ ecclesia forma^ habe^tes christianoru^, dubii
tn^ in fide christiana: inter catholicos manifest co^uetsantur, domu^
orationis in trant, sacramenta ad fidem pertinentia cu^ caeteris percipiunt: et
tamen nulla^ fide^ eis exhibe^t: neque ad salutem vtilia esse arbitrantur. hoc
au^t operibus pessimis quae agunt, manifest co^probant. Si enim in eis vera
esset fides, a multis iniquitatibus quas operantur abstinere^t, et adiecit,
dice^s: Multae haereses sunt in diebus istis, sed occulte: et haeretici multi
qui fidem catholica^ latenter oppugnant, et multos ab ea auertu^t Tunc
interrogaui eu^: dice^s. Dominemi quid dicis de illis quos catharos voca^t: qui
vita^ co^iugatoru^ omnino reprobare dicu^tur and respondit: dice^s. Ipsoru^
dequibus interrogas: vita abominabilis est coram domino, vitam illoru^ culpare
no^ possunt qui legitime co^iugium contrahunt: and secundu^ lege^ domini
cohabitant, custodientes in timore dei sacras feri as and ieiunia, and
necessitatibus pauperu^ misericordiam exhibe^tes. Iteru^ autem allo cuta su^
eum: dicens: Dn^e vt audiui quida^ ex eis asserunt quod legitimum esse non
potest coniugiu^ nisi inter eos qui vsque ad tempus legitime co^iu^ctionis
virginitate^ ambo custodieru^t, quid ad hoc dicis? and respondens: ait vbi tale
coniugium esse potest: gratu^ est domino, sed rarum est valde vt ita co^tingat,
veruntamen and ex iis qui non continuerunt: multi sunt acceptabiles domino,
legitima habentes coniugia, and in ma^datis domini ambulantes, alioqui nimis
contraheretur numerus populi dei, non habent reprehe^dere quicquam in ecclesia
dei isti dequibus loqueris: quia per viam reprehensio^e digni sunt, pro certo
noueris: quia ministri sunt sathane, cu^us opera praua exerce^t, ipse dux
illoru^ est: and omnis nequicie exemplis eos precedit, and sequuntureu^ per
omnia operibus pessimis Et dixi. Domine que vel qualis est fidis eorum aut
vita? Respondit, Praua est fides eorum: and opera peiora. Rursus dixi
videnturtamenin co^spectu hominum iusti: and lauda^tur quasi sint bonorum
operum, ita est inquit, facies suas simulant quasi just and innocentis vite
sint: ac per hoc multos ad se trahunt and seducunt, intrinsecus aute^ pessima
fanie plenisunt.

De via continentium. Sermo.
CElebrantibus nobis solennitatem beati Ioannis euangeliste: intenta eram
orationi post vigilias matutinas, ac deprecabar dominu^ valida inte^tione
cordis: vt secundum solitam benignitatem suam, disciplina^ viae co^tine^ ciu^
qua^ inspiritu videra^, mihi aporire dignaretur. Sed and diuinu^ euangelista^
and angelu^ doctore^ meum, vt mihi adiutores esse^t inuocaba^, cu^que ora^do
lassata fuisse^, remisi paululu^ oculos ad sopore^: and post pusillu^ repent
expergefacta su^, and ecce a^gelus mihi assistens: sermone^ que^ desideraba^
i^coauir his vbis. Dico vobis, O filii dei, O filii lucis: i^tuemini via^
vestra^quomodo floreat, and qua^ delectabile est currere in ea, currite ergo
and properate obuia^ spo^so vestro: qui vos expectat. Diligite castitatem: and
seruate illi integritatem virginitatis vestrae. Virgo ornata castitate,
charitate, prude^cia, humilitate: been currit, haec cum dixet, amplius no^
ad^ecit, sequenti vero die cum de beatis innocentibus officiu^ miss ageretur:
ego su^pta occasion exlectione Apocalipsis quae legebatur, deprecata su^dn^m
meum, qui iteru^ mihi assistebat: dicens. Dn^e si inueni gratia^ cora^te, dic
obsecro mihi, quale est hoc canticu^ quod de cantant isti beati martyrs ante
sedem dei and agni, sicut praese^s lectio testatur, aut quo modo sequuntur
agnu^ quocu^que ierit? Et respondens ait: Quid me interrogas: nunquam lingua
super terra^ no uit hoc canticu^, nichil inde tibi enarra bo. Quia aute^
interrogas, quid est quod sequu^tur agnu^ quo cu^que ierit: hoc est quod in
oi^bus virtutibus queque co^siderari possu^t i^ agno, eu^ imita^tur, i^
virginitate eu^sequ^ntur: quae i^ illis est sine macula, sicut and fa^ctus ille
agnus sine omni macula est, humiles et simplices and sine dolo fueru^t sicut et
agnus patientia^ in martirio habuerunt in similitudinem agni qui nihil vnquam
impatientiae demo^strauit in passio^e sua qua peccatu^ mu^di extinxit. Non
virgins neque su^t martyrs vlli: qui ta^ proprie agni vestigia sequuntur, vt
isti, excepta regina nr^a, quae prima virginitate^ sua^ munda^ and immaculata^
dn^o custodiunt, ipsa virgo egregia, and beati isti martyrs speculu^ sunt
omnibus sacris virginibus, et multieos secuti su^t, qui sa^guine^ suu^ pro
vginitate sua fuderunt, and propterea coronati sunt and glorificati in
co^spectu domini. Hos intue ri dete^ calote^ in manu. Vnde ait: Calidu^ est, et
qua^to magis calidu^ fuerit tanto maiore^ adhiberi oportet labore^ vt abluatur
ita quo magis se inquinat homo i^ immu^ditiis concupisce^tiae, eo laboriosius
purificatur ab eis. Potest tn^ emundari i^ dolor salubris poenite^tiae, and
lachrymiset bonis operibus: ita vt fiat acceptabilior deo quam fuisset, no^ne
intrinsecus mu^da et pulchra est manus tua, Sic est virginitas, du^ non vsque
ad interiora eius pertingat operis praui immunditia, and mundari potest a
pollutione ita vt ita nihil damni patiatur integritas eius, sicut facile
mundatur manus tua tantu^ foris polluta, si autem per effectum operis ad
interiora descenderit immunditia, impossible erit ita eam mundari, vt omnino
ad pristinum redeat decorem, sunt tamen multi qui qua^uis no^ ad opus
commixtionis libidine^ suam perduca^t: multis tame^ modis integritatem
virginitatis suae polluunt: and non animaduertunt, neque cor apponunt, vt
remediis poenitentiae ad plenum emu^dentur, ac deo satisfaciant, and ita vsque
ad fine^ permane^t. Horu^ virginitas deo accepta no^ est: and debita mercede
priuatur. Haec cu^ dixisset: metueba^ne forte a memoria excideret ordo vboru^.
Ideoque postulaui ab eo: vt iteru^ eade^ loqueretur, and in hoc quoque benign
me exaudiuit. Cu^ au^t in octaua beati Ioha^nis iteru^ se mihi praesentasset,
praeuenit vba mea ita me hilaritur allo que^s. Interrogare me vis, interroga
and respo^debo tibi. Et dixi si cut a doctoreprae monita fueram: Dn^e quod
scriptum est: Volu^tas pro facto reputabitur, nunquid aduersari potest sermoni
tuo que^ proxime dixisti? Et respo^dit: Nequaquam ide^que subiunxit. Veru^ est
certe quod scriptum esse testaris, cuius operis per ficie^di voluntate^
habuerit homo, ita vt nequaqua^ remaneat in ipso quin ad perfectu^ perducat
quod cupit: and sic vsque in finem permanet hoc quasi factu^ coram dn^o
reputatut. Et si malu^ quid fuerit quod peragere desiderat, deleri potest in
virtute verae poenite^tiae. quidquid enim cogitatione aut volu^tate fecerit
homo, ita anullari potest coram domino, ac si nunquam fuerit, recordare quia
dixi tibi secundo, vt emergeres manum tua^ ceno: and tunc difficilius ea^ posse
mundari affirmaui. ita primo polluiturhomo sola cogitatione, postea vero etia^m
voluntate, and tunc maiore difficultate mundatur, and permanet ^amen
integritas. Tunc protulit scriptura^, de qua interrogare cogitaueram, dicens:
Etiam scriptum est: Qui viderit mulie re^ ad concupiscendam eam: ia^ mechatos
est eam in cord suo. hoc ita est: si permanet homo in voluntate exercendae
libidinis, and a desiderio suo no^ recedit, sed qua^tu^ in ipso est, re^ ad
effectum ducit, and voluntate^ praua^ fructu poenitentiae non diluit, huius
integritas quamuis permaneat: inutilis and nullum consequitur fructum. iteru^
subiunxi dicens: Dn^e, sunt qui non sponte stimulos carnis experiu^tur in
te^tatione, and moleste ferunt ardore^ qui aduersatur munditie corporis sui,
nulla tamen repugnatione enitare eum praeualent, nunquid hoc eis reputabitur in
peccatum? Qui ait: Si moleste feru^t tentamenta huiusmodi, neque animo eis
consentiunt: leuiore poenitentia, culpae suae quam sic contrahunt, veniam
consequentur et mercedem magnam adipiscentur. Indicauit autem michi esse
hominem in Christo familiare, quis aut quae sit deus scit, sustine^tem ab
aduersario impugnatione^ castitatis, and nimiis ob hoc anima^ suam molestiis
affligentem and ait: Co^solationem ei annu^cia, dicesque ei vt parcat
afflictioni: reuocet in memoriam quod scriptu^ est de electis domini. Tanqua^
aurum in furnace probauit eos. gaudium sit ei, non tamen sine tristitia
gaudiu^, pro eo quod tale aliquid dominus ei imponere dignatus est, per quod
tale aliquid dominus ei imponere dignatus est, per quod ad mercedem magnam
praeparatus non sit tamen sine tristitia, quia in tali tentatione non omnino
culpa euitatur. Et dixi, Domine qua liter debet resistere aduersario suo: and
quibus armis eum superabit? Qui ait: oratione and confessione and flagellis
carnis pugnet and superabit. Non autem insistat togare dominum, vt ab hoc
stimulo liberetur, sed hoc oret vt misereatur ei Dominus in tempore
tentationis, si in loco secretiori fuerit, flectat genua ter coram domino, si
autem oportunitas loci ei defuerit, signet cor suum ter signaculo crucis, ac
dicat. Saluator muudi, salua nos, qui per crucem and sanguinem tuum redemisti
nos: auxiliare nobis te deprecamur deus noster.

Post haec vna didierum suscitauit lingua^ suam in haec verba. O virgins: ecce
ad vos clamat vox diuina, vox sponsi vestri pulsat ad aures vestras: Aperite
illi, and introducite eum ad palatium cordis vestri, and amplectimini eu^, quia
pulcrior and amabilior est omni creatura. Rursus adiecit. Dominus maiestatis
vnigenitus altissimi, rex diuinorum exercituum, replens coelum and terram,
magnifica gloria sua, magnus and tremendus in omnipote^ti fortitudine, suauis
and amabilis in inco^parabili benignitate, and totus desiderabilis in clarita
te perfecti decoris sui, in cumsa mabilem vultu^ cu^ incessabili desiderio
prospicere delectatur. Cherubi^ and Seraphi^ and vniuersa sodalitas nostra:
ipse (O virgins) ipse est q co^cupiscit decore^ vr^m, ipse vos ad castos
a^plexus suos inuitat, ipfe a vobis gloriosa lilia virginitatis vestrae
exposcit: vt suu^ secretiore^ thalamu^ ex eis exornet. Nescit ille thalamus
pudicitiae labe^, and omne corruptu^ no^ i^greditur in eu^, non illic
narcescu^t neque defluu^t sed incorruptibili decore permanent preciosi flores
virginitatis, and agnus immaculatus grata^ter cubat in eis: and spira^t ei
suauitatis odore^ tanqua^ margaritae electae and visu desiderabiles: sic
resplendent in thalamo sponsi sui virgins sacrae, and ipse q lauit eas in san
guine lateris sui, and facie^ earu^, signauit virgo speciosus: letatur in
aspectu earu^, and occulta pulchritudinis suae charissimis suis digna^ter
reuelat, organa electionis ibi sona^t concordantia^ in spiritu pacis and
ca^tatur ca^ticu^ desiderabile auditu, ca^ticu^ singulari letitiae, quod solis
virginibus ca^tabi le est, and familia ribus thalami supernis spititibus, ducit
choru^s po^sus in voce praeclara et excelle^ti and no^ adaequatur ei in milibus
cauentiu^ vnus. Vox eius, vox dulcis in plenitudine gr^ae: quae oe^s coelos
replet iocu^ditate: Beati qui audiunt ea^: beati nimis qui co^cinu^t ei, in
quibus primatu^ obtinuit, princeps nr^a virgo theothocos: cui solidatum est
supra omnes tubas angelicas voce^ exaltare. animaduertire filiae verba
ministerii mei: et signate ea in absco^dito me^tis vestrae, si est cor vestrum
ad spo^sum nobile^ et speciosu^, and qui amari dignus sit quare negligitis?
quid tardatis tota virtute vos in illum speciosum exte^dere, quo n^hil clarius,
nihil amabilius est in coelo aut in terra et si gloria^ diligitis: quid est
gloriosius qua^ talem sponsum habere and oi^a possidere in ipso? si habere
delitias ergaudia co^cupiscitis, ad thalamu^ iocunditatis qui vobis praeparatus
est, festinate, cuius ioc^uditati and suauitati omne quoth oculus vidit, vel auris
audiuit, vein cor hominis asce^dit, co^parari no^ potest. Haec cu^ dixisset,
posuera^ incorde meo verba, quae de virginali ca^tico fuerat locutus, and ad
hoc interrogatione^ apta^, dicens, Ita ne est dn^e mi, etia^ angeli canunt hoc
ca^ticum? Et nun quid oe^s virgins? Qui ait vere angelic inu^t hoc ca^ticu^
and omnes qui de hac vita sine macula ad regnu^ caeloru^ tra^smigra^t. Rursus
adieci. Quomodo ergo intellige^da est scriptura quae dicit: Et nem, poterat
dicere canticu^ nisi ce^tu^ quadragi^ta quatuor millia? nu^quid no^ sub illo
numero omnes virgins co^prehenda^tur? ita est inquit numerus iste perfectus
est: and significat perfectione^ coru^ qui se immacula tos custodieru^t, sicut
sine macula est infantia innocentu^ quae au^t amplius de hoc numero locutus
est, se^sus mei imbecillitas portare no^ potuit. Rursus assumpto exhortationis
vbo, locutus est, dicens: ecce aduenit spo^sus vester, praeparate vos O
virgins, ite and emite vobis vestes nuptiales, et introite cu^ eo ad nuptias
alioqui dicetur vobis, quomodo huc i^trastis no^ha be^tes vestes nuptiales? et
ne forte cu^ reprobis deputemini: cogitate cu^ omni solicitudine mentis quo
mode placeatis spo^so vr^o cu^ venerit Vigilate itaque: ne forte inueniat vos
dormie^tes cu^ fatuis virginibus: iteru^ subiu^ge^s: ait: Audite ergo O
virgins: et aperite cord^s vestri, and intelligite quo modo inuitat vos
spo^sus uester quod si agnouissetis quam pulcher and quam amabilis e^ ip^e que^
oi^s multitudo caelestis intuetur: se^per cu^ omni desiderio proculdubio
sperneretis mundum cu^ vniuerso orname^to eius and omne^ gloria^ saeculi
proiice retis retrorsu^ and omne studiu^ ap poneretis ad plene diligendu^
sanctum spo^sum vestrum and corpus vestru^ mundu^ and immaculatu^ post haec
interrogaueu^: dicens. Domine quae sunt vestes ille nuptiales de quibus
dixisti? Et respondit: Iste debent virgine^ ad interiora cordis sui: and emer^
illic tria gener^ ornamentorum. Vnum eas habere oportet vestimentu ca^didum and
immaculatum quod est innoce^tia carnis: Necessarium illis est and operimentu^
quo debent esse circu^ amicte, quod est charitas, qua ab illis dilige^dus est
Christus spo^sus. Tertiu^ ornamentu^ earum est, torques aurea. quod est
pudicitia, qua debet seipsa^ virgo constringere, vt sit verecunda ad loquendu^,
ad audie^du^, ad ride^du^, ad facie^dum omne quod impudicu^ est. Hoc est
signu^, de quo dictu^ est: Posuit signum in facie^ meam: hoc vt estimo adiecit
pro eo quod in festo beat Agnetis ipsam de hoc verbo interrogaueram, et nullu^
tunc michi super hoc dedit responsum. iteru^ dixi: Dn^e, quali precio emenda
sunt virginibus haec orname^ta? Et ait castigatione corporis proprii, ac
denatio vno, quod est co^templatio pudicitiae sponsi, qua^ reponere debent in
medio cordis sui. Hic denarius signatus est imagine regia: quoniam ipse est rex
omnium regum, benedictus in sac^la. Ru^sus interrogaui, dice^: Memento D^^e
verbi illius quod dixisti: vergo orn^ta, castitate, charitate, prude^tia,
humilitate, been currit, ibi ergo.iiii. ornamen^a distinxisti. et nu^c i^ hac
distinctio^e posteriori, duo quide^ priora assignasti, duo vero posteriora
praetermissae videris. Et ait, Vir deside rioru^ dici potest: qui tam
diligenter hoc inquirit. Tunc respondit interrogationi meae: dicens: duo quae
praetermissa tibi vide^tur, sub nomine torques co^prehensa sunt: vt enim
constringat virgo cor suu^ aduersus omne quod inuerecun dum est, non sine magna
prude^tia fieri potest, esse au^t no^ potest, vt desit et humilitas, si
affuerit prude^tia vera. Et rursum post aliquot dies: interrogatione^ praefato
sermoni subieci: domine cu^ constet quod ad nuptias cu^ spo^so ingressurae no^
sunt virgins ille, quae absque nuptialibus vestimentis, inuente fueri^t: qua
ratio^e ei poteritis, quomodo huc intrastis non habe^tes vestes nuptiales? At
ille respo^de^s ait: hic sermo ad nouissimu^ iudicium pertinet: Ibi
congregabuntur ante facie^ Christi electae sponsae eius oe^s adornate
nupcialibus vestime^tis secu^du^ opera bona, que egeru^^ in hoc mu^do. Eru^t et
ibi reprobi no^ habe^tes alique^ decore^ ad nuptias pertinet: quia neglexerunt
operari bona in vita sua. Propter quod dicetur eis a sponso. Ite maledicti in
ignem aeternum. In hac voce increpationem illam accepturisunt, quomo do huc
intrastis non habentes vestes nuptiales.

Iterum autem exhortatus est dicens. Ausculta and inclina cortuum michi, virgo
simplex and amabilis domini, noli emulari in filiabus seculi: quae prospere
gradiuntur in delitiis suis and placere querunt in oculis hominu^ and non dei
composite circumornate esse stude^t vt laudem accipia^t ab ore specta^tiu^, et
fia^t in laqueu^ and subuersione^ multorum. Sed sicut sermo lauda^tium, ita and
pulchritudo earu^ mome^ti vnius est, tanquam spuma aquefacile dissoluitur,
tanqua^ scintilla de igne consurgens, cito extinguitur carnis decor, and omnis
gloria eius: sic est vt flos arboris qui sub vna hora comparet, and statim a
venti commotione excutitur: Tu ante^ filia cor appone vt co^posita et
spectabilis ambules in co^spectu casti emulatoris tui regis nostri: qui e coelo
te intuetur, and omnes vias tuas dinumerat, illum decorem apprehe^de, qui neque
mo^bo emercessit, neque senio perit, and quem periture substantiae inopia non
obfuscat, quanto pulchrior es facie, ta^to amplius inuigila and speciosa sis
mente, fallax gratia faciei, sit gloria tua ab intus vt placeas spo^so tuo qui
intuetur cor. A spice viam castitatis, and attend: quod ex vtraque part
viriditatem habet graminis, and foris decorem, and ad locum castitati: no^
solum in carne, sed and in spiritu, quia vana est castitas carnis, vbi regnat
incontinentia spiritus, et caetera quae coinquin anta nimam, Inte^de quae dico,
sicut lucere non potest la^pas absque alime^to pin guedinis, ita sple^dere non
potest coram coelesti sponso continencia carnis sine spiritus castitate. Et
subject his verbis interrogationem huiuscemodi. Domine via nostra in visione
arcta apparuit: and quid est quoth scriptura dicit. Et ambulabam in latitudiue:
quia man data tua exquisiui, quae est illa latitudo: et quomodo eam considerare
possum i^ via ista? Ad haec, ita respondit, latitudo haec est: valida intentio
cordis, and charitas ardes intrinsecus, qua animae cast ardent ad sponsnum
suum Chirstum dominum quae est latitudo and plenitudo omnium viarum dei,
considera libertatem huius viae, quod absque spinis and impedimentis, hoc est
effectus charitatis quam operatur maxim in virginibus, du^ for as mittit spinas
curarum, et omnis malitiae vt vacare possint: and cogitare quae Dei sunt,
quomodo placeant ei, quem super omnia ama^t Et cum de angustia viae rursum
interrogassem: ait, Hoc est quod coarctare se debe^t virgins, vt in nullo a
seipsis possunt excedant, cui dixi. Nun quid domine a seipsis possunt excedere.
Possunt, in qu^t, et dixi, quae su^t per quae excedunt a scipsis? Qui ait. Haec
sunt ociositas et fabulatio, and omnia quae a memoria earu^ spo^sum coelestem
abduct. Et adieci: Angustia vie and angustie torquis qua^ proposui vobis, sub
vna significatione pronuncia^r, quod sponso Christo semper in arcto ambulandu^
est, in iis quae pertine^t ad huc mundum.

Et factu^ est co^pletis sermonibus his in secu^da dominica sacri ieiunii die
festo* beati Mathiae apostoli in te^pote diuini officii vel sacrificii:
apparuit michi benedictus domini angelus sanctus, dixique ad eu^. Obsecro
domi^e mi, si nu^c te^pus est and si bonu^ est i^ co^spectu tuo: vt sermoni tuo
quem hactenus prosecutus es ad virgins dn^i (co^petentem ia^ finem i^ponas)
vix oratione^ impleui: and continuo aperuit os suum in hac verba. Ecce adiiciam
vltra^ amonere vos fili delectissimi domino. Abstinete vos ab illecebris
viciorum, quae milita^t aduersis spiritum iactare cogitatu^ cordis vestri in
domino. and ipse enutriet vos sicut placitum est ante ipsum, et introducet vos
ad co^uiuia vitae aeternae quae vobis praesta re dignetur Jesus Christus filius
dei viui, qui cum patre and spiritu sancto viuit and regnat Deus per omnia
saecula saeculorum. Amen.

De via praelatorum. Sermo sextus and ca. 14.
Sermon praecede^ti ad fine^ deducto, distulit solito di^tius me visitate
angelus domini, quod ego delictis meis imputans, an xiabar intra me, ac
diligentius lachrymis et orationibus operam dedi, and adiuuabit me conuentus
nosteroratione co^muni, and consumatis dece^ and septem diebus ab eo quo iam
dicta verba co^pleuerat, stabam sola in oratoria circa horam tertia^ effundens
cora^ domino cor meum ac dicens: Non mea merita domine aspexisti in omnibus
quae hactenus mecu^ operatus es, sed in tua misericordia fecisti omnia haec.
Propterea obsecro ne compescaris delictis meis, aut cuiusqua^ alterius, quin
haec quae nu^c apud me initiare dignatus es, propter bonitate^ tua^ ad bona^
co^sumatione^ perducas Devia rectoru^ ecclesiae qua^ mihi i^ ministerio
demo^strasti, congruentem disciplinam nobis aperire dignare, ex qua aliquis
fructus correctionis proueniat, sicut necessarium esse nosci populo tuo. Adhuc
ista and his similia inoratione loque^te, ecce angelus desiderii mei subito
aparuit cora^ me: and sermonem que^ desideraba^: his verbis iniciauit, dice^s:
haec dicit dn^s: Ecce, ego mitto angelu^ meu^, vt annuciet vobis qui in sublimi
potestate irriratores estis. Dico au^t vobis, quod iniquitas teriae qua^
absco^diris propter auru^ and argentu^, asce^dit cora^ me sicut fumus de igne:
Nu^quid no^ animae sunt plus quam aurum et arge^tu^? quas suffocatis in igne^
aeternu^ propter auaritia^ vr^am Idcirco accusat vos religio vestra cora^ me:
Ecce. n. fetere fecistis sa^ctificatione^ vr^a^ i^ co^spectu populi, et versa
est i^ ab hominatione mi chi: occupastis principatu^ sa^ctoru^ meoru^: and
nesciui: maculastis stratu^ meu^, and sil^^. quid mihi and vobis exasperatores
ma^suetudinis meae? vnde ascendistis turbare ouile meum, and aggrauare cor meum
super filios meos quos genui in amaritudine animae meae in die laboris and
angustiarum mearum? Et adiecit iterum loqui ad me, dicens: No^ne pastores me
quasi in graui so^ no obdurati sun and quomodo eugilare eos facia^ Iuper greges
meos qui disparguntur, sicut oues qua^do pascuntur in virentibus pascuis? v^gi
facti sunt populi mei, vnusquisque sequitur eor suum, and discurrunt in
impetucordi sui, singuli post concupiscencias suas: and no^ est vox neque
sensus pastoribus meis ad increpandum and colligendu^ dissipatos, michi
obmutuerunt dicit dominus: michi insi pie^tes facti su^t, sibi autem sapientes
sunt and diserti, os eorum patens est: lingua eoru^ versatilis and acuta ad
vindemia^dam vinea^ in qua no^ laboraueru^t, velox pes eorum: and discurrunt in
tumultu, vt euellant and absorbeant carnalia plebis meae, qui spiritualia no^
ministrant, qui digitum mouere pigri sunt ad erudiendum ab iniquitate animas
meas: pro quibus mortem gustaui quasi ge^s que ignorant nome^ meum: ita me perse
qui non formidant, qui ambulant sub nomine meo, et iniqua (...) action
corpopuli mei contrista^t, and no^ apponunt auferre ob oculis meis, iniquitate^
adulteri, and fornicatoris, et percusoris, and violenti in proximum suum, and
furis, and malefici, et periuri, and fenerantis, and fallentis in pe^so and
mensura, and pollu^nt^s sabbata mea, in tu^p^tudinis lusu, and praeuaricantis
pactum sanctimoniae and incircuncisi in honorantis altar meum, nec
diiudicantis quod est mundum mundissimum, and vendentis and eme^tis
sanctifi^atione^ meam, et superbiam exercentis in haereditate sanctuarii mei:
haec and alia quae legibus meis prohibui, quasi flamma de solationis domu^ meam
deuasta^t, and taedere me faciunt super filios hominum, and pastores mei in
moribus eorum obmutescu^t: and qui escuut in desideriis animae suae, been
secundum pla^rationem sua^ gradiuntur: and gressus eorum digna^ retributione^
inuenie^t, dicit dominus. Haec ita prosequente angelo, qui mecum per interualla
te^porum loquebatur: dixi ad eum: Dn^e quae est illa euigilatio quam dn^s
co^minatus est pastoribus suis? at ille rursus, quasi i^ ira verbu^
co^minationis assume^s ait: Vos qui dormitis in increpationibus meis, and cor
vestrum obcaecatu^ est in dormitione sua: ego euigilare vos facia^, quando veni
et super vos mors antiqua, and inueteratus ille serpe^s and deuorabit vos en^
magno impetu, qm^ thesaurisastis vobis the saurosin infernalibus penis,
Infoelices et insesati aperite oculos vestros et legite scripturas, and
recordamini qua religione praecesserunt vos antecessores vestri: iterum facta
intermissione parui temporis, addidit dice^s Videte pontifice^ magnu^ and
excelsum super oi^a dn^m Jesus, quomodo in diebus obedie^tiae suae a^bulauit i^
medio discipuloru^ suoru^, non in altitudine dominantis, sed in humilitate
ministra^tis, tanqua^ pius emulator gregis sui vsque in co^summatione^ mortis
pro eo. Respicite semem eius quod est benedictu^, ministros vocatio^is vr^ae
beatos apostolos et successores eoru^: in quoru^ cetibus gloria mini: and
pascitis voluntate^ cordis vestri inlaboribus eoru^, nunquid si cut viae
vestrae viae illoru^ fueru^t: nolite arbitrari ita: quia viae illorum viae
pulchrae and rectae: vestrae autem contaminatae and nullius ordo est in eis,
no^ ambula ueru^t in altitudine spiritus sui, neque in tumultu superbi
comitatus, no^ in cupiditate questus, no^ in magnifice^tia vesti me^ti, neque
in dissolutio^e cord^s, no^ in crapula and ebrietate, and i^maculis carnis, non
in vanitate lude^tiu^, neque post canem and auem discursus eoru^. Inom ni au^t
sinceritate vestigiis magni pastoris adhaeserunt, vigilantes vigilias fideles
super gregem domini die ac nocte in laboribus and erumnis, in penuria
necessitatum, and quasi angustia parientis ministerium suu^ impleuerunt
sustinentes abiectionem et co^tume ha^ ab hominibus et persecutiones quas
dinumerare nemo potest, and dederunt any. mas suas in mortem, vt implere^t
terram eua^gelio dei, and lucrifacerent animas electoru^. Celebrantibus nobis
diem festum pasche, in te^pore diuini sacrificii, post lectionem euangelii,
apparuit mihi angelus dn^i stans cora^ me, cu^que petissem ab eo, vt hoc
procurare dignaretur, nequid negligentie in illa sacra co^munione quam
expectabamus accideret. Adieci postulare, vt sermonem suum de rectoribus
ecclesiae secundu^ quod inuocauerar, prosequi dignaretur. Ad quod mihi breue
respo^sum, reddidit, dicens. Si digni essent, multa magna decis dn^s reuelaret:
quo dicto stati^ ad altar cu^ festinatio^e accessit: and cu^ duobus a^gelis q
in pri^cipio missae aduenera^t cu^ magna dilige^tia, donec oe^, co^municasse
mus astabat: seque^ti vero die circa ide^ te^pus adueniens, ita exorsus est
dicens: Caput ecclesiae clamat, and me^bra illius mortua qm^ sedos apostolica
obsessa est superbia, and colitur auaritia, and repleta est iniqtate and
i^pietate, and sca^da liza^t oues meas, and errare eas faciunt, quas custodi re
et regere debueru^t. Verbum est dn^o eu^ potentia sua. Nu^quid hoc obliuiscetur
dex tera mea? nequaqua^ proculdubio nisi co^uersi fueri^t and correxeri^t vias
suas pessimas: ego dn^s contera^ eos. rursus de altero addidit, dicens: Haec
dicit dn^s magnis praelatis ecclesiae: Recordamin^ quam rationem reddituri
estis in treme^do iuditio de cuibus meis, quas suscepistis regere and
custodire, quando appreciati estis dona spiritualia populi mei precio
infoelicitatis: Nunc et gomitto ad vos paternas admoninitiones: Videre ne forte
iudicemini, sed conuertamini a vitiis vestris pessimis, and mundate
conscientias vestras, and reconciliabor vobis, alioqui ego Dominus delebo
memoriam vestra^ de terra viuentiu^. Post haec quasi in spiritu lenitatis:
verbum dei annu^cians, ait: Ego dominus clamo and ad moneo pastores meos, and
quare no^ audiuit vocem ad monitionis meae: sto et pulso ad hostium cordis
eoru^ and no^ aperiunt michi. Audite and intelligire verba admonitiones meae,
and delectamini in dilectione mea, quonia^ admoneo pastores and oues meas
admonitione paterna: sunt enim inter pastores meos qui mihi videntur boni et
pacifici: heu quam pauci sunt, and alii multi mali and peruersi qui me
prouocant ad iracundia^ propter quod oportet admoneri bonos vt in melius
proficiant, malos autem and peruersos vt conuertantur ne pereant de via iusta.
Et cum me iterum visitasset, adiunxit: Ecce adiecit dominus pastoribus suis
adhuc, dicens Attendite cum omni solicitudine mentis viam vestram viam rectam,
and nolite errate in ea. Vigilate and custodite vigilias noctis super gregem
meum, sicut boni emulato^es, ne forte super neniat grex caprarum, qui sunt
spiritus maligni, a quibus disperguntur greges ouium mearum.

Gaudete cum letitia vos qui pacifici mei estis dicit dominus: and recordamini
verborum meorum quae in praesenti sermon inuenistis, and custodite vos ab
illicitis huius mundi, and diligite ad^onitio ne^ mea^. Diligendus enim sum pro
tali admonitio^e, quod and si me diligitis, and nole meo honorem praebetis, qm^
de me eu^ accepistis, honorificabo vos cora^ sa^ctis angelis meis. Adhuc
loquente ad me an a^gelo sermo^es isstos de pastoribus ecclesie: visu^ est
quibusda^ oportunu^, vt interrogare^ deus, i^ quibus error^s sui occasione^ acc
piu^t dubri quida^ interrogaui igitur, no^ quasi in fide hesita^s* sed quasi
cupis fide^ nostra^ ex angelica authoritate firmari, and diceba^. Nq d dn^e i^
ecclesiasticis sacrame^tis pare^ habe^t veritate^, officia eoru^ po^tificu^ qui
sinistre and no^ secu^du^ deo^ ad po^tificatu^ suu^ intrcieru^t, and eoru^
quoru^, bonus introitus est. Qui respo^de^s ait. Multi dum talia profunde
scruta^turmagis depraua^tur quam emende^tur, and talia dn^i reuelaret, si non
eo liberius pecca rent illi, ad quos pertine^t ista: his dictis confestim
ablatus est ab oculis meis. Iteru^ autem die alia cu^ rediisset ad me,
interrogaui eum repetens eu^dem sermone^ qui prae scriptus est: and ille,
Habe^t, inquit, parem virtutem, sed beneplacitu^ est deo magis in officils
eoru^ qui been introierunt Iteru^ subieci dice^s: Ita ne est dn^e mi, vt quod
praesbyteri ordinati ab illis ouoru^ malus in troitus eadem habea^t potestate^
co^secrandi corpus and sa^gun si in altar; qua^ habe^t qui ordinati su^t ab
illis qui legittime introieru^t? Qui ait: No^ asce^dat vnquam dubitatio in
cortuu^ de hac re, sed certu^ habeto quod oe^s qui in ecclesiastica ordinatione
praesbyteratu^ acceperunt, ea^de^ potestatem habe^t in consecratione dn^ici
sacramenti sieve been sieve male introierunt ordinatores eorum verba illa diuina
quae in sacro canone dicu^tur, ta^tae virtutis sunt cora^ domino, vt verae in
illorum pronunciatione corpus et sa^guis domini fiat a quo cunque
praesbyterorum pronuncientur, non enim vel meritis bonoru^ efficitur, vel
peccatis malorum praepeditur consecratio illa: quamuis autem in diuinis
sacramentis inefficaces non sint, tam praesbyteri quam ordinatores eorum, nichi
lominus damnabiles sunt, sed ta^to grauiore damnatione punientur in futuro.

Quia apud paties nostros spiritualia iuditia in ecclesia habe^tes, totus hic
sermo pertinere visus est, rogam angelu^ domini, dicens: Oro domine, vt sicut
spiritualibus rectoribus verba admonitionis hactenus ministrasti, ita illis
quoque qui secularia iuditia habent, ali quas admonitiones, ex quibus et ipsi
corrigi possint a domino an nunciare digneris. Qui confestim petitio^i meae
consensum praebens, his verbis sermonem ad illos pertinentem exorsus est dice^s
Ecce constituit dominus super populum suu^ principes and iudices vt facerent
iudditium et iustiti^ and confirmarent veritatem and pacem inter virum and
virum, vt este^ omnis populus beneplacens coram deo uiuente Nu^c autem sunt
principes and iudi^^^ (...) dicit dominus, quasi equus and mulus, quibus no^
est intel^ectus: and anibula^t cora^ me exte^to collo et inflati superbia, no^
redde^tes gloria^ deo, a quo est omnis potestas in coelo and in terra, sed in
suis virtutibus gloriantur: exaltaui and honorificaui eos sup terra^, and ecce
contemnu^t scire and gloria^ dare mihi Si eni^ s^irent nomen me^ quod est
magna^ et metue^dum, ^e dextera^ mea^ forte^ qua^ exte^di super eos, forsita^
humiliarentur sub manu and retrahere^t ad seipsos ceruice^ sua^ qua^ erexerunt
in co^tumeliam mei, and declinate^t vultu^ in terra^, de qua sum p^^ eos and
patres (...) Vobis dico regibus terrae qui regiminiin excelsum, and clamore
iniquitatis vestrae ascendit in coelu^ cora^ me: audite vocem increpationis
meae, and disceptabo vobiscu^ in auribus populi mei. An nescitis quonia^ mea
sunt vniuersa regna mundi, et omnis gloria eorum, and quia potestate^ habeo
dandi ea cui voluero, and iteru^ qua horavoluero tolle^di ea? Nescitis quod ad
imperiu^oris mei subsistu^t cuncti viue^tes, et quia potens est sermo meus
diuidere inter spiritu^ meum vestrum, and carnem in ictu oculi: and quare
elat^^ est cor vestrum (...) iis quae mea ordinatio^e accept^is and non magis
s^liciti estis ministrare michi, i^ gradu sublimitatis vestrae, et gratias
agere michi pro multitudine beneficenciae meae? Redite ad cor vestrum, and
videte quid fecerim vobis, and reddi de ritis michi.

Ego dominus dominator vester, i^ueni vos absque meritis gratiaru^ mearu^ coram
me: and tame^ assu^psi vos sicut volui ex oi^ numero populoru^ multoru^, and
extuli vos super altitudinem princi and iudicium terre, and ^^fudi super vos
vnctione^ sancti^^^^^ me, and po^^^ diadema glor^^ in capite vr^o and porrexi
virga^ regni dextrae vestrae, and gladio vltionis meae accinxi vos, glorificani
vos cora^ omni populo meo, i^ diuitiis and potentatu excelso, de dique vobis
robur grande ad conterendam virtutem rebellium vestrorum, and famam nominis
vestri dilataui secundum latitudinem tertae. Ego Dominus feci vobis omnia haec:
vt magnificaretis laude^ nominis mei, super terram, and iustitias meas
exerceretis, in iis qous subieci vobis, maioribus et pusillis and coadunaretis
omnem populum meum, in vinculis pacis and equitatis, and daretis vosmetipsos
fideles refugium omni oppresso, and iniuriam patienti, and essetis vindices mei
contra violatores pacis and iustitiae, and quiescere faceretis terram ab iis
qui conturbant eam, and desolatam eam faciunt, in gladio and igne, at violenta
praedacione, and deuorant labores alienos, et vagos, ac mendicos faciunt
cultores terre, and inhonorant nome^ meum sanctum, quo signaui eos, et
segregatur in hereditatem michi. Hoc erat iugum seruitutis me: quod posui
super vos i^ die quo exaltaui vos super altissimos populi mei, vos autem
excussistis illud a seruitutibus vestris: and reddidistis michi pro omni
gloria, quam dedi vobis non timorem, and honorem, sed co^temptum, et
irtiracionem, clausistis oculos mentis vestrae vt non respiciatis ad iudicem
vestrum, qui est in celis, et subuertistis quod iustum est, propter auaritiam,
et elationem cordis vestri: et confirmastis iniquitate^ in terra, et statuistis
eam in excelso, per ambula^tibus vobis terram: audio plorationem et genutum
plobis mei post vos, and querela multa accusat superbiam vestram: quia
intollerabilis est equitatus vester, et no^ est numerus iniquitatis,
ambula^tium in circuitu vestri, onerosi estis populo meo: et hoc vobis
pusillum: nisi et domino deo vestro graves, et abhominabiles sitis, ab
inquinamentis impudicitiae vestre quibus me ad indignatione^ prouocare non ti
muistis, et in honorastis oleum sanctum, quo un xi vos, et honorabile nomen
meum, quid posui super vos, polluistis, and blasphemare fecistis in multitudine
populi pro infaciabili peccato, quod dominatu^ in vobis propter hoc iura ut in
fortitudine dexterae meae, dicit dominus: qui a ecce in proximo reddam vltionem
meam durissimam in capita vestra, and sicut p^te^ter cruciari vos faciam, and
conculcari ab immu^dis spiritibus quibus ministrastis, et no^ recedit flagellu^
a vobis in ^oc tempore: si non egeretis penitentiam, neque recesseritis a viis
iniquis quibus iram meam in regna vestra adducitis: poenitemini taque, et
nolite tar dare: et cum omni vigilantia ministerium vestru^ in quod vocati
estis ame, implere studete, et recordabor miserationu^ mearu^ a^tiquarum in
vobis: and propitius ero iniquitatibus vestris multis, et magni ficabo secu^dum
magnitudinem seruorum meorum regum qui fuerunt ante vos: et adiiciam vobis
gloriae coronam i^ regno meo, que no^peribit de capite vestro vsque insem
piternum. Intuemini vniuersi pri^cipes and iudices mei vba mea hec q portatis
iniquitate^ regu^ vestrorum: and corrigite vias vestras prauas in
increpationibus meis, quibus obiurgaui illos. Recedite ab auaritia et dolo, qui
suffocatis iustitias meas promuneribus, et fauore hominu^ and subleuatis ad
iniquitate^ corda populoru^ meoru^, vt nocea^t alterutru^, co^fide^tes in
iniustitia vestra. Ego dominu^ subieci plebes meas dominationi vestre vt
essetis illis i^ potestate^ a facie viole^ti and praeda^tis et ecce i^
superbia^ eleuatu^ est cor vestru^, and tanquam lutu^ platearu^ co^culcatis
eos, per quos stis gloriosi, and ta^qua^ lupi rapaces in proprio grege in
sania^ exerceris: assimilaui vos pri^cipatibus meis, qui praesu^t militiae
celi: and intelligere noluistis honore^ vestrum and induistis similitudine^
principum and infernorum, in multitudine maliciae qua affligitis populu^ meum,
and in tumore spiritus vestri, et in maculis inte^pera^tiae vestre quibus in
honorastis faciem mea^: que de celo vos i^ tue^t, propterea viuo ego dicit
dn^s, and viuit fortitudo dexteraemeae, sino^ audieritis vocem admonitio^is me
ae, et co^nersi fueritis ad me: Detraha^ vos ab altitudine vr^a, qua male vsi
estis in profundu^ inferni, and eritis consortes illoru^, quibus vosipsos
assimilastis in ince^dio viue^ti in se^piternum. In die sancto Pentecostes in
hora prima ante celebratione^ diuini officii, cum essem in oratione, apparuit
angelus cora^ me, and hactenus dictu^ sermonem, verborum istoru^ a diectio^e
compleuit. Haec dicit dn^s: Rex regu^ and dominus dominantiu^ vniuersae terrae:
Audite et intelligite verba oris mei, et emendate vias vestras in co^spectu
meo, quod si me placare studueri it is, qua^to ma^gis altiores estis in hoc tanto
magis dabo vobis altiore^ locu^ nominatu^ in regno meo, vt mecu^ viuatis and
regnetis sine sine. Amen.

De via viduatoru^. Sermo. 8.
IN FESTIuitate Sancti Martini inter Silentia missae allocutus sum angelu^
dicens: Placeat nunc domineus, vt exhibeas nobis disciplina^ congruente^ ille
vie, cuius vna via vepribus occupatum ta apparuit, altera vero floribus amoena
and scruta nihil habe^s vt ve prium and impedimentoru^. Vix petitionis meae
verba co^pleui, et protinus ait: Ecce dico vobis q in seculo viduati estis,
viue^tes in carne in laboribus and angustiis multis, abstinete vos a vitiis
huius saeculi, and a^bulate in via continentiu^ delectabiliter ornata, viuentes
secundum spiritu^: Egredimini de medio spinarum quae sunt in circuitu vestri,
quia ecce dissolutus est laqueus vester, quo allegati fuistis huic mundo, and
quasi captiui ducebamini ad seruie^dum voluntati alienae, and no^ eratis vestri
quando faciebatis voluntatem carnis, iuxta omnia desideria cordis vestri,
excusatione^ a necessitate conrugii accepistis. et si iterum carni obedite
volueritis, quam excusationem habebitis quid vltra concupiscitis humano aspectu
in superbo amictu and ornamento faciei vestrae? cui vltra carnem vestram iam in
part mortuam emitis inde litiis huius saeculi and desideriis quae aduersantur
spiritui vestro, and coaceruatis vobis solicitudines super uacuas? Audite magis
consilium diuinu^: et discedite a voluptatibus vitae huius quia fallaces sunt,
ne forte p^eoccu-pemini ab eis, et fiant nouissima vestra peiora prioribus,
apprehe^dite quietu dine^ mentis, and spirituales delitias, quas offert vobis
deus et agiteresiduum annorum vestrorum, in obsecrationibus, and vigilus, and
castigatione carnis, and operibus pietatis. Et adiecit in vigilia apostolorum
dicens, and quid addam vos admonere? ecce ostendi viam, instruxi vos doctrina,
p^lpate huc and illuc, co^siderate verba r^tinete exempla diligite castitate^,
curr^te ad claritate^ dei, and dn^i nostri Jesus Christi, qua^ vobis praesta re
dignetur, qui viuit and regnat per oi^a secula seculo ru^. ame^. Cupieba^
octaui sermonis iniciu^ accipere in die translationis sa^cti patris nostri
Benedicti, sed impedite sunt die illo, oratio^es meae ab hospitu^ praesentia,
and translatum est desideriu meu^ vsque i^ proximu^ diem. Tu^c enim sta^te me^
in oratione post horam capituli: prese^tauit se michi angelus domini, and
postulaui vt sermone^ ordiretur ad eos. quoru^ in vita visione quasi glebis
occupata apparuerat, and co^festim aperiens os suu^: haec verba locutus est

De via Eremitarum and solitarioru^. Sermo 8. cap. xvi.
ATtendite vos qui in eremo vita^ ducere elegistis, qua^ discretionem habeatis:
discretio eni^ est matter omniu^ virtutum, glebis aspera est. via vestra:
propter duricia^ vite videte ne forte offe^dat pes vester, quod and si
offenderit cauete ne lume^ quod in vobis est euacuetur propterea autem
necessaria vobis est discrecio: vt no^ cito sequamini omne^ impetu^ zeli vestri
qui vos ad altitudine^ perfectionis impellit neque super gradi amini me^suram
virtutis vestrae, laboribus immoderatis, multi in presumptione spiritus sui
ambulantes: vitam suam nimia afflictione extinxerunt, and perieru^t in
adinuentionibus suis, multi mensura^suam excede^tes humanum intellectum seipsis
subuerterunt et inuties facti sunt, and similes iume^tis i^ sipientibus. multi
per immoderatas fatigationes, in tedium adducti sunt, and elanguit virtus eoru^
et abierunt retrorsum and reuoluti sunt advoluptates carnales factique sunt in
derisionem spiritibus nequam, bona est vexatio carnis, quia aduersatur
co^cupiscencus immund tiae sed si mensuram exuperet, inutilis est, quia
suffocat deuotionem contemplationis, and lumen eius extinguit: Propter hoc
memento homo fragilitatis tuae vt caute gradiaris in via dura quam in^ressus
es, and pacienter agas in festinatione tua, ne ruinam paciaris, dirige in
consiliis sapientium cunctos labores tuos non in proprio sensu: and no^
confunde^is in exitu tuo. Dominatorem coelin^ tents sicut qui incaute su^cu
^am abiiciunt, and habent fiduciam quod mirificetur in eis potentiado mini
secundum dies antiquos.

Ad hec sum tibi eruditionem and disciplinam co^te^plationis* q^a^ annun ^aui
a domino, and consolare ab^ectione^ tuam i^n ea Consedentibus nobis in capitulo
ad audiendam lectionem: regule: in fest nirate sancte Marie Magdelene astitit
cora^ me dominus meus, et presentem sermonem, co^gruo fine co^pleuit, dicens.
Nu^c attendite, O homo qui insolitudine vita^ ducere elegisti et voluptatibus
seculi renunciasti: quale^ fructu^ afferas sunt enim aliqui hoi^m qui plus
amant solitudine^ propter libertate^ proprie voluntatis quam propter fructu^
boni operis. quod si in bonoperseueraueris condonabit tibi dominus, quod oculus
non vidit nec auris audiu t nec in cor hominis asce^dit quod vobis
prestaredignetur: qui viut^ et regnat deus per infinita secula s^culorum Amen.
Cum adsset festiuitas beati lacobi apostoli: in prima vespera, apparuit angelus
domini coram me, feci itaque sicutsug gesserat michi co^scriptor sermonu^
istorum: ac pecii ab eo, vt titulum qui i^ capite libri huius scribendus esset,
pronunciare dignare. Qui continuo peticioni me assentiens ait. Hic est liber
viarum dei: qui annunciatus est ab a^gelo dei altissimi, Eiizabeth ancillae
Christi et dei viui, in quinto anno visitationis eius, quo visi tauit eam
spiritus domini, ad salutem omnium qui paternas admonitiones dei, grata
benedictione and erat annus dominice Incarnaattonis millesimus centesimus
qninqua gesimus sextus.

De via adolescentu^. Sermo ix. caxvii.
MEnse augusto qui^ta die me^sis, mane post vigilias matutinas cu^ essem cubans
in lectulo meo, neque adhuc somnum cepisse, su^ bito apparuit ^oram me ang^lus
domini, and praesentis libri nonu^ sermonem initiauit his verbis: Ecce ego
habeo aliquid ad vos dice^dum qui in iuuentute positi estis, quasi lilium quod
ante solis ortu^ clausum erat, and qua^do tol splender in virtute sua aperit
se, et delectatur in ardore solis, sic est homo and fic floret caro cius in
inuentute sua, et delectat me^tem suam multis modis cactus, ac resoluitur ab
innati ca^oris blandi mento. Audite itaque filii, and percipite in verbis
ministerii mei, vocationem optimi patris vestri de coelo, qui dabit vobis locum
dulcissime amoenitatis ante soliu^ gloriae suae, si cle^ geritis ambulare in
consiliis e^us. Discite imprimis timere dominu^ coeli, et assuescite i^curuari
sub iugo timoriseius ab initio adolescentiae vestrae.

Ecce praeparauit in inferno crudeli ignem and sulphur, and flagella multa
nimis, and morsus amarissimos horre^dotu^ spirituum facientibus mala pusillis
and magnis, and nulli pacit aetati: propterea dico vobis, Discite continere vos
ab omni opere malo, et custodite innoce^tia^ vestram tanquam aurum electu^
cuius praeciu^ in decore^ adhuc ignoratis. cum autem senuerit intellectus
vestet, tunc cognoscetis and gustabitis ex ea fructum letitiae, quam nemo nouit
nisi qui accipit, consilium domini est filioli, quod dico: ecce in sinu vestro
est thesaurus deside rabilis and preciosus super omnes diuitias mundi: hoc est
virginitatis gemma. Beati eritis, si custodictitis eam, re^tam preciosam nolite
proiicere in lutu^, neque pro vili delectame^to quod est vnius mome^ti
co^mutetis eam quia semel abiecta, amplius inuo niri non potest ipsa est
fraternitatis nostrae in coelo proprium signu^, and propterea singulariterin
eis delectamur interra, quos titulo nostro signatos ess^ videmus. quod si
placuerit animae v^^^rae custodire eam: Attendite vobis vt non in quinetis eam
in negligentiis leu^tatis vestrae decinate cum pauore cordis ab irritamentis
immunditiae, et fugite co^f^bulationes and collusiones adolescentularum, et
cotruptoribus earum nolite sociari Custodite os vestru^ ab impud^co sermon,
and declinate aurem vestram ab eo, and ab omni turpitudine oculos vestros and
manus ab^tinete: audite and intelligite scriptura^ sapie^tis quae dicit felix
sterilis and i^coinquinata: quae nesciuit thoru^ in delicto, habebit fructu^ in
respectione animarum sanctaru^, and spado qui non operatus est permanus suas
iniquitatate^: dabit ei fidei donu electu^, and sors in te^plo dn^i
acceptissima. De hac scriptura cu^ requisissem ab eo cuius esset' ait, Spiritus
sanctus per os sapientis, locutus est, statimque ab oculis meis ablatus est,
neque amplius interrogari^ sese concessit.

Post haec rursus adiecit, and dixit: Ad huc addam loqui fratribus et conseruis
meis admonitiones patris ^orum. Filii adducite vobis in consuetudine^ mores
sanctitatis in floribunda aetate vestra, quos in tempore maturitatis vestrae
possitis exercere aptate in hoc mores vestros, vt sitis verecundi, mites and
sobrii, humiles and miseri cords, and pacie^tes estote ad correctionem and
doctrina^ sapientiu^ diligite and inuestigate, fugite verba me^datii and
melitiae, furta, comessationes, and rixas and ludos, quos auaritie adinuenit et
eos qui praesta^t occasionem immunde voluptati expedit and vobis orationi
frequenter inte^dere, quia tanquam suauitatis incensum est in caelo, oration de
immaculata conscientia procedens: supplicate creatori vestro, vt emaculatotes
vos custodiat ab hoc saeculo, and nolite sperare in longiturnitate vitae
praesentis, quia incertus est exitus vester: haec est viae vestrae pulchritudo.
O adolescentes and inuenes immaculati, ambulate in ea, and eritis filii
amabiles domino, and similes angelis dei in caelo, ad quorum societatem ducere
vos dignetur Jesus Christus dn^a noster, qui est benedictus and laudabilis
cumpatre and spiritu sancto in sempiterna saecula. Amen.

De via infantiu^. Sermo decimus. Cap. xviii.
CVM esset completus per angelu^ sermo praecede^s in vigilia assumptionis
sancte de^ genitricis Mariae rursus in ipso difesto in tempore diuini officii
visitauit me, and ait Ecce adhuc vol^ co^sumare sermones meos, quom am adhuc
locu est, et habeo aliquid breuiter dicere ad infantes* qui nesciu^t se
custodire propter ignorantia^. propter quod oportet admoneri matres eorum, vt
custodiant eos cum timore dei castos et immaculatos, ne forte pereant. Ad haec
ego subiunxi, interroga^s and dicens: Quid est dn^e quod dixisti castos and
immaculatos? quid facere possunt infa^tes, vnde castitate^ sua^ co^maculent?
no^ne et si quoth delinquu^t, ignora^tia eos excusat. Et ait: Castitate^ sua^
verbis immu^dis sepe coinquinant and operibus qualia and ipsi per ficere
possunt: et quamuis per ignora^tia^ facia^t, tame^ sine reatu no^ sunt, and
poenam omnino no^ euadere possunt de hac vita migra^tes quia neque ab aliquo
sunt castigati, neque per seipsos poenite^tia^ delicti habere scieba^t.
propterea castigari debe^t a parentibus pro delictis suis, quia sicut mala
facere assuescunt, ita and bona facere discerent, si per castitatem ad hoc
nutr^rentur, quod aute^ dixi vt i^maculatos, pro ipsis dixi qui cu^ paululu^ de
septennio ecierint, tunc amplius se co^maculant prauis operibus quia plus
noueru^t cogitare de malo, quonia^ non sint prohibiti ab eo, (...) and ipsi
inquantum possunt opera^tur opus impudicitiae, ita vt germanitate coniuncti
saepe copulen turnescie^tes quid saciunt Tales igitur si de hac vita migrant,
magnas poenas sustinent, quousque purifice^ ^ur, quia ^u^la omnino maculain
reguu^ dei potest intraro. Hoc ergo est illoru^ perire, de quo supra dixi,
tanto autem grauius ac diutius puniu^tur, quo minus orationibus etelemosinis
amicoru^ adiuua^tur pro eo quod eis indigere no^ credantur. dico vobis
parentibus et quicunque paruuloru^ custodiam habetis: atte^dite quomodo in
magna cautela eos custodiatis, quia in vos redundabu^t delicta eoru^, sine
glexeritis eos prona est per se omnis caro i^ malu^, et idcirco noli te
enutrire eos in vanitatibus vestris, neque incline it is eos ad ebrietatem, et
fabulationes vanas and prauas, neque ad superbia^ inducatis eos per delicata^
educationem. prohibete eos a verbis impudicis et conuitiosis, et obsceno cantu,
and lusibu^ malis, and rixa and vagatione incauta, ne rideatis super delictis
eorum, sed magisin virga mansuetudinis and verbis correctionis absteirete eos,
quia contumaces eru^t si proprie voluntate relinqua^tur. ^ncipite aute^ ab ipsa
aurora aetatis eorum, flectere eos ad timore^ domini and initia sacrae fidei,
and orationes dei, and omne quod admores bonos pertinet, auribus eorum
frequenter instillare curate. Consumauit autem hunc sermonem in octaua
assumptionis, adiectione^ verboru^ istoru^. Nunc autem filii charissimi quam
pulchta est via vestra, currite in ea. O quam amabilis est pater vester, quam
praeciosu^ est praemiu^ vestrum and rehnum aliorum quod vobis praestare
dignetur, filius qui manet^^ patre and pater in filio mane^s cu^ spiritu sancto
in secula saeculoru^. Amen.

Protestatio angeli de annunciatione libri viaarum dei.
CVM esse^^ poene consumati h^^ sermones in fes^iuitate apostolorum Petri and
Pauli, ante horam d^uini officit, fu^orans in secreto and apparuit in conspectu
meo angelus domini, et locutus est audiente me: verba haec. Treuerensi
episcopo, et Colonie et Magunc e episcopis, annu^ciatu^ sit vobis a domino deo
magno and treme^do, et ab angelo testament: libri h^lius: vt haec verba que
inueneritis i^ pres^nti libro, annu^cietis Roman ecclesie, toti^^ popul^, and
oi^ ecclesiae d^^ ^mendate vo sipsos, et conuertimini ab errotibus vestris: et
nolite indigne accipere admonitione^ sacram et diuinam, quia non sunt hec ab
hominibus inuentae di co autem vobis ex nomine: quoniam in ista prouincia nomen
religionis habetis, legite and audite ^^monitiones di (...) et suscipi^^^ (...)
placida m^ (...) nolite arbi (...) hec figmen^^^ ^^se mulierum (...) no^ sunt.
sed ^unt a deo patre omnipotente, qui est fons and origo omnis bonitatis, quud
autem vobis dico, ceteris omnibus dico.

HEC adiurat^o conscriptores sermonum istorum Adiuro per dominu^ et per angelum
eius, omnem qui transcripserit l^^^um istum: vt diligenter eum emendet, et hanc
adiuracionem codici suo ascribat.

FINIS.

