THE SVRVAY OR TOPOGRAPHICAL Description of France:

With a new Map, helping greatly for the Surueying of every particular
Country, Cittye, Fortress, River, Mountain, and Forest therein:

Collected out of sundry approved Authors: very amply, truly, and historically
digested, for the pleasure of those who desire to be thoroughly acquainted in
the state of the kingdom and dominion of France.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop at Poules
chain. 1592.

The Preface to the Reader.
THou see before thine eyes (gentle Reader) the face of the flourishing
Kingdom of France, whose luster and glory at this present is a little
eclipsed and dymmed by the cyuill dissension and bloody broiles that a long
time have afflicted it. I know many famous Cosmographers have in their maps
described the country in ample sort, unto whom an ancient Historiographer gave
the first and greatest light* I mean Julius Caesar who in his learned and
eloquent Commentaries of France did so excellently well that all the writers in
the world, and lay all their pens and wits together in that matter, cannot do
so well again, or once come near him, considering the time that he wrote was
so long agone. Amongst other that have written since of the country and people
of France, Be^le-Forests has not deserved the lest praise for his Collections
out of sundry good and approved Authors, published concerning this matter. Now
thou have also here of us a brief Topographicall description of France and
Navarre, gathered out of many of the later writers not to be neglected,
wherein are exactlye and briefly described their Regions, Provinces, Cities*
Castles, and Fortresses, the commodities of every soil, the nature of the
Inhabitants, their ancient and modern manners, laws* rights and customs,
with diverse other things coincident to the same, and very meet to be known
in such an History. To be brief I shall not need to write at large of the
Country in this place, for that thou shall be informed thereof most amply by
one that can set it down in better manner then I. I will speak a word or
two of Paris, the capital City and metropolis of all France, an university
whose fame is spread throughout all Europe for the famous Schools of learning
therein, and I think it to be beside one of the most populous Cities in the
world. The number of whose Inhabitants is of many millyons, and to make
shorter, is, as it were another world, or rather as one said of ancient Rome,
an epitome of the world: with the Crown of France is invested at this present
Henry the Fourth lyneally descended from Saint Lodouicke, who is now up in
Arms with the princes of his blood royal for his title and right unto the
Crown: Remarked for the most heroical and magnanimous King, for the most
victorious and invincible warrior that ever unsheathed sword for a Kingdom:
having bine personally present and fought more then fourteen or fiueteene
pitched fields, and had victory on his side at them all. So that I think if
we seek amongst all the Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecyans, Romans,
Almans, Jews, Tartarians and Mahometans, and over all the face of the whole
world beside, we cannot find a king of a greater race and more noble courage
then this: having had xxviii. kings in his house before him and all in line
masculine of his fathers side: His mother being the heir and issue of a
Queen, whose mother was sister to Francis the Great, excelled in wit, learning
and haughty courage of a woman all other Christian Princesses that ever had
lived before her. And if there be any that will contradyct me concerning the
kings royal parson or his ancient offspring and descent, to compare it to some
base, poor and ignoble Family, he is less able to speak of the royal, high,
ancient and noble families of Christendom, then frogs and rats are to
discourse of the greatness, height, essence, beauty and admirable operations of
the Sun: and for his country if there be any that will empeache the goodness
and beauty thereof, to say that it is not so fruitful nor so pleasant, nor so
well furnished and replenished with all things that are to be desired in such
a flourishing kingdom (Peace only excepted which the God of heaven send down
upon them spedily) he is no more able to dispute of a Country then a Mole or a
Mouse of the man in the Moon. For his Royal person, and noble progeny his
very enimyes and all the world shall be judge. And for his kingdom and country
William of Saluste Seigneur of Bartas, a man of that nation to whom credit
may woorthily be given in such a matter: whose verses in praise of his native
soil in his second day of his second week, I have translated thus out of
French: O Fruitful France! Most happy Land, happy and happy thrice!
O perle of rich Europaean bounds. O earthly Paradise.
All hail sweet soil! O France the mother of many conquering knights,
Who planted once their glorious standards like triumphing wights,
Upon the banckes of Euphrates where Titan Day-torch bright.
Rises, and blouddy swords vnsheathd where Phoebus drounds his Light,
The Mother of many artist-hands whose workmanship most rare
Dimmes Natures works, and with her fairest flowers does compare.
The Nurse of many learned wits who fetch their skill divine
From Rome, from Greece, from AEgipt far, and ore the learned shine,
As does the glymmering-Crimsin-dye over the darkest gray:
Titan ore stars, or Phoebus flowers ore marigolds in May.
Thy floods are Ocean Seas, thy Tounes to Provinces arise,
Whose civil government their walls has raisd to lofty skies.
Thy soil is fertill-temperate-sweete, no plague thine air does trouble,
Bastillyons four borne in thy bounds: two Seas and mountains double,
The Crocodile fierce-weeping-teares annoyeth not thy maine,
The speckled-race of crawling Serpents hant not thy domaine,
Not in one Acre of thy land that cursed seed is seen,
Backs-venimous-winding to and fro t'infect thy meadows green,
The Tigre-swift of-foote prays not within thy mountains hollow,
Nor hungry-soming ore thy Plains enraged his chase does follow.
No Lions in thy deserts lurk: no Seahorse monster rumbling,
Swymmes to thy maine, and steals thine infantes under waves them tumbling
If in thy streaming- riuers-rich-swift-gliding be not rold
The golden sands mong Pibble-stones, nor ore of massiue gold:
If Silver pure dropping from down thy mountains be not found,
And every step Perle, Ruby, Diamond, Grenate on thy ground,
In contre-chaung thou art as rich in woade, in wolle, in wines,
In Salt pits, Sindon fine good Grain: which are sufficient mines
To make thee far and near renound of earthly Kingdoms Queen.
It Is only Peace, thou lackst. Alas! O God whose Eyes have seen
Our blessings and our miseries, thine Eyes of mercy glance
Upon our present State and quench the flames consuming France:
Sweet father turn our storms to calmes: Thy heavy hand retire,
Hide quickly in thy Quiver all the Arrows of thine Ire.


Thou can not Gentle reader desire to know any more of this country then
this excellent poet has told thee, concerning they great treasures,
commodities and pleasures thereof, wherein it is worthily to be preferred
before all other countries under the scope of the heavens. Thou see first
with what worthy and honorable titles he saluteth this rich and flourishing
territory: then speaks of the great numbers of warryours, famous Artists, and
men of great learning that it has brought forth and bred. Next sets down
the Situation of the Country: to wit: that it is bounded toward the west and
the North with the huge Ocean Sea: and to the Southward with the Mediterrane:
being full of diverse rivers or rather little seas, passing and runninge every
way clean through the main: the names whereof are: The Rosne* the Saone,
Dordone, Loyre, Marne, Seyne, and Oyse: besides a great number of others
smaller and yet very famous to: It has her cities* as Paris, Toulouse, Roan,
Lions, Bourdeaux, and many other which are more populous then so many dutchies,
Countries and whole provinces. The fortresses at this day are fayrer, more in
number and better fortified then ever before. As for the Ciuility of the
people, I leave that to the judgment of the stranger that has lived there. The
fertility of the Country is almost incredible: the air is temperat every
where. For rampires and walls it has the two seas: and likewise the
mountains called the Alps toward Italy: and the Pyrenaean mountains
toward Spain, beside it is exempt from all venomous, cruel and rauishing
beasts, as Crocodyles, and other monstrous Serpents, which spo^^e the country
of Egypt and diverse other parts of Africa. If it have not mines of Gold and
Silver, precious Stones and perles, yet has it in cont re-exchang other mines
of far greater commodity and never to be searched to the botome: to wit:
lynen clothes: woade, wolles, salt, corn and wine: The wadd and salt are
found in Languedock: salt is found also in the Country of Guienne: wolles in
Province and in Beausse, where is also wheat in abondance: wine in diverse
parts, and in all provinces except four or five great provision of two or
three of these commodityes: The poet has remarked the principal things
whereof great traffic is made into foreign and neighbor nations from
France. This then might suffice to learn that nation to acknowledge the great
gifts of God and be thankful for the same. And seeing they have so many
benefits, to know what they want, and to ask it at his hands that can give
it. So also with my heart I can wish to this kingdom (that whilome was so
flourishing) and I hope all good christians wish the same, a flourishing, firm,
civil, vn^aigned and christian Peace, the band of true unity and concord to
endure amongst them for ever.

A TOPOGRAPHICAL Description of the two kingdoms France and Navarre, by their
several Parliaments and Provinces.
PARIS which serves for the I Will of France, Paris.
Picardie, Champagne, Bry, Auxerre, Puysaye, Gastines, Hurepoix, Chartres, with
the territories of the same, Perch, Montforte, Amaury, Timere, Vandosme, Dune,
Beausse, Orleans, Bloys, Sologne, Tours and Touraine, Maine, Aniou, Poictou and
the land of Auniz, Angolesme, Lymosin, the high and low March, Berrie,
Neuers, Bourbon, Auuergne, Forest, Lions, Beauiolois, and Mascon.

2 Roan serves for Normandy. Roan.


3 Renes serves for Bretaigne. Renes.


4 Digeon serves for Bargondie. Digeon.


5 Grenoble serves for Dauphine. Grenoble.


6 Aix serves for Province. Aix.


7 Toulouse serves for Viuares, Toulouse.
Velay, Geuoudan, Languedock, Rouergue, Quercy, Foix, Cominges, the county of
Ite in Jordan, the county of Gaure, Again, Cendon, the county of Lestraec,
Armignack, Bigorre.

8 Bourdeaux which serves for Xantonge, Bourdeaux.
Perigort, the land between the two seas; Bourdeaux, the land of Medoch,
Buchez, Laundes, the duchy of Albret, Bazoles, and Gascoigne, Mets with the
territory thereof, which have one President or sovereign Judge.

The King of Navarre has also two parliaments which serve for the countries
which he holds in sovereignty.

Pau.
1 Pau which serves for the territory of Bearne.

S. Palais.
2 S. Palais or S. Pelasge whereunto do resort all the Nauarrian part of Biskay.

An abstract out of Belforest.
THe Realm of France is divided into eight parts in respect of so many
Parlements therein contained.

Paris.
Paris serves for many countries.

Tholouze
Tholouze which serves for Languedocke and part of Guyenne.

Bourdeaux.
Bourdeaux which serves for the rest of Guienne.

Roan.
Roan which serves for all Normandy.

Grenoble.
Grenoble which serves for all Dauphine.

Digeon.
Digeon which serves for Burgondie.

Aix.
Aix which serves for Province.

Renes.
Renes which serves for Britain.

Metz.
Hereunto as a ninth part may be added Metz, which serves for the same town
and the territory thereof where the king has one President which judges
absolutely.

Jurisdiction of Paris.
Under the jurisdiction of Paris are comprehended the Bailiwike of Laon which
has the first place, then Rheims, Amiens, Abbeuille, Bullogne, Senlis, Sens,
Auxerre, Troy, Vitrye in Partenay, Chastle-thierry, Chaumont in Bassigny,
Meaux, Province, Melune, Poictiers, Angiers, Man's, Tours, Blois, Burges,
Orleans, Chartres, Angolesme, Rochel, Monfort, Amaury, Lions, Malins, S. Peter,
the minster, Rion, Orillac in Auuergne, then the Prouostship and Uicountie of
Paris, but Belforest observes not this order of Bailiwikes.

The Prouostship and Vicountie of Paris.
PAris stands in as good an air as any town in the world, The situation of
Paris.
the territory thereof being pleasant, fruitful and plentiful in Corn,
Wine, Whitemeates, Haie, Fruit, Herbage, Cattle, and clear waters, every
way inhabited with Farms, great Boroughs and Uillages, besides an infinite
number of houses of pleasure, as Gentilly, Bissestre, Vannes, Issy, Arcueil,
where there are clear waters, fountaynes and good springes, vaulted and arched
about. The lower Medoune which belongs to the Charterhouse. The higher
Medoune sometimes the Cardinal of Lorreyns, who procured the building of the
arteficiall and half natural Cave in the same, S. Clow, Montmartre, whence
they have their plaster of Paris, which is a great furtherance to the buildings
of the same. S. Dionise
S. Dionise in France (where are the Toombes of the French kings) contains
eleven parishes, it is wide, and has within the circuit thereof arable grounds,
meadows wine, and willow groves, whereby considering the compass thereof it is
nothing inhabited. It stands as well and in as fair a feeld as any town in
France. It is easy to be fortified and hard to be forced, in that there is no
hill or other thing to command it, for it stands in a fair and large
champion, almost every way compassed and environed with waters and marshie
grounds.

The Prouostship of Paris has seven under bailiwikes, termed the seven
daughters, whose seats do bear the name of under bailifs, and the guardian
of the Prouostship of Paris is the chief Bailie: their names are these, 1.
Poissi. 2, S. Germain in Lay. 3, Taurnon in Bry. 4, Torcie in Bry. 5, Corbeyl.
6, Mont-le-herye. 7, Gonnese in France.

Poissy.
Poissy stands nere the river of Seine in a pleasant small vale, on the one
side environed with groves, and on the other side with arable grounds.

S. Germains. Nanteere Wood of Treason.
S. Germains in Lay is very well seated, and in a good air, specially for the
game.

Nanterre a village wherein S. Genouiefe was born.

Within one league of S. Germains there is a great wood almost all oak, termed
the wood of Treason, if any twigge thereof be cast into the water, it presently
sinketh like a stone, and since the treason (whereof it takes the name) was
there contrived, it never prospered, for being cut it springs no more, a
matter utterly repugnant to the nature of Oak, at this present time there
stands little but Standers and Stompes. It is between Peck-gate and
Cat-gate, five leagues from Paris. In a corner thereof somewhat within the
wood on the side that lies toward S. Germains, there stands a great stone
table, whereupon it is said that Gaunelon of Hault-escul and his confederates
conspyred the destruction of Charlemaigne and his posterity.

Corbeil.
Corbeyl, a County lieng upon two rivers, Seyne and Essonne, or the river of
Estampes, it is situate in a fair feeld, but ouerlooked and commanded with two
hills.

Among certain ruins and decayed buildinges, between Consolans and Charenton,
there is an Echo which answers the voice ten times.

Villeneuf S. George or S. Georges new town, Villeneuf.
is a great Borough, three leagues distant from Corbeil.

Mont-le-hery, Mont-le-hery.
which is not far distant from Chartres, between the same and Paris lies the
manor house of Palaiseau Longuineau, Anthonies bridge, or Pont-Antoine, Queens
borow, or Bourg la Roine and Vau de Ceruay an Abbey.

Gonesse no walled town, Gonesse.
but nevertheless is one of the fairest and wealthyest Borowghs in all France,
they make there most excellent bread.

The Land and territory of Chartres.
CHartres is a Duchy scytuate between the 49. and 50. degree of the North
latitude, Chartres.
howebeit Ptolome places it in the 48. Westward, it bordereth upon the
territorye of Orleans and Beausse, Northward on Perch and Normandy, Southward
upon Dune, and Eastward upon France and the land of Gastine. The soil
plentiful in all kind of grain, fruit, cattle, wine and gardeines. Thorough
this country passes the river of Aure, which falling from Perch, keeps his
Channel alongest Chartres, Nogentle Roy, Dreux and ^uet, and thence running
near to Louiers at Pont de Larche, falls into Seyne. The Church of Chartres
was founded long before the coming of Jesus Christ, in the honor of a
virgin which should bring forth the Savior of the world. Vidamy of Chartres.
In Chartres there is a Vidamye: the Bishopric is forty leagues outright, and
in Ecclesiastical causes has jurisdiction over 1600. Parishes or Steeples. It
has under it Bloys, Vandosme, Dune, Dreux, Mante, Montforte Great Perch and
Poissy. Sundry baronages of Perch, do at every death or alteration of Lord
relieve of the Byshopricke as Allay, Brow, Monnirall, Anthone, Bazoch, the
Uicounty of Laygny, and Mess do relieve of the Vidam. The inhabitants of
Chartres are familiar and courteous, and greatly given to buyeng and selling
of corn.

Chartres.
Chartres is a Bayliwicke, and has a judgment seat, whereupon do depend these
under bailiwicks. 1. Neufchastell in Timerais. 2. Great Perch. 3. Perch Gouet.
4. Estampes. 5. Dourdant. 6. Nogent le Roy. Bonneual.

The land and terrytorye of Chartres comprehends also Beausse and Sologne,
whereof:

Beausse.
Beausse has on the South Gastine, on the East and North, the territorye of
Chartres and Vandosme, on the West. This country lieng between Loyre and
Paris is one of the plentifullest in wheat throughout Europe, and ever is an
assured Storehouse to the I Will of France and Paris. It lies leuel, no one place
higher than other, and the plains so even that no river can run through it:
whereby they have there no water but out of Pooles, marshes, and wells, which
for the most part are dry in summer and so consequently water very scarce:
such drought makes this Country more apt to corn then any other. Therein do
stand some towns and villages though not of any great name, as Toury Angeruille,
Meruville, Gemuille, Artenay, and Pluuiers, which is rather thought to be in
Gastine.

Sologne.
Sologne lies beyond Loyre, which boundeth the Eastside thereof as Orleance
does the North, Berry the South, and Touraine the West. The chief Towns
therein are Gergeau, Suly, Ferte, S. Laurent des Eaux, Clery, and others that
lie in the plain which stretches from Orleance to Bloys, and is one of the
fairest in France, the soil is sandy and so consequently good for Rye.

Estampes a Duchy, Estampes
well seated in a good Uine ground, the town is of a reasonable circuit:
howbeit but slenderly inhabited and is very waste, and yet rich by reason of
the traffic of corn, there is a fair and strong castle, also a river which
is well stored with Crayfishes, but has no name but what it borrows of the
town.

Dourctan and Espernon Towns.
Dune depends of the bailiwicke of Bloys, Dune.
it lies in the 48. degree of the North latitude, and is 10 leagues broad but
not so long: on the East lies Orleance, on the West Vandosme and the
territory of Maine, on the North Galerne, Chartres and Perch, and on the South
Bloys, the head Town thereof is Chasteau Dune which stands on a rock upon
a very high hill and hard to come to, Chasteau-Dune.
especially on the North side, from whence they may see as far about as the
day can conceive. This Castle stands upon such a hanging hill, that it
seems to hang or lean in the clouds, and is fortified with a great tower.
In this town is the justice seat for the whole county of Dune, whereon do
depend five castlewicks viz. 1. Montiguy Ganelon. 2. Courtalane. 3. Montilar.
4. Esdars. 5. Rebecan: With others which have recourse by appeal like as
Chasteau-dune has to the royal Sea of Bloys, the suburbs are 4. times
greater, better built and more plentifullye inhabited then the town. The
dwellers of good capasity, their speech meetly neat, proper and short. Toward
Perch the territory of Dune is full of groves, Forests and pastures, with
pooles and store of cattle. Toward Orleance and Bloys, it is plentiful in
corn and vines, the vine grounds do end at Chasteau-dune, for approaching
toward Normandy there are no more except some few wild branches, which they
maintain only for a show, making veriuice of the fruit of the same. In this
Countye is the lake of Verde, which conteyneth two leages in length, Verde Lake.
and 250. paces in breadth when it is at the fullest, and is well stored with
fish and wilde-foule.

Bloys.
Bloys. This country is well watered with diverse springs and brooks, besides
four Ryuers: Loyre, who taking his head in the forest of Chamrout, passes by
Illiers, Alluy, Bonneuall, so below the Suburbs of S. John de la Chaisne, at
Chasteau-dune, so to Vandosme, and thence falls into the river of Sastre at a
Uillage called Escoublanc, which is a legue above Chasteaudune. In swaloweth
the River of Conny which springs in the Forest of Orleance near to Arteuay,
deuideth it self into two channels, whereof the one runs to Baygnolet in
Beausse, and the other to Varez. This small stream notwithstanding whatsoever
rain, does never arise, ouerflow, or is troubled: but contrariwise it rises,
ouerfloweth, and is most troubled in the hottest season of the year and in the
dog days, if it chance to ouerflowe and pass extraordinarily beyond the
banks and usual bounds of his bed, the contreymen are sure of a harvest
plague or famyne the next year after. The third is called Aigre, and the
fourth Hyerre, which so soon as it is sproong up, immediately hides it self
in the earth, not far from the first head, breaks out again, and soon
after falls again into the earth, where it runs above a league under
ground. This country appertains to the house of Longueuille, which is
descended of John the Bastard of Orleance, and natural son to Philip of
France, who was son unto king Philip of Vallois.

Millencay and Remorentine do depend upon the Bailiwike of Blois. Millencay
and Remorentine.
Remorentine is a small Town standing upon the territory of Blois, but
comprised in Sologne. It stands in the river of Sodre.

Blois stands in the 47 degree of the North latitude, Bloys.
and somewhat more on the East lies Orleance, on the West Touraigne, on the
South Sollogne and Berry, on the North Vandosme and Beausse, toward Beausse it
stands upon Loire, part upon a hilly rock, and part upon the plain. For
the plenty of excellent wines, corn and fruit, few countries may be compared
to Blois. It has store of underwoods, orchards, rivers, pooles, and quick
springs of fair and clear waters, whereof do proceed the fruitfulness of
the soil: the feed is fair, the air wholesome and very temperate, the heat
moderate. It excels Beausse and Sologne wherein it does participate, in
that besides the abundance of corn, it is provided of Wine, Fruit, and Water
between Blois and Orcheze (a village within two leagues of it) where is found
earth in color and effect resembling the Turks Terra sigillata. At Blois are
conduits of such greatness and height, that three horsemen may pass afront
upon them. There is also a Bayliwike and Iustice-seat, whose jurisdiction lies
forty leagues out, and contains seventeen towns, and six hundred great
parishes.

Cha^bort.
Chambort stands within three leagues of Blois from whence it may be seen,
it is a castle wherein is a staire, upon the which a great number of people
may pass too and fro at once, and yet not see each other. Therein is also the
Q. garden containing x. akers of land, from the which stretches an allie
toward the forest of Blois, which is half a league long and six fathom wide,
beautified with fair rows of elmes, each one planted six foot from other,
whereof there are about six hundred in a rank.

Va^dosme.
Vandosme and the territory thereof are bounded on the East with Beausse, on
the West with Aniow on the North with Perch, and on the South with Touraine, it
is a Duchy appertaining on the farther side to the king of Navarre, and is of
the land of Chartres, the town stands upon Loire.

Houdan and Dreux Perch.
Houdan and Dreux are also of the land of Chartres.

Perch a County, is also of the country of Chartres having on the East and
North Normandy, on the South Chartres and Vendosme, on the West the territory
of Maine.

The notablest Towns therein contained, are Mortaigne, Bolesme, Feuilet, in
high Perch in Perch.

Mortaigne, Bolesme, Feuillet, Gouet. Bazoch Gouet. Aluge, Nonumirall, Brow,
also Anthon, Malues, Rauxuiaillard, Conde upon Huynes, Nogent le Rotron.

The Territory is watered with the streams of Huynes, Comerche, Lambee.

Part of this country belongs to the Duchy of Alenson, and therefore
aforetime depending upon the parliament of Roan, but now upon the Exchequer of
Alenson, the rest is of the Bailiwike of Chartres, and so consequently has
recourse to the parliament of Paris.

The Bayliwike and Duchy of Orleans.
THis country has on the East Gastine, Description of Orleans.
on the South Sologne, on the North Beausse, and on the West Touraine, Orleans
is as well seated as any Town in France, having at the foot of the walls
Loire, which coming out of the mountains of Auuergne passes toward Geuouand.
In this river they take Salmons quick, Plaice, Aloses, and Lampraies, and they
use thereupon great trade of merchandise, Loire^ falls into it, which is a
spring or Fountain, a small league from Orleans upon the side of Oleuet, and
runs not past the length of one league in all, notwithstanding whatsoever
drought it never dries up, neither is it ever frozen, so that when Loir is so
frozen that the milles cannot grind, they have recourse to those of Loiret. The
soil is fruitful and well inhabited, sufficiently provided of corn, as well
of the self growth as from Beausse, their neighbor and the side of Sologne.
Great store of Fish and Foul, but specially of good wines both White and
Claret, for the Orleans wines do bear the name of the being more helthsome,
delicate, and nothing so corrosife as the Gascoigne wines. Their plenty is
such that they send great store to Paris and all other parts of France, also
into other foreign countries. The town stands high, very wholesome, and in a
fine air, and the inhabitants do speak as eloquently for French as do the
Castillians for Spanish, or the Tuscans for Italian.

Unto the Bayliwike of Orleance have recourse Bois commigne, Yeinuille which is
in Beausse, Chasteau Reuard, Yeur the castle, Neusuill at the lodges, Syan,
Montaugis, Loris, Neune upon Loire, Boisgencye.

Baugency.
Baugency upon Loire, one of the delicatest towns of the Realm, as abounding
in wine and corn, beside the pleasure of all sorts of game, as also in respect
of the traffike.

The Forest of Orleans.
The Forest of Orleance is twelve leagues long and feeds an infinite number of
cattle, besides that they there fetch their timber to build with, as also
fuel for the whole country round about.

Melune and the land of Gastine.
Melune.
MElune stands upon Seine, having on the East Bry, on the South Gastine, on
the North that side of Paris that looks to Corbeil, and on the West Beausse:
it is about the 4 degree of the latitude, part thereof stands upon a high
ground, paunching upon which in that place makes an Isle as at Paris, in the
which the Castle stands. The soil is pleasant and fruitful in corn, wine,
wood and fruit, and the river in fish. The Citizens are courteous, active, and
of good capacity.

The Bayliwik and Justice seat of Melune has recourse to the seas of Moret,
Nemours, Chastealoudon, Chapelle la Reyne, Villy in Gastine.

Gastine has on the East Bry and the River of Seyne, Gastine.
on the West Beausse, on the South the Forest of Orleance, and on the North
the land by Chartres, the soil is in many places sandy, and yields but
little. The most famous places are Nemours, Chasteauloudon, Nore^, Ferte,
Fountainbeleau, and an infinite number of Gentlemen's houses.

S. Maturine l'Archant stands in a large, S. Maturine l'Archant.
sandy, dry, and almost barren soil.

Fountainbeleau (the kings mansion) is very well seated. Fou^tainbeleau.
Wood, game, brooks, pooles, rivers, wild-foule, and fish, are plentiful.

Moret a small town upon Loire, Moret.
easy to be fortified, and a reasonable good soil.

Nemours stands also upon Loyre. Nemours.
The duke of Nemours is of the house of Sauoy.

Sens.
SOme men think Sens to be in Burgondie, Sens.
others in Champagne, and some others do think it to be a province of it
self. The territory of Sens has on the East Champagne, on the West Gastine,
on the South the territory of Auxerre, on the North Bry, from the which the
river of Yonne does part it, for the jurisdiction of Sens reaches almost to
Montereau. The town stands upon a hill, and leans over the river of Yonne,
which runs at the foot thereof, large and well ditched, with clear streams
continually running through the streets thereof, which springs out of a Lake
that is without the town, not far from the which there is a Spring whose
water naturally does turn into pommish stones, which be very light and have
correspo^dence with the froth. The country abounds in Corn, delicat wines,
flesh, whit meats, wool, fish, and other commodities: there is also more store
of Oil and Nuts than in any other part of all France, for the whole country
is covered all over with Walnuts, yea all the plain from Meutereau unto Sens,
wherein are sundry towns and villages, fair meadows and good grounds, also on
the other side of Yonne toward Gastine, are many hills, some very high, laden
with vines.

Pont sur Yonne-
Pont sur Yonne a little town, whose inhabitants are nimble, ticklish, and
given to wars.

Villeneuf le Roy.
Villeneuf le Roy the only sea royal, depending upon the Bayliwike of Sens.

The land of Auxerre.
Auxerre.
AVxerre is situate in a most fruitful soil, very pleasauntly upon the river
of Yonne, which dividing it from Burgondie and the territory of Neuers,
comes to wash the lowest part of the town, which beginning in a vale
climbeth up to the top of a hill, whereupon stands the castle, an ancient
thing compassed and fortified with great walls. This town consists of eight
parishes, out of this soil does proceed the most part of the wine that
waters Paris.

Chablis.
Chablis a small town not far from Auxerre.

Champagne.
Champagne.
CHampagne and Bry are herein accounted but for one land, through the which the
river of Marne takes his course, and so at Charenton which is within two small
leagues of Paris, does fall into Seyne. These countries do on the one side of
Marne comprehend these Towns following: Laigny, Meaux, Forcy, Colomiers,
Province, Montereau, Bry County Robert, Nogent* Merye, Troy, Bar upon Seine,
Mussy l'Euesque, Douzenay, Vandoeure, Bar upon Aube, Ferte upon Aube, Pont upon
Seine, S Florentine, Erny the castle, Fonuille, Sedan, Rebel, the land of
Bassignye, the land toward Vitry in Perch, which parts Bar from Champagne,
and France from Lorraine. On the other side are Rheims, Glaye, Gaudelu,
Chasteau-Thierry, Dorma^t, Espernaye, Chalons, Laygny, S. Menehou.

Bry and Champagne have on the East Lorraine and Parre, Brye. Champagne.
on the West France and Hurepoix, from the which Seine does divide them, on
the South Burgondie, and on the North Picardy.

Champagne is a country flat, fruitful, and meet for tillage. Brye is woodie,
but yet in a manner as fruitful as Champagne, the firmament clear, and the
air gentle and temperate, the rivers great, the people active and given to
good husbandry, the Nobility courteous, valiant, and many; the towns
welthy, the villages well inhabited, and to be brief, they want nothing
necessary for man's life: corn, wine, cattle, wood, fruit, game, flight,
fishing, as plentiful as in any other Province of France. Howbeit the people
of Champagne are somewhat teastie and selfwilled.

Troy The chief Town of Champagne, Troy.
stands some 47 degrees and a few minutes from the Equator, being situate
upon the River of Seine. The soil fat and fruitful. The circuit of the walls
the largest in France. It has a Bayliwik and Justice sea, whereunto have
recourse Bar upon Seyn, Mussy l'Euesque, Forest upon Aube, Negent* Pont upon
Seyn, Eruy the castle, S Florentine, all Towns situate in Champagne.

Chastillon stands upon Seyne. Chastillo^.


Bar.
Bar upon Aube is parcel of Bassigny.

Arssy.
Arssy stands also upon Aube.

Bassigny.
Bassigny whereof Charcont is the chief town, it is a town of great resort
standing upon a rock, furnished with a reasonable strong castle. It has no
river to water it, neither any water other than in cesterns, saving one spring
which is beneath the Dogan, Dogan is a Townehouse or a Costomehouse.
nevertheless beneath runs the river of Suize, which takes the head out of
the Fountain of Ormances, and pooles of Maran, within four or five leagues of
Chaumont. Marne which springs out of Marmote near to Langres, runs a good
way from the Town. The chief traffike is cloth both woollen and linen, and
the drapers and weauers are of greatest account among Marchaunts, and are
welthie and rich. The soil is fruitful. To the Bayliwike and Justice sea do
answer the seat of Bar upon Aube. It has also Consular Jurisdiction.

Montirandell.
Montirandell stands upon Marne.

Ieinuille, of the dependence of a yoonger son of the house of Guyse.
Ieinuille.
It is a principality whereupon does depend the Boroughs of Sullye, Douleuant,
Roches, Escairon, with other Castles and Uillages.

Vassy.
Vassy, a royal seat of the inheritance of Guyse, and patrimony of the
Scottish Queen, it stands in the midst of the woods upon a small river
named Bloys, and has goodly fountaynes, of the which one being in the
Hospital of the Dogan, yields such plenty of water in less than 120 paces
it drives sundry milles. Not far from Vassy are the mines of earth whereof
they make that notable Bole Armoniak, that is so greatly esteemed and
transported all over France and other Provinces. Parthois, Parthois.
whereof Vitry is the chief town, lies upon the river of Saux, which coming
from the country of Bar, and springing at Chenets (a strong hold 12 leagues
from Vitry) does within half a league of the said town of Vitry fall into
Marne. The Bayliwike of Vitrie contains between 35 and 40 leagues square,
beginning at S. Disiers upon Marne, and higher on the south, and stretches
Northward to Nogent l'Artant.

Under the same ar comprehended the seats of S. Menehon, Teismes, Passe-avant.
Espernay, Rouueray, and Passe-avant

This town stands upon a hill, having on the east the plain of Parth, on the
west the river of Marne which begins there to carry laden boats, whereby
they transport to Paris al kinds of merchandise, corn, pulse of al sorts, iron,
hemp and other wares, whereof Parth does abound. The country is great, and
every way enclosed with the rivers of Saux and Marne, which makes it almost an
Island, except on the east, where these 2 rivers be 2 leagues asunder, and in
that place stands S. Disier, a fair strong town.

Prouins a bayliwike of the land Bry, Province. Mo^tereau
having under it Sesane, Ley le chastel, Bray upon Seyn, Montereau a town at
the meeting of Seine and Yonne, the castle between two rivers, but ouercrowed
by a high mou^tain whereon the vines grow: on the east it has between the 2
rivers an extent of meadows, drawing toward Trole, on the west Gastine, on the
north Bry, on the south Gastile with the co^fines of Moret. The soil fruitful
in corn, wine, fruit, hay and wood, but especially pleasant for the game,
chiefly on the side that lies to Bry.

Between 2 rivers do lie the villages of Morolles and Molu, Morolles and Molu
whereof Bertra^d of Foessi knight of the order, who is known by the surname of
Genuay, is Lord. On the side of Bry are the villages of Fonges, Celle, Tauers,
Vernon, Valences, whereof the eldest of the Allegrynes of Paris is Lord. They
be now two brothers, William Allegryn Lord of Valences, and Octauian Lord of
Bordes, a Uillage not far from Valences.

Nangis.
Nangis appertains to the Lord of Beauuais.

Blandye.
Blandye, the mansion house of the Duke of Longueuille.

Prouins.
Prouins stands upon a hill, and is built on the point thereof, the river of
Morat watering the foot of the said hill falls near unto Laygny into Marne.
There is small store of wine, whereby the people are forced to furnish
themselves from other places. But the soil yields plenty of Corn,
Pastures, Wood, Springs of clear waters, and especially red Roses, called at
Paris Roses of Prouins, whereof in the said town they make great store of
Conserues.

Colomiers
Colomiers in Bry depends of Meaux.

Meaux.
Meaux stands on a hill in the very fat and fruitfulness of Brye. At the
foot Westward on the side of France it has Marne. This town is divided into
two parts, whereof the town is one, and the market (a very strong place) the
other, and it is a brook that falls from the rock that parts them: the
hold is easy to be fortified, as having nothing to master or overthrow it.

The Bayliwike of Meaux comprehends the seats of Crecy, Colomiers, Ferte
Gauchet. Bryecontyrobert and Torcye do belong to the castle of Paris.

Mo^ceaux.
Monceaux a castle and a house of pleasure, which the Queen mother has built
in the Territory of Meaux.

S. Fiacre.
S. Fiacre a Religious house.

Iouerre and Fermouchier religious of women. Iouerre and Fermouchier. Loygny.
Castle-thierry. Rheims.


Loygny which has a fair Fountain.

Castle-Thierry, a Bayliwike whose vnderbailifs are Chastillon upon Marne,
Ouchy le Chastell, Tressons milly S. Front.

Rheims an University and Bayliwike, comprehending the seats of Chalons,
Veruz, Espernay, Tismes, and the Bayliwike of Sauldron.

Chalons stands upon Marne, Chalons.
bordering Eastward upon Bar, Northward upon Rettell, and Westward upon
Espernay, which also stands upon Marne.

Picardye.
PIcardye has on the East Flanders, Picardye.
from whence the rivers do divide it, on the South Champagne, on the West the
Sea and part of Normandy, and on the North the prospect of Callais and coast of
England. It is watered with the Rivers of Some, Oyse, Ayne, Escaut, Scurpe, and
others. The country is great, and as well inhabited as any other in France.
It is one of the fruitfullest in the world, and a principal storehouse for
Paris, wanting nothing but coin.

It contains these Bishoprikes: Soissons, Senlis, Beauuais, which some count
in France, Noyon, Laon Amiens and Bullogne, in steed of Teruin.

The notablest places are Fere, Gandelu, Villiers Costeruz, Beaumont, Creyl,
and Verbery between Marne and Ayne.

Between Ayne and Oyse are Lyance, Velly, Nato, Riemont, Compegne and Chauny.
Breteuile, Clermont in Beauuais, Mondidier, Pinquignie, Blangis, Abbeuille and
Valerye.

Between Oyse and Some: Veruin, Guise, S. Pelle, Landrecy, Fousome, Bohan, S.
Quintin, Nesle, Roye.

And Some encloseth in Ham, Peronne, Corbye, Dourlens, Rue, Crotoye. Hesdin now
in decay, Renty Montereuil on the Sea, Staples, Bullogne.

Where the land waxes narrow along the coast of the sea, and so forth by the
country of Oyse which comprehends the Towns of Guyne, Ardres, Hames,
Blarues, Callais.

Soissons.
Soissons is in the Bayliwike of Laon.

The territory of Laon is comprised between the rivers of Ayne and Oyse,
whereof Laon is the chief town which stands, it is a bayliwik whereon do
depend Soissons, Noyon, S. Quintin, Riemont, Coucy, Chauny, Guise, Peronne,
Mondidier, Roye.

Lyans.
Lyans or the Lady of Joy, is not far from Laon.

Co^pigne.
Compiegne is in the same quarters.

S. Quintin.
S. Quintin the head town of Vermandois, scituat upon Some, environed with
fennes and meadows is the kay of France. Ham. Chastelot.
Hard by are Ham and Chastelot.

Guise, a Duchy and ancient inheritance of the yoonger sons of Lorraine.
Guyse.


Peronne.
Peronne, a strong town upon Some: Corbye, Roye, Mondidier, Nesle.

The territory of Beauuois whereof is chief:

Beauuais.
Beauuais or Beauuois in a fair seat, having the little fruitful hills on
the one side, with the Meadows and pastures on the other, then the arable
lands and vine groves. The walls thereof well flanqued and rampired, the
ditches deep and large, with sluses to let the water out or in from the brooks
and rivers. The town is one of the greatest and best set out in all France,
so that in beautye of building, strength of rampires, stateliness of Churches,
and pleasantness of feed it is one of the notablest in all France, the
territory for three or four leagues about the town is so full of Buroughs
and great Uillages, that the one is not past half a mile from the other. The
soil yields the finest Flax that may be: especially Bale, a small Town
where the Flemings and Hollanders do resort for those kinds of Flax, whereof
they make there so notable fine linen cloth, which they disperse and sell over
the whole world. In the same soil they dig also a kind of earth (almost as
excellent as that of Venis) to make vessels and pots. But the original of the
cheifest wealth of this town arises of their woollen works, and Diaprie, for
there they make the best Serges in all France, yea such as may compare with
those of Florence. The Stammels also of Beauuais are the finest in France, and
are transported al over France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and Greece.

Clermont in the territory of Beauuais, Clermont Gerberoy, and Beaumont.
a County. Gerberoy a village not far from Beauuais Beaumont upon Oyse, do al
belong to the bishoprik of Beauuais

To the Bailiwike thereof have recourse Compigne, Clermont in Beauuais, Creyl.
The Prouostof Augy, Chaumont in Welxin, Pontoise, Beaumont upon Oise, Cressy,
Ferte milon, Pierrefons, Montmorency, a small town near to Senlis.

Amiens upon Some which does almost compass it about, Amiens.
it has the deepest and the most fearful ditches in France. On the east lies
the land of Artois, on the south Vermandois, on the west Beauuais, and the
frontiers of Norma^die, on the north Dourdens. It is one of the best and
fruitfullest towns in France, in respect whereof, it is exempt of garrison,
for the inhabitants are so valiant, that they are able of themselves to
withstand any adversary, the Mayor and Sherifs have the custody of the Town,
with the charge of the warding, as also nightlye to set watch and Sentinel.

Abbeuille
Abbeuille a strong hold upon Some, in the diocese of Amiens, it is the chief
Town of Pontiew, a country so called in respect of the great number of
bridges therein contained, which proceed of the diversity of brooks that do
fall into the Sea about S. Valeries.

In this country are these towns, Abbeuille, Pequignye, Dourlens, Aury,
Crecy, Rue and Crotoye, whom three brooks do water. Reny and Mutterell are on
the sea, Hesdin and Terwin are decayed, and the Bishoprike of Tirwin is
transported to Bullogne.

S. Omer.
S. Omer, a parcel of the Low country, and subject to the king of Spain, it
is one of the strongest that may be, both by the natural situation and manual
fortification. It stands on the river of Dae, which falls into the sea on
the North side Graueling. On the North lies the country of Oye, on the West
Bullogne, on the South Pontiew and part of Artois, and on the East Flanders.

Oye. Guien. Bullogne.
Oye, Guine, Bullogne, three countries together being limited Eastward with the
territory of Flanders, by the river of Dae, southward with Picardie, and the
Bayliwike of Mutterell, from the which the river of Canche divides Bullogne,
and Westwarde and Northward by the great sea. The whole country comprehends
many towns, villages, borroughs and castles, as Beauquesne, Caerteuil,
Estaples, which stands at the fall of Canche into the Sea, S. Riquier, S.
Iosse, Pont de Bricque and others.

Bullogne.
Bullogne is strong and inexpugnable. It is divided into high Bullonge and base
Bullogne, and is watered with the sea, which is not much more then a hundred
paces from the high Town. High Bullogne is enclosed with strong walls, and
fortifyed with very deep ditches.

Guynes a County, Guynes.
wherein stands the strong Castle of Blannes, the house and hill of
Inglebert, and the town and fort of Guynes, which is divided in two, the one
part standing in the salt Fennes, the other upon firm land, and so strongly as
it seems inexpugnable.

Between Guynes and Ardres also is a very strong Town by the fennes of
Belangen and Andres, with that channel of the Sea that runs unto Guynes,
and parts the country of Oye and Guines, making that country invincible.

In the high country of Guines lies the Haven of Nieullet, Artincourt,
Peuplinge, and others.

Callais is situate fouresquare, Callais.
and is every way terrible, on the North lies Rice-bank upon a point of land
that runs into the Sea, on the West the causey of Nieullet bridge, on the
South the salt washes fleeting from Hammes, on the East the land of Oye and
the downs which stretch even to Graueling.

The land of Oye, so called by reason of a small town of that name therein.

Langres with the remainder of the territories of Champagne.
LAngres, Langres.
a strong town nere the mount Vosegus upon the frontiers of the free county,
which together with part of Bassigny lies on the East side thereof, on the
North that side of the mount Vosegus that breeds Marne, on the West that side
of the same mount from whence Seyne does spring, on the south Bourgondie,
within which Duchy this town is comprehended, but the dependences have their
recourses to Sens.

Vandoeur
Vandoeur, a strong castle in the territory of Langres, near unto the head
of Seyne. These lands do abound in corn, wine, groves, yron-mines, and other
things.

Vignory.
Vignory, a Town standing some quarter of a league from Marne, between two
hills, upon the one whereof stands the Castle.

Montesclair.
Montesclair, a castle three leagues from thence, standing on the top of a
high hill in the country. It has been fortified as being the first front in
France on the side of Lorraine, and at the foot of the same hill is the great
borough of Montesclair, a Castle, three leagues from Rimanont.

Other places. Ioignye, a County. Tonnerre, a County.

Vezelay. Here was the famous Clark Theodore de Bezabotne.
Vezelay and the Castle of Grimont are builte on the top of a hill, along
the foot whereof runs the river of Yonne.

The land of Neuers or Niuernois, a Duchy.
THis country is large, and watered with three nauigable rivers, Neuers.
Yonne, Allier, and Loire: having on the East Burgondie, on the South Bourbon,
on the West Berrie, on the North Gastine and Sologne. The chief town thereof
is Neuers upon Loire. The river of Nyeure runs along the East side of the
walls thereof. It stands upon a hill, round about enclosed with good strong
walls and great towers well ditched, and beautified with a stone bridge of
twenty arches over Loire, watered with diverse fountains, wherewith they may
always fill their ditches. It has no suburbs, and contains ten parishes.
Half a league beneath it Allier falls into Loire, Nyeure does continually
drive iron mils and forges. The country is full of wood and pasture grounds,
so that the people do give themselves much to the breeding of cattle. They
are poor and live miserably, as having no will to labor, except in some few
places between Neuers and Charity. There are toward S. Leonards some Silver
mines which are not much haunted, but the iron mines are well frequented, by
reason there is wood enough, beside they use some stone-cole which they find
near Dezize within 2 leagues of Neuers: they have in the forest free stone to
build with, the best in France, and that they transport to Orleans, Blois, etc.

In the land of Neuers are 11 walled Towns, as Neuers, Dezize, Clamesy, Douzi,
Monluis, Angilberts, Corbigue by S. Leonards, S. Sage, Luizy, Premery, etc.

S Pierre le Monstier, S. Pierre le Monstier.
is of the dependances of Neuers, and a bayliwike whereunto have recourse the
land of Douzye, Xamcoignes, Cusset, the borrough of S. Steven of Neuers. The
rest answers to the prouostship of Neuers, as Charity upon Loire.

There be also other towns as Castlechinon, Lornye, Cosne, which belong part
to the king, and part to the duke of Neuers.

S. Pierre le Monstier stands on Allier, and ioineth upon Bourbo^ and Cosne,
which lies toward Sologne.

The land of Douzy or Douziois, Douzy^
is an addition to Neuers, whereby the duchy contains 30 castelwiks.

Berry.
Berry.
THis country has Loir, Neuers, and Bourbon on the East, on the North Sologne
which the river of great Soudre parts from Berry, on the west Tourain which
the river of Under parts therefro, and on the south the borders of Lymosin,
from which the river of Creuse does divide it.

This land contains many towns, villages, borroughs and hamlets, forests,
hills, brooks, fountaynes, vine grounds, arable lands and pastures, with
great store of cattle, wherewith they traffike throughout all France.

The chief towns are Bourges, Sancerre a county standing upon a hill, with the
river of Loire at the foot thereof. Cosne upon Loire, accounted in the land of
Neuers, but not within the duke of Neuers Lordship. Coucresant and the
castellwike thereupon depending.

Besides the which there are Aubigny upon Nerre, whose Lords are descended of
Berant Steward Lord of Anbig, a Skot well known in the wars of Naples.
Remorenti upon Sousdre, is of the dependances of Blois. Selles in Berry.
Menesto upon Cher. Vierzo^. Dun le Roy upon Aurette. Chasteauneu^ upon Cher.
Boussac, Aigurand, Cluys an ancient house. Arge^ton. Chastre upon Under.
Victow and Berry by the river of Creuze. Blane in Berry which parts Limosin.
Chasteau roux, Buramois, Paluau, Chastillon, upon Under. Preuilly a goodlye
place that parts Limosin from Berry.

Thence returning Southward, are Chasteaumeillant, Limeres, Chaumroux,
Issoudun, on the cheef seat depending upon Bourges.

Bourges does somewhat lean to the side that regards the fennes, Bourges.
the river of Auret runs thorough it. It is one of the greatest towns in
France, and so strong, that it is thought almost impregnable, by reason of the
washes, which rising out of the quick springs, can never be driven nor turned
away they have such gulphs and depths. The great tower is round, from whence
they may see three or four leagues, the walls are three fadome thick, the
outside formed like a painted dyamond. It is also fortified with other towns,
walls, and deep ditches, shaped like an Asses back. The form of the
enclosure of the town resembles a sheep coat, being in compass 4004
fathomes, and fortified with 80 great towers. It has seven gates, seven
canonical Churches, and seventeen parishes. Also the house of James Geur now
belonging to the Lords of Aubespine, the Dutch house, the Sands, otherwise
called the Arenes, in old time an Amphitheatre. It has an University, also a
bayliwike, whereupon do depend the seas of Issoudun, Dun le Roy, Menu upon
Yeure, Contressant.

Under that of Bourges are Sancerre, Sancerre.
a County which comprehends diverse parishes and Castelwikes, also the
Baronage of Mont-faulcon, Mont-faulcon.
which also contains sundry parishes.

Lary a small Town armed with a strong castle, Lary.
with the rivers of Cher and Arnon running along by it.

Issoudun the second royal town of Berry, Issoudun.
strong, well walled and rampired, with a castle standing somewhat above it,
whose walls the river of Cher does wash. It is a welthy town, and of
traffic, containing but two parishes, the soil yeldeth good wine and wool.

Of this sea do depend diverse Castelwikes, as S. Severe a borough, Limeres,
Bausac, Perouse and others that are of the same Lordship.

Of the Bayliwike do depend Chasteauroux, Gracay, Argenton, Chastre,
Chasteaumeillant, Chastelet, Charots, and many others.

Charots.
Charots, a town upon Arnon, between Bourges and Issoudun.

Chasteauroux.
Chasteauroux stands 16 leagues from Bourges, and is scituat upon Under,
near to Blois and Limosin. It has a fair castle, and contains 4 parishes.

Deols.
Deols a fruitful soil in corn and wool, whereof they make great
merchandise, the jurisdiction thereof reaches above 20 leagues about, and
thereof do depend about 120 fiefes or farms. It is now a country belonging to
the Lord d'Aumont.

Argenton
Argenton, a town with a strong castle, armed with ten towers. It stands
upon Creuse, and belongs to the Lord of Monpensier.

Boussac.
Boussac and Perouse, Towns upon the borders of Bourbon and confines of
Limosin, the latter stands in a barren soil.

Chastre.
Chastre a town and castle upon Under near to Limosin. It belongs to the
county of Chasteauroux and to the Lord of Aumont.

Chasteaumeillant.
Chasteaumeillant lies now wast, howbeit there is yet a strong castle.

Dun le Roy.
Dun le Roy, the third royal town of Berry, and royal sea.

Chasteauneuf.
Chasteauneuf upon Cher.

Vierzon, the third royal sea of Berry, in a fair seat by reason of the woods,
Vierzon.
forests, warrens, and the rivers of Cher and Yeure, howbeit the soil is
sandy and more meet for gardens than tilth.

Ametrun upon Yeure, Ametrun
the fourth roial sea of Berry.

Aubigny, Aubigny.
a town.

Coucressant, Coucressant.
a great borrough upon Soudre, with a castle almost impregnable, and of the
fairest and best built in Berry, it is a royal sea. Augilon.

S. Aignan, S. Aigna^.
a County under the walls whereof do run Cher, Soudre and Yeure together,
and do carry reasonable boats.

Lenrous, Lenrous.
a town well walled.

Vatan a town belonging to the Lords of Vatan. Vatan


Tourain.
THe territory of Tourain is not very great, Tourain.
on the west lies Anieou and Poictou, from which Creuse does divide it, on the
South Poictou, along the river of Creuse toward the haven of Piles, also Berry,
on the East Blois and Berry, from which Cher does divide it, on the North Main
and Vandosme, which Loir parts from it.

Towns subject to the jurisdiction and duchy of Tours: Chinon, Lodun, Thouars,
Langers, Amboise, Loche, Chastillo^ upon Under, Montrichard, and others

Tours is one of the welthiest towns in France, Tours.
as well in respect of the fruitfulness of the Soil, which is termed the
garden of France, as through their traffike, especially of silk.

Amboyse, Amboise.
the kings mansion standing upon Loir in the best air and fairest feed in
France.

Montrichard, Montrichard.
situate in a fair plain on the one side, environed with rocks and groves,
on the other side goodly meadows. The river of Cher is a near neighbor unto
it, without the town do appear the houses under ground, and above them the
gardens and vine groves.

Chaumo^t.
Chaumont upon Loir, well seated.

Cormery.
Cormery, an Abbie.

Loches.
Loches, a town and castle upon Under. It has on the East Chastillon upon
Under, on the North Cormery, on the West Beaulieu, which is not past two bow
shot from it. The Castle is such as few places may be compared with it, it
stands upon a rock with one only way to it, and the same defended with a
fair gate, armed with a great Bulwark, strong walls, and double ditches
large and deep, so as no humane strength is able to force it, neither is there
any way to beat it without breaking the Rock which is about 1000 or 1200 paces
long. In our Lady church in the Castle lies fair Agnes, Lady of Beauliew,
her Toombe is of black Marble with her picture lively drawn thereupon. On the
east side of this castle be the manors, which are the Kings lodgings, and
near thereto the lodgings of fair Agnes, which are very stately. These two
together do make but one. There is also a great dongeon which serves for a
prison to such as the king minds to keep very straight, wherein are two iron
cages, the one called Balue cage, because Lewis the eleventh did commit
cardinal Balue to the same. These cages are six foot wide, and eight foot
long, having no more room but for a pallet to lie upon, the grates are of wood
very thick corded on with iron, and the partitions so straight, that a man
cannot put his hand out of them. Loches is a sea royal, depending upon the
justice sea of Tairs. The suburbs are greater than the town.

Paremy, Paremy.
which is not far from Loches, is a castle, and stands upon a hill in a good
air, with a park on the backside that is two leagues compass, and walled
round about, wherein are two fair great pooles, the town is watered with the
river Brignon, the vicountie of Paremy belongs to the house of Voyer.

Lodum, Lodum.
a sea royal between Tonnere and Creuse.

Chinon upon Creuse in a fair and fruitful soil. Chinon.


Touraine has plenty of fruit, Tourayn.
which bearing the name above all other are transported into diverse countries,
also of Corn, Wine, Wood, Game, and wholesome waters. It is greatly
traffiqued, the people courteous, tractable, fair spoken, whereby among all
French speeches that of Touraine is best polished.

Man's stands upon the river of Sarth. Man's.


Main.
THe territory of Mayn is divided, Main.
for Man's and the confines thereof remain in the kings hand, but the town and
duchy of Maine belongs to Charles of Lorraine duke of Guyse.

This country has on the East Perch, on the West Britain, on the South
Anieow, and on the North Normandy. It has three rivers Maynne or Maine,
whereof the town and duchy of Maine which stands thereon do take their
name, Loire which parts Main, Touraine and Vandosme, and Sarth which rises
in the land of Chartres. In this country are two fair Forests, sundry groves
and fair large lands, but more fit for game and breed of Cattle than for
tillage, whereby the country consists both of fat and lean, fruitful and
barren, and many places abounds in wildfoule. The inhabitants are painful,
industrious, not easily deceived, more crafty than their neighbors save in
words, which is repugnant to the Proverb, That one Mauxman is worth a Norman
and a half.

Man's.
Man's is a Bayliwike and Justice sea, whereunto have recourse the Castle of
Loire, Vall, Beaumont, S. Susane, Chasteaugotier, Flesche, Maine, la-Iahais,
Sable and Ferte Bernard. All under one clymat, of like fruitfulness, and of
like liberties and laws.

Aniow.
Anieow
THis country is one of the fruitfullest in France, it is hilly, as being
replenished with risings, and hills, laden with vines, beautified with
forests, groves and vales, flourishing with meadows and lands, the nurses of
cattle; but above all the white wines do bear the name to be the best in the
realm. It has above forty rivers, beside fountaynes, pooles, ponds, washes,
brooks, stews for fish, and other small lakes, besides this region is
moystened under ground with good springs. It has Tourain and Vandosme on the
East, Britain on the West, Poictou on the South, Main and La-Val upon the
North.

Angiers.
Angiers stands upon Mayenne, which runs through it, and is fortified with
a fair and strong castle.

Of the Bayliwike of Angiers do depend the seas of Saumure, Bauge, Beaufort,
Pont de Se, and others.

Rivers in Anieow.
Rivers in Anieow. On the one side of Poictow are Loire, the chief* Viene,
which coming out of Poictow and Limosin falls into Loire, in the Baronage of
Monserean Monserean above Saumeure, a royal see.

Dine which springs near Moncontour, Dine.
falls into Loss of Poictow, and Loss into Thonets, which falls into
Loire near Samur.

Antane, Antane.
whereinto do fall the lakes and pooles of Brissac, whereof Charles of Loss
is County.

Layion runs to Chemille, Layion.
a county depending of the marquisat of Beaupre, and so falls into Loir above
Cassone, which is the B. of Angiers.

Leure falls into Loire beneath S. Florentz. Leure.


Guynet beneath Chant, Ceaux. Guynet.


On the East, Anthyon.
West, and North side. Anthyon beneath Logne, receaueth Latan, which takes the
name of Latan, the Lords whereof do bear the surname of Neaille, also Coesnam
which passing by Bag a town and vnderbayliwike, and by Beawforte an
vnderbayliwike and county, from whence are issued the families of Cauillac and
others, falls into Anthyon, above Audard, which is near the slate quarries,
whereof Anieow is full, as also of white lyme and marble of all colors, and so
finally Anthion falls into Loire, benaeth Angiers above Pont de Se.

Loyr swalloweth Ternaur beneath Lude, Loyr.
a county belonging to Guy of Daillon, Seneschall of Anieow, which runs by
the said Town, and so falls to the Baronie of Flesche, thence to Duretall, a
county belonging to the Lord Frauncis of Speaux, marshall of Vielluille, so to
the castle of Verger, belonging to Peter of Rohan, Prince of Guimenay, also by
Matesilon an ancient house, and finally falls into Sarth, beneath Bryolay,
which appertains to the marquis D'Elboeuf.

Rivers on the east, West and North side of Anieow. Sarth comes out of
Normandy, Sarth.
and runs along the country of Main, runs to S. Nicholas de Sable, a
town and baronage of the Lords of Guyze so to Chasteauneuf a baronage, and so
beneath S. Aubins falls into Mayenne.

Mayenne.
Mayenne springs above Alenson, and so passes through the duchy of Main,
the which belongs to Charles of Lorraine, a yoonger brother of the Guyze, so
to Castelgautier a sea royal, having recourse to Angiers and depending upon
the duchy of Beaumo^t le Voyer which is the king of Nauars, and so passes
close by the castle of Angiers, and within two leagues thereof falls into
Loir, at a place called the mouth of Mayenne. It has diverse other rivers, but
none of any name.

Normandy.
Normandy
NOrmandy has on the East Picardy, and the river of Epte, on the west
Britain, with Cenon a river running from Fougiers, and passing by Pontarson,
and so falling into the sea at S. Nicholas mount, does seperat from it on the
north the Ocean sea, and on the south Main. It is in elevation of the 46 and
47 degree of the North latitude, and so one of the coldest regions in France,
except the country of Oye.

Normandy comprehends seven Bayliwikes, Roan, Caux, Caen, Eureux, Gisors,
Constantine, and Alenson, which now is an Excheker by the favor of Monsieur
the kings late brother.

Roan.
Roan stands upon the banks of Seyn, not far from an arm of the sea, the
flood does almost beat the town walls: with 2 small rivers on the East that
water it, vz. Rober and Aubette, on the North a great plain of medows with
sundry high hills, round about the town there are fair fruitful fields, as the
field of Rohonois, so called of the village of Rohom, one of Neusbury, of old
Wessin and of Caux. It is a merchant town by reason of the river and channel
which is capable of great ships, so that the neighborhood of the sea has made
it so plentiful, that at this day there is no town in Europe more haunted with
merchants, or where the citizens are better seen in traffike, either by sea or
land, either where there are more expert Pilots, or that make greater or longer
voiages than they, as indeed it is a thing almost natural to the Norman. The
fairest houses are the Archbishops lodging, the Abbot of S. Ouins house,
standing in the fairest, best ayred, and eastliest of the town full of fair
gardens. The kings when they come to Roan do ordinarily lodge therein. The old
castle, where in time past the parliament was holden, which now is kept in the
palace. There is also a court of ayds, whereto all the elections of Normandy,
Perch, the prouostship of Chaumont, with the counties of Maigny and Po^toise,
have recourse, the bailiwike and justice sea is usually called the Cohue.. The
stateliest buildings are the Bridge and our Ladychurch, which is armed with
three great Towers.

Eureux a bayliwike and Justice sea depending of Roan, Eureux.
it stands on the river of Iton. On the East it has Seyn, on the West the
territory of Lisieux, on the north the confines of Roan, and on the south
Perch.

It contains sundry towns, as Vernon, Aigle, Passy, Furilles, Conches,
Breteuil, Rogles, Brayn, and Hermonuille.

Lisieux has on the east the land of Eureux, Lisieux.
on the North Auge, on the South Perch and Alenson, on the west the confines of
Seez, the teritorie of Lizieux stretches to the river of Rille, which coming
out of the forest of Aigle, passes under sundry bridges, as Autene, Montfort,
Ponteaudemer, so falls into Seyne at Honflew a coast town, Dyne does also
water it, Lizieux.
and parts it from the territory of Seez. Lizieux, far enough from the sea
between Seez and Verneuil.

Caux.
Caux a reasonable large country, having on the East the territory of
Abbeuille, on the South Beauuais, on the North the Ocean, on the West Seyne,
and part of the territory of Roan.

The notablest towns therein are Gisors, S. Cler upon Epte, Gournay, Aumale, a
Duchy. Pontoise, rather of France than of Caux. Neuf-chatell, a see roial.
Hen, a county of the duke of Nauars heirs. Fescamp an Abbie. S. Valery on the
Sea. S. Valery in Picardy, is upon Some.

Diepe.
Diepe a famous Haven, a strong Town, and of great resort, the inhabitants are
famous on the sea, and do make long and dangerous voiages.

Haure de grace.
Haure de grace, and New haven a war town, which cannot be forced but toward
the old tower, by reason of the river, of the washes, of the flood and ebb,
the Haven is very safe for travelers, and every way opens on the plain,
except one way, where there are diverse small Hills that seem to command it,
but they are all to small purpose.

In the country of Caux, when either Noblemen or yeomen do die, all the
inheritance falls to the eldest, neither can any part thereof be given to the
yoonger, except some pension to maintain them during life, but if they die it
returns again to the eldest, so as the yoonger cannot dispose thereof in any
respect. This law with some small difference is observed through the rest of
all Normandy and Britain.

Seez stands upon the river of Orne, Seez.
which falls into the Ocean beneath Caen. It is a bishoprik which has
jurisdiction over the most part of Alenson and Perch. This country stands in
the midst of Normandy, having on the east Lisieux, on the West Bessine, on
the South Alenson, on the North Caen and Auge. Part of Alenson, a Duchy, now
an Exchequer with right of sovereignty in justice and roialtie. Before time
this duchy had recourse unto Roan, and part to Paris; for the Duchy of
Alencon stretches out to Normandy.

Falaize belongs to the Bishoprike of Seez, Falaize.
and to the Bayliwike of Bayeux.

Bayeux the head town of the land of Bessine, Bayeux.
is near to Seez, which is on the East side thereof, Constantine on the West,
Main on the South, and the confines of Caen on the North. The Bayliwike is
greater than the Bishoprike, as having inrisdiction over the most part of the
Diocese of Seez.

The territory of Bessine is plentiful in Corn and fruit, Bessine.
the river in fish, and the champion in Cattle and pasture.

Bayeux is a Bayliwike and Uicountie, Bayeux.
depending upon the justice sea of Caen. In this Uicountie stands the great
borough of Torigny, a county appertaining unto James of Matignon, who has
three sons, vz. Odel, Lancelot, Charles.

Aure, Aure.
a river that runs not far from Bayeux, it falls under ground at a place
called la Fosse au Souoy, and appears again half a league thence upon the
sea shore. It makes a fair haven called the haven in Bessine.

Argenton
Argenton a town upon Orne, near Hiesmes.

Falaize.
Falaize upon Orne, stands equally distant in the bottom of a valley, being
every way compassed with mountains, the form thereof resembling a long and
narrow ship. It has but three streets, of the which two do run clean through
it from the one end to the other, the castle stands as the stern of the
ship. It is upon a rock and commands all the town. It is armed with deep
ditches, environed with two pooles, and has a great round tower, so high that
it is thought to be the fairest in France, also over against it there is a
rock almost as high as it. It has also a dougan as strong or stronger than
the castle. The town is more inhabited with Gentlemen and Lawyers, than with
Merchants, and to say truth, there is no great trastike, it contains but two
parishes. It stands in a fair and healthsome air, by reason of the meadows
and small hills, which always are green, as also through the infinite number of
fountains that water every part of the soil, whose brooks do wash and
cleanse the Town. They make there the best Knyues in France.

Guybray.
The borrough of Guybray is not far thence, where the Fair of Guybray is
holden at mid-August, with great resort of people and wares.

Arinnes.
Arinnes, a mountain within a league of Falaize toward the West, therein do
breed Hawks and Foul for the game, as Faucons, Sacres, Tircelets,
Sparhawkes, and sometime Eagles, and other foul as well for the game as the
mouth.

Arnes.
Arnes, a village near to Falaise, within 8 or 9 leagues of the Sea, situate
in a plain Champion, naturally very dry, without any river or brook at all,
and yet sometime by conduits underground, the Sea comes in so plentiful, that
it makes a lake or poole, bringing in great store of Fish, and when the Water
is gone again, the place remains dry.

Vire a small town castle and vicountie, Vire.
whereof the territory about it is called Vau de Vire.

Caen upon the river of Orne or Anhie, Caen.
which twice a day is filled, according to the ebb and flood of the sea. It is
next to Roan, and chief of the lower Normandy, and accounted one of the
fairest and plentifullest in France. The river running under S. James bridge,
whereon the Townehouse is builded, upon piles and bending arches, with 4
stages, and 4 towers, and at the four corners divides it into two towns. On
the other side of the Town runs Oudon, and that part ^s best builded and
inhabited of the whole town. It runs through the midst thereof, and
drives diverse milles, then falls into the great river, which embracing the
town, falls at Estreban 3 leagues from the town into the sea, whereby the great
boats have passage, which causes both the country and town to abound in all
sorts of merchandise, wines, fish, and other vittels. The castle stands on
high over the town, upon a rock fortified with a dougan, in the midst
whereof there is a great square Tower of a woonderful height and bigness, at
the four corners flanqued with four great Towers and Ditches, deep and full
to the brim. This Castle has so great a court that therein you may range six
hundred men in Battle raye. And in respect of the importance of the place, it
is usually committed to the custody of great Lords. The late Constable was
Captain thereof, whose room the Marshall D'Anuille now enjoys. At Caen they
have a court of Aids, a Justice sea, and an University, the traffic and the
fruitfulness of the soil are great, and although Normandy yields no Wine,
yet grows there some at Caen that may serve, but at Argences, which is within
three leagues thereof does grow very good, and thence do the inhabitants of
Caen usually furnish themselves.

Aura^ches
Auranches is in the Bayliwike of Constantin, scituat upon the top of a hill
and rock which is very steep and hard to come to on the sea side, standing on
the top of the town walls, they may see above four leagues about upon a white
and sandy ground, whereupon the Sea fleeteth even unto the foot of the rock,
which is a pillar and proppe to the said Town, which the Sea at his full flood
does wash, on the other side they may behold the flat country covered with
groves. From the top of the walls they may also see S. Michaels mount in the
Sea. Auranches is in circuit round, well walled and flanqued, the ditches
large and deep, and the Suburbs greater than the Town.

Constantine.
The land of Constantine has the Sea on the North, the Territory of Seez on
the South, the Bayliwike of Caen on the East, and Britain on the West.

The towns thereof are Carentan, near whereunto is the closet of Constantine,
that abounds in pastures. Valtorgue. S. Lo.

Constances.
Constances, which resembles a champion without walls or enclosure, without
the same on the West side is a fair bridge with many arches, under which
runs a brook, and about it a Fountain conducted in pipes of lead a long
half league into the midst of the Town, which otherwise should want fresh
water, saving that they have a few wells that do somewhat help them.

Villedieu, Villedieu
a commandrie not far thence belonging to the knights of Rhodes.

Hay parsnell. Hay parsnell. Grand ville. Launde Heroult.


Gran-Ville, a Haven town.

Launde Heroult.

This country of Constantine along the sea side is beautified with an infinite
number of castles, and some towns. It has almost an Island which is
unfruitful, called Hague, also all these have recourse to Constances:
Monteburg, an Abbie. Hague. S. Voast, Barsleur, Chierbourg, a town and
castle. Breuall, Briqueber, Hanby, belong to the house of Esconteuil.

The Isles of Constantine, are Gerzaie, Grenezaie, these ysles belong to the
dyoces of Auranches. Sere, which have all forts to withstand rouers.

Constantine is the last Bayliwike in Normandy, Constantine.
having under it the castelwikes of Briquebec, Noyon, S. Sauueur. l'Audebu, Hay
du Puis, Creances, Villedieu.

Normandy is one of the welthiest, Normandy.
goodliest, and mightiest Provinces in France, considering the great number of
towns, buroughs, and Gentry, with the fruitfulness of the soil, and
traffike upon the sea. The Normans are the wariest and subtillest people in
France, hardest to be deceived, great talkers, given to profit, sly, cunning
in plays, shifts, cautels, and circumuentions of cosenage.

Normandy
Normandy abounds in cattle, fish, corn, fruit, trees, especially in Pear
and Appletrees, so as the inhabitants make their drink of those fruits. The
common people for the most part are given to spinning and weauing of cloth,
using little other drink than Perrie and Lider.

Britain.
Britain
Britain by Astronomicall measure lies out 3 degrees and a half, or 4 at
the most, and stands in some 44 or 45 degrees of the latitude, so as the
longest way it is not above 120 French leagues, having on the east Main and
part of Anieow, on the north the Britain Sea and Constantine, on the West the
Occean sea, and on the South Poictow: the whole country is divided into three
languages, whereof every one contains three regions and diocesses, vz. three
speak Britton Brittonant, Cornouaile, S. Paul, alias Leon: Freguier, alias
Landriguet, Qunipercorantin: three for the French Brittons, and speak French,
Dol, R^nes, S. Masco, alias Alet. The other three dioces do speak a mixed
language, sometimes French sometimes Britton when they list, Nantes, Vannes, S.
Briew. Thus are there 9 Bishoprikes in Britain, and on the east the rivers of
Cosnon, Sarth, and do part it from Normandy and Main. Main and Loire from
Anieow.

Dol.
Dol a Bishoprike, sometimes an Archbishoprike.

S. Malo.
S. Malo, alias Alet, a bishoprike not far from Dol.

Caucale.
Caucale, a Haven town.

Co^bourg.
Combourge.

Sa^briard.
Sambriard where they take makrels in May.

Dinant.
Dinant a fair town, the river of Rause runs by it, and not far off
falls into the sea, which makes the town far richer and of greater traffike.

Chasteau-Briant, Chasteau-Briant.
belonging unto the Lords of Montmorency.

Lambales, Lambales
whereof the country is called Lambalois, and depends upon the bishoprike of
S. B^ieu.

Treguier, Treguier
alias Landriguet, Quinp^^, stands upon a point running into the sea, scituat
in the waters, and oftentimes watered with the flood and ebb of the sea,
ships do ariue there to the great commodity of the inhabitants.

Vannes, Vannes.
wherein stands the castle of Hermine.

S. Brieux, S. Brieux
there is a great rock which serves for a harbor to ships against wind and
wether, upon the which stands the castle.

Quintin a town and castle, Quintin.
near whereunto is a forest ten great leagues long.

Iugon, Iugon.
a town near whereto is the forest of Hunandye, also the castle of Corlay
belonging to the Lord of Ton.

Auongour, Auongour. Guimpgand. Lambalois.
a town and ancient house descended of the race of the duke of Britain.
Guimpgand.

Lambalois a land in the marches of S. Brieu, where they make more parchment
than in any country of France, by reason of the plenty of cattle.

Leons, or S. Paul a Bishoprike.

Cornouail, Leons.
a Bishoprike.

Renes the parliament seat for all Britain, Cornouail Renes.
standing on the river of Vilene, not far from Chambourg and Guerch.

Rohan an ancient house. Rohan.


Guymenay, Guymenay.
descended of the marshals of Gye.

Nantes upon Loire, there is a chamber of accounts. Nantes.
In the territory of Nantes are Anc^nys upon Loyre. Clipson, Montagne, on the
coast of Poictow.

Britain
Britain is one of the fruitfullest and goodliest countries in France in
arable land, medows, lands for pasture, forests: traffike upon the sea, salt,
iron, lead, in some places silver mines. There grows also some wine, but it
is but small. The Britains are generally tractable, but those that are nearer
the sea coast are not so courteous as the rest. They are sly and subtle,
though naturally they seem dull and gross. They love their profit, and haunt
tauernes, where they make most of their bargains.

La-Val.
La-Val, an ancient house upon the borders of Britain and Main.

In Britain are also Rieux, Raiz, Blossac, Ponthieure, Vitrye, Fougeres, and
As^erac.

Poictowe.
Poictow.
ON the East it has Berry and Touraine, from which Creuze and Vienne do
separate it, on the South Angolesme and Limosin, on the North Touraine and part
of Britain, and on the West the sea from Creuse to Rouffec in Angolesme,
which is the bounds of Poictow, it is 36 good leagues toward Limosin. It
stands upon the county of Bridiers, which is in the contribution of Poictow,
and on the other side within 3 leagues of Nantes, so as in length, going
overthwart it is above 100 French leagues. This country contains one
thousand two hundred parishes, comprised under three Bishops.

Poictiers.
Poictiers, the chief town, under whose diocese there are ten Abbeys.

Lusson, Lusson.
under the which there are ten Abbeys.

Maillezai, Maillezai.
under the which there are four.

The Isles of Ree and Oleron are also in Poictow.

Poictow has royal towns with Justice seas, Poictiers, Niort, Fontenay,
Mommorillon, Luzignan. Cyuray was lately made a seneschall sea.

The other Towns are, Touars, a neighbor to Touraine and Anieow. S. Maixent.
Partenay, a Uicountie. Chastelleraut a duchy, Nelle, Rochsur-yon, a
principality in the house of Bourbon. Chize, Chaun^quy, Angle, Lussac, Cirnaw,
Bressenire, S. Low, Blanc is of the diocese of Bourges, but of the resort of
Mo^morillon. Gencay, with infinite Castelwikes and Buroughs, as: Chastagneray,
S. Messinin, Plauian, Sables, Aulonne, Mareuille, S. Hermene, Montagu, Coue, a
walled town. Vi^on, an ancient house. Mortemer, Lezay, S. Sauin, Bourgneuf,
Maigne, Vouuent, Neruant, Chefbotonne, Narcillac, Chasteauneuf Dampierre,
Puygurreau, Iarnac, Argenton, Aspremo^t Comiquiers, S. Michail en ^her not
far from the sea. Talmond, a principality belonging to the house of
Trimouille. Mauleon, Mortaign, Tifanges, Essars, Fon-Benist.

To the justice sea of Poictiers are subject the seas of Lusigna^, Chateleraut,
Mommorillon, Dorat which comprehends part of Limosin and part of Berry, the
low marches, Fountenay the County, Nyort, Ciuray, S. Maxent.

In Acquitaine the Captains of Roch-foucaut, Roch-foucaut.
Rochchouart, and Rochchandrye, ever since the gospel was first preached at
Poictiers, do stand upon their guard, as the family of Montmorency do at
Paris, and the house of Senecey in Burgondye.

Rochchouart is a Uicountie in old Poictow. Rochchouart.


Sauray.
Sauray, a town and castle upon the confines of Anieow and Poictow, stands
on a hill between two Rivers, whereto a number of Gentlemen be vassals, the
Lords thereof are issued of the ancient Earls of Poictiers, he that now is
Lord thereof is called Rene de Sanzay, Governor of Nantes, whose children are
Rene Lord of S. Marsant, Coronell of the Ban, and Arrierban also, Christopher,
Charles, Anne.

Clayn.
Clayn, a river running by Poictiers.

The Husbandmen of Poictow are sly, subtle, will deceive a man with prattling
their pedlarly speech, dull witted lubbers, malicious, disloyal, and finally
to be trusted, lovers of brablings and novelties: but such as inhabit the
Towns are utterly of an other disposition, they are tractable, courteous, and
willing to do pleasure, liberal, open without deceit, pleasant, foreseeing,
and such as will not easily be deceived, they know cosenars afar off, they
love knowledge and learning. The Nobility is wary, valiant, and extract from
ancient race. The Soil is good, fat, wealthy, fruitful in Corn, Wine,
Flesh, Fish, Wood, Wool, Flax, Fruit, and game for the Nobility, but
especially about Chasteleraut.

Rochell and the country of Aunys.
Rochell.
ROchell begins at the gate of Marans, and is divided from Poictow by the
Rivers of Seure and of Nyort, and reaches unto S. John d'Angely. On the East
and North lies Poictowe, whereof some think it to be a parcel, on the south
Xantonge, on the West the sea and the Isles of Ree.

Rochell stands upon an edge and goulphe of the Sea, Rochell.
which makes a point therein, it is one of the easiest havens of Xantonge to
ariue at, and the Fortress of the whole country, having the sea upon the one
side, and the washes and fennes upon the other, whereby it is almost impossible
to beat it, it has such strong walls, Rampires, Towers, defenses and ditches,
that there are few Towns in France comparable unto it, either in strength or
wealth, how great soever it be. It is in the 45 degree of the latitude, and
head of the confines thereof and of Aunys, and has recourse to the Parliament
of Paris. It is exempt of all Garrisons, and Citadels, saving of one tower
where the armor of the town is kept. The Mayor and Sherifs have the custody
of the Town, moreover it stands in a fruitful soil.

Xantonge.
XAntonge has on the East Angolesme, Xantonge
on the West the sea, on the North Rochell, on the south the territory of
Bourdeaux.

Xaintes, xaintes.
the chief Town of the country stands upon Charente, which springing at
Carenac that is between Limoges and Angolesme runs to Siuray, Angolesme,
Cognac, Saints and Soubize, where it falls into the sea about some 15
leagues from the head thereof.

Blay, Blay.
which has a Castle several from the Town.

Marenes, Marenes.
where they make their ^ault with the heat of the sun.

Marans.
Marans is a great borrough, fortified with a strong castle, through the
midst thereof there runs a great arm of the sea that makes a haven,
whereby with the help of Seure and of Nyort they may send their merchandise
out of Poictow into al parts of Europe. The Castle cannot bear the Cannon,
but is accessible in Summer, by reason the least warmth lays the Marshes dry.

Pontz.
Pontz stands within four leagues of Saints, and is built like an arch, for
standing upon a small hill it does cover the head and sides thereof, upon the
highest part stands a strong Castle, and in a vallie at the foot thereof
runs Seugue through 3 several channels, the one along the walls, the
second through the midst of the meadows, and the third parts the vplands
from the meadows, and all these arms do gather again together, then they
come at the low town where they make sundry bridges, on the one side of the
mountain it has the groves and woods, on the other the champion where it is
double walled with ditches, full to the tops, except on the river side. It
contains three parishes, it has jurisdiction over 32 Parishes, and has 250
^iefes of Noblemen and Gentlemen that hold thereof.

S. John d'Angely.
S. John d'Angely is one of the greatest and best built towns in Xantonge, and
is reasonably well walled and ditched, it stands in a vallie with an Abbie
that serves it in lieu of a rock and fortress: the river of Bottonne which
springs at Chef-bottonne in the hills of Angolesme, does wash the walls
thereof, on the side of Poictow the country is hilly and of difficult access.

Barbezieux.
Barbezieux is within 9 leagues of Saints, upon the confines of Angolesme,
and is within 5 leagues of the Town of Angolesme, of Congnac, and of Pontz.
The country is fruitful, far from rivers it is but a wild thing and
contains but three parishes, it has a strong castle.

There are also Bourg, Soubize, with other towns and villages. This country is
under the Parliament of Bourdeaux.

Angoumois is the territory of Angolesme. Angoumois.


It has on the East Limosin along the channel of Charenton, on the West
Santonge, which is the whole length thereof, and amounts to 24 leagues, on the
South Perigort and part of Xantonge, on the North Poictow, with a cantle of
Santonge, which is the breadth, and contains sixteen leagues.

The towns are Angolesme, Angolesme.
the Capital Seneschal sea and justice sea depending of the parliament of
Paris. Chasteauneuf, Cognac, seas royal, having recourse to Angolesme,
Auoelerre, Rochfoucault, an ancient house. Morton upon Baudille, belonging to
a younger son of Rochfoucaut. Blanzac, the partition of the Lord of
Marmonstier. Valeois and Nareuille, belong to the house of Nareuille.
Montberon, Boutteuill, to the house of Montmorencye.

Angolesme stands upon a very long promontory between the rivers of Eugeny
and Chare^te, Angolesme.
which do there meet. The flat of this hill is no more than is requisite for
the compass of the town walls, every way environed with a natural rock. The
houses stand out of order, the streets rugged, the walls of several
workmanship, but double on the side of the valley eastward, the ditches also
double because that side seems the weaker, though now the strongest of the
town, it has no gates. The castle and castellet have their issues apart by
themselves. The soil yields store of Corn and good Wine, also Hemp, as
having plenty of water, it is meet for gardens and has store of wood, and
among the rest there lies the forest of Brancone, which contains 14500
acres of land. Near to Angolesme is the head of Townur, within half a league
thereof it falls into Charente. It is so deep a goulph, that there can no
bottom be found thereof, heretofore covered with swannes, and paued with the
best salmon trowts in France. It is supposed to be Baudiat a swift brook,
with so quick a spring that it never dries up, the same coming out of
Lymosin and passing by Noutron loses himself under ground at Marton, which is
within three leagues of his head. The inhabitants of this country are quick
witted, standnig upon their reputation, stout, great boasters, taking small
delight in traffike, living for the most part upon their rents, and
counterfeiting gentry, courteous, etc. The pesaunt dull witted, rude and
clownish, given to toil, testie, meet for wars, yet of very good courage
and bold.

Perigort.
Perigort.
PErigort has some 40 degrees of latitude, and 20 or 20 and a half of
longitude with Limosin, on the East Angolesme, part of Santonge on the West, on
the North Angoumois, wherinto it is entangled, on the south Dordonne, which
divides it from Again, and the land between two seas. It is hilly, stony,
sharp and rough, for the most part full of woods, some of Oak, but the most
of Chestnuts, which they use to fat their swine, also to sell into all parts of
France and Spain. Chestnuts being cut do soon grow again, and bears the
fayrer and better fruit after it is cut at the foot, otherwise it were
impossible to mayntaine so many iron and steel Forges as there are. It has
grain enough to serve the Country, and good Wines, though in some places but
small: the air subtle, healthful, and temperate, so as sildome there is any
plague or contagious disease, whereby the country is woonderfully inhabited.
The men sound, nimble, lusty, strong, and long lived by reason of their
natural sobriety, for they feed little, and use great exercise: they are
affable, courteous, wary, meet for wars, especially the Nobility, whereof
there is store. The women more fair than nice, and good huswiues. This land is
watered with sundry rivers, having on the one side Dordonne, which running out
of Auuergne, runs through Quercy, Again, and Perigort, and so falls into an
arm of the sea beneath Libourne, not far from the castle of Fronsac L'isle
gives the name to a small town in the country, and so runs to Perigueux,
Vezere, Holuezere. Dionne runs to Brancone, B^ndial, to Noutron, and sundry
other brooks that stand the country in great steed for their iron forges,
shouell makers, brasiers, also for their corn and paper-milles. It has also
diverse fountaynes, whereof some are medicinable and hot. Near to the borough
of Marsac there is one which has his ebb and floode, as the arm of the sea
at Bourdeaux, and yet it is two long leagues from thence. Also near to Liude a
small town upon Dordonne, there rises one out of a square Tower which with
his spring does continually drive two milles. Near to Miremont there is a
cave named Cluseau, that runs 5 or 6 leagues under ground, and has fair
rooms paued after the Antique fashion, some altars and paintings, diverse
fountains and brooks, especially one, which being 120 foot broad, is both
swift and deep. Perigort has as many simples as either Italy or Greece, also
Capilaray of all sorts. Concerning minerals about Noutron, there are great
siluered crustes, also stone like unto same, which the Latins do call lapis
Azuli, upon a rock four leagues from Perigueux there is red earth, of the
same color, virtue and effects, as Bolus Armoniacus, and from that mine they
do fetch into sundry parts.

The towns are Perigueux, Sarlar, a bishoprike, Bergerat, both seas royal,
having recourse to Perigueux. Lyude, Miremont, Mussidan, Lisse, Riberac, an
ancient house and Uicountie. Aubeter is of Angolesme, but in the diocese of
Perigueux. Noutron a town and castle, an impregnable fortress. Branconne, a
small town upon Drone, in a fat and fruitful soil, with one of the fairest
Abbeys in Guyen: therein Limel stands on a rock, the Lords thereof are come
of the house of Touraine.

Perigeux
Perigueux stands almost in the midst of the country in a plain, every
way environed with hills and mountains, which nevertheless cannot command it,
and they are covered with vines, yelding reasonable good wine: within 50 fathom
of the city is algrotte toward Vizone, which is 100 foot high without
appearance either of door or window, and the entry into it is under ground,
and near thereunto are the ruins of an Amphitheatre, wherein do yet remain
the cages wherein the wild beasts were shut up for the combats and punishmente
of condemned persons. Perigueux is separat into two parts, whereof the city is
walled, and contains not past 8 acres of land at the most within his circuit,
and is a Bishoprike. The town stands 150 paces from the city, contains
some 14 acres of land. It is very close, well inhabited, and in a small ground
comprehends much building. It is a justice sea of the parliament of Guyenne,
they use much traffike and mechanical sciences.

Limosin or the territory of Limoges.
LImosin stands in the 45 and a half degree of the North latitude having on
the East Berry and Auuergne, Limosin.
on the west Angolesme and Poictow, on the North Poictow and Berry, on the
south Perigort. It has 2 bishoprikes, and is divided into high and low
Limosin, and yet is but one government and seneschall sea, depending on the
parliament of Paris.

The brook of Bredasque with high Vezere, and the march land does part high
Limosin from the low, and the longest way it is 40 French leagues long: this
high country is watered with Vienne, which falls out of the mountains of
Ville. Vannes runs to Limoges, so through Angolesme and Poictow to
Chastelleraut, and thence into Loyre High Vezere springs out of the pooles of
Forsac, near to Masseres, and so runs into Perigort. This country being so
waterish, has plenty of cattle.

Limoges is the capital town thereof, Limoges.
standing part in a vallie, vz on the side of Vienne, and part on the top of a
small hill. It is more long than it is large, well walled and ditched. At the
top of the Town it has a fountain wherewith they water their houses and
cleanse the streets. It is a vicountie belonging to the king of Navarre. It
has consular Justice by reason of traffike, which is so great as it seems
impossible, considering how far the sea is off, as also all passages, and
beside has never a river nauigable. The very meanest will be a merchant: the
men are active, the women painful, fair, and charitable, not greatly
delighting in decking up themselves.

High Limosin.
High Limosin is almost barren, howbeit it has some corn, namely Rye, Barlie,
Tares, Chestnuts, and plenty of Radishes. The wine about Limoges is green and
nothing pleasant, bread, flesh, fruit, wildfoule and venison are reasonable
cheap, and it is good living at Limoges, or there about, because the
inhabitants are sober and content with a little, and drink little wine, except
it be in the towns: they detest licourishnesse, and are healthful, lusty,
strong, and good husbands. In some villages you shall have one family wherein
an old man shall see his children to the fourth generation, and without
dispensation they may marry together and dwell together without parting of
goods, yea there is some one family of above a hundred persons, all being
kinsfolks, which live together and have al their goods common as it were in a
college.

The rest of the Towns in high Limosin are: S. Irier, Perch a sea royal upon
the confines of Angolesme and Limosin. S. Iunien upon Vienne. S. Leonard a
town and abbie. Saloignac, Souterraine, Beneuent, Pierrebuffier, a great
borough commanded by sundry hills, which being full of Uines stretch to the
gates of Limoges. Chaslus, where there are great Faires kept for great horse
and cattle. Grammont an Abbie and chief of that order.

Ancient houses, Pierrebuffier, Chasteauneuf, Rochchouart. Cars, a county
from whence is sprung that of Vaugnyon. Maignac bears the surname of
Neusuille, they be diverse brothers, of whom the eldest is Lord of Maignac.

Low Limosin is almost as large as the high, Low Limosin.
it contains the county of Ventadour: T^ne^, Canbort, Uicounties which
contain much lands, and many other small towns.

It is watered with Dordonne, which running along the confines of Perigort
parts it from Auuergne. Vezere, which falling to Ruff^gnac and Vzarch falls
into Perigort. Coreze, which falling from the hills of Mon^idier, runs to
Tulle and Bryne le galiard, and thence falls into Vezere.

It has but three towns worth the speaking of, vz. Tulle, Perch Bryne, all
three royal towns.

Tulle, Tulle.
a Bailiwike and Bishoprike, it passes the rest of the Towns of this low
country in wealth and traffike. The inhabitants are paynfull, subtle, very
crafty, and love brablings. It stands between two mountains in a rough
ground, for the whole country is hillic and crooked, nevertheless fruitful
in vines and walnuts, out of the oil whereof they reap great profit.

Vzarch is fair, Vzarch.
pleasant, and in a good air, it stands upon Vezere (a swift stream, and
not to be waded over during the raynes. The situation is such as it seems
impregnable, being round about environed with waters, having only 2 ways to
come to it. The soil is fruitful in Corn, Wine, and chestnuts, and the
rivers in Fish. The townsmen love weapons, are warlike, and care not for
traffike.

Bryues.
Bryues stands in a fair champion, with wood, wine, arable and meadow
sufficient, were it not the Bishoprike, it would be no great matter, for the
inhabitaunts are not much given to travel.

Other Towns, Treignac, Douzenac, Alassac, Beaulieu, Neissac, Vslet. S. Angel
and others, al standing in a fair and fruitful soil.

Ancient houses, Ventadour, Combort, Turenne, Pompadour, Neaumont, Ruffignac,
the houses of S. Jacob, and others: much Nobility, wealthy and valiant.

The Limosin is grave wary, ripe, wise, subtle, and crafty, not too hasty in
his doings, diligent and painful, ready enough to do pleasure, niggardly and
slouenly at home. The gentry are most hardy and valiant, and the citizens are
more civil than the clownes.

Auuergne.
Auuergne
AVuergne stands in the 44 degree and a half of the North latitude, having
on the East Forest and Lions, on the South Velay and Geuoudan, on the North
Bourbon and la March, on the West high Limosin, there is also high Auuergne and
base Auuergne, which is the same that stands in the champion and plain named
Limagne, by reason of the river Lamone or Lymone, which falls from the
mountains into Limagne, and so takes his course toward S. Flour, Nochers, S.
Amaw, and S. Saturnine, from whence it falls into Allier, it is the fruit
fullest place of Auuergne, and in deed has always bin accounted the chief,
besides that, Clermont which is the capital of the country stands therein,
near whereunto there are vaults under the ground whereby a man may walk well
a league under ground.

Clermont stands at the end of the plain country, (...)
which ends at the foot of the mountain of Dome, upon a hill every way (...)
with (...) full final hills, from whence sundry brooks and fountains do
fall, the streets, houses and buildings are of little cost, and seem as they
had been made in have. Before the (...) stands one of the fairest fountains
in France, which is brought by pipes under the ground^ (...) a place called
^^on. The town is n^w (...) good (...) strong wais and diverse towers without
the (...) stands the Abbie of ^ Allier, through the (...) runs a stream
named F^^^^^^ne whereupon stands the bridge of L^ which is of (...) of the
water of a fountain which (...) stone: this fountain (...) river, whereto as
(...)wherethrough it passes (...). The bridge is 10 fathom long, 6 fathom
thick and 8 fathom wide. (...) Clermont there is a fountain whose water
tastes as (...), but (...) to drink. There is also (...)

(...) Combrailes, Montagri, Aigues perses, Clermo^t, Monpensier, it is the
second of the country, and is wealthy and rich, standing in the fat of the
country.

Montserrant.
Montserrant, the chief of Lymagne. It is one of the fairest towns in
Auuergne, and enriched with the court of generalles.

There are also other towns, as Billon, Issoire, Briond, Tusonne, Langeac, S.
Germain, Lambron, Aigues-perses, Eusureule, S. Porsain, besides many other
towns, buroughs, villages and castles, belonging to diverse great Lords, as
Montagu, Montmorin, Montgazon, Antregues, Cuseron, Rundan, Montpensier, Rauil,
Fontauiles.

Limagne
Limagne is 20 leagues long from old Bryond unto Ganat or S. Porsain, and eight
leagues broad from the mount of Puy de Doyne unto Tier a wealthye town. All
the soil is fruitful in corn, wine, wood, meadows, fountains, rivers, whot
bathes, saffron, silver mines, and all sorts of merchandise. The spring of
Allier is 4 leagues beneath Bryond, it runs by Vsson, where is a goodly mine
of gold and azure, thence to Pont de Chaldam, a small Town where it begins
to carry boats so to S. Pisain the least town of Lymagne.

High Auuergne.
High Auuergne consists in mountayns, having on the East Velay, on the West
Quercy, on the south Rouergue, on the North Lymagne, S. Flour is the head Town
thereof standing upon a high Rock, which seems to be hewn plumb down with
the chisell, it is a wealthy town and bishops sea.

Orillac.
Orillac the second of high Auuergne, a bayliwike and justice sea, whereupon
do depend the seas of S Flour, Carlat, Morat, and others, which have no other
traffike tha^ such cattle as they are able to feed, although in diverse soyles
of the towns aforesaid there be plenty of grain of all sorts, because al
Auuergne is of it self fruitful, except on the side where the vines cannot
prosper by reason of the height of the hills, which are always covered with
snow, and yet are always very profitable, in respect of their pastures and
cheese.

Other notable places of Auuergne: Pontgibaut. Rore.
Pongibaut, a small Town 4 leagues from Clermont. Rore, a village near to
Pontgibaut, both appertaining to the Lord of Fayet. There is a silver mine
which by the kings leave the said Lord has caused to be serched with profit.

Dome-hill, Dome-hill.
a league from Clermont, it is pleasant and one of the highest in France,
fruitful in pastures and simples.

Cosme-hill, Cosme-hil
which is laden with trees and pastures, near whereunto in a place called
Cherre, is a fountain which in the greatest heat of summer is all frozen and
full of yse, and in the winter and coldest time does thaw, yielding smoke as
out of a furnace.

The golden hille is a good league high, Golden hille.
and has plenty of pasture and springs which make the head of Dordonne. It
has also bathes both hot, lukewarm and cold, whereby yearly diverse
diseased persons do by washing themselves find ease.

There is also Besse, Besse.
a Town standing near to the hill of gold or D'or, within a quarter of a
league whereof there is a great lake, almost on the top of a hill, of which
lake there can no bottom be found, neither can it be perceived that any
other water has recourse thereunto, and if any do cast any stone thereinto,
let him assure himself of thunder, lightning, hail, and rain.

Creux de Soultis.
Not far from this lake there is a goulph called Creux de Soultis wherinto
casting a stone you shall hear a most wonderful noise and roaring, which also
in su^mer it makes though nothing be cast therein. Near to the town of V^chy
is a fountain of hot water, which causes that near thereunto be soueraign
bathes for such as will bath themselves therein in April, May and September. At
Chaudes-Aigues, a strong place about 8 or 9 leagues from S. Flour are many
bathes wherein men do find great ease.

Bourbon and the Territory thereof called Bourbonois.
Bourbon.
BOurbon has on the North Niuernois or the land of Neuers. It is a sea royal,
and Iustice-sea for the seneschalcie of Bourbonois.

^^^rre le ^^stier.
S. Pierre le Moustier is also comprehended therein. It is a town and justice
seat whereto have recourse Douziois, or the land of Douzy; Xaincois, or the land
of Xantonge; Cussell, and others that are part in Varennes, and part in
Auuergne.

Bourbon.
Bourbon, a town standing between Allier and Cher.

Loire.
Loir passes through this country.

Forest.
Forest.
FOrest takes the name of the woods and groves therein growing, and has some
good towns.

The soil is fruitful, and the inhabitants very good husbands, subtle, and
given to take great pains.

Treues, Metz, and the country of Messine.
TReues is wealthy by reason of the commerce which Mosselle (whereof it
stands) does procure. Treues.
The Archbishop is one of the electors.

Metz has Treues on the North, Metz.
Thoulon on the south, and Verdune on the west. It is a fair and strong town
by reason of Mostelle and Seilles, that do run through it, and has nothing to
command it but the Citadell. There they plead not by any written law, but
custom only takes place, so that for the most part the judges are men of
occupation, and none but the only president for the laws does in sovereignty
judge and determine the appeals, which were wont to go to the imperial
chamber of Spires. The soil is fruitful and plentiful in corn wine, flesh,
fish, hay, sault, wood, and mineralles, whereby they stand not greatly in
need of their neighbors. The people are somewhat dull and rude, smelling of
the Dutchmens manner of life, many of them speak both French and Dutch: they
are valiant, strong, painful, simple, and not very greedy of learning.

Verdune a welthy town and second in Messine, Verdune.
it stands on a hill along the river of Meuse.

Thoul upon Moselle, Thoul.
stands beneth Ponta Musson, in a fat and fruitful soil.

Bourgondy.
BOurgo^dy has on the north Cha^pagne and the land of Auxerre, Bourg^^y
on the west Niuernois, on the south Biauiolis and Lion, on the east Saone,
which divides at from the Franch county and Bresse.

Diion
Dijon the head town, situate almost upon the frontiers in a fair champion,
coasted with a mountain which yields the best vines in France, that are
planted upon the sides thereof. This town is 66 leagues from Paris, and 33
from Lions. On the south the river of Ousch does water it, on the north the
brook Suzon. It is strong by nature, but made by handiworke in respect of such
great bulwarks and fortification. It has a castle that stands for a
citadell.

To the parliament of Dijon do resort the Bayliwiks of Dijon, Autun, Chalon,
Aysie, the mou^tains that are simply of the body of the estates: the lands laid
to the^ are Mascon, Charrolois, Auxerre, Auxone a Uicountie, these have
particular estates: Noyers, and Bar upon Seyn have no estates but of the kings
elect, and officers who make the departiments.

The Bailie of Dijon has under him four seas, whose appeals are immediately
brought to the parliament. At Digeon also there is a chamber of accounts.
Beaune, Nuiz, Aussonne, S. John de Laune.

Talant.
Near to Dijon is Talant, a marvelous strong town upon a hill, and Fountain
a village where S. Barnard was borne. Dijon is but smally traffiked and
standing at the least six leagues from any nauigable river, besides that the
soil yields no more vittels but for the sustinaunce of the inhabitants,
neither is it wealthy, and few strangers do haunt it, only the inhabitants
thereabouts have recourse thither for their business and administration of law,
they are also more perfect and have less corruption then such as dwell in towns
of great resort of strangers. They love well, and haunt one another, are easy
to be acquainted with, hard of capacity, and so obstinate, that it is hard to
turn them from any thing that once they have printed in their minds: the
women gallant and bravely adorned, the commons given to labor, especially to
the tilth of vines, they are valiant, bold, and such as will not be dealt with,
but to others cost.

Beaune stands in a plain Champion near to the mountain in a fat and
fruitful soil, Beaune.
chiefly for wines which are esteemed the best in France. It has a lake at
hand wherewith the town may arm her self making the enemies lets. It is strong
and closed with good walls, well ditched and rampired with a strong castle,
the air temperate and healthsome, waters plenty, whereof they have two springs,
the one enters into the Town, where it runs like a river, the other
falls into the ditches and inuironeth the circuit of the walls, both of them
do drive milles. The hospital resembles rather a kings palace than a
hospital for the poor, and therein all kinds of diseased are harbored and
cured, except of leprosy and French pox. The chief inhabitants are Lawiers,
the merchants and poorer sort are given to tilth of their vines, also to making
of drapery and cloth of flax and hemp, whereof they have plenty.

Cisteaux an Abbie standing in a great and dark wood. Cisteaux.
The Abbot is as it were metropolitan over 1800 monasteries of men, and as
many of women.

Authunois or the land of Authune. Authunois.


Autune, Autun^
the head town thereof stands at the foot of the mount called Conis, and is
watered with the river Aron, it is wide, scattering, and without bridges saving
in the Castle, and in the Fort called Merchant beneath the Castle.

Under this Baylewicke are contained three other, viz. Montenis, Bourbenancy,
Semur in Brianois.

Auxerois and the land of Auxerre.
Auxerois.
AVxerois is hilly, but fruitful, having no hill but is laden with Uines and
arable grounds.

It yields the best wine in Burgondy: It has plenty of Woods and Groves,
also of Cattle and Wool, whereof they make merchandise. It has on the east,
the territory of Dijon: on the south, Autune, on the west, Niuernois, and on
the north Auxerre, and the mountain: It contains 20. leagues in length, and
almost as many in breadth, and has diverse towns, as Semur, Aualon, Aisay le
duc, Noyers, Sauliew, Flauigny, Moubar, Viteaux, Rauieres, Mont S. John
villages, as Moustier sur Ion, with other Castles and Uillages: Missery, Thoi^y
l'Euesque, Montigni, upon Ormensac, Saum^iz le duc, Bourbilly, Espoisses,
Baigny and others.

Auxerois
Auxerois is a bailewick, whereof Semur is chief: but it has been divided into
other seas, as Aualon, Aysay le Duc.

Semur.
Semur is capital of Auxerois, and standing in the midst of the Country is
environed with hills every way, saving toward the East it has in the compass
thereof three enclosures, but so joined together that a man would not take them
all to be but one town. The first enclosure is called the Borough, and is the
greatest and most inhabited, and that of the nether front: The second is the
dougan which serves as a circle to the whole town. It is a strong thing
standing between the Castle and the Borough, armed with Cartines, and has on
the outside great, thick, and marvelous high towers, which on the inside are
filled with earth up to the loopholes: It stands on a rock whereto there is
no access, and round about it environed with the river of Ormenson: It is 120.
paces long, and 50. paces broad. The third is the Castle founded upon a rock,
which although it be very high, has nevertheless two wells, whereof the
deepest is not above 30. foot deep. The people are gentle, quiet, courteous,
charitable, one loving another, and living in good concord together, and do
delight in strangers: they have plenty of Uines, Uiolets, and Giroflowers, the
dellicatest and sweetest in France.

Flauigny a town near to the mount of Auxerois, Flauigny
at the foot whereof stands Alise, a village where sometime was Alexia.

Chalons, or, Chalonois.
CHalons the capital town stands upon Saone. Chalons.
The compass of the Walls resembles ascutchion: It is fortefied with a
Citadell.

Senecey the first Barronage of Burgondy is not far from it, Senecey.
and is in the possession of the Lords of Bausremont. The Castle is one of the
strongest in Burgondy, standing on a great plain upon the way from Diion to
Lions: the soil is plentiful in fruit, wine, poulse, wood and pooles. It
stands not above a league from Saone.

Bausremont a barrony in Lorayne.

Tournes between Chalons and Mascon, Bausremont. Tournes.
a small Town, more long than wide. It stands in a fruitful soil, and good
easterly air, well flanqued with Saone: it is of the dioces of Chalons, but of
the bayliwike of Mascon.

Mascon or Masconois.
Masconois.
MAsconois has on the East Saone and Bresse, on the west Forest, on the north
Charolois, a country in the king of Spaines hands, but of the jurisdiction of
France, on the South is Blauiolois.

Mascon.
Mascon, a country standing along Saone, and almost of the same proportion.
Concerning Saone, it falls out of the mount Vosegus, divides the duchy of
Bourgondy from the franche county, and with a soft course runs southward,
and falls into Rhosne beneath Lions.

Lions, Forest, and Biauiolois, which have recourse to Paris.
Lionois.
LIonois, or the Territory of Lions, has on the north Bresse, on the East
Sauoy, on the South Dauphine and Languedocke, and on the West Forest and
Auuergne.

Lions.
Lions is one of the greatest, welthiest, fairest, and stateliest towns in
France, standing upon the confluence of Saone and Rhosne, a river descending
from the Alps, and running through the lake of Lausanne, and without mixture
falls down to Lions, where it receaueth Saone. These two great rivers make
the seat of Lions pleasant, and the country welthy through the great plentye
of merchandise conuaied upon the same. Two mountains do fortify it, and man's
hand has made it impregnable: there resort merchants out of all Europe,
whereby the exchange is greatly exercised there: it is a justice sea whereon
do depend Lionois, Masconois, Forest, Beauiolois.

Domees, Domees.
a hilly soil near to Lions, it is a sovereignty appertaining to the Lord of
Monpensier.

Forest.
FOrest has on the East Biauiolois, Forest.
on the West Auuergne, on the north Bourbonois, on the south Velay. It
comprehends 40 walled towns, and 37 buroughs: Montbrisson.
the chief Towns, Montbrisson, the capital and sea of the bayliwike,
answerable to the justice sea of Lions.

Ieures upon Loire. Ieures.


S Steven of Turan, S. Steven.
where they make the armor and sire pieces that are used through the realm,
by reason of the commodity of the water, which makes good trempe, and the
mines of natural and earth cole the belt in France.

S. Galmier. S. Galmier.


S. Germain le vall, standing in a good and fruitful soil for wines. S.
Germain le vall.


S Bouer, the castle where they make the most and best clothworkers sheeres in
Europe, whereof they have great vent. S. Bouet.


Rouane, Rouane.
one of the best towns in the country, and standing upon the passage of Lions
and Loir. There is no bridge over hereabout, but that of S. Rombert, which is
the first bridge over Loire, from the spring thereof.

The country has no more corn or wine but for their own provision, but plenty
of cattle and forests of fur, the people simple, subtle, wary, using great
words and loving gain.

The principal houses are Versse, an old Castle standing so high as it may be
seen all over the country: Cosan which is of the house of Leuy.

Dauphine.
Dauphine.
DAuphine has on the North Lionois, and on the one side lies the low Country
of Dauphine: whereof Vienne an Archbishopricke is capital: on the west Rhosne,
which parts it from Lionois, Viuaretz and Velay: on the East Sauoy, on the
South Province, and this part is called high Dauphine, whereof Embrun is
capital. This country lies in length from the 43. degree of the latitude unto
about the 45. and from Durance unto Rhosne, wherewith it is watered, as also
with Drosine, Isere and others.

High Dauphine.
High Dauphine has Embrun, an Archbishopricke: and these towns, Valence, Gap,
Dye, S. Paul, Bishoprics.

The low Country has Grenoble, the capital and parliament of the country.
Vienne an Archbishopric, Romans, Crest, S. Antony of Vienne, S. Vallier,
Cost, Moustier, Chasteau Dauphine, Briancon standing in the hills whereof all
the country does take the name. Montelimart famous for the trafique there. Tiny
upon Rosne pertaining to the Lord of Tournon.

The people are valiant, and constant in their dealinges, careful to keep
their own, dull witted, smelling somewhat of hilly rudeness: and although
among the clownes there appear a certain wild barbarousnesse: yet are the
gentry and Burgesses of towns, courteous, sociable, quick witted, free in
speech, sildome dissemblers, high minded, capable of reason, and such as will
easily be moved. The soil in some places is very fruitful in corn and wine,
in other places barren saving for chestnuts and marons whereof they have store,
as also of cattle and vittels, both good, and reasonable cheap, whereof they
may also spare for their neighbors.

Grenoble stands on the frontiers of Sauoy and river of Isere, Grenoble.
and is capital and parliament of Dauphine. It is in a fat and fruitful soil,
and by little and little adioining to the foot of the hills, stretches
eastward, whereof the soil is also round about the town and is so fat that
the country passes in fruitfulness and abundance of things necessary for
man's life. Isere a river springing out of the tops of the Alps on the east
side thereof, and violentlye passing along the country of Torrentuise, and
Morienne, waters and washes Dauphine, and so falls into Rhosne between
Tiny and Valence, on the north part it has a fair bridge of Isere, and on the
south side runs Drac a fierce brook, which not far from Grenoble falls
into Isere. On the same side is the flaming fountain which boileth
continually, and burns whatsoever comes near it. On the side of S.
Laurence suburbs the country begins to be hilly, and thence do appear the
high hills covered with vines, and yields the best wine in all Gaul
Narbonense: on the tops of those hills is the great charterhouse, chief of all that order, also on the one side is the excellent vinegrounde of Challemont. At
Grenoble they have also a chamber of accounts.

Romans stands upon Isere, Romans.
and is one of the fairest and welthiest towns in the country.

Viennois.
Viennois a county having on the East side Sauoy on the West Rhosne, on the
North Lionois, on the south Valentinois. Vienne is head thereof.

Valentinois.
Valentinois has on the North Viennois, on the south Auignon, on the East high
Dauphine, on the west Rosne and Viuarets, the soil is fruitful.

Valence.
Valence, the head town thereof stands along Rhosne, having on the east the
fountains of Charon which are so vaulted that a man may go upright under them,
of the one of the^ there can neither head nor spring be found. The town is
wealthy and of trafike, within a league thereof Isere falls into Rhosne at a
place called Consolans. It is walled with two strong walls, and flanqued with
sundry towers equally distant each from other. It has a justice sea an
university, and a storehouse of salt.

Embron.
Embron stands in the mountains of Dauphine, upon the confines and passage
of Italy, and so bounded that in a half a day a man may from it enter into the
county of Nice, in a small time into Piemont, and in less than 2 hours into
Province. It stands on a rock in the midst of a pleasant vallie, so as
from the town one may see all the field round about, and the meadow wherethrough
Durance does run. It is every way environed with mountains, that from the top
to the feet do abound in corn, wine and fruit, and in diverse places the air is
so mild and temperat, that they gather there as good and delicate manna as any
in the world. These hills do also yield Agarike, Turpentine and other
simples. The town contains 7 parishes. There is a Forte on the rock which
is formed like a terrasse or platform, being thirty fathom high, and so
steep as it were hewn, and cannot be mined, scaled, surprised or forced by
assault, the rest is well walled and flanqued. It has five gates, the waters of
the fountains have their springs in the town it self. It is a bayliwike and
justice sea of the dependence of Grenoble. The inhabitaunts of Embron are
courteous, obedient, peaceable, no quarrellers, nor deceitful, given to labor
the earth, and careful of their husbandry.

The ancient houses of Dauphine: Bressieux, Boutieres, S. Vallier, Nauigeron,
Gordes, Clauezon, and others. The knight Bayard also was thereof, and issued of
the house of Terrail.

Province.
Province is divided from Italy by the River of Var and stands in the 40
degree of the North latitude, Province.
and so subject to much imtemperate air, for the heat is there greater than
in any other part of France. In plenty of corn the I Will of France cannot
surpass the fields of Arles, which lie after the manner of a tongue of earth,
and a champion enclosed with 2 arms and channels of the river of Rhosne,
containing 7 Province leagues, as long as twelve of France: the plain of S.
Chaumur, Miramon, Senai, and Melemort to Ourdan and Ardage, and so toward the
river of Durance, is comparable to Beausse: and that which lies from Ourgen
unto Aix and Marseilles, and so to Yerres, Frein and Antibe, unto the river of
Var, which divides Province from the Duke of Sauoys land, throughout the whole
extent thereof is replenished with store of fruit and sweet trees as Orrenge,
citron, olive, pomgranate and quince. The soil covered with rosemary, mirtles,
iunipers, and other sweet shrubs. They have also Palm trees which bear very
good fruit, and in manner as great as those of Affrike, near to Yerre they
have planted sugar canes, whereof they hope for profit, for the soil is very
good. Also Rosine, Rue and wood are plentiful in many places, oil of Olives
the best in Europe, they do moreover gather Manna there. In Province the high
country and havens do resemble Normandy, as at Escales, Seyne, Cohuars,
Castelnaw, and other grounds that bear no vines, but are replenished with
apple, pear, chestnut and walnut, and other such trees as rejoice in cold
soil, for one side of Province by reason of the mountains whereupon the same
lies all the year long is very cold, but plentiful in cattle. They also make
cheese but of sheep and goats milk only. The land of Ryes and the country
that stretches out unto Moustier, Draguignon, Lirques, Terealquier, Oigne,
Valla^solle, have resembla^ce to the soil of Brye and France, for the seasons
are more backward, as standing in a more cold and temperat an air than the
other parts of Province, whereby their harvest is longer out by 15 days or 3
weeks than in other places, neither are their wines so strong and forcible as
those that grow about Arles, Salo^, Aix, or Marseilles: besides that their
vintage agree with the season in France. Those few forests and groves that
they have, do for the most part consist of oaks and Pinetrees, as well male
which yields Rosine, as female that brings forth the pyneapples and
kyrnels which are good to be eaten with their Almo^s. Also in some places
namelye in the mountains of Lestent, which are between Treyn and Antibe they
have Cork trees. They have likewise goodly salt pits, as at Berre, Yerres,
also at the poole of Valence out of the which at that time of the year that
the salt is baked and hardened, it is not possible for ten thousand men to draw
it clean out. In air Province also resembles Italy: and such fruits as do
grow in Italy, prosper in Province. The people valiant, strong, bold and
quick witted.

Nice is the first town of Province, Nice.
on the East standing upon a gulf of the sea, where Var falls into the
Ligustian sea, which is called the river of Gam, this town belongs to the
duke of Sauoy, and is a bishoprike suffragant to the Bishop of Embrune.

Antibe, Antibe.
situate very strong on the sea shore, it has Gene a bishoprike, whose sea is
now translated unto Tarascon* over against Antibe is the I Will of S. Honorat
otherwise called Leuin.

Frein a bishoprike and haven one of the strongest places in all the country.
Frein.


Eres or Yerres with the isles adjacent, Eres or Yerres.
which bear the same name do lie along the coast between Freyn and Tolon:
along those Isles they gather Coral.

Tolon a bishoprike. Tolon. S. Victor. Marseilles
S. Victor.

Marseilles is almost over three sides washed with the sea, and the fourth
which is firm land is hard to be assaulted because the vallie lies high
along, and of difficult access. The inhabitants are great seafarers, and do
traffike into al places, into Afrike yea even into the heart of Ethiopia. It is
in a manner the storehouse of all such wealth as is transported out of the East
into the West. The kings galleys do usually harbor in that haven.

Between Aix and Marseilles lies Baulme a solitary place and an Oratorie
where Magdalen doing her penance died: this Mount is craggie, being 3000 paces
high, and 10000 long. It is as it were even hewn, and is inaccessible,
resembling a wall, at the foot whereof is Magdalens cave raised as high as a man
may cast a stone. The opening of it lies like the mouth of a furnace: in the
end of this cave is a spring whose issue cannot be perceived.

S. Maximine.
S. Maximine a Town six leagues from Aix.

Aix the capital Town, standing almost in the midst of Province is a
Parliament and University. Aix.


Cisteron.
Cisteron a Bishoprike standing upon Durance, not far from Daulphine.

Cauallon.
Cauallon a Bishoprike standing upon the entry into the church lands and
county of Vanduse. It is watered with three rivers, Rhosne, Durance, and
Sorgue.

Pont S. Esprit.
Pont S. Esprit stands upon Rhosne.

Aurange a Bishoprike, a principality fallen to the house of Nassaw, Aurange.
where are yet extant the ruins of the most woonderful Theater in the world,
with other antiquities.

Auignon the Popes Toombe.
Auignon contains seven notable things, and of every of the same, seven: vz.
seven palaces, seven parishes, seven hospitals, seven nunneries, seven
colleges, seven couents, seven gates. The kings lands do lie almost round
about it, for at Demipont is the entry into Languedocke, and within half a
league of it passing over Durance, they enter into Province. The Town is
stored with vittels, cloth, fine colors, and good paper, Durance a river.
al growing and made in the same soil: one branch of Durance serve their
diars, who make the best die in grain or crimosine that is in France, they
have great plenty of small grayns which they use for a very fine vermillion,
and do therewith die their silks. Auignon is an Archbishoprike, and has
there a continual Legate representing the Popes person. It is also an
University which is fortified with the spring and Fountain of Vanduse, which
enclosing it does fall into the ditches thereof.

Vanduse, Vanduse.
a place not far distaunt from Auignon, whether Petrarch usually withdrew
himself. It lies in a pleasant vallie environed with rocks, from whence the
spring before mentioned does arise, which growing into a river through the
course of other springs thereabout, is called Sorgue.

Croux a very strange country. Croux.


Carpentras, Carpe^tras
Vaison, Bishoprikes.

Mirtegue Salon of Croux, Martegue etc.
S. Chama, towns. The 3 M^ries, a coast Town between Arles and Marseilles.

Tarascon stands upon the fall of Durance into Rhosne. Tarascon


Arles an archbishoprike nigh to Rhosne stands in the fennes where they now
breed as goodly cattle as may be. Arles.
Therein are to be seen the ruins of an Amphitheatre.

Being past Arles ye come to Camargue a fruitful soil whereon stands S.
Giles the head Town of the country, also Aiguemortes so termed of the still
and sleeping waters. This town stands upon the swallowing of Virdoule into
the sea, from whence nevertheless the channel of Rhosne keeps his course
westward.

Languedocke with other the countrieo depending upon the Parliament of Tholouze.
Viuaretz
VIuaretz near to Rhosne whereof Viuiers is the chief.

Velay.
Velay, whereof P^y is capital, in this country lies Tournon. Just Lewis of
Tournon Countye of Roussillon is Lord thereof.

Geuoudan which on the East and North bordereth upon Viuaretz and Velay,
Geuoudan
on the South upon Rouergue, and on the West upon the Territory of Albye.
Mande is the chief town thereof.

Languedocke.
Languedocke upon the East has the Pirenean mountains, on the west Garonne, on
the south Province, and on the North Geuoudan, and Auuergne. It comprehends
two archbishoprikes.

Narbone.
Narbone wherevnder are the bishoprikes of Carcasson, Bezieres, Agde, Lodesue,
Nismes, Maguelonne Vzes, Eaule, Aleth, and S. Pont of Tonniers.

Tholouze
Tholouze which contains under it Montauban Rieux, Mirepoix, Vaur, Lambars,
S. Papoul, and Paumiers.

Narbone stands as it were in a quagmier at the fall of the river of Ande
into the French Sea. This river springs in the Mountains of Foix, thence
passing through Languedocke falls into the Sea near to Narbone where it
makes a great fennie marish, upon the which this Town is situate.

Carcasson
Carcasson stands upon Ande.

Aleth.
Aleth stands at the foot of Pireneans.

Agd.
Agd is scituat not far from the fall of Ande into the sea upon a goulph
thereof.

Beziers.
Beziers is upon the river of O^be, which falls into the sea between
Montpelier and Agde.

Montpelier.
Montpelier stands not far from the Sea in a good air upon a hill, in a
fair and fruitful Soil. The river of Lez runs within a bow shot of the
walls. The town is fair and welthie, the inhabitants courteous. It
contains an University wherein Physic is as learnedlye read as in any
place of the world. It has also a court of Ayds.

Beaucaire a seneschall sea, Beaucaire
the town stands upon Gardon, the Territory thereof do stretch on the one
side to Auignon, on the other to Viuarets.

It has jurisdiction over sundry towns as Allaiz a Vicountie, Vzes a
Bishoprike and Duchy in the house of Cursol. Lodesne, a Bishoprike standing
upon Orb.

Between Beaucaire, Vzes and Lodesue, stands the bridge of Gardes, which
being of a marvelous workmanship, has served as a conduct to Nismes.

Nismes stands in a fair and plentiful soil, Nismes.
beautified with sundry antiquities as Arennes and others.

Sommiers stands upon Virdoule. So^miers. Castres, etc. Clermont Carcasson


Castres, Villemans, Pezenas, Agde upon the river of Erhant, Cabestan, S.
Nazare.

Clermont and Lodesne.

Carcasson a strong town and the chief sea of the seneschall sea of Tholouze,
except Tholouze it self. Leaving Carcasson we come unto the plain of
Languedocke, which is accounted one of the fruitfullest in France,
comprehends sundry Towns, as Auragnes, the territory of Tholouze, part of
the country of Foix (for the land of Alby and the rest of Foix is all hillye)
S. Pons of Tonniers, S. Papoul, Vaur, bishopriks. Castelnaw of A^y, the chief
town of Auragnes, standing in the flat champion, is fruitful in corn, pulse,
and wood, wherein also the most part of Languedocke abounds.

Quercy.
Quercy and Rouergue are accounted in Acquitain, and yet have their recourse
unto the Parliament of Tholouze. The river of Tarne parts Rouergue, whereof
Rodez is the chief town, from the rest of Languedocke.

Rodez.
Rodez a Seneschall sea belonging to Toulouse, whereupon do depend the seas of
Alby, Castres of the Albigeois, Gaillac.

The country being hilly, is but barren, the people painful and quickwitted,
howbeit contrariwise the soil of Alby abounds in corn, wine, saffron, and
iet, and is bounded with the rivers of Lot and Tarne.

Quercy.
Quercy a Seneschall sea is one of the fairest and fruitfullest parts of
Aquitaine, having on the East Auuergne, on the West and North Perigort, on the
south the very Languedocke and territory of Tholouze. Corn, cattle and wood
are plentiful, as also natural coals, the rivers abounding in fish, the
soil yields a sweet air, as consisting both of vales and hills. In this
country are two bishoprikes: Mountaubon, a Town standing upon a hill leaning
to the bridge that goes over Tarne, and fenced with an old castle, having at
the head of the town a Fountain sufficient to water the whole. The Town
stands in a fruitful soil upon the great high way from Toulouse to Limoges,
and Paris.

Cahors the other bishoprike, is the chief town of Quercy, and stands upon
the river of Lot which falls from the hills on the side of S. Flour. It
stands on a hill, having toward Mountaubon a deep vallie, and toward
Sauillac the river. The whole soil is stony, and the vines grow upon two
steep hills, that it seems impossible for the laborers to climb them: the
Town is fair, large and wealthy, framed like an Egg, the streets
beautiful, hard to be besieged, it is the seneschall sea, notwithstanding
Montaubon has the Justice sea, and is an University. The Bishop is county of
Cahors, and so consequently Lord both temporal and spiritual, celebrating
Mass he has his sword, gauntlets, and helmet on the altar, with his legs
armed.

Castle Sarasin stands in this country on Tarne, Castle Sarazin.
it is no great Town, but strong, and stands low.

Montech, Montech.
a Town.

Moissac, Moissac
one of the four principalles of Quercy, pleasauntly seated, having on the
North and West the hills laden with vines, on the East Tarne and a fair
champion replenished with vines, gardens, and all manner of fruits, and on the
South even along the walls runs Tarne, which falling from the hills of
Auuergne passes by Geuoudan, and somewhat above Alby, thence with a swifte
course through a pype in the rock it makes such a noise as may be heard two
leagues off, then enlarging it self it waxes nauigable and falls into
Garonne, may be discerned by the space of two leagues. This is the greatest
trafficked town in Quercy, as dealing with corn, wine, wood, saffron, oil,
wool, salt, and fish. It was but lately erected to a Seneschall-sea.

Lausart, Lausart.
a Town situate upon a rock not far from Moissac.

Tholouze stands under a hill along the banks of Garonne, Tholouze
part in Languedocke, and part in Acquitaine, Garonne falls out of Mount S.
Beat in Cominges, nigh to S. Bertrands and passing by Caseres, Narsac, Meuret
and others, it runs almost through the midst of Tholouze, which next to
Paris is one of the greatest towns in France, and has an University,
Parliament, Justice sea, and seneschalsea. The soil fat, wealthy, fruitful,
and abounding in all things necessary for man's life: the people civil and
courteous, devout, and severe in punishing offenders.

Part of Guyenne which is under the jurisdiction of Toulouse.
Foix and Cominges
FOix and Cominges.

The jurisdiction of Toulouse reaches into Guyenne from Lorat unto Biscay, the
division being limited by the river of Gane. It stretches from the one sea to
another. The mountains of this country are described according to the
inhabitaunts of the saine, on the side of Languedocke are the mountains of
Sant which part Roussillon from Narbon, next are those of Foix, and Westward
are the mountains of Cominges, Aure, Bigorre, Aspe, S. Sera^ce, and Biskay,
these mountains are welthie, and their valleys fruitful: the tops beautified
with woods, and the sides with green pastures, besides that no soil yields
better iron mines than Foix, it also yields rosin, turpentine, pitch,
frakinsense, cork, marble, jasper, and salt, also whitmeats, and an infinite
number of wild beasts, with many quick springs. The diols of nine of clock
and noone, which are two hills, so termed because the funne is never off the
one at nine of the clock, neither of the other at noone, and are two of the
highest hills of the Pireneans, the one is in Bierne, the other amongst the
mountains of Auronne. The mountains of Lauedon do breed the best horses in
France, yea such as exceed the Spanish both in strength and quicknes, but the
number is not great, because the hill is small, and has also woolues, bears,
bores, hearts, hindes, goats and cammels, also plenty of simples: from the same
do spring sundry rivers, as Ande, Aure, Garonne, Said, Baiz, Gerz, Dour,
Garand, Graves, and other which fall into the sea.

The county of Foix lies on the mountains side, and is the nearest region to
Toulouse.

It has a Bishops sea which is at Pamiers, but the town of Foix is the
justice sea and chief of the country, whereunto it gives name, as also to a
noble family: on the East lies Languedock, on the West Cominges, on the North
the country called Riueres. The Riuerins do inhabit about the mountains of
Foix, along the course of Garonne, on the South the Pireneans. Most part of
this country is hilly, especially on the side that lies toward Tarascon, where
the hills are plentiful in iron mines and natural coals.

Carmain a county. Carmain
The Lordship of Mirepoix, are of the dependances of Foix At this day there be
the children of the late County of Carmain brother to the Lord Poule of Foix
one of the privy counsel, but the Lords of Mirepoix are come of the family
of Leuy.

Caseres upon Garonne, Caseres.
and Rieux a Bishoprike not far from the same river, are between Toulouse
and Cominges.

Cominges a county nigh unto Foix, Cominges
which lies on the East thereof, having on the North, part of Languedocke and
the counties of Lisle and Gaure, on the South the Pireneans, and on the West
Estrac, and Armignac, it is divided into the higher and the lower, the higher
is all hillye, comprehending the Towns of S Bertrand, Conserans, S. Beat, S.
Fregon, Moregeau, Saliers, and others.

The lower contains Lambers a bishoprike, Samathan, Mourer, which are the
chief royal seats, and have recourse unto the Seneschall sea of Tholouze,
and thence unto the Parliament thereof.

S. Bartra^d
S. Bartrand is the capital of Cominges, and stands on the top of a hill,
and several from the rest. The territory about it is fruitful. In the valleys
and on the mountains are plenty of Groves and pastures for cattle, to the
breeding whereof the husbandmen do more apply themselves than to any other
thing.

Coserans.
Conserans stands upon the River of Pamiers.

S. Tregeo^
S. Tregeon situate upon the side of a very high hill, so strong, that the
access unto it is very difficult. This hill is full of Vines, and the valleys
are replenished with fat and fruitful meadows and arable grounds. From hence
runs a valley along the river of Saine, even to the fall thereof into
Garonne, beneath Grenade, from whence you may behold Coheiles, Pamier, Rieux,
Espaon, also the ysle of Dodon, a Town standing very high with Sone, at the
foot thereof, and is one of the royal castelwikes of Cominges under the
jurisdiction of the Castle of Samathan, the ancient mansion of the Earls.

Dez.
Dez a commaundrie in the aforesaid vallie from the top whereof ye may
discern Saueterre, a town belonging to the Lords of Aubigeou of the house of
Amboise.

In this country are the families of Moncorueil, Lauuesan, Aulin, Rocquet,
Polansic, Saias, Sarac, and others.

Lambers upon Saine a small Town, Lambers.
yet well walled and ditched, the vines on the one side, and a fair champion
of corn and meadows on the other. It stands four leagues from Samathan.

Samathan stands part upon a hill, Samatha^.
and part in the bottom of the vallie of Saine, which running through the
midst thereof, parts the town called the Borough from that part that is
termed the Market. The higher part is houered with the side of a castle, and
is environed with marvelous deep ditches.

The noble houses of this country: Montamar, Aligne, Bezerille, Polustron,
Sauiquas, Lahaz, Noalhan, Cazoux, whereof is la Vallet, Esquiuso, Moth of
Sauinez, Montague, Moubla^c, Basside, Andohiel, Fonterailles and others.

Montpezat near whereto is the house of the L. of Bellegarde is near to
Samathan. Montpezat.


Mouret being within 5 leagues of Samathan stands upon Garonne in a fruitful
champion, Mouret.
and has a hill which ouerlooketh it.

The whole territory of Cominges is plentiful in corn, wine, oil of nuts,
fruit, millet, wood, or other things, and is well inhabited, the men valiant,
and warlike, nothing regarding learning, patient, in labor, sore in diet,
discreet in talk, not lavish in apparel, and haters of pleasure. The women
great huswiues, chaste and never idle.

Beneath the Castle of Lahaz there is a Brook which parts Cominges from the
county of Gaure between which two is enclosed the small countye I Will in
Iordain, a town standing upon Saine, appertaining to the house of Navarre, she
extends her limits far into the Forest of Baconne, on the side whereof
stands the town of Lauignac.

Gaure.
Gaure a great county with fair towns therein as Gimount, Beaumont, Grenade,
which stands upon Garonne, not far from the fall of Saine therinto.

Beaumo^t.
Beaumont the chief town of the County is in the plain, divided so with
waters, that some think it to be part of Lomagne, but in troth it depends
upon the bayliwike of Gaure.

Gimont.
Gimont lies on the side of a steep hill, hard to come unto: along the
walls thereof runs the river Gimoe. It contains three parishes, and is a
great town, and wealthy in corn, but cheeflye in wine.

Again.
Again the capital town of the territory of Again called Agenois, which lies
out at length between Lot and Garonne, having on the East Quercy, on the west
Gascoigne, on the South Garonne, on the North Perigort, that land contains
fair towns, as Port S. Marye, Villeneuf in Again, Hautefay, Clerac Tonins,
Marmand and others.

Again.
Again, a bishoprike stands in a fair, fat, and fruitful soil: it is
accounted one of the welthiest in Guienne, and is watered with three rivers
Lot, Dordon and Garonne. The town stands in a plain champion, and is the
Justice sea and Seneschal sea of the country. It is greatly traffiqued with
merchants from Toulouse, Bourdeaux, Quercy and Rouergue by means of the said
rivers, for it is very plentiful.

Condone the head of the territory of Condone, Condone.
is a great town, but not so welthy as Again, for it is no throughfare, neither
has any nauigable River coming to it. It stands in a fruitful soil, almost
every way environed with small hills, full of vines, and has the river of
Baize, which springing in the Pireneans parts Armignac from Bigorre and
waters the territory of Condone. It is a iusticesea and has under it
Valence, Clairac on Garonne, Romio^ between Condone and Lectore, Nerac, a
welthy town, Montreall and others. Also Noble houses, the Uicounties of
Fitzmarcon, Gondri, Forces, Moulac.

Estrac a county appertaining to the house of Co^dale, Estrac.
lies upon the confines of Samath, Auchx, and Cominges, it comprehends
diverse Towns and Uillages, as Mirande the capital thereof. Pauy a small
league from Auchx, Castlenaw of Barbareux, a strong hold and inaccessible.
Santelix, Cimorre, Saromon and others.

The noblest houses thereof are, Uicountie of Lupereux, Lord of Maccube, lord
of Pauesac, the houses of Terms, and others.

The inhabitants (especially of the Uillages) are dull witted, rustical,
nothing wary, al stammerers, their toongs fat, gross, and heavy, and therefore
not able to pronounce the Latin, and so consequentlye more unapt to learning
than any country in France.

Auchx one of the chief towns of Armignac, Auchx.
stands upon Gers, it stands on a very rock inaccessible, but on the one
side: It is built scattering, except on the height thereof, where it is
sufficientlye enhabited and replenished with people.

Armignac.
Armignac is a large country containing many towns whereof Lectour is
capital, and a Bishopric and Seneschall sea standing on the top of a hill,
which each way except on the passage to Tholouze, is inaccessible. The castle
is on a rock safe from mining or battery. This is one of the strongest towns
in France, having a triple wall armed with a strong bulwark, terrasses and
platformes, on that side which is accessible, having in it a fountain
sufficient to minister drink to the people and water to their horses, for the
town stands far from any river. It has also foure-skore wells or more,
whose springes cannot be cut off no more than the springs of the said
Fountain. The inhabitants are civil and courteous, few artificers, as living
for the most part upon their revenues, thorough the fruitfulness of the soil
in Corn, Wine, and other things.

Castera.
Castera, a Town belonging unto the Lords of Founteuilles in Cominges is not
far from the same. It has Vic, Nogueron, Euse, Casauban, and others.

Lectour, etc.
Lectour, Auchx and Vic do all three stand in a fruitful soil, but
approaching toward the land of Bourdeaux. The country of Armignac yields
nothing but chestnuts and such other Trees and further all pastures, but
finally it is a mere wilderness. The inhabitants are gross witted, simple,
good husbands, such as can make commodity of any thing, and given to traffike
especially in cattle: they have also honey and wax.

Bigorre.
Bigorre bordereth Eastward upon Armignac, Westward upon Bierne, Northward upon
Albret, and Southward upon the Pireneans, in the which the most part thereof
does lie even from the mount of Aure unto the hills of Saul and Aspe, which
are in Bierne.

Tarbes the chief Town thereof stands in a fruitful soil upon the River
Adour and is parted into four or five bodies whereof each has his channel,
Tarbes.
bridge, gate, and wall. It is the seneschall sea of Bigorre, wherein are
contained these other towns, Try, Runectain, Mouborget, Bagueres, wherein are
the whot bathes.

Wood is reasonable throughout the whole country, which is very cold by reason
of the mountains wherein stands the Town of Lourd, which is the last of
Bigorre, as also of the jurisdiction of the parliament of Tholouze.

These famous houses are also therein contained, Aste* the original of the
Cramounts who now are in chief authority in Biskay. Bennac, Louirs,
Barbassan, Aussune, and others.

The people high minded, borne to wars, sudden in their attempts, deep
dissemblers, churlish, rusticall, not bearing with injuries, for trifles ready
to kill and slay, loyal, no robbers, nor malicious, but simple, how beit in
towns society makes the people more civil. The Nobility are valiant
courteous and sociable.

In Bigorre as well among the Gentry as Pesants, the eldest brother bears
away the whole inheritance, saving some small allowance to the rest, but in
Bierne it is as in Caux. They have also in Bigorre few or no Gentlemen that
have authority of high Justice, but all have law from the king. They cannot
take notise of any matter above 60 soulz value, neither may they whip but
imprison, but so that within 24 hours they yield the body of the offender into
the kings presence.

In Bigorre and in Bearne and almost throughout all Gascoigne, there is a race
of people called Gabots or Gathets, Gabots or Gahets.
of whom all men generally do shun and avoid the acquaintance, esteeming them
as leapers, they may not dwell within any town, but several in some corner of
the suburbs, and in the Churches have their seats severally enclosed. They are
all either Carpentars or Coopers, and of no other occupation. Goodly men,
painful, very mechanical, they are strong in smell, and coming near to them
their flesh sauoureth very much. They are not very greedy of devotion, and
have their burial apart from all other Christians, almost without any
solemnity: wheresoever they inhabit they are pore and live upon day labor,
ready to serve every man for his money. If any of them grow rich, it is sildom
seen that his children inherit his substance, except such mooueables as every
man shunneth as the pestilence. There is almost no town nor village in
Gascoigne especially in Bigorre or Bierne, but has some one family of them.
They are said to be of the off spring of Gehesi, whereto the Leaprosie of
Naaman the Syrian shall cleave unto the last day.

The Resort of Bourdeaux.
Guyenne.
GVyenne at this present contains no more but the countries depending upon
the Parliament of Bourdeaux, vz. the land of Bourdeaux, the territory of
Bazas, the lands of high Gascoigne, part of Biskay and Medocke, which lie
beyond Garonne, but on the hither side are those countries that are termed the
land between two seas, depending upon Bazas, Fronsades, Perigort, Limosin and
Xaintogne, already described.

The land between two seas is so called because the sea flows on each side
thereof by two arms, The land between two seas.
which in their course do receive two great rivers: the one Garonne at
Bourdeaux, the other Dordon at Libourne, whereby the said two arms do make
the country almost an Island, the point whereof lies at a place called
Carboniers, where begins the great stream of the flood and ebb which
runs so furiously along the channel of Dordon that it ouerwhelmeth the
great ships if it take them on the one side. The inhabitants of the country
do term it Marcareth, and it sildome opens but in the whottest of summer
in the equinoctial. The towns standing in this said land between 2 seas,
belong part to Again, part to Bazas, and part to Bourdeaux.

To Bazas do belong Reone upon Garonne, a strong and wealthy town, Montsegar
upon Drot, two leagues from Reolle, S. Bazille, S Ferme, Castelmouron, Geronde,
Saueterre, and others.

In Bourdeaux: S. Maiere, Benanges a County, Libourne upon Dordon, a goodlye
Town at the gulf and fall of Dordon into the sea, Fronsades lyeng beyond
Libourne, now a Marquisate and famous in respect of the castle of Fronsac,
which is one of the strongest in Guyenne, and stands on the side of a hill,
with the prospect along into the sea.

Bourdeaux stands upon the banks of Garonne which in sundry places washes
the walls thereof, Bourdeaux.
yea and at the full of the Moon when the tide is in, it comes up before the
palace. The haven resembles a horned moon, which makes it the fairest and
strongest in France, and great ships may enter into the same. The sea shore
is on the North side, for on the East and South side of Bourdeaux lie the
Laundes, and on the West the Fennes, the marches and land of Medocke. Round
about it is very well fortified, beside the natural strength of the situation
which is with great Walls, Bulwarks, rampires and ditches. It has a
Seneschal sea, Parliament, Admiraltie, and Uniuersity. The soil plentiful in
good wines, as the wynes of Grave, Larmont, Bastide and others. Also farther
off at a place called Melion are such white wines as in plentifulnesse and
goodness may compare with Maluoisy. The bread of Potensac and Alenson, that
are not far from Bourdeaux, is accounted the best in Guyen. Bourdeaux wants
no store of fish or flesh, but the air of the sea makes the country
vnhelthfull, and much subject to sickness and pestilence.

Espare, etc.
Along the coast beneath Bourdeaux stands the town of Espare, then Cap S.
Marye, also about the fennes lies the land of Medock, very low and much
subject to inundation.

Blanquefort.
Blanquefort a castle belonging to the Lord of Duras, stands in this fenny
and slymy land, whose slyme proceeds of the gulphes that the River of Garonne
makes therein.

Buchz.
The land of Buchz is a principality belonging to the house of Cantalle, the
Lord whereof bears the title of Cantalle, lies also in the aforesaid fenny
and slimy soil. This country is full of Rosine, whereof the poorest sort of
the inhabitants, as also of Armignac, Bierne, and Bigorre, do make their
candels, whereby their house does wax black, for the smoke of these candels
do yield a wonderful black color, and makes the very people look with
the sent of a tawny and duskie complexion, besides that naturally the people of
Medocke and the Laundes are not all of the goodliest personages.

The Laundes wherein lies a long way all sandy and full of gravel, Launds.
which in summer is very tedious, for these sands do skald and skorch, besides
that, the country is so dry, that there is scarce a drop of water to be had,
which notwithstanding there be some villages standing out of the way: the
inhabitants thereof are very industrious, and for the most part of small
stature, simply apparelled, spare in diet and yet somewhat welthy by reason of
commerce of cork, rosine, pitch and cattle, whereof they have store.

Albret a duchy whereof all the country is named, Albret.
does lie in this country.

Chalosse, Chalosse.
a town famous in respect of the goodness of the white wines which there grow,
is near.

Bazas whose territory and land comprehends Mont de Marson, Bazas.
Castle-Geloux, Air and Bazaz it self. Bishoprikes also, the Mas of Air and
others whose soil resembles the Launds.

Bazas stands in the midst of the sands, and yet toward the North has a
reasonable good soil, plentiful in corn, wine, fruit, and cattle, which is
their chief wealth. The bishoprike and seneschalsea thereof have their
jurisdiction extended into both sides of Garonne.

S. Severe, S. Severe.
the chief cape or point of Gascoigne, for in these quarters was the ancient
habitation of the Gascoigns. The true Gascoigns are the inahbitants of Bayonne
the Basques and the people of Bierne.

Gascoigne
Gascoigne comprehends sundry towns as Axe a Bishopric and Seneschalsea,
whereto have recourse Laundes, Bayon, and high Gascoigne.

Axe.
Axe a strong town having therein whot bathes which heal diverse diseases:
therein stands a castle which serves as a citadell. Without the town there
is a pit of salt water, whereout they draw plenty of salt, but it is corosiue,
as being tainted with some vain of Alum.

Adur.
Adur, a river which runs by Axe within one quarter of a league of the said
river there is a cave wherein do stand three toombes, which in the full of the
moon are full of water, but in the wane have not one drop. The soil is
fruitful, and has therein sundry bathes, also mines of iron and other
metal, and pitch.

Bayonne.
Bayonne stands in the edge of the West sea, even at the fall of Adur and
Gane into the same. It is one of the strongest in France, and chief of so
much of Biskay as pertains to the French king even to the river called I-hon,
which is beyond S. John de Luz, and divides France from Spain. It is a
bishopric and a government of great importance. It is not lawful for any man
to come weaponed into it, except the king and the princes of his blood, al
other whosoever must leave their Swords at the gate of the lower town.

Bierne.
Bierne.
BIerne lies at the foot of the Pirenean Mountains, bordering Southwarde
upon Bigorre, Northward upon the Bayonnoise part of Biskay, from the which the
river of Sonson does divide it Eastward upon the Launds and Chalasse along
the river of Adur, and Westward upon the Nauarrian Biskay, of the which S.
Palais or S. Pelasge, is the chief, and is the second parliament for those
lands that the king of Navarre holds in sovereignty on this side of the
mountains.

Bierne is divided into two parts, Bierne.
whereof the one contains the mountains, and therein is the Bishopric of
Oleron. The other the valleys wherein do lie the towns of Escar l'Euesque,
and Pau the cheifest town of the whole country.

There be also other good towns as well traded, as O^tes, Morlais, Nay,
Pontas, Coderch, Nauerreins, which standing at the foot of the mountains is a
bulwark to the rest, and is very strong as well by nature as by art.

Oleron stands on the top of a mountain between Courde and Nay even in
the very sharpest of the hills. Oleron.


Pau, Pau.
the Princes seat is the parliament Town for the whole country. Therein is a
stately palace.

Serrances, which stands on the top of a Mountain, and is the first of all
Gaul.

The valleys of Sault and Aspe, Sault and Aspe.
are the best inhabited in all the country, and the people valiant, bold and
stout.

The territory of Iuranoon where do grow good wines. Iuranoon.


The Bathes of Aigues-chaudes and Cauderats, are the best and most excellent in
Europe.

In the country is plenty of Millet, though not for want of Corn or wine,
the land is also fruitful in pasture, so as there is store of cattle, milk,
butter, cheese, flax, hemp and wool, whereof they make great trade. It also
exceeds the rest of all France in goats. The people nimble, familiar,
courteous, subtle, crafty, fair spoken, valiant in the field, lovers of
liberty, and such as generally will be all Gentlemen, high stomacked,
accounting well of themselves, and contemners of all others.

The noblest houses are Grammont, and Lusse, which bear now all the sway in
Biskay.

There are also in Bierne Andoyns, who is now high steward of the country,
Mitenes, Iarders, Mouens, S. Columbe, Esgarrabague, Coderch, Nauailles,
Castelnaw, Naseres, Laz, Suz, and others.

FINIS.
A brief recapitulation of the parliaments of France, with the countries
which have their recourse to the same.
Under the Parliament of Paris are comprehended the Countries ensuing:
THe Prouostship and Uicounty of Paris, Paris.
whereto do appertain S. Dionise, S. Clou, Poissy, S. German in Lay, Tornan
in Brye, Torcy in Brye, Corbeil, Montlehery, Gonnesse, S. Georges, Newtowne or
Villeneuf, S. George, Palaiseau, Longumeau, etc.

Meleun, a bayliwike whereof do depend the land of Gastines, whereof Milly is
the chief town, then Nem^urs, Castle, Landen, Moret, Ferte, S. Mathurin of
Archant, Fountaynbeleau.

Picardy which comprehends: Picardy.

Monfort l'Amaury a Bayliwike.

Laon a bailiwike under it are Soissons and Noyon. The territory of
Verma^dois, whereof S. Quintin is chief, Riemont, Coucy, Chauny, Guyse, Peronne
Mondidier, Chastelet, Corby, Nes^e.

Senlis a bailiwike in the government of the Isle of France, whereto have
recourse Beauuais, Clermo^t which also is under the government of France,
Cha^pagne, Creyl, Augy, Chaumont, Pontoyse, Beaumont, Crespy, Ferte, Milon,
Pierre, Fons, and Montmorency: Amiens, the chief town of Picardy is a
bayliwike.

Abbeuille a bayliwike, and the chief Town of Pont^ieu under the jurisdiction
whereof are Poruigny, Dourlens, Aury, Crecy, Rue, Crotoy, Renty, Montruil,
otherwise called Muttrell.

Bullogne, a Bayliwike comprehending Estaples, S. Rogmer, Guynes, Ardres,
Hames, Blarnes, Clais, Oye.

In Picardy there are also Ferte, Gandelu, Villiers-Costeretz, Verbery, Velly,
Male, Veruin, Capelle, Londreoy, Tonsomme, Bohain, Breteuille, Blangy, and
Valerie.

Champagne, which comprehends:
Champagne.
Troy the chief of the country, and a Bayliwike whereto have recourse Bar upon
Seine, Ferte upon Aube, Meussy l'Euesque, or Bishops Meussy, Nogent, Pont upon
Seine, Castle Erny, S. Florentin, Chastillon upon Seine.

Chaumont the chief Town of Bassigny and a Bayliwike, whereto have recourse
Bar upon Aube, Montirandall, Ianuille, and Vassy.

Vitry, the chief town of Parthois, and a Bayliwike, having under it. S.
Disier, Nogent, l'Arcant, S. Menehou, Feisme, Espernay, Roueray, Passeauant.

Rheims, a Bayliwike comprehending Chalons, Espernay, Tismes, Vertuz, and
Saudron.

Sens, a Bayliwike containing Villeneuf le Roy, Pont sur Yonne, Langres,
Vandeaur, Vignorye, Mo^tesclair, Rimaucourt, Andelon.

Brye comprehends:
Brye.
Meaux the capital Town and a Bayliwike, having under it Crecy, Colomiers in
Bry, Ferte Gauchet. Moneaux, S. Tiare, Iouerre, Laigny, Brye, County Robert,
Torcy do depend of Chastelet in Paris.

Province, a Bayliwike whereto have recourse Sazaime, Loy, the castle Bray
upon Seine, Monterain, Vallery, Nanges.

Castelthierrie, a bayliwike comprehending Chastillon upon Marne, Tareffons,
Castle Ouchy, Milly, S. Front.

In Champagne and Berry there are also Merry, Tonuille, Rebel, Glaye, Dormans,
Ioigny, Tonnerre, and Vezelay.

The Territory of Auxerre. Auxerre.

Auxerre a Bailiwike head of the same, wherein are contained Chablais,
Tontenay, etc.

The land of Chartres. Chartres.

Chartres a bailiwike whereon do depend Nogent le Roy, Neufchastel in Timerais,
Va^dosme, Estampes, Dreux, Houdan, Dordan, Espernon, great Perch, that which
contains Bazach, Gouet, Aluy, Momiral, Brou, Autonne, Rouxmaillard, Conde
upon Huynes, and Nogentle Roteron.

Beauce which comprehends the towns of Toury, Angeruill, Merennelle,
Genuille, Artenay, Yeinuille is of the Bayliwike of Orleance.

Sologne, which has under it Gergeau, Suly, Ferte, S. Laurence des Eaux,
Clery, Millansay, and Remorentine, whereof some are depending upon the
Bayliwike of Orleance, and some of the Bayliwike of Blois.

Orleance a Bayliwike, whereto have recourse Boiscommune, Castlereinard,
Yeinuille in Beausse, Castle Yeure, Neufuille at the lodges, Gian, Montargis,
Lorris, Meune upon Loire, Baugency, Gergeau, Clery, etc.

Blois, a Bayliwike whereto have recourse Millancy, Remorentin, Chambort, etc.

Touraine.
Touraine.
Tours a Bayliwike, containing Chinon, Lodun, Thouars, Longests, Amboise,
Loches, Chastillon upon Indre, Montrichard, Chaumont, Beaulieu, Pauny.

Main.
Main.
Mauns a Bayliwike, to it have recourse la Val, the castle of Loir, Beaumont,
S. Safarie, Castlegautier Flesch, Maine, Luhaiz, Sable and la Ferte Bernard.

Aniou.
Aniow.
Angiers a Bayliwike wherein are contained Saumur, Bouge, Beaufort, Pont de se,
Mont^oreau, B^issac, Chantoceaux, Lude, Durall.

Poictow.
Poictow.
Poictiers a Bayliwike comprehending Lusson, Mailezai, the Isles of Re and
Oleron, Niort, Fontenay, Monmorillon, Lusignan, Ciuray, Thauars, S. Maxent,
Partenay, Chastelleraut, Melle, Rochsuryon, Chize, Chauigny, Angle, Lussac,
Orinac, Bresseure, S. Lou, Blanc, Charcoux, Gensay, Chastaigners, S. Melun,
Paluiau, Sables, or the sands, Aulonne, Mareuille, S. Hermine, Montagu, Coue,
Viuorne, Mortemer, Lezay, S. Sauin, Burgaife, Maigne, Voue^t, Mernaut,
Chefbouton, Marrillac, Chasteauneuf, Dompierre, Baygereau, Iarnac, Argenton,
Aspremont, S. Michael en le her, Maulion, Mortaigne, Tistanges, Es^ars, Ton
Bommint, Talmonde, Sausay.

Angolesme.
Angolesme.
Rochell a Bayliwike for the Territory of Aunis.

Angolesme a bayliwike containing the towns of Chasteauneuf, Cognac,
Aubeterre, Ma^^on, Villebois, Mareuille, Mombacon, Bouteuille.

Berry.
Berry.
Bourges a Bayliwike comprehending Sancerre, Cosne, Coucressant, Aubigny upon
Nerre, S^lles, Meneste Vierzon, Doule Roy Chasteauneuf, Boussac, Augurane,
C^uys, Argenton, Chastre, Blanc at Berry, Chasteauroux, B^zances, Paluan,
Chastillon, P^enby, Chasteaumeilla^t, Linieres, Charroix, Essoudun, Menu upon
Yeure, Lury, Cracay, Augelon, S. Aignan, Leuroux, Vatan.

Bourbon, Auueagne and Neuers, and the territory of Do^zye.
Molins a Bayliwike.

S. Pierrele Moustier a bayliwike for part of Bourbon and Auuergne, as Bourbon
Xancois S. Poursain Casset, also for Keuers Do^zy Desize Clamery Augillert S.
Leonard S. Sange Laizi Premery Charity Castle Chinon Lornie Cosne in Berry.

Lions, Biauuiolois, and Forest. Lions. etc.

Lions a bayliwike, containing Monbrisson, the Capital of Forest, Teures S
Steven of Turan S. Salimer S. Germain le val, the castle of S. B^net, Rouane,
Vise, Cosen.

Mascon.
Mascon a Bayliwike having under it Tournes, Mascon.
etc howbeit this country is under the government of Bourgondie.

Auuergne, wherein are: Auuergne

Ryon a Bayliwike of Limagne, having under it Clermont Mont^errant Combrailles
Montagu Aiguereses Montpensier Billon ^^^oire Brionde Langeac S. Germain
Lambrun Eusbreule S. Porsain Cusset Montmorin Montgason Antragues Cuseron
Rondon Fontamilles Pontgibaut. etc.

Orillac a Bayliwike of high Auuergne, comprehending S. Flour Carlat Murat
Chaudes Aigues or the whot waters.

Limosin.
Limosin which has:
In high Limosin, Limoges and Iuet, Perch, S. Iunion, S. Leonard, Saloignac,
Souterrane, Beneuent, Pierrebuffier, Segur, Chasluz, Cars, Maignac.

In low Limosin are Vantadour, Turrenne, Combort, Tulle, Vzerch, Bryne,
Treignac, Douzenac, Alassac, Beaulieu, Meissac, Vslet, Pompodour, Ruffignac.

Roan.
Under the Parliament of Roan is all Normandy, which contains:
Roan, a Bayliwike.

Eureux a bayliwike co^prehending Vernon, Aigle, Passy, Breteuille, Rugles,
Brain, Hermeinaille, etc. Lisieux, Honflew, Ponteaudemer.

Caux, a bayliwik comprehending Gisors, S. Clear upon Epte. Pontoise is rather
of France, Gournay, Aumale, Neufchastel, Heu, Dieppe, S. Valery upon the sea,
Tescampe, Hour, Harflew, Caudebec.

Alenson a bayliwike.

Caen a bayliwike.

Bayeux, a bailiwike containing Sees, Falais, Guibray, Torigny, Argenton,
Hiesmes, Vire.

Constances, the capital of Constantine, whereto have recourse Aurenches,
Carenton, Valognes, S. Lohay, Poiuel, Granuille a haven, Launde Herould,
Mo^tebourg, Hogue, S. Voast, Barfleur, Cherebourg, Breuall, Briquebec, Amby,
Hogue, which is almost an Island, Gerzaie, Grenezaie, Sere, Islands.

Renes.
Under the Parliament of Renes is Britain, which comprehends:
Renes, Dol, S. Malo otherwise called Alet, Caucal, Combourg, Sambriort,
Dinant, Castle Briand, Lambales, Treguier, alias Landrignat, or
Quimpercorentine, Vannes, S. Brieux, Quintin, Iungon, Auangour, Guimpgand, Leon
alias S. Paul Cornouaill, Rohan, Guimenay, Chambourg, Guerch, Nantes, Aucems,
Clisson, Montagu, Raiz, Blossac, Pont eure, Vitry, Fouggiers.

Under the Parliament of Dijon is Bourgondy, Dijon.
which comprehends.
Dijon a Bayliwike under the which are Beaune, Nintz, Ausonne, S. John de
Laune, and Tallent.

Autune a bayliwike comprehending Monteins, Bourbonency and Semur in Brionois.

The bayliwik of the land of Aux contains Semur in Aux, Aualon, Arnay le duc,
Noyers, Sau lieu, Flauigny, Mombarre, Viteaux, Raniers, Mont S. John le
Moustier, Espoisses.

Chalon a bayliwike.

The bayliwike of the mountains.

Charolois a bayliwike whereof Charolois is the capital town.

Under the Parliament of Grenoble is Daulphine, Grenoble.
which is divided into two parts:
High Dauphine comprehends the Towns of Ambrune, Valence, Gap, Dye, S.
Paul, etc.

Low Dauphine contains Grenoble, Vienne, Romans, Gest, B^ianzon, Mo^telimart,
Triennes, S. Antony of Viennois, S. Valier, Cost, Moustier, castle Dauphine.

Under the Parliament of Aix is Province, Aix.
which comprehends these towns:
Aix, Marseilles, Antibe, S. Honor an isle in the sea, Freins, Erez, Tolon, S.
Victor, S. Maximin, Casteron, Pont S. Esprit, Craux, Tarascon, Martegue, Salon
of Craux, S. Chama, the 3 Mary's, Arles, S. Giles; Aguimortes, Senas, Malemort,
Ourdon, Andage, Escalles, Seiues, Colmars, Castelaume, Riez, Moustier,
Draguignon, Lirques, Folcaquier, Vallensolle, Oigne.

Auignon Cauallon Nice Aurenge and Carpe^tras are not the kings.

Under the Parliament of Tholouze is Languedocke with other Countries, Tholouze
as:
Viuarets, whereof Viuiers is chief.

Velay, wherein stands Puy and Tournon.

Geuoudan, whereof Mande is capital.

Languedocke, which comprehends Toulouse Narbone Carcasson Beziers Agde
Lodesne Castelnaw Ary the chief town of Lauragnes.

Rouergue containing Rhodes Alby and Castres, Albygeois.

Roueray containing Cahors Montaubon Castleserrasin Montech Moissac and
Lausarte.

Guyenne has recourse also to Toulouse.

Foix a County, comprehending the Towns of Paumiers Sauerdun Masers Carmain
Mirepoix and Rieux.

Cominges, containing S. Bertrand Conserans S. Fregeon S. Beat Montregeau
Saliers Coheilles Paumier Esperon. Also in the low country of Cominges,
Lombers Samathan I Will Dodon Muret Ruimes Dez Saueterre and Montpesat.

Isle in Iordain, a county containing the town of Lauignac.

Gaure, a county containing the Towns of Gimont Beaumont and Grenade.

The land of Again comprehending Again Port S. Mari Villeneuf in Agenois Hautesay
Clerac Touers and Mermande.

Condone comprehends Condone Nerac Valence Lairac Romion and Montreal.

Estrac a County, containing Mirand Pauy Castehian of Barbereus Santelix
Cimorre Saramon.

Armignac containing Lectour Auchx Castera Vicynogueron Casanbon Ense.

Bigorre, comprehending Tarbes Try Rauistains Maubourget Baigners Lord.

Under the Parliament of Bourdeaux is Guyenne, Bourdeaux.
which comprehends:
Xaintonge containing Xaintes Blaye Marennes Marans Pons S John d'Angely,
Barbezieux Boury and Soubize.

Perigort containing Perigeux Sarlate Bergerat Linde Miremont Mussidam Lis^e
Riberac Mantrone Branthone and Luneis.

Reolle. Reolle.

The land between two seas, containing S. Basil Montsegur S. Term
Castlemoron Gerind Sameterre S. Macire, the County of Benanges, Liborne
Fronsac.

The territory of Bourdeaux containing Bourdeaux Grave Esparre, the land of
Medoc Blanquefort, the principality of Busch, the country of Laundes, the
duchy of Albret, Chalosse, etc.

Bazadois comprehending Bazas Montdeniarson Castlegeloux Air, the Mas of Air.

Gascoigne containing S. Severe Axe Bayonne S. John de Luz.

The king of Navarre has two Parliaments.
Pau for the territory of Bierne which comprehends Pau Oleron Escarre Ortes
Morlais Nay Pontac Cadeich Nauerrems and Serrances.

S. Palus or S. Pelasge, whereto have recourse the whole Nauarrian Biskay.

FINIS.

