ORTHO-EPIA GALLICA. ELIOTS FRVITS for the French: Enterlaced with a double
new Invention, which teaches to speak truly, speedily and volubly the
French-tongue.

Pend for the practice, pleasure, and profit of all English Gentlemen, who will
endeavor by their own pain, study, and diligence, to attain the natural
Accent, the true Pronounciation, the swift and glib Grace of this Noble,
Famous, and Courtly Language.

Natura and Art. IW
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by John Wolf. 1593.

Al molto Nobile e Mag.co Sig.re il Signor Roberto Dudleio.
SVogliono gli Antichi e moderni scrittori Nobiliss.mo signore, di consecrare
l'Opere loro alli nomi di personaggi di qualita, i quali col valor e auttorita
loro potranno nascondere non solamente gli errori commessi nello style, ma
anchora l'ingegno meno intendente di colui, chi la medesima opera componeua. Et
io nato e nodrito nel contado di Varvik, dove l'Illustrissima casa vostra e
sempre stata honorata non potrei far manco, che tener' questo obligo a S.S. ad
offerirui un picciolo tributo e talento mio per segno di piu agradeuol'
seruitio, supplicandovi humilmente di riceuerlo non risguardando tanto al dono,
quanto alla sincera affettione di colui chi lo presenta: Obtulit vt sacras sua
munera pauper ad aras:
Et placuit pietas officiosa Deo.
Il che ho fatto, non per rispetto che istimassi S.S. priua di tanti doni e
tesori eccellenti delle lingue: le cui altre qualita virtuose, e attioni
caualaresche meritano somma laud fra i cortegiani Inglesi. Supplico adunque
V.S. di pardonarmi questa prosontione, poi che altro non desidero che la sua
candida pro^ettione: la qual mi sara un riparo e ricapito di grande efficacia
contra i maligni, e vna piu degna auttorita per i gentilhuomini di questa terra
affettionati alla lingua Francesca, i quali accettaranno l'opera mia in
migliorparte, vedendola fauorita da S.S. e approuata col honoreuole nome vostro
in front. Offerendomele tra tanto, diuotis.mo seruitore, e prega^dole dal
cielo ogni compita felicita, ogni virtu, valor, sapienza, intendimento delle
lingue, e tutte quelle virtu heroiche che risplendeuano nelli predecessori suoi
illustri, accioche ne siate, come eglino sono stati, fedel suddito alla Maesta
Reale, amico del Paese suo, e un ornamento della Rep. Christiana.

B. l. m. d. v. s. S. d. v. s. Gio. Eliota.

To the learned professors of the French tongue, in the famous city of London,
Io. Eliot Sanita e guadagno.
MEssires, what news from France, can you tell? Still wars, wars. A
heavy hearing truly: yet if you be in good health, have many scholars, get
good store of Crowns, and drink good wine, I doubt not but you shall do well,
and I desire the good God of heaven to continue it so still. Have they had a
fruitful vintage in France this year, or no? me thinks our Bourdeaux wines are
very dear, and in good faith I am very sorry for it. But they will be at a
more reasonable reckoning, if these same lofty leaguers would once crouch and
come to some good composition. A vengeance of the mutinous race of the
demouorers, demogorgons, demi-diuels, who eat up the poor populace of France.
I pray the prince of Paradise to pour down his peace privily upon them, that
we may safely fetch their deifiyng liquor, which dies quickly our flegmaticke
faces into a pure sanguine complexion. Surely for my part, France I love well,
Frenchmen I hate not, and unto you I swear by S. Siobe cap de Gascongne, that
I love a cup of new Gascon or old Orleans wine, as well as the best French of
you al: Which love you must know was ingendered in the sweet soil of France,
where I piaffed like a bon companion, with a steel at my girdle, till the
Friars (a canker of the curssed Covent) fell to drawing of naked knives, and
killed indeed the good king Henry of France, the more was the pity. Since
which time I retired my self among the merry muses, and by the work of my
pen and ink, have dezinkhornifistibulated a fantastical Rapsody of
dialogisme, to the end that I would not be found an idle drone among so many
famous teachers and professors of noble languages, who are very busy daily in
devising and setting forth new books, and instructing our English gentlemen in
this honorable city of London: but after the worthy example of the wise
Philosopher Diogenes, who among the Syracusians seeing every man bestir
himself, some to repair walls, others to new furbish their arms, some
sounding drums, others trumpets, some riding horses, others trayning soldiors,
and al in very great expedition of war; least he should seem only idle
amongst so many busybodies, what does he good folks? what does he? marie I
shall tell you by and by, if you will give me but a little leisure; In great
vehemency of spirit he tucketh up his sleeves, girdeth close his gown,
charge on his shoulders his tun, the imperial palace, and runs up to
the top of a high mountain nere the city, where in all diligence he begins
to belabour his roling city, to set it going, to turn it, ouerturne it,
spurn it, bind it, wind it, twind it, throw it, overthrow it, tumble it,
ru^ble it, iumble it, did ring it, swing it, fling it, ding it, made it leap,
skip, hip, trip, thumpe, iumpe, shake, crake, quake, washed it, swasht it, dashed
it, slasht it, naild it, traild it, tipped it, tapt it, rapt it, temperd it,
tamperd it, hammerd it, hoopt it, knocked it, rockt it, rubd it, tugd it, lugd
it, stopped it, vnstopt it, tied it fast, then losed it again, rusht it, crushed
it, brusht it, pusht it, charmd it, armd it, farmd it, set it an end, laid it
along, harnest it, varnest it, burnisht it, furnished it, stickte it full of
feathers, caparrassond it, and rold it amain from the steep rock to the low
bottom, ouertakes it, takes it on his shoulder, mounts the hill, and turles it
down again with violence, stays it, plays with it, and fetches it a mile
from him. Whom when the Siracusians espied, what did they, I pray you? what
might they imagine? what could they think? did they not laugh at the poor
philosophers extreme pains? Go look if you have the leisure: and do not blame
me, if because I would not be found a loyterer in mine own country, among so
many virtuously occupied, I have put my pen to paper: if I have been busy,
labourd, sweat, dropped, studied, devised, sought, bought, borrowed, turned,
translated, mined, fined, refined, enterlined, glosed, composed, and taken
intolerable toil to show an easy entrance and introduction to my dear
countrymen, in your curious and courtesan French tongue: to the end to advance
them as much as may be, in the knowledge of all virtuous and noble qualities,
to the which they are all naturally addicted. But I pray you be ready quickly
to cavil at my book, I beseech you heartily calumniate my doings with speed,
I request you humbly control my method as soon as you may, I earnestly
entreat you hiss at mine inventions, I desire you to peruse my periodicall
punctuations, find fault with my pricks, nicks, and tricks, prove them not
worth a pin, not a point, not a pish: argue me a fond, foolish, frivolous and
fantastical author, and persuade every one that you meet, that my book is a
false, fained, slight, confused, absurd, barbarous, lame, imperfect, single,
uncertain, childish piece of work, and not able to teach, and why so?
Forsooth because it is not your own, but an Englishmans doing. Fail you not
to do so, if you love me, and would have me do the like for you another time.
So with the gentle Beso las manos, the Petite accollade, and with the Courtesan
clip clasping you fast by the buttockes, I pray the God Aesculapius patron of
Physicians, Mercury the God of cunning, and Dis the father of French crowns,
in santy long time to conserve your Signiories, that you may have as fair a
life in this world, as had the goodly and wise Philosopher Epictetus, who did
nothing else all his life time but take his eases, and as a renowned poet says
in your own language: Saulter, dancer, fair les tours,
Boire vin blanc and vermeil,
Et ne rien fair tous les iours,
Que conter escuz au soleil.
Id est,
Skip and dance, trip on toe,
Drinking White and Claret Wine:
And naught every day did do,
But tell crowns and bags of coin.


I greet you all, gentle doctors of Gaul, Adieu.

To the Gentlemen Readers, students of the French tongue, Io. Eliot salutation.
MY loving Countrymen, you that be students of this famous language, and desire
nothing more then the sweet fruition thereof, which if you might be sure to
attain speedily, ye would spare no small cost, nor refuse any reasonable
pains, Two things I know you will request at my hands before I go any further:
first, that I should dilate in some good speeches, the dignity of the French
tongue, whose praises if I should repeat from the beginning, a flood of
Eloquence would not suffice: but I will be brief, and it shall content you
only to know, that it is a Courtly speech, spoken and understood by most
Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen in all parts of Christendom, because still
the finest wits delight to read books of State, Policy, Marciall discipline,
Physic, Humanity, History, Divinity, and a number of most rare spirits
have written thereof in French. Some are given to read Poesies and Loue-toies,
the sweetest that are to be read are in French, pend by Bartas, Marot, Ronsard,
Belleau, de Ports, and diverse other wits inimitable in Poesy: some to follow
arms and the conduct of war, the French is the only tongue for the
Marcialist: others to traffic with the stranger, the French is the only
trading tongue in Europe. And again, if we mark well the situation of
France, it lies in the very heart of Christiantie, and thither are sent
Ambassadors from al other quarters of Europe, from England, Scotland,
Pole-land, Constantinople, Italy, Barbary, Spain, Netherland, Germany,
Agents from Malta, Rhodes, Sicilie, and from the Seigniorie of Venice, the
Popes Noncio from Rome: and the French they have their Lidgers, Agents, and
Ambassadors with all these States again, beside the great traffic and
intercourse of merchants from all these parts, and the recourse of the French
trading with them all again, makes their language very famous, and in very
high request and estimation.

Secondly you will desire me to show you what ease this book of mine shall
bring to the learning of the French more then other books have done heretofore.
You must understand that the greatest difficulty which does hinder our English
Nation from the speedy attaining of this language, is the true and natural
pronounciation: for to help and ease the which, after the example of some
learned French, but especially of two, James Pelletier, that whetstone of wit,
and Peter Ramus that glorious star of Arts and Sciences, who invented many
new letters for the reducing of their mother tongue the French, into a more
easy and true characterie, I have sounded the French by our English Alphabet,
and by two sundry methods enterlaced the natural accent and true
pronounciation, to the end that any may more easily hereafter find it out of
himself.

Mine invention is this: First I have set down absolute and brief rules of
pronounciation.

2 Secondly I have added to six chapters the true pronounciation of every word
wholly, and have put certain little strikes (called approches) between the
sillables that are to be spoken roundly and glib with one breath, which help
for the volubilitie and swift roling of the speech, one of the greatest graces
thereof.

3 Thirdly I have annexed collaterally the English value of al difficult French
letters, vowels, dipthongues, and tripthongues, with their true sound by our
English letters.

4 Fourthly, I have written the whole book in a merry fantastical vain,
and to confirm and stir up the wit and memory of the learner, I have
diuersified it with variety of stories, no less authentical then the devises
of Lucians dialogues: as of the Lark and her note of Tee-ree-lee-ree: the
Nightingale and her aubade: the Spider and the Spideresse her daughter: the
Seigneur Valerian, and his beso las manos: the terrible Vespasian, and his
cutting and slashing: the Seignior Cocodrill, and his martial Rhetoric, with
many other fantastical plaisanteries to delight, not to dull your spirits.
These are profound and deep mysteries I may tell you, and very worthy the
reading, and such as I think you have not had performed in any other book that
is yet extant.

It follows then next, that I set down the Reader a good course to take some
fruit of this my book, which if he will learn, he must get the true meaning
of the French, conferring it word for word with the English, and when he has
so conferred it, that in reading he does understand the French well, let him
begin after one months progress a little and a little to lay his hand on the
French to hide it, and looking only on the English, try with him self how
swiftly he is able to Frenchifie the English, and if he miss, let him reuise
and correct himself still by his book, till he be perfect and get some habit
of the tongue that way. This I have learned by long experience to be the
readiest way to attain the knowledge of any language, for that we of
Englishmen make French, and not of French learn English.

Gentlemen I propounded unto you in my Scholar, a general method of learning
and teaching all languages, contrived by Nature and Art, the which does hold
with the rule of Justice only, and is conformable to the precepts of Aristotle
the father of Art, and son of Nature. And except that only method, none can
be true: but the dispute thereof belongs not to this place. I will dilate it
more at large in a book in Latin De Natura and Art linguae Gallicae, which
you shall by Gods grace have so speedily as I may, imprinted.

In the mean time these two methods I think shall be needful for all young
scholars, who are troubled with the difficulties of the French pronounciation,
which indeed is an intricate thing, and for any English at the first or second
sight irremarkeable. And that thou may have a view thereof, come hither
gentle Reader, I pray thee cast an eye after the Table of my book, look a
little, view, see what a dish of rare dainties there is for thee. Those are the
difficulties of the French pronounciation.

Do thou see what a sea, what a gulf, there is? Thou had need of Theseus
thread to guide thee out of that Labyrinth. Tell me I pray thee, what device
thou will have to help thee here. It must needs be some new mystery, some
happy invention that shall stand thee in steed, for in all those vowels and
letters that thou see, the French differ from themselves, and from us English
in many more. So that I think reckon up all the Tongues that thou have ever in
thy life heard talk of, Hebrew, C^ldaean, Syriacke, Arabian, Greek, Sclauon,
Russe, Tartarian, Turkish, Moresko, Latin, Italian, Spanish, English, Dutch,
amongst all these find not a more ticklish tongue to pronounce, then the French
yet deemed such a jewel, so dearly bought, and so much desired of all. This is
then the best ease that I can do thee gentle Reader, I have brought that gulf
of difficulties into this narrow spring, and contrived that maze within this
little modele, whereof in a few* letters I make thee demonstration in the
margin. This is the demonstration of my last method, this is my easiest Art,
this is my best skill and last invention. ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh
aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee
eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie
zie ii ziee io zio io^ zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu
ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci
see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui g^e gueu geu m
fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x
fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




I present you then loving countrymen both the French counterfeit and the
English colors, you that be Englishmen censure favorably of an Englishmans
imperfections, for this picture was painted in have, and many faults have
passed the pen and the print, yet I have gone as nigh as I could aim, or so
near as any English colors might imitate, or else I am double deceived in my
aim and my colors both. And if any French will paint this piece better, the
pensill is at his gentle command, for I assure you I had some pain to make
our English hybber-gybber iump just with the Iargon of France.

And if any one say that I have plowed with other men's heighfars, answer for me
in mine absence, Countrymen, and when I am present, I will answer for my self:
The truth is I turned over some few French authors, and where I espied any
pretty example that might quicken the capacity of the learner, I presumed to
make a piece of it fly this way, to set together the frame of my fantastical
Comedy, pulling here a wing from one, there an arm from another, from this a
leg, from that a buttocke, and out of every one I had some share for the better
ornament of my work. And to the end to defraud no man of his glory, I will
tell you by whom I have best profited: I have taken a few pleasant co^ceits
out of Francis Rabelais that merry Grig, an example or two out of Lewis Viues,
a score or two of verses out of Bartasius: and put all together that I have
bought, begd or borrowed, it will not all amount to make two sheets of printed
paper, and I cannot deny but the rest is of mine own invention and
disposition.

I see well my preface is too long: to conclude, I will be brief, and shake
you straight by the hands, but because here are three or four asses, I shall
shake the^ first by the ears: here is a French tucke for thee Timon of Athens,
here is a dash in the lips for thee Diogenes, dog Cynopaean, for thee Momus a
mew, a zest for thee Zoylus, and for all Sycophants that carry that in their
tongues, that the glystering Glow-worme has in her venomous tail, that is
fire to set men's fame on fire; a fig, a fly, a fillip: let them do their
worst, for I have done my best, and here I turn all such asses to grass
together, till I find them out another time by their long ears. Gentle Readers
and courteous countrymen, it is time that I kiss your courteous hands. So fare
you well, 28 of April, 1593.

An easy Table for the finding out of every several Dialogue and Chapter.
The contents of the first Book.
Dialogue 1 THe Scholar. Fol. 1 Dialogue 2 The Tongues. 16 Dialogue 3 The
Traveler. 41
The Contents of the second Book.
Chap. 1 THe vprising. Fol. 17 Chap. 2 The Courtesies. 20 Chap. 3 The Walking.
23 Chap. 4 The Exchange. 26 Chap. 5 The Pawn. 30 Chap. 6 The Banquet of
Dronkards. 35 Chap. 7 Pastime of Cards. 54 Chap. 8 Dicing. 58 Chap. 9
Tenise-play. 59 Chap. 10 Hunting. 61 Chap. 11 Falkener. 63 Chap. 12 Barber. 64
The second Method.
Chap. 1 THe Booke-seller. Fol. 67 Chap. 2 The Mercer. 68 Chap. 3 The
Goldsmith. 70 Chap. 4 The Draper. 14 Chap. 5 The Painter. 74 Chap. 6 The
Armorer. 82 Chap. 7 The Apoticarie. 84 Chap. 8 The Horseman. 86 Chap. 9 The
Tailor. 90 Chap. 10 The Shomaker. 93 Chap. 11 The Debtor. 94 Chap. 12 The
Sergeant. 98 Chap. 13 The Way. 100 Chap. 14 The Thief. 104 Chap. 15 The
Mariner. 106 Chap. 16 The Sickman. 110 Chap. 17 The Inn. 116 Chap. 18 The
Going to bed. 120 Chap. 19 The Slasher. 124 Chap. 20 The Bragger. 134
Conclusion of the Parliament. 144
Errata.
The faults of the first Book.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 4 34 Ie suis. read I'ay este. 8 20 habit
habitude 10 7 a cree crea 12 5 sont e^^e furent 14 25 d'eux d'icelles. 22 3
commencoit commenca Ibid. 4 taschoit tascha Ibid. 7 faisoit feist Ibid. 10
enuoioie enuoya 32 23 fuit fut 34 17 tous toutes 37 33 l'hauteur la haulteur 44
32 mansion mayson Imperiale 46 27 mansion mayson Royale 48 33 merchande
marchande correct i^ so every where. 50 24 beau^ belles 56 14 per par 60 9
trent trente. The faults of the second Book.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 17 6 first read second 18 17 cramoisin cramoisi
Ibid. 17 cramoe'sin^ cramoe'zee-^. 19 37 mirouer miroir meeroe'^ 25 20 ooest
ouest* 26 26 folastrant folatranta- 32 23 mirouers meeroe'r 60 29 blo^ out
quarente cinq, and all the line. 62 26 braquets braques.

In the Italian Epistle,
la medesima opera le medesime opere.

I Promised thee, gentle Reader, to set down the difficulties of the French
pronounciation: because it may seem that the method which I have dilated in my
book is somewhat obscure, and had need of more ample demonstration. I will
therefore give thee here a few Rules which although they be not perfect and
sure, yet shall they be as Mercuries finger to direct thee in thy progress of
learning: See here then the Atoms of the French tongue, the which to observe
well, thou had need have an hundred eyes as Argus had. Look whether thou
have any skill or not, ai and ay ai ay ay ain aine ai or ay am an au aille aou
e e e e ea eay ei ey e-e e-e-e cille co e eu eau


if thou have not, learn to sound these vowels: after our English manner e
long, Except fay, may, gea^, cathay, sound ey.
as l'aymant, le-mant, the Adamant.

Before gn sound a a^ chastaigne, shata-nheh, A Chestnut.

Before l sound a as caillou, ca-lhoo, A Peeble.

A Termination of the Preterperfectense, sound ee as ie parlay, zie parlee, I
have spoken.

ein. as Vilain, vee-lein, a Villain.

eneh. as Roman, Romeneh, Romish.

Before a vowell in the midst of a word, sound Liquid, as Payen, Pa-y-an, A
Pagan. Ayeulx, a-y-ewz, Ancestors.

awm, de profundo nare, as chamber, shaumber, A chamber.

aun, de profundo nare, as sante, saunte, Health.

o. long. as Austruche, otrusheh, An Estridge Except espause keeps aw.
They differ in France much in the pronouncing thereof, for they sound in many
places plain aw in most words, and in others o long altogether.

a-lh^h. as Caille, escaille Ca-lheh, eka-lheh, A Quail, a shell.

oo or o Greek, as Aoust, O ot, August.

Masculine is marked with an Accent thus e, sound e very long, as bonte,
beauty, boonte, beaw^e, Bounty, Beauty.

Neuter, or e before r, sound ea, as terre, tearreh, Earth.

Neuter, or e, before s, sound ea, as feste, feateh, A Feast.

Feminine eh, as half an English e very short or a breath only, as Pere,
Pereh. Poire, Poe'reh, Father. Pear.

a. as lean, zlean, John.

Termination of a Preterperfectense, ee, as Mangeay, manziee, Nageay, naziee, I
have eaten, Swimmed.

e Masc. as Seiche, sesheh, Dry. Except ie vey, sey, and their deriuatiues.
Seigneur, etc sound ee.


Double, e-eh, as leuee, leve-eh, A cawsie.

Treble, e-e-eh. as Creee, cre-e-eh, Created.

e-lheh. as Treille, tree lheh, A Portall.

o. George, zIor-zIeh, George.

Marked thus with two pricks, diuides it self from the vowels following or
going before, as queue, kew-eh, A Tail.

ew. Whiningly, as feu, few, Fire.

eaw. Sound all three vowels, as veau, veaw, A Calfe.

Sometime it loses his first vowell, as beaucoup, sound bawcoop, or bo-coop,
Much.

eoi elle eine em en et ent i ie ye i iei ieu ille ia ie io iu ieu iou joy
io oy oine oyne ou oeu oui or ouy om and on ouille u ulle u uei y y^u c c ce
ci ch d ge gi gn or ngn gua gue gui or guy ll m m ph qua que qui quoy s s sch
ss th tion x c, f, g, l, m, n, q, r bre, cre, chre, dre, fre, pre, tree ble,
gle, ure.


oe' as Veoir, voer, To see.

e-leh. as Rondelle, roondeleh, belle, beleh, A Target, Fair.

eneh. as Vein, veneh, A vain.

am. as Embusche, ambusheh, An Ambuscado.

an. as Encre, anchor, Ink Except rien, mien, tien, etc. sound ee-en.
. Except, if it follow i in words of two siilables, then it sounds as en does
in English.

Signifiyng and e Masculine.

A Termination of the verb plural, et short, as ils parlerent, ee parleret,
They spoke.

ee. English, as Idiot, ee-dee or, An Idiot.

Sound both the vowels one after another swiftly, as miel, siel, mee-el,
fee-el, Honey, Gall.

With two pricks, as e before, etc.

Sound the first two vowels, as vieille, vee-e-lheh, An old trot.

eew. as Dieu, Deew, God.

ee-lheh Except ville, anguille, mill, sound ee-leh
as Fille, fee-lheh, Castille, Castee-lheh, A daughter, Castilia.

These sillables sound as if they had a z prefixed over them to make them
hizze, and so you shall find them written with a z over them in my book, thus:
zIa. Ialousie, zialoozee-eh, Ielosie. zIe. Ienisse, zieneesseh, a Heighfare
zIo. My-iour, mee-ioor, Noonday. zIu. Iuif, zIewif, A Jew. zIeu. Ieudy,
zIewdee, Thursday. zIou. Iournee, zioor-ne-eh, a journey. zIoy. Ioyaulx,
zIo-y-auz, Jewels.


oe'. as Miroir, meeroe'r, A looking glass. Loy, loe', Roy, roe' Law, King:
except a vowell follow, then sound the vowels apart, as Boyaulx, bo-y-awz,
guts.

oe'neh. as Moyne, moe'neh, A Moonk Except Royne sound Reenneh.


oo or o Greek, as Coucou, Coo-koo, Hibou, Hee-boo, Cuckoo, Owl.

ew. as Soeur, sewr, Coeur, kewr, Sister, Heart.

oo-ee. as Ouir, oo-eer, To hear. Ouy, oo-wee, or o- we, Yea.

De profundo nare, as Ombre, nomb're, montaigne, fontaine, oomber, noomber,
moonta-nheh, foonteneh, shadow, number, mountain, fountain.

o- lheh, or oo-lheh. as Grenouille, grenoo-lheh, Andouille, andoo-lheh, Frog,
Chitterling.

ew. as Tu, Tew, Thou: sound it whiningly with a pewling voice.

u leh. as Nulle, newleh, None.

With two pricks as e end i before, etc.

ei. as Cueillir, kei-lheer, To gather Except vey, etc.
.

ee. My-nuict, meenuit, My-mars, meemarz, Midnight, Midst of March.

eew. as Yeulx, eewz, Eyes.

Alters his sound to g, in becasse, second, secondement, secret, secretaire,
secretement, etc. sound Begasseh, segoont, etc. Woodcocke: second, secondly:
secret, secretary, secretly, etc.

With a tail, sound double ss, as Garcon, garssoon, Macon, massoon, Boy, Masen.

se sce. as Cedule, seduleh, Ciron, seeroon, A scroll, a worm in the hand.
Except Cercher, shersher: Rechercher, reshersher, To seek, To find out, and
their deriuatiues.

sh. as Cheual, sheual: Chauue, shoueh, Horse, bald Except Chorde, Eschole,
Echo, Christ, Christophle, Chrestien, Cholere, choleric etc where h is not
sounded.
.

Final, that is, at the end of a word before a vowell, sound t, as Quand a
moy, Kanta moe', As for me.

Almost zie ziee. as Gemeau, ziemeaw, A Twinne. Un Gibet, zieebet, A Gallows.
Gibbier, zi^ebbee-er, Wildfoule.

nnh or nni. as Mignon, mee-nhoon: oingnon, oin-nhoon, A Darling, an Onion
Sign, Digne, Cygne, Cognoistre, etc. sound not g at all.
.

ga. as Language, langa-zieh, A Language.

ge. as Muguette, mugeteh, A Nutmeg.

gee. as Guiterne, geeterneh: Guydon, geedoon, A Gittarne, an Ensign.

One l single, as Salle, saleh, A Hall.

Final, n, as Dam, dan: nom, noon: renom, renoon: Loss, Name, Fame.

Before these labiall letters, b, f, m, p, v, cons. is sounded doubtfully
between m and n, as Mon friar, mon pere, sound Moom frereh, moom pereh, etc.

f. as Phiole, fee oleh, A Violl.

ka. as Quadran, kadran, qua drin, ka dreen, A dial, a farthing.

ke. as Quen ouille ke-noo-lheh, A Distaffe.

kee. as Quinaud, keenawt, A Monkie.

koe'. as Pourquoy, poorkoe': dequoy, dekoe', Why, Of what.

Single between two vowels, z, as cerise, seree-zeh, A Cherrie Martirises,
deuali^es presuposer, resembler, resentir, keep s.
. And in the end of a word, a vowell or dipthong following, as Allon^ a Romme,
sound Alloonza Rommeh, Let us go to Rome.

In the midst of a word is a monster in the French tongue.

sh. as Mousche, moosheh, A Fly.

Sound c, as Fesse, feceh: fosse, soceh: fusse, fuceh, A Butlocke, a Grave,
Were.

t. as Theater, teater: atheiste, ateesteh, a Theater, an Atheist.

see-oon, as Caution, cosee-oon, Bale.

Final s, as Deux, doux: dews, doos, Two, Sweet. Before a vowell or a
dipthong, Perplex, sound x and in words derived of Latin, except lexiue,
soixante, sound ss.
z, as Ioyeux a dire, io-y-ew-za deereh, Glad to tell.

Final, retain their sounds for the most part, and sound as though an h
sounded with them, which makes the tongue to hang in the midst of the mouth, as
o^il, conseil: eilh, coonseilh, an Eye, Counsel, etc. Yet sometimes in talk
the French speak so thick, that they eclipse them. So the rule is uncertain.

When they are final sillables, have their vowell e silent, or else sound it
very short between the mute and the consona^t, as for example, Membre, mamber,
A Member. Cancre, kanker, a Canker. As it were mambr' cancr', etc.

Apostrophos,
Or the rule of two vowels, is, when one vowell is excluded by another, and it
is always in some of these particles, ce, de, ie, le, la, me, ne, que sy,
grande, as c'est a vous, It Is yours, etc.

Synalepha
Is an Elision of e Feminine, or of one of these particles, son, ton, before an
open vowell or dithongue, as for example: I'ayme en effait t'amour non, ta
monnoye:
Carma mignionne en ce prend plus de joy. id est,

I love indeed, thy love, no, but thy money,
For therein takes more joy my pretty Conie.


Another, La belle Helaine aim Antoine amoureusement, Say, La Belelenemantoe'
namoorewzemant. Fair Helen loves Antonie amorously.

The Rule of two consonants
Is when a syllable or word ends in one or two Consonants, and the next
syllable or word begins with a diverse consonant, the first of the two or
both, for the smooth and glib pronounciation of the French are to be
suppressed, as Deux petits chiens iappans font grand bruit, pronounce, Dew
petee shee-en ziappan foon gran bruit, Two little dogs barking, make great
noise.

The volubilitie of the French tongue.
THe French use in one period (if a word end with a consonant, and the next
following begin with an open vowell or dipthongue, no point or comma coming
between) to pronounce three, four, or five words with a swift voice together,
as, Prins en amor ardant embrassoit un image, sound,
Preenzanamoorardantambrasso ettewnneemazieh, as if it were all but one word.

Accent. e -foem. es ent

Every letter or syllable final is long, except these three, e foem. es, ent,
which are short, as mere sound mereh short, Mother. Peers, sound Peers very
short A pres after is excepted.
, Fathers, as Ent In the third person plural of verbes, as ils aiment, sound
emet, very short, They love.

These are the greatest difficulties which I have observed in the French
tongue; there are infinite other, which if they should be all written, a little
volume would not contain them; but the Reader shall find some ease for the
pronounciation, if he read my book and use conference, for Use makes
perfectness, and so farewell.

Finis.
ORTHO-EPIA GALLICA. Or Le Parliament des Babillards. Id est: The Parliament of
Pratlers.
L'escholier. Dialogue premier.
DE LA MANIERE d'aprendre and enseigner les langues estranges.
DIeu vous guard, monsieur.

Soyez le tres-bien venu, sire.

Estes vous sort empesche?

Pas autrement: vous plait-il quelque chose?

Ie vien deuers vous, requerant vostre adresse and aid.

S'il y a chose en mon petit pouuoir, en quoy ie vous puisse seruir and aider,
ie fuis a vous, commandez moy librement.

Ie vous remercie bien humblement.

Orca, que dites vous a moy, asteure?

Faites vous profession des langues?

Oui-dea, I'enseigne le Grec, Latin, Italien, and Francois: L'Hebraique, la
Caldaique, Persique, Turquesque, Arabesque, Egyptiaque, Espagnolle, l'Almande,
Escossoise, Irlandoise, l'Angloise, ie n'enseigne pas.

M'enseignerez vous la Geometry, l'Arithmeticque, and la Cosmographie?

Ie vous monstreray la Dialecticque, la Rhetorique, la Musicque, and la
Grammaire.

Scauez vous iouer du Luc, Cystre and de la Pendore?

Monsieur, pour vous en dire en peu de parolles, i'enseigne seulement la la^gue
Grecque and la Latin: and si d'aduenture quelque gentilhomme prendroit plaisir
de conioindre l'estude de la langue Italienne and Francoise ensemble auec les
lettres Latins, ie mettray mon deuoir de luy profiter si tossed que possible
seroit.

S'il vous plaist de prendre un peu de peine auec moy, ie n'en seray point
ingrat.

Ie n'en doubt point: pour mon regard ie suis content de prendre quelque
peine, si vous auez envy d'apprendre.

Ie ne desire rien plus.

Vous dites bien.

Or quant a moy ie vouldroye lire les Oraisons de Ciceron pour l'eloquence. Ie
desirerois aussi de scauoir le Francois: comme aussi d'entendre parfaictement
les histoires du Tite Live: car il a escrit chooses de tres-gra^de consequence.

Escoutez monsieur: il vous faut auoir un ferme propos and resolution a
poursuivre voz estudes; and non pas pour fair comme plusieurs de noz Anglois
font ordinairement, qui commenceront vne langue auiourd'huy, and vne autre
demain: puis apres ayants apprins un: Comm' portez vous? en Francois: un: Come
state? en Italien: and un: Beso las manos: en Espagnol: s'estiment pour des
braues hommes tout quant and quant, and gens dignes de porter un ambassade au
grand-Seigneur

Vous auez pourtant en Angleterre des autres gentils-ho^mes qui sont bien
affectionnez aux langues, and mesmes qui en parle^t rondement and auec fort
bonne grace.

I'ay veu encor bien peu de tells.

Vous n'auez pas hante a la cour, ny vescu a Londres, ou les pouuez veoir and
ouir: and en trouuerez aussi a Londres and ailleurs, plusieurs autres qui
seroye^t bien aises d'apprendre, s'il y auoit des pedagogues doctes pour leur
fair lecon.

Que dites vous? Il y a tant des Italie^s and Francois qui mo^strent leur
la^guages a gages par la ville de Londres.

Les Italiens and Francois qui enseignent icy, selo^ le dire d'aucuns, qui ont
hante auec eux, sont un peu trop hautains, and ne s'accommodent pas longuement
au naturel de nous autres Anglois.

Pourquoy dites vous cela?

Pource qu'ils sont capricieux and superbes.

Vous leur faites tort en disant cela, a mon aduis: il y a d'eux come des
Anglois, and des bons and des mauuais. Ne les co^de^nez pas tous pour un qui
soit mescha^t; car il y a des perso^nages doctes and de grand scauoir retyrez
and refugiez a Londres, qui enseignent les langues, and qui meritent d'estre
bien payez pour leur peines.

Il y a parmi eux, a dire la verite quelques gens de bien; aussi y en a il
quelques mescha^tes testes, ie die bien, bestes and serpents, qui ont empoisonne
par le venin de leur scauoir la nation Angloise auec les oeuures du Nicolas
Machiauel and du Pierre Aretin, tous pleins and farcis de vilennie and
mescha^cete; qui meritent pour leur peines quelques coups d'estrapades ou
basto^nades, and y estre chassez horse du royaume d'Angleterre. Tell doit estre
le guerdon and salaire de ces pestifereux. On deuvroit bannir tells pestes
horse d'une Republique Chrestienne.

Vous dites vray certes. Ie suis este escholier a un ou deux d'iceux; mais il
ne me plaist pas de leur maniere d'enseigner, car ils prendront argent deua^t
main, and quand ils sont paiez, ils ne se soucient gueres du profit des
escholiers pour leur instruire les rudiments de leur language un peu, qui n'est
pas grand besongne.

Quel est leur order en enseignant?

Cest seulement de lire quelque demy-page, and le construire, qui n'est pas
grand' chose aussi: and ne targero^t plus d'vne demy-heure a fair la lecon, de
sort qu'ils font toute chose a demi.

Or dites moy, ie vous en pry monsieur, quel estimez vous le meilleur moyen
pour apprendre les langues?

C'est cestuy-la qui nous est enseigne par Nature and par Art.

Comment par Nature and par Art? les mots ne naissent point auec nous, ains il
faut que nous les apprenio^s par hantise and long usage.

Ie ne nyeray pas cela: and ie die bien que l'vsage est roy des languages du
monde: encore ya il quelque adresse and invention heureuse en l'esprit humain
pour y plus-tost paruenir a la perfection d'eux auec facilite: and ie die que
cela se fait par Nature and par Art.

Quel Autheur m'alleguerez vous?

Plusieurs doctes personnages ont observe cest order and method, en enseignant
les langues: enter autres Alunno, Italien, en sa Fabrique du monde.

Ie trouue son liver bien confus and difficil.

Quant a moy ie le trouue fort beau, artiste, and excellent certes.

Qu'entendez vous donc par son order de Nature?

Non autre chose, que l'ordre des chooses naturelles.

Ie n'entends pas ce que vous voulez dire.

Ie veux dire les noms simples de toutes chooses creees par Nature rengees
ensemble: car iamais en scaurio^s nous parler vne langue parfaictement, deuant
que scachions nommer and appeller toute chose simplement par son nom propre and
commun.

Ce seroit vne chose bien difficile, attendu que la Nature des chooses est si
diverse.

Rien moins, car elle tient en toutes chooses qu'vne bien petite and simple
principaute.

Que dites vous de l'Art doncques, que nous enseigne autreme^t que la Nature?

Ie die, que celuy qui veut bien enseigner, il luy faut marier l'Art auec la
Nature.

Par Art que voulez vous entendre?

Les precepts and reigles de la Grammaire; and l'authorite des hommes scauants,
laquelle est la plus avouee and approuuee au monde.

Certes monsieur vous estes trop profond and obscur pour mon entendement.

Si est ce pourtant, que ie ne parle point en Aenigme.

Aussi ne suis-ie pas un Oedipus pour interpreter ces problemes: car il m'est
aduis que parlez des premieres intentions Logicalles.

Mon Dieu que vous estes un peu dur d'esprit.

Comme^t enseignez vous monsieur?

I'enseigne par Nature and par Art.

Les autres n'enseignent-ils pas tout du mesme?

Nenny, ils enseignent, iene scay ny comment ny quoy.

Ma foy i'en scay autant qu'auparauant. Vous enseignez les langues, dites vous,
par Nature and par Art: Ie vous en pry, espluchez a moy par le menu ces terms
un peu plus clairement.

Escoutez donc: Ie veux dire, que i'enseigne par deux moyens: l'vn touch un
Method de Nature, l'autre un method de l'Art. Le premier enseigne les noms
simples and purs des chooses naturelles: le second touch la racine and
fondement des langues: and considere principallement les noms, les verbes and
la naifue prononciation selon l'equite Grammaticale. Car en ces trois consiste
le plus profond mistere de toutes langues: pource qu'ils aydent beaucoup le
judgment, l'inuention, and la memoire, a lyre, ente^dre and escrire.

Voulez vous proposer and mettre en auant ceste maniere d'enseigner dez le
premier iour du commencement d'vn ieune escholier.

Non, non, il luy faudra ietter un fondement touchant la racine des noms and
verbes, and qu'il soit un peu auance en la langue qu'il estudie, deua^t qu'on
luy present ce method puis apres on pourra enseigner l'escholier a traduire
Dialogues, Commedies and Prose, and luy entamer le method de Nature and de
l'Art; qui enge^dreront la pratticque and l'habit de parler vistement, and
parfaicteme^t ente^dre tout ce qui se presentera en lysant, parlant, and
escriuant.

Monstrez moy de grace un exemple familier afin de me satis-faire plus
amplement.

En voyci deux: ie veux commencer auec un de Dieu, qui est le Prince and Roy de
Nature, and finiray auec un autre du Diable l'ennemi de Dieu and de la Nature.

Le Method de Nature.
DIeu le Pere.

Jesus Christ le Fills.

Le Saint Esprit.

La Deite.

La Trinite.

Tout-puissant.

Creer.

Le Ciel.

Le Firmament.

Le Monde.

Vne Estoile.

Vne Sphere.

Le Throsne de gloire.

Vne Legion des Anges.

Un Ange.

Un Faux-Dieu.

Lucifer.

Vne Deesse.

Vne Idolle.

Un Idolatre.

La Terre.

Nostre Saulueur.

Nostre Redempteur.

Filz unique

Bien-heureux.

Le peuple de Dieu, bien-aime.

Crucifier.

Meurtrir.

Un Iuif.

Un Infidel.

La Practicque de l'Art.
DIeu le Pere Tout-puissant, auec son Filz Jesus Christ, and le Saint-Esprit,
c'est a dire, la Deite ou la Saint Trinite, a cree le Ciel, le Firmament, les
Estoiles and autres rondeurs celestes, appellees Spheres pour son habitation,
and estant enuironne en son Throsne de gloire auec legions des Anges, a
confondu tous les faux Dieux and Deesses de la Terre, ne veut point des Idols
ny Idolatres, a chasse les Anges qui pecheoient, Lucifer and ses compagnons du
Ciel, and a enuoye Jesus Christ son Filz unique and bien-heureux nostre
Saulueur and Redempteur, pour estre pour les pechez du monde crucify and
meurtri des Iuifs, iadis le peuple de Dieu bien-aime, ores vne Nation
Infidelle, cruelle and vagabonde par tous les coins du Monde.

Ceci est le premier exemple, le second s'ensuit a l'autre page.

Le Method de Nature.
UN Ange.

Un Diable.

Un Esprit maling.

L'ennemi de Dieu.

La justice divine.

L'Enfer.

Un Abisme.

Lucifer.

Beelzebub.

Astaroth.

Le Prince des Diables.

Un Demon.

Un Daemoniac.

Un Diablottin.

Vne Diablesse.

Punition.

Peche.

Tomber.

Gehenner.

Enchainer.

Tormenter.

Brusler.

Feu eternel.

Feu inextinguible.

Fumer.

Flamboyer.

Sulphur.

Poix.

Vne Ame damnee.

Les peines d'enfer.

Obscur.

Puant.

Tenebreux.

S'entrebattre.

S'entre-frapper.

Pleurer.

Grincer les dens.

Tempter.

Maudire.

Ietter les tisons.

La Pratticque de l'Art.
LEs Anges pechants sont este faicts Diables and Esprits-malings, ennemis de
Dieu and des hommes, and par la justice divine iettez de leur gloire en haut
tomberent au plus profond Abisme d'Enfer. Ou Dieu auoit prepare vne place de
punition digne de leur peche, and a mis Lucifer, Beelzebub and Astaroth,
Demons, Princes regnants sur les autres Diablottins, gehennez, torme^tez and
enchaynez tous ensemble au feu eternel, and inextinguible. Ou aussi descende^t
toutes les autres Ames temptees a mal fair, sans s'en repentir, and sont
damnees es peines mesmes d'enfer, estant un lieu plein de Sulphur and de Poix,
fort obscur, fumant, puant, tenebreux and tousiours bruslant: ou ils seront a
tous-iamais s'entrebattans, entre-frappans, pleurans, grincans les dents, and
iettans des tisons flamboyantes les vns contre les autres, sans aucune
esperance d'en sortir iamais, car en Enfer il y a nulle redemption, selon les
escritures saints, etc.

En voyla le second exemple. Que vous en semble?

Me semble que ces exemples sont plus-tost metaphisiques que naturels.

Saufla vostre: car encore que Dieu and le Diable soyent Metaphisiques en leurs
essences: les autres chooses a eux subjects and comme accidentales sont bien
naturelles.

Ie vous entends fort bien asteure.

A grand' peine, ie croy.

Si fay certes: vous dites qu'il y a un method pour pl^stost auancer and
profiter ceux qui estudient les langues, dress par Nature and par Art: la
Nature, vous dites, touch principallement l'ordre naturel, le rang and
sympathy des Noms and Verbes, ou des autres pars de l'Oraison iointes
ensemble, selon ce qu'elles sont propres and conuenables a un mesme subject:

L'Art concern le judgment des reigles Grammaticales, pour l'vsage des
escholiers, quand ilz en auront affair, ou en composant ou en parlant.

Vous dites bien asteure.

Cecy, est ce un exercice pedagogic ou Scholastic?

C'est tous les deux.

Est cecy le plus asseure moyen pour apprendre les langues?

Ie l'ay observe des personnages de grand esprit, pour estre de beaucoup le
plus expedient: d'aduantage les doctes scauent, combien le method bien dress,
qu'on appelle: Eruditionis modus, ou (...) est vne chose mal-aisee a conceuoir,
and qu' Aristote mesmes qui l'a excellement monstre, and si doctement deduit en
ce sien admirable labeur, appelle Organe, est entendu de fort peu des gens.

A ce que ie voy donc, quand on aura tout fait, ce ne sera que quelque oeuure
imperfaict, de l'ordre and du moyen que nous tenons pour entendre des autres
langages que le maternel.

Vous dites vray: and pour vous en confesser la verite, il faut maintenant vser
la vie d'vn homme entierement, pour apprendre les mots de langues, soit de
l'Hebraicque, Grecque ou Latin: and s'en contenter pour y fair quelque petit
larrecin d'eux: c'est a dire, apprendre a babiller: and au lieu d'estre bien
versez en Philosophy divine and human, il faut trauailler apres des
syllabes, des mots, des periodes and autres tells petits exercices; qui nous
font blanchir la test and le menton, and acheuer noz iours sans auoir a bon
escient sceu ou gouste que c'est de la Iurisprudence, Medicine and Theology,
qui sont les sciences principales.

Monsieur, pardonnez moy ie vous en pry, car ie vous done quelque
empeschement icy de voz estudes.

Non-faites certes: vous m'estes le tres-bien venu.

Ie prendray mon conge de vous asteure monsieur, and vous reuiendray veoir
apres disner.

Vous serez le tresbien venu, quand il vous plairra d'y retourner.

A dieu Sire.

Bonne vie and longue monsieur.

Dialogue 2. De la dignite des Orateurs, and l'excellence des langues.
DIeu vous sauue and guard, monsieur

Bien venu, bien venu certes monsieur.

Ie vous vien visiter cest apres-disner selon ma promise.

Asteure suis-ie bien de loisir de parler a vous.

Nous auons discouru ce matin du method and moyen d'apprendre les langues
estranges.

Que voulons nous fair maintenant?

Ce qu'il vous plaist, monsieur.

I'ay grand desir d'apprendre les langues, mais ie ne scay pas quelles sont les
plus fameuses and renommees au monde pour le iour d'huy.

Ie les vay conter: l'Hebraicque, la Syriacque, l'Arabesque, la Grecque, la
Latin, l'Italienne, l'Hespagnolle, and la Francoise. Voyla huict des plus
belles and nobles que ie vous en scache nommer, mais il y a tant d'autres.

O pleust a ce bon Dieu que ie sceusse parler tant seulement ces huict: mais il
n'est pas possible qu'vn homme les possedast toutes ensemble.

Que dites vous? Il y a un homme a la court de l'Empereur qui les parle toutes
nai^uement: and parle d'auantage plusieurs autres fort eloquemment.

Ie ne le peux croire.

Il est vray: l'homme est encore viuant.

Comment a il nom?

Il s'appelle Scaliger: and pour vous confermer ce que ie vous die Bartas
tres-excellent Poet Francois a fait aussi mention de luy en sa Second
Sepmaine, au iour qui s'appelle, Babylone.

Il a escrit en Francois, ie ne l'entends pas.

Pource qu'il est homme digne de foy, ie veux hasarder de traduire son
tesmoignage: encore que ie scache combien grande sera mon outrecuidance d'y
presumer de ma part a contrefaire par l'Anglois son style inimitable.

Ceux-cy sont ses verse: Mais le seul homme peut
discourir d'attrempance,
De force, d'equite, d'honneur,
and de prudence,
De Dieu, du ciel, de l'eau,
de la terre and des airs,
Auec terms choisis,
signifians, diverse:
Desueloppant son coeur,
non par un seul langage,
Ains comme Scaliger,
merueille de nostre age,
Le soleil des scauants,
qui parle eloquemment
L'Hebrieu, Gregeois, Romain,
Hespagnol, Alemant,
Francois, Italien,
Nubien, Arabique,
Syriaque, Persan, Anglois
and Caldaique,
Et qui Chameleon, trans-figurer
se peut,
O rich, o souple esprit!
en tell autheur qu'il veut:
Digne fills du grand Iule:
and digne friar encore
De Sylue son aisne,
que la Gascogne honor.


Voyla un bien grand louange pour luy certes.

Ie m'asseure qu'il l'a bien merit.

Le judgment soit a tous ceux qui le cognoissent bien: car il est recognu par
toute l'Europe pour un homme d'admirable esprit.

Quel estimez vous auoir este le premier langage du monde? Sans doubt c'est
l'Hebrieu, qui est le plus ancien, and le mesme que nostre pere Adam en parloit
estant en Paradis auec Dieu.

L'Hebrieu est ce un langage mysterieux, comme la langue Egyptiaque, laquelle
est hierogliphique and Cabalistique?

Elle comprend en peu de mots beaucoup des chooses, est merueilleusement
signifia^te, pure, chaste, saint and divine, explique clairement and
briefuement tout ce que lon scauroit penser, and quand il est question de
discourir les plus secrettes and enueloppees cachettes du coeur, elle ne laisse
rien en arriere, ayant vne grauite douceur, viuacite and efficace merueilleuse
en ses mots, periodes and discourse; plus admirables que toute la douceur de la
langue Grecque, qui auec ses mots de mesme signification, ses Epithetes hardis
ou curieusement recerchez, ses translations subtiles, ses mots composez, ses
Aoristes and autres gentilesses, n'est non plus comparable a l'autre, que le
sifflet d'vn Geay au chant du Rossignol.

Qui est le meilleur Autheur Hebrieu?

C'est Dieu-mesme: car l'Eternel proposant and escriuant luy mesmes par deux
fois sa loy a son peuple, and parlant de sa bouche en la montagne a Moise, and
a ses autres seruiteurs, s'est serui du langage Hebrieu. Les Anges, and les
Prophets ont fait du mesme.

Quelle est la cause que l'Hebrieu est au iour d'huy en si peu d'estime?

L'impiete and le mespris de la vraye Theology fait que l'Hebrieu n'est pas
estime, mais il est tant plus cheri de ceux qui scauent que c'est.

La langue Hebraicque donc est la premiere and la plus ancienne de toutes
langues?

Ell'a le premier and le plus ancien lieu enter celles qui ont este, qui sont
and qui seront au monde.

Il y a pourtant des aucuns qui disent hardiment le contraire, and un quidam
Goropius medecin Brabancon en ses livers intitulez Origines Antuerpianae, a ose
escrire pour prouuer son Flamand le plus ancien and aisne des langues.

Rien, rien, monsieur, le bon hommet s'abuse en ses gros volumes.

Il tasche a le prouuer tout a faict pourtant.

O ces sont contes des Flamands! Le pauure homme a perdu sa peine en cela.

Il y a bien d'autres, qui en ont escrit autant que luy.

Ie croy autant a l'un que a l'autre.

Leur febures quartaines. On leur remonstrera bien, que leur langue n'est point
de l'antiquite qu'ils pretendent, mais estre nee en Babel, and n'estre autre
chose qu'vn iargon corrompu, effemine and inconstant au regard de
l'Hebraicque, quoy qu'ils osent cracher au contraire.

C'est donc vne tresgrande outrecuidance en eux pour escrire tells bourdes.

Si Aristophane le Comic fust en vie, il auroit icy bon subject d'vne nouuelle
Commedie de leur impudence.

La langue Syriacque, quelle langue est ce?

C'est vne langue deriuee telleme^t de l'Hebraique, qu'elles ont tres-grande
conuenance ensemble.

Quel est le meilleur autheur?

Jesus Christ a parle Syriacque, and la pluspart du nouueau Testament est
escrite en icelle: toutes fois elle est en peu d'estime auiourd'huy, seulement
on la parle lez Jerusalem, a Tripoli en Sorry and es terroirs a l'entour, non
ailleurs. C'est la langue qu'on parloit soubs la monarchy des Assyrie^s. Et en
icelle est escrit le Thalmud de Iuifs.

Auez vous iamais estudie la langue Arabesque?

Non, monsieur, mais a ce qu'on conte, c'est un beau langage, rich, eloquent,
and qui a plus grand' vogue qu'aucune autre qu'on parle au Monde.

On en trouue bien peu des livers escrits en l'Arabesque.

Il y a plusieurs qui sont escrits a la main, mais bien peu imprimez ^ncore:
quand i'estoye a Rome, il y a asteure pour le moins sept ou huict ans passez,
que le Pape Gregoire le treizieme commencoit a dresser vne imprimeriela au
Champ des Fleurs, and taschoit recouurer plusieurs livers escrits a la main es
langues Arabesque and Syriacque, faisoit tailler a ses grans despens des fort
beaux caracteres pour les fair imprimer: and enuoyoit par le monde pour auoir
des compagnons ouuriers en ce mestier, afin de les mettre en besongne la
dessus. Ie ne scay si ces Papes qui sont este crees depuis son temps ont
continue ce bon commencement.

Ie m'en doubt bien. Car autrement les livers fussent desia paruenuz a noz
mains: mais de grace en quel pais nous sert plus le langage Arabien?

Par tous les pais du Leuant. C'est le meilleur langage du Monde pour passer
par tous les terroirs du gran-Seigneur, par grand' part de l'Asie, par toutes
les contrees des Iapanois, par China, par tout l'Empire de Prest-Ian, and par
toute l'Africque, and pass bien un homme par la troisieme party du monde par
icelle. C'est vne belle langue certes.

Ie croy qu'elle est fille de l'Hebraique.

Ell'est nee de l'Hebrieu sans doubt.

Tous les Turcs and Mahumetains parlent Arabic: a cause que Mahumet leur
faux-Prophete a escrit sa loy ou Alcoran en icelle.

Quels gens sont ces Arabes?

Les Arabes pour le present sont quasi tous larrons and brigans, and habitent
peu en villes closes, mais vagabondent vollans and desrobbans les passagiers
qui voyagent parmi les deserts and forests d'Arabie.

Les voyageurs le disent certes.

Toutes-fois il y a enter eux plusieurs qui sont medecins naturels and
tresexperts.

De qui sont les plus facondes escrits qui nous auons des Arabiens?

Ce sont les oeuures d' Auerroes le Commentateur, tres-excellent Philosophe,
and qui a fait des beaux Commentaires sur la plus part des oeuures d' Aristote.

Mais on ne les entend pas en l'Arabesque.

Ilz sont traduitz en Latin and imprimez a Venize.

Ce Philosophe Auerroes estoit homme d'vn subtle esprit, and d'vn tres-profond
judgment.

Quel autre bon autheur avons nous d'entre les Arabiens?

Il y a encore Auicenne orateur tres-faconde en son Arabesque, and plusieurs
autres des-quels nous auons les escrits par l'Europe en plusieurs endroits.

Il estoit medecin.

Aussi bien fut l'autre.

Apres ces trois soeurs quelle estimez vous la meilleure langue?

L'ancienne Grecque; mais quant au Grec vulgaire d'auiourd'huy il est fort
grossier.

Ou trouuerons nous le pur and vrayement bon?

Il le faudra puiser des fontaines de ces grans Orateurs, Poets and
Rhetoriciens Grecs: de Platon, Xenophon, Demosthene, Isocrate, Homere,
Euripide, Sophocle, Pindare, Plutarque, Basile, Chrysostom, Nazianzene, and
d'autres en tres-grand nombre.

Qui a este le plus ancien autheur Grec que nous avons?

C'est Homere en son Iliade and Odyssee descrites en 48. livers.

Homere, estoit il le premier Poet Grec ou non?

I'estime qu'oui, encore ne scay ie pas bien si Amphion, Orpheus, Lynus, and
quelques autres ont este au deuant: mais ie suis certain que ce grand Poet
Grec, combien qu'il fust des son enfance aueugle, il a neantmoins descrit des
chooses si profondes and admirables, qu'aucuns ont ose escrire de luy, que si
toute la sagesse des Poets estoit fondue en vne gra^d' fournaise, elle ne
pourroit egaller, ie ne scay quoy d'admirable qui reluist en ses oeuures, ne
luymesme s'il estoit resuscite des morts, ne pourroit refaire ce qu'il a faict.

Ie croy qu'il n'y a eu iamais Grec ou Latin qui le sceusse imiter ou
contrefaire.

Certes son esprit estoit admirable, ses inventions inimitables, ses discourse
naifs, ses verse coulans, artistes, and qui ont infinies graces tant plus on les
considere: au rest un sens cache and la source de toutes sciences humaines,
comme nous voyons mill and mill pieces de ses Poesies dans les livers des
Philosophes, Geographes, Orateurs, and Historiens. Tesmoing en soit Plutarque
enter tous les autres.

Platon, n'estoit-il pas un Autheur autant renomme par la Greece que luy?

Platon Philosophe fort renomme (non moins honor en Greece que iceluy Homere,
pour les os duquel sept villes de la Greece contendire^t longuement) fut
surnomme, le Divine, esprit merueilleusement pur and haut, esleue en tous ses
discourse: vray disciple de celuy qui faisant profession de ne scauoir rien
qu'vne chose (qu'il ne scauoit Rien) a monstre qu'il scauoit tout ce qui se
peut apprendre au monde touchant le monde.

On dit bien qu'il auoit veu vne party du vieil-Testament.

Ie n'en scay rien. Il peut auoir veu quelques-vns des Prophets: brief quant
au regard de la science de salut, luy and son maistre Socratez l'ont ignoree.

Qui a eu le troisieme lieu enter les Orateurs Grecs?

Herodote l'Ionien, qui estoit Historien grave, sage, and treseloquent en son
langage Ionien.

Que dites vous de Demosthene, ou le mettez vous?

Il tiendra sa place icy, comme il l'a merit. Demosthene certes est le Prince
des Orateurs Grecs, reigle de tous ceux, qui veulent disertement parler, homme
qui many les coeurs comme bon luy semble, excellent en tous ses discourse,
lesquels sont party en lumiere, and leus auec grand fruict, and de grand usage
pour ceux qui s'en scauent seruir.

Qui sont les ornaments and piliers de la langue Latin?

Le principal est Ciceron, surnomme Pere d'Eloquence.

Ie m'esbais bien pourquoy il estoit si extremement hai par Catiline, and Marc
Antoyne.

C'estoit a cause qu'il n'a pas voulu endurer and fauoriser leur complots and
conspirations contre la Republique Roman: mais il les auoit viuement
poursuiuis aussi, comme ses harangues appellees Catilinaires and Philippicques
en font foy.

O le braue-hommeque voyla! c'est grand' pity certes qu'il n'a pas este
Chrestien.

Erasme n'en doubt point qu'il ne soit sauue: il a parle si diuinement de
Dieu: il me souuienne ou il did: Si vnus Deus est vt aiunt en son liver de la
Vieillesse.

Qu'eust il dit s'il eust este Chrestien: disant cela estant qu'vn pauure
Payen? O mon Dieu! que ie suis raui considerant la viuacite de son Esprit!

Ses oeuures tant de fois imprimees, tant leaves and releues de tous, les
escrits de tant d'hommes doctes, qui ont emprunte tous leur beaux traits de ce
fleuue d'Eloquence, de ce rich esprit docte and disert a merueilles verifient
ce que dit un Poet Chrestien de luy: L'ennemi capital
d' Antoyne and Catiline,
Qui foudroye, qui tonne,
and de qui la poictrine
Source mill torrents,
ou de merueille espris
S'enyurent chaque iour
les plus rares esprits.


Qui a gaigne le prix apres Ciceron pour le Latin?

c'a este Iules Caesar, lequel a este vaillant enter les vaillants; and
eloquent enter les eloquents; comme sa vie escrite par Plutarque, and ses
Commentaires de Bello Gallico, ou il a enleue la plume des mains de tous hom
mes doctes, and leur a oste l'enuie d'escrire histoires, voyans qu'ils ne
peuuent approcher que de fort l oing d'vne tell perfection, le prouuent
suffisamment.

Qui sera mis en troisieme rang?

Ce sera l'Historien Saluste, du quel nous auons deux histoires courts, mais
sententieuses, nerueuses and tesmoignages de ceste ancienne vigueur Roman.

Enter les Poets Latins qui est le premier?

Virgile est le Pere des Poets Latins, duquel lon n'en scauroit trop bien
dire: ses Georgiques and so^ Aeneide estans livers admirables par dessus tous
livers d'humanite en font preuue suffisante.

On dit pourtant que ses verse sont trop raboteus and durs.

Ie ne parle point de l'excellence de ses verse; mais son judgment, la
profondeur le ses inventions, sa bien-seance, sa modesty, sa grauite, sa
majesty, and l'auantage qu'il a sur tous autres paroissent non seulement en
chacun liver, mais en chacun de ses verse, ou lon trouuera mill and mill
secrets de toutes les sciences, desquelles nous auons comme un Epitome; ayant
au rest les terms propres, les epithetes tousiours conuenants, les metaphores
and figures semees en leur endroits, and par tout un langage pur and disert,
sans affeterie ni ordure quelconque.

Qui a este le plus excellent Orateur en la langue Italienne?

Iean Boccace, qui a escrit il y a assez long temps: mais foit gentillement and
purement, comme son Decameron, sa Flammette, le Philocope, le Labyrinthe, and
autres siens livers aimez par les enfans du monde en font foy.

Qui sont les meilleurs Poets Toscains ou Florentins?

Ces trois desquels ie m'en vay fair mention:

En premier lieu sera le gentil Poet Francois Petrarque, qui a escrit ses
Poesies depuis le temps de Iean Boccace, and a inuente de tres-beaux mots, a
enrichi ses verse d'infinies gentilesses tirees de tous bons Auteurs and de son
vif esprit aussi, hardi au rest, and qui a des sonets, chapitres and chansons
du tout admirables.

Quels autres Poets Italiens me nommerez vous?

Deux seulement, l'vn est Louis Arioste Ferrarois qui a publie un Roman
intitule Orlando furioso, en verse si doux and agreables que toute l'Italie les
a en la bouche, plein d'affections en ses discourse, and plaisant au possible a
cause de la diversity des chooses qu'il recite, estans ses fables si proprement
desguisees qu'on est esmeu quelques-fois en les lysant, comme si c'estoit
chooses vrayement avenues, ou au moins vray-semblables.

Qui est l'autre?

Torquato Tasso, un brave homme certes, qui est encore viuant, le dernier Poet
Italien qui est de grand' renommee en nostre aage, mais digne de premier
honneur; and outre qu'il est Poet divine, il est Orateur and Rhetoricien
tres-excellent; comme ses belles lettres missiues le demonstrent. Ce gallant
s'enragea pour l'amour d'vne damoiselle de grande maison quand ie fu en Italy.

Quels autres beaux livers a il compose.

Plusieurs: il y a trois Tomes de ses oeuures imprimez a Ferrare, ou il y a
diuerses sorts de verse de toutes sorts de belles inventions: vne Comedy, vne
Tragedy, diverse Dialogues and discourse en Prose, le tout digne de lecture des
plus sages and vifs esprits de l'Europe.

Est cela tout qu'il a escrit?

Non, car il a la plume en main tous les iours.

Vous auez oblie sa Gierusalemme liberata.

Vous dites vraye. Ce filz a escrit en verse heroiques un Poem excellent enter
tous autres Poemes Italiens, intitule comme vous dites, ou toutes les richesses
des Grecs and Latins sont recueillies and enchassees si dextrement que rien
plus, auec cest bien-seance, briefuete, grauite, erudition, viuacite and
majesty que lon remarque en Virgile le Prince des Poets Latins.

Qui ont este les plus vifs esprits Espagnolz renommez par le Monde?

Pour un historien Antoyne Gueuare qui estoit secretaire a l'Empereur Charles
le quint.

I'ay leu and releu quasi tous ses oeuures; mais quels sont les plus grands
Poets Espagnols?

Ce sont du Boscan, de Grenade, Garcilace* and Mont-maieur.

Ie m'esbais que lon ne les face traduire en Anglois.

Ils n'auroyent point de grace.

Pourquoy non? On les trouue quasi trestous traduits en Latin, Italien and
Francois.

Ie le croy, encore ont ils plus de grace en leur Castillan, qui est le plus
pur dialecte Espagnol, auquel les hommes doctes escriuent and parlent
ordinairement.

Parmi les Francois qui sont les plus eloquens autheurs?

Il y a plusieurs qui ont escrit en rhyme and en prose, mais ie vous mettray en
auant seulement un demi-dosaine des braues hommes, trois Poets and trois
Orateurs, and Rhetoriciens nompareils:

Premierement vous auez Clement Marot, Poet du Roy Francois, qui a este
admirable pour son temps.

Il fuit le fol du Roy; car depuis son temps on appelle les sots and fols en
France Marots, Vous estes un Marot, dit-on: Diable c'est le Marot.

Vous vous abusez grandement, il estoit Poet royal non pas fol royal: de qui
les belles poesies seront leaves and releues, tant que dureront l'Ouy and le
Non, enter les hommes scauans.

Vous me pardonnerez monsieur, car ie ne parle pas autrement qu'vn fol, par
ouydire and a la volee.

Lon dit qu'il fit passer les monts aux Muses, and les a habillees a la
Francoise. Il a fait merueilles certes en ses commencements.

Ie le vous recommends par un Poet naturel: quand vous entenderez
parfaictement le Francois lisez moy ses livers, si auez le loysir.

Qui est le second Poe'te Francois, a vostre aduis?

C'est Pierre de Ronsard, rich es despouilles des Grecs and Latins; comme ses
Amors, poemes diverse, odes, elegies and hymns le verifient, esquels on lit
toutes sorts de verse, and d'arguments tantost en style bas, ores en moyen and
sublime.

Qui sera le troisieme?

Nous mettrons pour le troisieme le Poet Chrestien Guillaume de Salluste, le
Sieur du Bartas, qui a plus escrit en Trois-Sepmaines que tous les autres
Poets Francois, ou tous les autres Poets Payens ou Chrestiens n'en firent de
toute leur vie. Au rest homme d'autant grand esprit qui onques en nasquist en
France.

Qui sont les plus singuliers Rhetoriciens de la France?

Nous auons Jacques Amiot, qui a turn de Grec en Francois l' Histoire
Aethiopique d' Heliodore, les sept livers des Histoires de Diodore Sicilien,
and toutes les oeuures de Plutarque, ou il a heureusement trauaille.

Quel est son style?

Haut and esleue: son langage est pur and simple, non affecte, non recerche:
brief, il se monstre vray-Francois.

Quels autres Orateurs Francois me nommerez vous?

La France a nourri plusieurs habiles hommes de grand' renommee, qui ont puise
leur eloquence de Rome de Greece, d'Aegypte and de tous les parts and coins du
monde: enter vne infinite ie feray mention que de deux Rhetoriciens, lesquels
ont emporte le prix de tous autres: l'vn est ce tant renomme and fameux par la
France, Blaise Vigenere, qui a aussi traduit beaucoup de livers, comme l'
Histoire de Pologne, vne party de Tite Live, Caesar, Philostrate, and
Chalcondile.

Certes il a vertueusement opere.

Ce Blaise Vigenere a beaucoup d'addresse certes en ses escrits and des beaux
traicts and bien choisis: Lon dit qu'entre tous les nourissons des Muses que la
France a enfante, ce Vigenere a si bien dit, qu'il a clos la port a tous ceux
qui viendront cy-apres tant en elegance de langage qu'en doctrine.

Il faut encore le troisieme pour mettre fin a ces discourse des Langues and
Orateurs.

L'honneur appartient a Philippes de Mornay, qui a combatu l'atheisme de nostre
temps d'vne terrible facon, auec viues raisons, arguments, inductions and
preuues inuincibles, iointes auec un langage graue-doux, bien lie, resonnant
auec si beaux and bons terms Francois, qu'il meine le liseur ou bon luy
semble; and cestuy-ci mettra fin a nostre dispute de langues.

Nous auons auiourd'huy bien discouru des langues, des Orateurs and
Rhetoriciens.

Il y a au Monde tant des autres langues and des Orateurs renommez pour leur
Eloquence, qu'vn gros volume ne suffiroit pas pour les y mettre tous par order.

Certes la gloire and majesty de l'homme appert en rien plus qu'en son parler.

Il est vray, a cause que par la il demonstre sa raison, la lumiere du corpse
and de l'ame.

En combien de temps pensez vous qu'vn homme de bon esprit pourroit attaindre a
parler ces huict langages dessus nommez?

En huict ans il est possible, si on veut mettre de la peine, and qu'on a bonne
adresse de parler ces huict eloquemment, auec bonne grace, and les en escrire
auec expedition and vistesse.

Enter ces langues n'y a il pas quelques-vnes qui sont beaucoup plus nobles and
plus magnificques que les autres?

Il ne faut point doubter que l'Hebrieu des anciens Peers and Patriarchs n'ait
eu le meilleur accent and vne grace en la prononciation souueraine sur toutes
autres langues; quoy que les Iuifs d'au-iourd'huy viuans par le monde le
parlent lourdement, ie ne scay comment; mais au rest le vray Toscain, Romain,
ou Florentin, quand il est bien accentue and prononce, a plus de grace and de
gloire, est plus fluide, and coulant que tous les autres langages qu'on parle
en Europe.

Ie suis d'oppinion certes qu'il n'y a langue au monde plus heroique que
celle-la.

Ie ne vous accorderay pas cela.

Pourquoy?

N'auezvous-iamais de vostre vie oui parler un Mexicain; un Moscouite, un
Tartarien; un Iapanois ou un Chinois?

Iamais de ma vie.

L'An huictant and quatre ou cinq Xistus quintus estant Pape Romain; il y auoit
quatre ieunes princes, ou roys, ou filz de rois Iapanois qui venoient de ces
pais d'Orient a Rome, auec le Padre Mesquita Italien qui les auoit conuertis a
la Religion Roman, and les conduisoit la pour fair l'homage and prester
obeissance and serment au Pape. Ie les ay oui parler en passant par les rues:
leurs mots sont tous quasi monosyllabes, leur langage royal, foudroyant,
superbe, glorieux, and magnific a merueilles.

Combien des langues parleon en Mexicque la grand' Cite tant renommee es Indes
Occidentales.

On parle (a ce qu'on dit) quattre langues diuerses: and ces quattre langues
Mexicaines sont toutes si disertes, gratieuses, and eloquentes, que la Grecque,
la Latin, l'Italienne l'Espagnolle and Francoise semblent quelques notes
effeminees ou iargons barbares au regard de l'hauteur, profondite and douceur
d'icelles.

Que voulez vous dire de ces langages septentrionaux de Moscouites and Tartres?

Ie leur done le prix and l'honnour certes; car la Russienne and Tartarienne
sont langues imperialles, tonnantes, resonnantes esclattantes, nobles and
genereuses sur toutes autres en la surface de l'Asie, l'Europe and l'Affrique.

Le haut Alemand tient quelque petit trait de leur excellent grace and accent
en son parler: pour conclurre, toutes les langues Antartiques des Indois
Orientaux ou Occidentaux and celles-la de l'autre party du monde, ont beaucoup
plus grand' luster, magnificence and generosite que celles-cy que nous parlons
en nostre moytie de la Terre.

Il est bien vray monsieur que ie ne voudrois pas apprendre aucune de ces
langues: aussi scay-iebien que vous ne les monstrez pas; mais ie port grand'
affection a la Francoise, laquelle ie desirerois d'apprendre de vous, s'il vous
plairroit de m'en donner instruction en icelle.

Ie feray pour vous tout ce que me sera possible.

Mais, il faut scauoir combien vous prenez par sepmaine, par mois, par
quartier, par An.

Ie ne merchande pas auec ceux qui i'enseigne, car les dons de graces and les
calibres nobles and vertueuses ne se doibvent pas vendre.

Donnez moy ce que vous voulez, demy-escu, si voulez, un escu, un Angelot,
vingt solz, cinq livers, dix livers, vingt marcs, vingt livers sterling, la
sepmaine, le mois, le quartier, par An.

Les autres enseignent a cinquante and deux solz par An, cest un sol la
sepmaine, ce que ie vous bailleray volontiers pour estre naifuement instruit en
la langue Gallicane.

Ie ne m'en souci point de ce que les autres mercenaires font, mais quant a moy
ie ne feray point de march en cecy.

Mettez le cas que vous esties pedante mercenaire; combien voudrez vous
demander pour le filz d'vn Mecanicque?

S'il fust filz d'vn Merchant il payeroit en merchant, ie demanderoye and n'en
prendroye pas moins de cinq livers par an.

Et pour le filz d'vn Gentilhomme?

S'il seroit filz de bonne maison, il me payeroit dix livers par an.

Et s'il fust filz d'vn gr an-Seigneur?

Ma foy il payeroit pour grand' Seigneur, and me donneroit tous les ans vingt,
trente, ou quarante livers au moins.

Vous auriez bien peu d'escholiers a ce prix-la, car vous estes trop cher.

Aussi ie ne voudroys pas vendre des calibres nobles a gages des vilains and a
prix vil and commun: ains chacun me payeroit selon son estat: le merchant en
merchant, le gentilhomme en gentilhomme* and le grand seigneur selon son degree
d'honneur.

Il ne vous desplairra monsieur si ie demand ou vous auez aprins la langue
Francoise?

A Paris en France, ou i'ay este nourri trois ans entiers au College de
Montaigu. I'ay aussi regente un an en Orleans, au college des Africains; and
vescu dix mois a Lion.

Monsieur, vous m'excuserez s'il vous plaist; il est temps que ie me retire a
mes escholiers.

Ie me conseilleray donc enter cy and demain, and puis apres nous accorderons
par ensemble, si plaist a Dieu.

A Dieu soiez recommande. A Dieu mon bon Seigneur.

Dialogue 3.
MOnsieur Noe-Ionas-et-Ely, ie suis bien aise de vous veoir en bonne sante!

Granmercy mon bon amy.

Comment vous portez vous?

Fort bien, a vostre commandment and service.

Et moy au vostre certes.

Combien est-ce que nous fumes ensemble a Paris?

Il y a pour le moins sept ou huictans.

Il n'est pas tant, a mon aduis.

Ie m'abuse autrement, car c'estoit au commencement que le Duc de Guise levast
les arms pour ceux de la Ligue.

Ie m'esbahi fort de vostre partement que fut si sudden de Paris.

Que disoit on de grace, enter mes amiss and cognoissance?

Ma foy lon disoit que vous estiez rendu Moyne de l'ordre de S. Benoist.

O pauure homme, i'estoye bien mari pour vous.

Il est vray qu'apres le premier an ie laissay mon habit.

Vous n'auez pas iettele froc es ortics?

Non par ma foy: ie sorti de l'abbaie auec conge en homme de bien.

Vous feistes les trois voeux de chastete, pauurete, and obedience.

Sauu e vostre grace:

Ie n'en fei rien, vous di-ie, car i'estois receu seulement que pour un ieune
Moyne, ou comme vous dites en Anglois pour un Novice.

Mais de grace ou auez vous este depuis ce temps la?

Tout par tout: en Italy, en France, en Espaigne.

Ne vous mocquez vous pas?

Non certes, pourquoy me mocqueray ie?

De Paris quelle routte prinstes vous?

De Paris ie m'acheminay verse l'Italie.

Auez vous demeure a Rome?

I'y fei quelque residence.

Quelles nouuelles me direz vous de ces quartiers-la?

Il y a depuis fept ans en ca quatre ou cinq papes morts.

N'auez vous pas pass plus auant qu' a Rome?

Si ay: iusques a Naples.

Comment feistes vous pour ne tomber point es mains des Inquisiteurs?

Ie me suis habille en pellerin.

O le fin pellerin que voyci!

Comment auez vous eschappe l'inquisition? dites moy de grace.

Il n'y a point de dangier pour un qui est papal and du nombre des Catholics.

Comment fera donc celuy qui est de la religion pour passer par l'Italie
iusques a Rome?

Il luy faudra dissimuler.

Ie le nigh, il n'en a point de besoing. Quoy donc?

Il luy conuient seulement fair la bonne mine, car passez vne fois Venise,
l'Inquisition y est par tout.

Auez vous vescu a Venize, Padoue, Pauie, Milan, Mantoue, Cremone, Pise,
Sienne, Vrbine?

Non, ie passay par la seulement.

Auez vous veu Florence, Ferrare, and Boulongne?

Ie les ay veu and visit.

Auez vous pass a Lion?

Signor si, sur les ponts, and sur le paue.

Estes vous venu par Orleans?

Oui monsieur.

Auez vous traficque a Paris?

Oui a boire and manger.

N'auez vous pas hante a Roan?

Ien'y fu iamais.

Auez vous seiourne a Amyens?

Quelques quatre ou cinq iours.

Puis que vous auez veu tant des belles villes en ces deux contrees; contez
nous aussi quelque chose d'Hespaigne.

En Espagne les villes capitalles sont Siuille, le magazin des Indes pour la
diversity des merchandises que lon apporte la.

Il y a encore Saragosse, Grenade, Valedolit, Medine des champs, Pampelone en
Nauarrois, and Lisbone en Portugal: ou il y a aussi Conimbres, academie fort
renommee.

Quelles autres belles villes y a il en Espagne?

Il y en a tant, que ie ne les peux nommer toutes.

Quantes vniuersitez ont ilz la.

Il y en a plusieurs: ie nommeray seulement Salamanque, university ou lon
estudie en Droict, Medecin, and es sept Arts liberaux.

Le Roy Philip ou tientil sa court?

Pour la plus part a Madril, ou a l'Esquireal, ou il a basti le plus magnific
palais de toute l'Europe, estant la mansion du Roy Catholic, and c'est le plus
beau bastiment que ie vei onques de ma vie.

A vostre aduis donc c'est le plus beau, superbe and sumptueux bastiment qu'on
scauroit imaginer.

C'est un manoir enrichi de grans iardins, parterres, and vergers de plus rares
fruicts qu'on pourroit souhaiter.

Quelle est son assiette?

Sur un belle riuiere.

De quelle form est ce bastiment?

Il est fait en figure exagone: and les pilliers en diametre.

A vostre conte les palais du Pape, du Cardinal Medicis, and tant d'autres en
Rome ne sont comparables a cestuy-ci.

Il est cent fois plus magnific que ceux-la, ou tous les autres en Italy,
nommez en tant que voudrez.

Certes ce Palais est un Paradis terrestre, tell que promet Mahomet en son
Alcoran a ses Musselmans.

O mon amy, le Roy d'Espagne a plus de vingt nauires qui retournent toutes les
annees des Isles de las Perlas, de Peru, de Mexicque, and Cannibales, chargees
de lingots d'or and d'argent, de Perles, and pierrieres, and de la soye crew en
grand quantite.

Ie m'esbais donc pourquoy il n'a pas paue son palais dix lieues a lentour auec
fines pierreries, escarboucles^, rubiz, diamans, saphiz, esmeraudes,
turquoises, grenatz, agathes, berilles, perles and autres unions d'excellence.

Il a bien d'autres moyens pour les y employer. Certes ie croy que vous auez
descrit un palais a plaisir and parle par hyperbole. Car vous auez un privilege
vous autres voyagers de parler a plaisir, quand bon vous en semble.

Ie parle a bon escient.

Si parlez a bon escient, ie vous responds, que sa majesty d'Angleterre, a ses
palais autant beaux, bien fondez, gentilment parez, autant sumptueux, and non
moins magnifiques que tous ceux que scauriez nommer ou en Espagne, ou en
Italy: and en voyci six que ie vay nommer: premierement le palais Royal de
Greenwich: puis apres la mayson S. Jacques, apres sa mansion dela halle blanch,
and de Richmonde, le manoir d'Anton-cour, sa mayson Nompareille, and le
chasteau d'Oinsoir, tous assis dans le contour de quinze lieues sur la belle
riuiere de Thamise: palais, ou (pour mieux and plus proprement dire) Paradis de
salubrite, amenite, serenite, commodite, delices and tous honnestes plaisirs
dignes d'vn Prince sans mentir en un seul mot.

Sans aller pluz auant, dites moy ie vous pry, que vous semble de ceste ville
de Londres? N'est-elle pas belle, and bien peuplee?

Elle est belle certes, and me plait fort bien. Mais ie ne vous en scauray rien
dire encore, car depuis quatre jours, que ie suis icy arrive, ie n'ay bouge de
ma chamber, estant las and rompu de tant cheminer and courir la post.

Vous n'auez pas este donc plus auant au pais?

Non pas, mais si plait a Dieu ce printemps cy j'iray veoir tout le pais, and
les meilleures Villes.

Vous verrez donc un beau pais, fort plantureux, bien fertile, and d'vn air
bien tempere, abondant en viures, plein de belles dames, fort courtoises and
gracieuses, and vne Isle enuironnee de mer.

N'ont ils pas du vin icy, me semble qu'on y boit de l'eaue?

Sauf la vostre, mons on y boit de la biere qui est un breuuage faict de-l'orge
and de l'eau, boullies ensemble, estant un buisson fort sain and selon le
naturel de nous autres Anglois.

Vous autres Francois, vous buuez du vin, vous en trouuerez du vin icy en
grande abondance.

D'ou vient il?

Il y en a qui vient de la France, d'Espagne, de Candie and vin du Rhin tant
que voulez.

Quelles sorts des vins ont ils?

Ils ont du claret, du rouge, du sec, du moscadel, and de la maruoisie.

Est il cher ou a bon march?

Le claret, rouge and blanc se vendent pour cinq sols la quarte, le sec pour
huict solz, le moscadel and la maruoisie pour dix.

Il n'est pas trop cher.

Non vrayement: c'est honestement vendu, and a prix raysonnable.

Il est plus cher de vray en plusieurs endroits de la France.

Londres, est ce vne ville fort merchande?

Ouy-dea: fort merchande.

Quelle merchandise y a il la?

De toutes sorts qu'on peut sou-haiter.

Les merchants, ou font ils trafficque?

Par tout le monde: en France: en Italy: en Espaigne: en Barbary: en Guinee:
en Bresille: es Indes Occidentales, and Orientales, es terres du leuant: en
Turquie, en l'Arabie: en Perse, en Tartarie, en Russie, en Pologne, en Boheme,
en Hongrie, en Alemaigne, en Frize, en Flandres, en Dannemarc, en Escosse, en
Irlandres, par toute l'Asie, l'Europe, l'Afrique and la nouuelle Amerique.


De quelle merchandise trafficquent ils?

Le meilleur estain du monde se trouue en Angleterre: la meilleure lain, les
meilleurs draps and carisees; toutes sorts des mettaulx, comme l'or, l'argent,
du plomb, estain, cuivre, fer, acier, bronze, le meilleur saffran que soit,
grande quantite de cuirs, de bleds, force bois and bestail, comme cheuaux,
hackenees, boeufs, vaches, brebis, de Iume^ts, Il y a bien peu de cheures.

Il n'y a point de loups, Ours, lions, ny serpents, si lon n'en apporte
d'ailleurs.

Quel esbat prennent ilz les festes?

De toutes sorts de passetemps, comme a veoir Comedies, and Tragedies, a
saulter, danzer, eux d'escrime, la chasse d'ours, tirer de l'arc, courir, tirer
de l'arquebuze, pourmeiner aux champs, monter en batteaux sur l'eaue.

Y a il quelque belle riuiere a Londres?

Vne fort belle and grande.

Apporte elle de grands vaisseaux?

Elle est bien nauigable, pleine de toutes sorts des poissons, embellie sur
l'vne and l'autre riue de beaux edifices, de belles villes, villages and
chasteaux, and la Court de la Rynne y est quasi tousiours a l'entour.

Comment appellez vous la Riuiere?

On l'appelle la Thamise.

Descend-elle a la Mer?

Oui, elle s'embouche en la grande mer Oceane.

Les viures sont-ils a bon march?

Aucunefois ilz sont chers assez: autrefois a bon march: car la Thamise y
apporte grand'partie des commodites de la vie, en des nauires and basteaux de
charge.

Il y a tousiours grande abondance du pain, de la chair, fromage, beurre,
poisson salle, gibbier, etc.

Combien dVniuersitez y a il par deca?

Il n'y en a que deux: celle de Cantabrigie, and ceste d'Oxonie.

Y a il gran nombre des Escholiers?

Assez.

Et des gens scauants?

Ouy dea, il y en a, and qui ont grand vogue.

Ont ilz de beaux Colleges?

Fort beaux and sumptueux, bastis de pierres de taille, and de grands fraiz.

Sont ilz de grande antiquite?

Les histoires en font mention de plus de mill huict cens and trois ans.

Auez vous veu les Colleges and Vniuersitez de la la mer: sont ilz beaux?

I'ay este en plusieurs academies, les plus renommees de l'Europe, and
premierement en celles d'Italie: comme en Romme: en Pise: a Bolongne: en Padoue
en Turin: and puis apres en celles de la France: comme a Paris: en Orleans: a
Bourges: a Rheims en Champaigne: a Pontamusson: a Verdun: a Geneue: a Tournon:
en Poictiers: en Angiers: a Toulouse: and a Montpelier: En Alemaigne ie n'en ay
veu nulles: bien peu en Hespaigne: mais en Romme il n'y a que quatre beaux
Colleges: c'est asscavoir: le College Romain, dit le Seminaire de Iesuistes:
Cestuyla des Allemans: le College des Grecs: and l'autre dit l'hostel, ou
College des Anglois, tout aupres, qui s'appelle autrement, la casa Ingleze
situe en la rue du peuple, pres le march des Iuifs. En Paris vous auez vne
belle academie, ou il ya plusieurs beaux Colleges: comme les Colleges de
Sorbonne: de Navarre: de Montaigu: de Bourgongne:: de Damuille: de Calui: de
Justice: de Tours: de Beauuais: de Presles: de Lisieux: de Rheims: de Boncourt:
des Lombards: des Thresoriers: de Narbonne: de la Merci: des Bernardins: de
Clugny: de Premonstre, des Cholets: du Cardinal le Moyne: du Plessis: de
Marmonstier: d'Autun: de Fortet: de la March: de Saint Barbe: du Man's: de
Harcourt: de Laon: des bons enfants: de Tournay: de Boisi: de Bayeux, Coqueret,
Mignon, de S. Denis: de maistre Geruais: de S. Michel, des trois Euesques, ou
de Cambray, ou se font les lecons publiques des professeurs du Roy.

Il y en a encor quelques autres mais i'ay marque seulement les principaux,
delaissant les Abbaies, and moyneries.

Ces Colleges sont ils magni^icques, bien bastis, parez and ornez? Ils sont
Colleges trestous: mais non pas pour fair comparaison aux Colleges d'Oxford, a
l'Eglise de Christ le miracle du Monde: ny au College Nouueau: ny a un S.
Iehan: ou a Toutes Ames: aux Colleges de Merton and Magdaleine, en Oxonie
lesquelz sont de grande antiquite, bien fondus trestous and semblent plustost
des palais royaulx, que des Escholes pour instruire les Arts liberaulx, and
pour entretenir des pauures escholiers.

Et qui les vouldroit paragonner a ceux de Cantabrigie, comme au College de la
Trinite, a un S. Iean: aux Colleges du Roy, de la Royne, d'Emmanuel, de Caius
and de plusieurs autres, ou les pensionaires ont leur reuenuz pour les
entretenir annuellement, ie diroye que ce seroit quelque pauure aueugle, qui
n'entend rien du tout: and qui meriteroit d'estre iette es tenebres
Cymmeriennes, les fers aux iambes pour si gross ignorance.

Orsus Monsieur, qui gouuerne en Londres?

C'est mi-Lord Maieur, qui est Lieutenant pour sa Ma. auec ses freres les
Escheuins de la Ville.

Quelle police ont ils?

Belle: les coustumes du pais sont en plus grand vogue.

I'ay entendu dire qu il y a grand nombre de mal-faicteurs, comme larrons,
assassins, and escumeurs de Mer.

Il y en a assez: Encor que tous le jours on en pend.

On n'en pend pas tous de ceste race?

Quelques vns tousjours s'eschappent.

N'ont ils pas autre mort pour les malfaicteurs?

Non pas: sinon pour les trahistres qui sont tirez a quatre cheuaux iusques a
la place de la justice, and esquartelez.

C'est vne grande chose que vous me dites, y a il tant de trahistres la?

Non pas: car la justice les chaslie si bien qu'ilz n'osent complotter ny
brasser aucune trahison.

Dieu veuille per sa saint grace garder la Royne ELIZABETH, and luy doint
longue vie and prosperity, rompant les desseings de ses ennemis, and luy
concede heureux succes de tous ses saints desirs.

La Rynne vient-elle souuentes fois a la ville?

Bien peu: mais elle se tient tous-jours auec sa Court aux enuirons.

Toutes Nations estrangeres admirent certes les grandes vertuz and preudhommie
de sa majesty.

Pour vous y confesser la verite, il ny a langue suffisante pour exprimer ses
louanges: Car elle est en liberalite, magnificence, courtoisie, prudence,
gracieusete, beauty, noblesse, scauoir, gentilesse and sapience l'vnique
Phoenix du monde; ornee de toutes les plus belles vertus, don't les plus belles
Roynes and plus fameuses es histoires des Grecs and Latins ont este reuestues.
Elle se peut plustost dire Ange celeste que creature terrestre.

Tient-elle grande Court?

Tres-grande and magnificque certes.

Aim elle les Estrangiers?

Elle les aim bien.

Parle elle plusieurs langues?

Elle en parle huict, pour le moins: asscauoir, la langue Grecque, Latin,
l'Italienne, Francoise, Espaignolle, Escossoise, Flamande, and l'Angloise: Ie
ne puis exprimer les autres belles vertus don't elle est de tout point
accomplie: and pourtant ie vous mettray en auant ce que le tresexcellent Poet
Francois G. de Saluste, le Sieur du Bartas a escrit en sa louange.

Ceuxcy sont ses verse, comme ie le les ay traduits en Anglois, Mais quel
nouueau soleil me done sur les yeux?
Suis-je fait tout d'vn coup heureux bourgeois des cieux*
O quel'auguste Port! quelle royale grace?
Quels yeulx doux-foudroyans! quelle Angelique face?
Filles du souuerain, doctes Soeurs, n'est-ce pas,
La grand'Elizabet, la prudente Pallas,
Qui fait que le Breton, desdaigneux, ne desire
Changer au male ioug d'vne femme l'Empire?
Qui tandis qu'Erynnis less d'estre en Enfer,
Rauage ses voisins and par flamme and par fer,
Et que le noir effroy d'vn murmurant orage
Menace horriblement l'Vniuers de naufrage:
Tient en heureuse paix sa Province ou la Loy
Venerable fleurit auec la blanch foy.
Qui n'a pas seulement l'opulence faconde
Du maternel langage: ains d'vne bouche ronde
Peut si bien sur le champ haranguer en Latin,
Grec, Francois, Hespagnol, Tudesque and Florentin,
Que Rome l'Emperiere, and la Greece and la France
Le Rhin and l'Arne encor plaident pour sa naissance.
Claire perle du Nort, guerriere, domte-Mars,
Continue a cherir les Muses and les Arts,
Et si iamais ces verse peuuent d'vne aile agile
Franchissant l'Ocean voler iusqu'a ton Isle,
Et tomber, fortunez, enter ces blanches mains,
Qui sous un just frein regissent tant d'humains,
Voy les d'vn oeil bening, and favorable pense
Qu'il faut pour te lover, auoir ton eloquence.


Certes ce du Bartas estoit homme de rare esprit.

Il est vray est que ceste Princess a gouuerne son Royaume en grande
prosperity depuis trent and quatre ans en ca durant les troubles and ruins des
autres pais, ayant este auec son peuple garantie d'infinis dangiers: and a les
langues mentionnees par le Poet bien a commandment: and d'aduantage
auiourd'huy, par vne singuliere faueur de Dieu, est recognue pour la perle du
Septentrion, pour vne heureuse guerriere; les victoires and heureux succes
d'icelle, memorables en toutes sorts, meritent vne histoire entiere que la
posterite reuerera a tout iamais.

Dieu la tienne en sa saint guard, la benie and prospere longuement, selon
son bon plaisir.

Monsieur il est temps que ie me retire a mon logis.

Ie me recommande donc.

Ie vous baise les mains, Adieu.

The Scholar. Dialogue 1.
THE MANNER HOW to learn and teach strange languages.
GOd save you, sir.

Be you very welcome, sir.

Are you very busy

Not very busy, what is your pleasure?

I come to you requesting your direction and aid.

If there be any thing in my small power wherein I may pleasure and help you,
I am yours, command me freely.

I thank you most humbly.

Well, what say you to me, now?

Make you not profession of the tongues?

Yea forsooth, I teach the Greek, Latin, Italian, and French: the Hebrew,
Chaldean, Persian, Turkish, Arabian, Egyptian, Spanish, Dutch, Scottish, Irish,
English, I teach not.

Will you teach me Geometry, Arithmeticke, and Cosmographie?

I will teach you Logic, Rhetoric, Music, and the Grammar.

Can you play on the Lute, Citterne and Bandore?

Sir to tell you in few words I teach only the Greek and Latin tongues: and
if peradventure any Gentleman would delight himself to enterlace the study of
the Italian and French together with the Latin letters, I would endeavor my
best to profit him so soon as possibly might be.

If it please you to take a little pain with me, I shall not be ungrateful.

I doubt not of it: for my part I am content to take any pain if you have a
desire to learn.

I desire nothing more.

You say well.

But as for me I would feign read Tullies Orations for the eloquence. I should
desire also to be cunning in French: likewise to understand perfectly Titus
Liuius History, for he has written things of very great consequence. Hear me
a word sir: you must have a firm purpose and a resolution to prosecute your
studies; and not to do as many of our English do commonly, who will begin one
language to day, and another to morrow: then after they have learned a Comm'
portez vous? in French: a Come state? in Italian, and a Beso las manos: in
Spanish, they think themselves brave men by and by, and such fellows as are
worthy to be sent in embassage to the great Turk.

You have for all that in England others, gentlemen, who are greatly affected
to the tongues, and some who speak them volubly and very fluently.

I have yet seen very few of those.

You have not haunted the Court, nor lived at London, where you may both see
and hear them: and you shall find beside at London and in other places, many
others who would be very glad to learn, if there were any learned teachers to
instruct them.

What say you man? London is full of Italians and Frenchmen, who teach their
languages for wages in the City of London.

They Italians and French who teach hear, as some say who have haunted with
them, are a little too high minded, and do not fit themselves long to the
nature of us English.

Why say you so?

Because they are capricious and proud.

You do them wrong in saying so, in mine opinion: there is of them as of
Englishmen, both good and bad. Condemn not all for one bad one, for there are
very learned men and of great knowledge refugiate and retired to London for
their consciences, who teach the languages, and such as deserve to be well
paid for their pains.

There are amongst them to tell troth, some honest men; so also are there some
wicked heads, I say beasts or serpents, who have empoysoned by the venime of
their skill, our English nation, with the books of Nicholas Machiauell, and
Peter Aretine, replenished with all filthiness and vilanie; who deserve for
their pains a few swings of the strapado, or some bastinadoes, and to be
banished out of the kingdom of England. Such payment ought such pestiferous
mates to receive for their pains. Men should banish such plagues out of a
Christian commonwealth.

You say true indeed, I have been scholar to one or two of them, but I like
not their manner of teaching, for they will take money before hand, and wen they
are paid, they care little for their scholars profit, to instruct them the
rudiments of their tongue a little, which is no great piece of work.

What is their order in teaching?

It Is only to read some half side, and to construe it, which is no great
matter, and will not stay above half an hour to make a lecture, so that they
do all things by the halfes.

But tell me I pray you sir, which think you to be the best mean to learn
the tongues.

It Is that which is taught us by Nature and Art.

How by Nature and by Art? words are not ingendered with us by nature, but
we must learn them by companying and using with others.

I will not deny that, and I grant that use is king of all the languages in
the world: yet is there some address and happy invention in the spirit of man,
to attain sooner the perfection of them with facility, and I say that is done
by Nature and by Art.

What Author will you allege me?

Many learned men have observed this order in teaching the tongues: amongst the
rest, Alunno an Italian in his Fabrica del Mondo.

I find his book to be very confused and hard.

And I find it to be very fine, scholerlike, and excellent truly.

What understand you by his order of Nature then?

Nothing else but the order of natural things.

I cannot tell what you mean.

I mean the simple names of all things created by Nature ranged together: for
we shall never be able to speak a tongue perfectly, before we can name and call
every thing simply by it proper and common name.

This should be a very hard matter, seeing that the nature of things is so
diverse.

Nothing less, for she has but a very little and simple principality in all
things.

What say you of Art then, which teaches us otherwise then nature?

I say that he who will teach well, must marry Art with Nature.

By Art what will you understand?

The precepts and rules of Grammar, and the authority of learned men, which
is best allowed, and liked of in the world.

Truly sir you are too profound and obscure for mine understanding.

Nevertheless, I speak not in Parables.

Neither am I an Oedipus to interpret these Problemes: for it seems to me
that you speak de primis intentionibus Logicis.

Jesus you are hard of capacity.

How teach you sir?

I teach by Nature and by Art.

Do not others teach after the same manner.

No, they teach I know not how nor what.

By my faith I am as wise as I was before. You teach the tongues, you say, by
Nature and Art: I pray you give me to understand particularly these terms more
manifestly.

Hear then: I will say, that I teach by two means, the one concerns a
method of Nature, the other a method of Art. The first teaches the simple and
pure names of natural things: the second concerns the root and ground of
the tongues; and considers principally the nownes and verbs, and the natural
pronounciation, according to the equity of Grammar. For in these three
consists the profoundest mystery of all tongues; because they aid much the
judgment, the invention and memory, to read, to understand, to write.

Will you propound and begin with this way of teaching at the first day of the
young scholars beginning?

No, no, we must first lay a foundation concerning the root of nownes and
verbes, and that he have gone a little forward in the tongue that he studieth,
before this method be presented to him; then after may we teach the scholar to
translate Dialogues, Commedies and Prose, and set abroch this method of Nature
and Art, which shall engender the practice and habit of swift speaking, and
perfect understanding of any thing both in speaking, reading and vvriting.

Show me, I pray you, one familiar example, to the end to satisfy me more
amply herein.

Here are two: I will begin with one of God, who is the Prince and King of
Nature, and I will end with another of the Devil, the enemy of God and Nature.

The Method of Nature.
GOd the Father.

Jesus Christ the son.

The Holy Ghost.

The Deity.

The Trinity.

Almighty.

To Create.

The Heaven.

The Firmament.

The World.

A Star.

A Sphere.

The Throne of glory.

A Legion of Angels.

An Angel.

A feigned God.

Lucifer.

A Goddess.

An Idol.

An Idolater.

The earth.

Our Savior.

Our Redeemer.

An only Son

Blessed.

The people of God, beloved.

To Crucify.

To murder.

A Jew.

An Infidel.

The Praxis of Art.
GOd the Father almighty with his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, to
wit, the Deity, or the holy Trinity, has created the Heaven, the Firmament,
the Stars, and other celestial Globes, called Spheres, for his habitation:
and being environed in his Throne of glory with legions of Angels, has
confounded all the feigned Gods and Goddesses, of the Earth, will have no
Idols nor Idolaters, has chased the Angels which sinned* Lucifer and his
companions out of Heaven, and has sent Jesus Christ, his only Son our
blessed Savior and Redeemer, to be for the sins of the world crucified and
murdered of the Jews, once the well-beloved people of God, now an Infidel
nation, cruel and vagrant in all the corners of the world.

This is the first example, the second follows in the next page.

The Method of Nature.
AN Angel.

A Devil.

A malign Spirit.

The enemy of God.

The justice divine.

Hell.

A deep pit.

Lucifer.

Beelzebub.

Astaroth.

The Prince of Devils.

A spirit.

One possessed with a Devil.

A little Devil.

A she Devil.

Punishment.

Sin.

To fall.

To rack.

To lay in chains.

To torment.

To burn.

Fire eternal.

Unquenchable fire.

To smoke.

To blaze.

Brimstone.

Pitch.

A damned soul.

The pains of Hell.

Dark.

Stinking.

Dark as Hell.

To beat one another.

To strike one another

To weep.

To gnash the teeth.

To tempt.

To curse.

To cast firebrands.

The Praxis of Art.
THe Angels sinning became Devils and wicked spirits, enemies to God and men,
and by the divine justice being cast down from their glory on high, fell to
the deepest pit of Hell. Where God had prepared a place of punishment according
to their sin, and has set Lucifer, Beelzebub and Astaroth, wicked spirits,
princes reigning over the other little Devils, tortured, tormented and chained
all together in eternal and unquenchable fire. Whether also go down all the
Souls tempted to evil without repentance, and are damned in the same pains
of Hell, being a place full of Brimstone and Pitch, very dark, stinking,
obscure, smoking, and always burning: where they shall be for ever beating and
striking one another, weeping and gnashing their teeth, and flinging flaming
firebrands one at an other, without any hope of ever departing from that place,
for in Hell there is no redemption, according to the holy Scriptures.

There is the second Example, What think you thereof?

Me thinks that these examples are rather transnaturall then natural.

By your leave no: for although that God and the Devil be Metaphisicall in
their proper essences: the other things subject and incident as it were to
them, are verily natural.

I understand you very well now.

Very hardly, I think.

Indeed I do: you say that there is a method to further and profit more
speedily those that study the tongues, contrived by Nature and Art: Nature,
you say, touches principally the natural order, the place, and the sympathy
of Nownes and Verbes, or of other parts of speech joined together, as they are
proper and fit for one and the same matter:

Art concerns the judgment of the Grammar rules, for the use of scholars,
when they shall need, either in composing or in speaking.

You say well now.

Is this a pedagogicall or scholasticall exercise.

It is both.

Is this the most assured means to attain the tongues?

I have obscrued it of men of great spirit, that it is far the most
expedientest: moreover the learned know how hard a thing the two methods well
contrived, that they call Eruditionis modus, or (...) is to be conceived, and
that Aristotle himself, who has so excellently taught it, and so learnedly
showed it in this his wonderful work, called the Organo^, is understood of
very few.

As far as I see then, when we have all done it shall be but some imperfect
work, of the order and way that we have, to understand more languages then
our own mother tongue.

You say true: and to confess the truth unto you, we must now spend a man's
whole lifetime to learn but the bare words of Tongues, be it of the Hebrew,
Greek, or Latin: and content our selves to steal a little out of them: to
wit, to learn to babble: and in steed of being excellent well seen in
Philosophy divine and human, we must hunt after sillables, words, periods,
and some other such little exercises, which make our chinnes and heads look
gray, and even make an end of our days before we have indeed known or tasted
what Law, Physic, and Divinity are, which are the principal sciences.

Sir pardon me I pray you, for I trouble you here from your studies.

You do not truly, you are very welcome to me.

I will take my leave of you now sir, and come see you again after dinner.

You shall be very welcome, when it shall please you to return.

God be with you sir.

A good and long life sir.

Dialogue 2. Of the dignity of Orators, and excellency of tongues.
GOd save and keep you sir.

Welcome, welcome truly sir.

I come to visit you this afternoon, according to my promise.

Now am I at good leisure to speak with you.

We have discoursed this morning of method, and the way to learn strange
languages.

What shall we now do?

What you will, sir.

I have great desire to learn the tongues, but I know not which are the most
famous and renowned tongues in the world, at this present day.

I will reckon them to you: the Hebrew, Syrian, Arabian, Greek, the Latin,
Italian, Spanish, and the French. There are eight of the best and noblest
tongues that I can name you, but there are infinite other.

O if it were Gods will that I could but only speak these eight: but it is not
possible for a man to possess them all at once.

What say you man? there is a man in the Emperors Court who speaks them all
naturally: and speaks besides many others most eloquently.

I cannot believe it.

It is true, the man is yet living.

How call you him?

He is called Scaliger: and to confirm that which I say, du Bartas a most
excellent French Poet, has made mention of him in his Second Week in the day
which is called Babilone.

He wrote in French, I understand him not.

Because he is a man worthy of faith, I will hasard to translate his
testimony: albeit I am not ignorant how great my sawcines shall be by
presuming to take upon me to counterfeit by our English his inimitable style.

These are his verses: These gifts in only man infused
from God we must impute,
Of Fortitude, of Equity, of Honor
to dispute,
Of wisdom, temperance, God and
heaven, of water, air, and ground,
In him who has a filed phrase, and
choice of terms y-found:
Not by one only Idiome
his secrets to unfold,
But as the learned Scaliger,
whom men the wonder hold,
Of this our age the muses star,
whose tongue is not to seek,
Roling the Hebrew, Latin, Dutch
English, Castilian, Greek.
French-fine, Italian-glorious,
Numidian, Arabesko,
Assyrian, Caldaean, Persian tongues,
the Turkish and Moresko.
O rich and supple spirit that can
his tongue so quickly change,
Cameleon-like into what author
likes him best to range.
A worthy son of great Iulus,
worthy fellow mate,
Of Syluius his first brother-borne


Whom Gascons celebrate.

There is a worthy praise surely for him*

I am assured that he deserved it well.

The judgment be referred to all those who know him well: for he is known all
over Europe, to be a man of an admirable wit.

Which do yoo deem to have been the first speech in the world?

Without doubt it is the Hebrew, which is the most ancient, and the very same
that our father Adam spoke, being in Paradise with God.

The Hebrew, is it mysterious, as the Egyptian tongue, which is Hierogliphicke
and Caballisticke.

In few words it contains many things, is maruellously significatiue,
energicall, pure, chaste, holy and divine, manifests clearly and breefely all
that any man can think in his heart, and when need requires to express the
least hidden secrets and deepest corners of the heart, it leaves nothing
unspoken, having a gravity, sweetness, a marvelous viuacitie and efficacy
in every word, period and discourse; more admirable then all the sweetness of
the Greek, which with his words of one signification, his Epithetons rashly
devised or curiously sought out, his subtle translations, his made words, his
Aorists, and other fine devises, is no more comparable to the other, then the
chattering of a Iay to the sweet note of the Nightingale.

Who is the best Hebrew Author?

It is God himself: for the Eternal God giving and vvriting himself twice
his law to his people, and speaking with his mouth in the mountain to Moses,
and to other of his servants, used the Hebrew tongue. The Angels, and the
Prophets have done the same.

What is the cause that the Hebrew is at this day in so small account?

The impiety and the contempt of the true Divinity, is the cause that the
Hebrew is not esteemed of, but it is so much the more cherished of those that
know what it is.

The Hebrew then is the first and most ancient of all tongues?

It has the first and most ancient place among all tongues that have been,
that are, and which shall be in the world.

There are some for all that which rashly say to the contrary, and a certain
Goropius a Physician of Brabant, in his books entitled Origines Antuerpianae,
has been so bold to write to prove his Flemish to be the most ancient and
first borne of tongues.

Tush, tush, sir, the honest gentleman mistakes himself in his gross volumes.

For all that he labors to prove it expressly.

O these are Flemish flamflues, the poor man has lost his labor therein.

There are more besides him who have written as much as he.

I believe as well the one as the other.

There Fevers quartains. We shall show them that their flambumbarkin is not of
the antiquity that they pretend, but was ingendered in Babel, and to be
nothing but a barbarous hibber-Iybber, corrupted, effeminat and variable in
comparison of the Hebrew, whatsoever they dare spit to the contrary.

It is then a very great impudency in them to write such filthy lies.

If the Commicall Aristophanes were alive, he should have here a good argument
to write a Commedie of their impudency.

The Assyrian tongue what language is it?

It is a speech so derived from the Hebrew, that they have great affinity
together.

Which is the best author?

Jesus Christ spoke the Syriac, and the most part of the new Testament is
written in it: nevertheless it is in small account at this day, only they
speak it about Jerusalem, at Tripoly in Syria, and in the confines, no where
else. It was the tongue that was spoken under the Assyrian Monarchy. And in it
is the Thalmud of the Jews written.

Have you never studied the Arabian tongue?

No sir, but as men say, it is a goodly speech, rich, fluent, and which has
more scope than any other that is spoken in the woorld.

We find very few books written in the Arabian.

There are many manuscripts, but very few printed yet: when I was at Rome, it
is now at the least seven or eight years since, that Pope Gregory the
thirteenth began to set up a Print there in Campo de Fiori, and sought to
recover many manuscripts in the Arabian and Syrian tongues, caused very fair
Caracters to be cut at his charges, and sent all abroad to get workmen in
that mystery, to set them a work thereupon. I cannot tell whether the
Popes that have been created since his time have prosecuted this good beginning.

I doubt it much. For otherwise some of the books would have been come to our
hands. But I pray you in what country does the Arabian most besteed us?

Throughout all the Leuant countries. It is the best tongue in the world to
travail over all the great Turks kingdoms, over greatest part of Asia, through
all the countries of the Iapanians, through China, through the empire of
Presbiter John, and through all Affrike, and by it a man passes well over the
third part of the world. It is a singular fine tongue surely.

I think that it is the daughter of the Hebrew.

It is come of the Hebrew without doubt.

All the Turks and Mahumetains speak Arabian, because that Mahumet their
false Prophet, wrote his law or Alcoran in the same.

What people are these Arabians?

The Arabians at this present are almost all thieves and robbers, who dwell
but little in closed cities, but roue abroad spoiling and robbing trauaillers,
who make their voiages through the deserts and forests of Arabia.

Truly the travelers say so.

Notwithstanding there are amongst them very many who are natural and skillful
Physicians.

Of whom are the most eloquent vvritings that we have from the Arabians.

Those are the works of Auerroes the Commentator, a most excellent
Philosopher, who has written most singular Commentaries on the greatest part
of Aristotle's works.

But we understand them not in the Arabian.

They are translated into Latin and printed at Venice.

This Philosopher Auerroes was a man of a subtle spirit, and of a most
profound judgment.

What other good author have we among the Arabians?

There is besides him Auicenna, an eloquent orator in his Arabian tongue; and
many others, of whom we have the writings in many places of Europe.

He was a Physician.

So also was the other.

After these three sisters, which esteem you the best tongue?

The ancient Greek; but as for the vulgar Greek at this day it is very
gross.

Where shall we find the purest, and that which is good indeed?

We must fetch it from the fountains of these great Greek Orators, Poets and
Rhetoricians: out of Plato Xenopho^, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Homere, Euripides,
Sophocles, Pindarus, Plutarke, Basil, Chrysostom, Nazianzene, and out of
others in great number.

Who was the most ancient Greek author that we have?

It is Homer in his Iliads and Odyssees written in 48. books.

Homer, was he the first Greek Poet or not?

I think so, yet I cannot tell whether Amphion, Orpheus, Lynus, and some other
were before him or no: but I am sure that this great Greek Poet, although he
were blind from his infancy, has nevertheless pend things so profound and
admirable, that some have dared to write of him, that if all the wisdom of
Poets were moulte^ together in a great furnace, it could not compare with
something so surpassing which shines in his works, nor himself if he were
raised from the dead, could not do that again which he has brought to pass.

I believe there was never Greek nor Latin that was able to imitate or
counterfeit his style.

Truly his wit was admirable, his inventions inimitable, his discourses
natural, his verses flowing, full of art, and which have infinite graces the
more we consider them: beside a hidden sense in them, and the fountain of all
humain sciences springing out of them, as we see a thousand and a thousand
sundry pieces of his poesies fly into the books of Philosophers, Geographers
Orators, and Historiographers. Witness be Plutarke hereof, amongst all the
rest.

Plato, was not be an Author as much renowned in Greece as he?

Plato the most famous Philosopher (no less honored in Greece the^ that
Homer, for whose bones seven cities of Greece warred so long one against
another) was surnamed, the Divine, a spirit maruellously pure and profound,
lofty in all his discourses: a true disciple of him who making profession to
know but one thing, (that he knew Nothing) well showed that he knew all that
may be learned in the world concerning the world.

They say that he had seen a piece of the old Testament.

I cannot tell. He may have seen some of the Prophets: to be short, touching
the knowledge of salvation, he and his master Socrates, were altogether
ignorant thereof.

Who has had the third place among the Greek Orators?

Herodotus the Ionian, who was a grave, sage and most eloquent
Historiographer in his Ionian Idiome.

What say you of Demosthenes, where put you him?

He shall have his place here, as he has deserved it. Demosthenes indeed is
the Prince of Greek Orators, the rule of all those who will speak
learnedly, a man who handles the hearts of his hearers as he lists,
excelling in all his discourses, which are partly in light, and read with
great fruit, and of great use for those that can tell how to help themselves
with the^.

Who are the ornaments and pillars of the Latin tongue.

The principal is Cicero, surnamed the Father of Eloquence.

I vvonder wherefore he was so extremely hated of Catiline and Mark Antony.

It was because he would not abide nor favor their trecheries and
conspiracies against the commonwealth of the Romans: but he pursued them both
lustily, as his Orations called his Inuectiues against Catiline and his
Philippicks do well witness.

O the brave man that this was! it was great pity truly he was not a
Christian.

Erasmus doubts not but that he may be saved: he has spoken so divinely of
God: I remember where he says, Si vnus Deus est vt aiunt, in his book of
Old Age.

What would he have said if he had been a Christian, saying so much being but
a poor Pagan?

O my God! I am ravished considering the quickness and viuacitie of his spirit.

His works so many times printed, so many times read over and over again of
all, the vvritings of so many learned men, who have borrowed all their fine
discourses out of this flood of Eloquence, from this rich spirit learned and
eloquent past all men's vvonder, do verify that which a Christian Poet does
say of him: Raging Antonius mortal foe,
a scourge of Catiline,
From whose sweet breast does stream
a flood of Eloquence divine,
A flood whose current seems to cast
forth lightening and thunder.
Which ravish all the rarest spirits
of men, and make them wunder.


Who has vvoon the price next after Cicero for the Latin?

It has been Julius Caesar, who has been valiant among the valiant, and
eloquent among the eloquent, as his life written by Plutarke, and his
Commentaries de Bello Gallico, where he has taken the pen out of the hands of
all learned men, and discouraged them from vvriting of Histories, seeing they
cannot once come near his perfection by far, do prove it sufficiently.

Who shall be put in the third room?

That shall Salust the Historian, of whom we have two short histories, but
sententious, full of good matter and testimonies of that ancient vigor of the
Romans.

Who is cheifest among the Latin Poets?

Virgill is the Father of the Latin Poets, of whom we cannot speak too
well: his Georgicks and Aeneidos being books admirable above all other books
of humanity do make sufficient proof.

They say that his verses are rugged and hard.

I speak not of the excellency of his verses, but his judgment, the
profoundnesse of his inventions, his Decorum, his modesty, his gravity, his
majesty, and his conceits, finer then any other appear not only in every
book, but in every one of his verses, where one shall find a thousand and a
thousand fine secrets of all sciences, of which we have in him as it were an
Epitome, besides he has his words so proper, his epithetons so fit, his
metaphors and figures bestowed so well in their places, and every where his
language in so pure and eloquent terms, without any affection or other fault
at all.

Who has been the most excellent Orator in the Italian tongue?

John Boccace, who wrote now a good while ago, but very finely and purely, as
his Decameron, his Fiammetta, his Philocopo, his Labyrintho, and other of his
books loved by the children of this world do well witness.

Who are the best Tuscan or Florentine Poets?

These three which I will now name:

In the first place shall be the fine Poet Francis Petrarke, who wrote his
Poesies since the time of John Boccace, and has invented many trim words, and
enriched his verses with infinite pretty devises taken out of other Authors,
and many devised of his own wit also, be^^de he was very bold and has some
sonnets, chapters, and Cantoes altogether admirable.

What other Italian Poets will you name me?

Two only, the one is Lodouike Ariosto of Ferrara, who has published a Poem
called Mad-Rowland, in verses so sweet and full of delight, that all Italy
has them still in their mouth, full of passions in his discourses, and very
pleasant by reason of the diversity of things that he recites, his fables
being so cunningly disguised, that a man is moved sometimes in reading of
them, as if they were things truly come to pass, or at the least having some
resemblance of troth.

Who is the other?

Torquato Tasso, a fine scholar truly, who is yet living, the last Italian
Poet who is of any great fame in our age, but vvorthie of the first honor;
besides that he is a divine Poet, he is also a most eloquent Orator and
Rhetoricyan, as his missiue Epistles do show very well. This Youth fell mad
for the love of an Italian less descended of a great house, when I was in
Italy.

What other fine books has he made?

Many: there are three Toomes of his works printed at Ferrara, vvherin there
are diverse sorts of verses of all kinds of fine inventions: a Commedie, a
Tragedy, diverse Dialogues and discourses in Prose, all vvorthie the reading of
the vvisest and quickest spirits of Europe.

Is that all that he has written?

No, for he has the pen in hand every day.

You have forgotten his Gierusalemme liberata.

You say true, this child has written in Heroical verses one excellent Poem
amongst all other Italian Poesies, entitled as you say, wherein all the
riches of the Greeks and Latins are gathered together and enchaced so
cunningly past all others skill, with such grace, brevity, gravity,
learning, liveliness, and viuacitie that is remarqued to have been in Virgill
the Prince of Latin Poets.

Who have been the quickest Spanish wits of any fame in the world?

For an Historian Antony Gueuare, who was Secretary to the Emperor Carolus
quintus.

I have read over and over again almost all his works: but who are the best
Spanish Poets?

They are Boscan, Grenade, Garcilasso and Mont-maior.

I vvonder that men get them not translated into English.

They would have no grace.

Why so? we find them almost all translated into Latin Italian and French.

I believe it well, yet have they more grace in their Castillian, which is
the purest Spanish dialect, in which the learned write and speak ordinarily.

Amongst the French, who are the most eloquent authors?

There are very many who have written both in rithme and prose, but I will
name you only one half dosen of brave men, three Poets; and three Orators,
and Rhetoricians whose likes are not to be found:

First you have Clement Marot, that was King Francis Poet, who was admirable
for his time.

He was the Kings fool, for since his time they call all fools and idiots in
France Marots, You are a Marot, say they, A vengeance of the Marot.

You deceive your self greatly, he was the Poet Royal, not a fool royal:
of whom the fine poesies shall be read and read again, as long as Yea and Nay
shall last amongst learned men.

You will pardon me sir, for I speak no otherwise then a fool by hear say
and at all adventure.

They say that he transported the Muses beyond the mountains, and attyred them
on the French fashion. He has done marvelous well in his beginnings truly.

Hold him of my word for a natural Poet: when you shall understand French
perfectly read me his books, if you have the leisure.

Who is the second French Poet in your opinion?

It is Peter Ronsard, rich in the spoils of the Greeks and Latins; as his
Loves, his diverse Poesies, his Odes, Elegies and Hymns do testify, in the
which we read all kind of verses, all kind of Arguments in all kind of styles.

Who shall make the third?

We will put down for the third the Christian Poet William Sallustius, Lord
of Bartas, who has written more in Three-Weekes, then all other French Poets,
or all other Poets either Pagan or Christian have done in all their life.
Besides a man of as great a wit as ever France bred any.

Who are the most singular French Rhetoricians?

We have James Amiot, who translated out of Greek into French the Ethiopian
History of Heliodorus, the seven books of the History of Diodorus the
Sicilian, and all the works of Plutarke, wherein he has happily spent his
time.

What style writes he?

High and lofty: his language is pure and simple, not affected, not coined: to
be brief, he shows himself a right Frenchman.

What other French Orators will you name me?

France has nursed many sweet men of great fame, who have drawn their
eloquence from Rome, from Greece from Egypt, and from all parts and corners of
the world; amongst an infinite number I will speak but only of two
Rhetoricians, who have got the goal from all the other: the one is this
Blaisius Vigenerus, so famous and renowned in France, who has also translated
many books, as the History of Polonia, a piece of Titus Liuius, Caesar,
Philostratus, and Chalcondilus.

Truly he has been virtuously occupied.

This Blaisius Vigenerus has much fine skill in his writings, and many choice
and fine carriages. It is said that among all the puples of the Muses that
France has suckled, this Vigenere has said so well, that he has shut the
door to all those who shall come after him as well in eloquence of speech as
in learning,

Yet we lack a third man to make an end of this our discourse of Tongues and
Orators.

The honor appertains to Philip de Mornay, who has so terribly combatted
and beaten down the Atheism of our age with lively reasons, arguments,
inductions, and invincible proofs joined with a language twixt grave and
sweet, well compact, thundering with so fine and fit French phrases, that he
brings his Reader whether he lists to have him; and this learned man shall
end our dispute of tongues.

We have to day discoursed lustily of Languages, of Orators, and Rhetoricians.

There are yet in the world so many other tongues, and so many famous Orators,
that a great volume would not suffice to set them all down in order.

Truly the glory and majesty of man appears in nothing more then in his
speech.

It is true, because that thereby he shows his reason, the light of his soul
and body.

In what space think you that a man of a good wit may attain to speak these
eight languages above named?

In eight years it is possible, if he will be studious, and that he have good
direction to speak these eight eloque^tly, with the grace of the true accent,
and to write them swiftly and volubly.

Among these tongues is there not some which are far more noble and glorious
then other some?

It is not to be doubted but the Hebrew of the ancient Fathers Prophets and
Patriarchs, has had the most magnificent accent, and a souueraigne grace in
the pronounciation above all other tongues, although the Jews living at this
present day in the world, speak it harshly, I cannot tell how; but the true
Toscaine, Roman or Florentine tongue, when it is accented aright, and well
pronounced, has a better grace and glory, is more fluent and glib then all
other speeches spoken in Europe.

I am of opinion truly that there is no tongue in the world more heroical
then that.

I will not be of your mind therein.

Why so?

Have you never in your life heard a Mexican; a Moscouite, a Tartare; a
Iapanois or one of China speak his language?

Never in my life.

In the year eightie-foure or five Xistus quintus being Pope of Rome; there
were four young princes or kings, or sons of the kings of Iapan, which came
from these countries of the Orient to Rome with the Iesuist Mesquite an Italian
who had converted them, and brought them thither to do homage and to take the
oath of obedience to the Pope. I heard them speak in passing along* through the
streets: their words are almost all of one syllable, their speech princely,
thundering, proud, glorious, and marvelous lofty.

How many languages speak they in Mexico the great City, so much renowned in
the West Indies.

They speak (as it is reported) four diverse tongues, and these four Mexican
tongues are all so flowing, full of grace and eloquence, that the Greek, the
Latin, the Italian, the Spanish, and the French seem some effeminate notes or
barbarous prittle-prattle in comparison of their loftiness, profoundnesse, and
sweet phrase of speech.

What will you then say of these more Northren tongues of the Moscouites and
Tartarians?

I give them the price and the honor truly, for the Russian and Tartarian are
tongues imperial, thundering, resounding, rattling, noble and generous above
all other tongues on the face of Asie, Europe, and Affrike.

The high Almand retains some little accent of their excellent tone in their
speech: to conclude then, all the Antarticke tongues of the East or West
Indians and those of the other part of the world; have far greater luster,
magnificence and generousnesse in them, then those that we speak in this
other moitie of the Earth.

True it is sir that I am not desirous to learn any of these tongues: also I
know that you do not teach them; but I have a great affection to the French the
which I would desire to learn of you, if it would please you to give me
instruction therein.

I will do for you all that I can possibly.

But I must know how much you take by the week, by the month, by the quarter,
by the year.

I make no merchandising with those whom I teach, for the gifts of the graces
and the noble and virtuous qualities ought not to be set on sale.

Give me what you will, half a crown, if you will, a crown, an angel,
twenty shillings, five pounds, ten pounds, twenty marks, twenty pounds
sterling, by the week, by the month, by the year.

Others teach for fifty and two shillings by the year, that is twelue-pence a
week, which I will give you willingly to be naturally instructed in the French
tongue.

I care not a whit what other mercenaries do; but as for me I will not stand
to bargain in this matter.

Put the case you were a mercenarie Pedante your self; how much would you
ask for the son of a Mecanicke?

If he were the son of a Merchant, he should pay for a Merchant, I would
demand and would take no less then five pounds by the year.

And for the son of a Gentleman?

If he were come af a good house, he should pay me ten pounds a year.

And if he were the son of a great Lord?

By my fe he should pay for a great Lord, and should give me every year
twenty, thirty, or forty pounds at the lest.

You should have very few scholars at that price, for you are to dear.

So also would not I sell noble quallities for the wages of a villain, at a
vile and common price, but every one should pay me according to his estate: the
merchant for a merchant, the gentleman for a gentleman, and a lord for a lord,
according to his degree of honor.

It shall not displease you sir, if I demand where you have learned the
French?

At Paris in France, where I was brought up three years together in the
college of Montagu. I have also been scholemaister at Orleans in the College of
Affricans; and lived ten months at Lions.

Sir you shall excuse me if it please you, it is time that I go to my scholars.

I will advise my self then between this and to morrow, and then we will
come to agreement, if it please God.

God be with you.

Fare you well my good sinnior.

Dialogue 3.
Master Noe-Ionas and Ely, I am very glad to see you in good health!

I thank you my good friend.

How do you?

Very well, at your command and service.

And I at yours truly.

How long is it since we were together at Paris?

It Is at the least seven or eight years.

It Is not so much in my opinion.

I am deceived else, for it was at the first when the duke of Guise did levy
his arms for those of the League.

I vvoondered much of your departure which was so sudden from Paris.

What said they I pray you among my friends and acquaintance?

By my faith they said that you were become a moonke of the order of S. Benet.

O poor man, I was very sorry for you.

True it is after the year of my probationship, I left my habit behind.

You have not cast your frocke into the nettles?

In good faith no: I departed out of the abbie with license, like an honest
man.

You made the three vows of chastity, poverty and obedience.

About some no:

I did not, I tell you, for I was received only but for a young Monk, or as
you say in English, for a Nouice.

But I pray you where have you been since that time?

All abroad, in Italy, in France, in Spain.

Do you not mock?

No truly, why should I mock.

From Paris what way took you?

From Paris I went into Italy.

Have you dwelt at Rome?

I made some abode there?

What news will you tell me out of those quarters?

There are within these 7. years last, four or five popes dead.

Have you never been further then Rome?

Yes, as far as Naples.

How did you escape falling into the Inquisitors hands?

I attired my self like a Pilgrim.

O the fine pilgrim that here is!

How escaped you the inquisition? tell me I pray you.

There is no danger for one who is papal and of the number of Catholics.

How shall he do then who is a Protestant to pass through Italy as far as
Rome.

He must dissemble.

I deem that, he need not.

What then?

He must only carry a good face, for pass once Venice, the inquisition is
there every where.

Have you lived at Venice, Padua, Pauia, Milan, Mantua, Cremona, Pisa, Sienna,
Vrbino?

No, I have passed by them only.

Have you seen Florence, Ferrara and Bolonia?

I have seen and visited them.

Have you past by Lions?

Signor si, upon the bridges and on the pauements.

Came you away by Orleans?

Yea, sir.

Have you trafficked at Paris?

I, in eating and drinking.

Have you not haunted at Roan?

I was never there.

Have you soiourned at Amiens?

Some four or five days.

Seeing that you have seen so many fine cities in these two countries; tell
us also something of Spain.

In Spain the chief cities are Siuillia, the vvarehouse of the Indias, for
the diversity of mer^handise that men bring thither.

There is beside Saragossa, Grenada, Valledolida, Medina del campo, Pampelona
in Navarre, and Lisbona in Portugal: where is also Conymbria, a famous
university.

What other fair Cities are there in Spain?

There are so many, that I cannot name them all.

How many Universities have they there?

There are many: I will name only Salamanca, an University where they study
the Law, Physic, and the seven liberal Sciences.

Where keeps king Philip his court?

For the most part at Madril, or at the Esquireal, where he has built the
most magnificent palace of all Europe, being the dwelling house of the
Catholic king, and it is the fairest building that I ever saw in my life.

In your mind then, it is the most goodly, stateliest and sumptuous building
that a man can imagine.

It Is a palace enriched with great gardens, closes, and orchards, and with the
rarest fruits that a man can wish.

How is it situated?

Upon a pleasant river.

Of what form is this building?

It is built six corner fashion: and the pillars stand diameter wise.

By your reckoning the Palace of the Pope, of the Cardinal Medicis, and many
other in Rome are nothing comparable to this.

It Is a hundred times more magnificent then those, or any other in Italy, name
as many as you will.

Surely this palace is a terrestrial paradise, such as promises Mahomet in
his Alcoran to his Musselmans.

O my friend, the king of Spain has more then twenty ships which come home
every year from the ysles of Perles, from Peru, from Mexico and the Canibals,
laden with lingots of gold and silver, pearls and stones, and raw silk in
great quantity.

I vvoonder why he has not then paued his palace ten mile round with orient
pearls, carbuncles, rubies, diamonds, saphires, emeraudes, blew stones,
grenates, agathes, crystal, perles, and other stones of excellency.

He has something else to do with them. I believe that you have described a
pallaice at your pleasure, and spoken by a figure. For you have a privilege you
travelers to speak at pleasure when it seems good unto you.

I speak in good sooth.

If you speak in good sooth, I answer you, that her Majesty of England has
as goodly palaces, well founded, finely set out, as sumptuous, and no less
magnificent then all those that you can name either in Spain, or in Italy:
and here are six that I will name: first the palace royal of Greenwich; then
her house called Saint James, then her mansion of Whitehall and of Richmond,
the honor of Hampt^ncourt, her house called Nonesuch, and the castle of
Windsor, all scituat within the compass of fifteen leagues, on the sweet
river of Thames, palaces (or to speak more properly) Paradices of wholesome
air, pleasure, fine soil, full of all abundance, delights, and honest
pleasures, fit for a Prince to have, not lying in one only word.

Before we go any further, tell me I pray you, what think you of this City of
London? Is it not fair and very populous?

It Is fair indeed, and likes me very well. But I cannot tell what to say yet,
for since four days, that I am here arrived, I have not stird out of my
chamber, being weary and tired with so sore traveling and running the post.

You have not been then any further in the country?

No, but if it please God this spring I will go see all the country, and the
best Cities.

You shall see then a goodly soil, very fruitful, very fertile, and of a
very temperate air, abounding in victuals, full of fair women, very
courteous and beautiful, and an Island environed with the sea.

Have they no wine here, me thinks that they drink water?

Not so sir, they drink beer, which is a drink made with barley and water
brewed together, being a drink very wholesome, and agreeing with the nature of
us Englishmen.

Ye Frenchmen, ye drink wine, you shall find wine here in great abundance.

Whence comes it?

There is that comes from France, from Spain, from Candie, and Rhenish wine
your belly full.

What sorts of wine have they?

They have Claret, red, Sack, Muscadine, and Malmesie.

Is it dear or good cheap?

The Claret, red and white are sold for six pence a quart, Sack for eight
pence, Muscadine and Malmesie for ten.

It is not to dear.

No truly, it is reasonably sold, and for an indifferent price.

Truly it is dearer in many parts of France.

London, is it a City full of merchants?

Yea sir, very full.

What merchandise is there?

Of all sorts that a man can vvish.

The merchants, where do they traffic?

Throughout all the world: In France, in Italy, in Spain, in Barbary, in
Guynea, in Bresilia, in the East and West Indies, in the East countries: in
Turkey, in Arabia, in Persia, in Tartarie, in Russia, in Poland, in Bohemia: in
Hungary, in Germany, in Frizeland, in Flanders, in Denmark, in Scotland, in
Ireland, over all Asia, Europe, Affricke, and the new America.


With what merchandise do they trade?

The best Tynne in the world is found in England: the best wool, the best
clothes and kersies; all kind of metals, as gold, silver, lead, tin,
copper, iron, steel, brass, the best saffron that is, great quantity of
hides, of grain, much vvood, and cattle, as horses, hacknies, oxen, kine,
sheep, mares.

There are very few goats.

There are no wolves, bears, lions, nor serpents, if they be not brought from
other countries.

What pastimes use they on holidaies?

All manner of pastime, as to see Comedies, and Tragedies, to leap, to danse,
fencing, beare-bayting, shooting, running, shooting in the piece, walking
abroad in the fields, rowing in boats on the water.

Is there any fair river at London?

One very fair and great.

Does it carry great vessels?

It Is very nauigable, full of all kind of fish, finely garnished on the one and
the other side with goodly buildings, fair Cities, villages and castles, and
her Majesty's Court lies almost always about it.

How call you the River?

It Is called the Thames.

Does it fall into the Sea?

Yea, it is swallowed up into the great Ocean.

Are victuals good cheap?

Sometimes they are dear enough: otherwhile very cheap: for the Thames does
bring in a great part of commodities for man's life, in ships and vessels of
burden.

There is always great plenty of bread, of flesh, cheese, butter, salt fish,
wild foul, etc.

How many Universities are there here?

There are but two: that of Cambridge, and this of Oxford.

Is there any great number of Scholars?

Sufficient.

And of learned men?

There are, and some that have great authority.

Have they fair Colleges?

Very fair and sumptuous, builded of freestone, and very costly.

Are they of great antiquity?

The histories do make mention of more then a thousand eight hundred and three
years.

Have you seen the Colleges and Universities beyond seas: are they fair?

I have been in many Universities, the most famous of Europe, and first in
those of Italy: as in Rome: in Pisa: in Bolonia: in Padua: in Turin: and then
next in those of France: as in Paris, in Orleans, at Bourges, at Rhemes in
Champaigne: at Mussi-pont: at Verdun: at Geneua, at Tournon: at Poictiers, at
Angiers: at Toulouse: and at Mont-pelier: In Germany I have seen none: very
few in Spain: but in Rome there are but four fair Colleges: that is to wit
the College of Rome, called the Seminary of Iesuists: that of Almans: the
College of Greeks: and the other called the hospital, or College of
Englishmen hard by, which is called otherwise, la casa Ingleze, standing in
strada del popolo: near the Jews market place. In Parts you have a fair
Academie, where there are many fair Colleges: as the Colleges of the
Sorbonists: of Navarre: of Montagu: of Bourgondie: of Dam-uille: of Caluy: of
Justice: of Tours: of Beau-uais: of Presles: of Lysieus: of Rhemes: of
Bon-court: of Lombards: of the Treasorers: of Narbone: of Mercy: of the
Bernard-friers: of Cluny-friers: of white Monks, of Cholets: of the Cardinal
Monk: of Plessis: of Marmontyer: of Autun: of Fortet: of the March: of S.
Barbara: of Man's: of Harcourt: of Laon: of good children: of Tournay: of
Boisie: of Bayews, Coc-keret, Minnion, of S. Dennis: of master Geruis: of S.
Michael, of the three Bishops, or of Cambray, where are read the public
Lectures by the Kings professors.

There are yet some other, but I have set down only the principal, leaving
out the Abbeys, and Monasteries.

Are these Colleges magnificent, finely built, set forth and trimmed? They are
all Colleges: but not to compare with the Colleges of Oxon. with a
Christs-Church a wonder of the world; nor to new College: nor to a S. John's:
or to an All-Soules: to the Colleges of Merton and Magdalens in Oxenford:
which are of great antiquity, very well founded all, and seem rather Palaces
for Kings, then Schools to teach the liberal Arts in, and to maintain poor
Scholars.

And he that would compare them to those of Cambridge, as to Trinity College,
or to a Saint John's, or to Kings College, Queens College, to Emmanuel and
kayes Colleges, and to diverse others where the pensioners have their revenues
to maintain them yearly, I would say, that he should be some poor blind
buzzard, that understands as little as may be, and who should deserve to be cast
into Cymmerian darkness with fetters on his heels for his so gross
ignorance.

Now sir, who governs in London?

It Is my Lord Mayor, who is her Majesty's Lieftenant, with his brethren the
Aldermen of the City.

What policy have they?

Fine policy: the customs of the country bear the greatest sway.

I have heard say, that there is a great number of malefactors, as thieves,
murderers, rouers, and Pirates.

There are many: yet they hang them every day.

They do not hang all of this race?

Some of them escape always.

Have they no other death for the malefactors?

None: but for traitors who are drawn with four horses to the place of
execution, and quartered.

It Is a great thing that you say, are there so many traitors there?

Not so: for justice does cut them off so well that they dare not devise or set
a broach any treason.

God of his holy grace preserve Queen ELIZABETH, and grant her long life and
prosperity, frustrating all the practices of her enemies, and give her happy
success of all her holy desires.

The Queens majesty does she come often to the City? Very seldom: but she
keeps with her Court always very near.

All foreign Nations truly admire the great virtues and sagenesse of her
majesty.

To confess the truth, there is no tongue able to set forth her praises: for
she is in liberality, magnificence, clemency, wisdom, mercy, beauty,
nobility, knowledge, courtesy and sagesse, the only Phoenix of the world;
endued with all the most noble virtues, wherewith the fairest and most famous
Queens in all histories of Greeks and Latins have been adorned. She may rather
be called an Angel of heaven, then an earthly creature.

Does her Majesty keep a great Court?

Truly very great and magnificent.

Does her majesty love strangers?

She loves them very well.

Does her majesty speak many languages?

She speaks eight at the least: to wit: the Greek tongue, the Latin,
Italian, French, Spanish, Scottish, Flemmish, and English: I cannot show the
other excellent virtues wherewith her majesty in all perfection is adorned:
and therefore I will produce that which the most excellent French Poet William
Salustius Lord of Bartas, has written in her praise.

These are his verses, as I have translated them into English, But what new
beam of Phoebus bright, comes dazeling ore mine eyes?
How am I at this instant made a bourgis of the Skies?
O sacred Port! what majesty so royal do I view?
What twinkling eyes like glistering stars, what face of Angels hew?
Daughters of Jove, say sisters nine, ye mistresses that taught her,
Say, is not this Elizabeth the-Great, Mineruaes daughter?
Who makes the Britain brave disdain the male-kinde Monarchy?
To crave for females Scepter, which she swaies in Britanny:
When she is moved, her neighbors round do find a fury fell,
Which seems disquieted to bring both fire and sword from hell:
Whose fear does make them sore aghast, and threats the Machine round,
With thundering tempests, rattling storms, and furious rage to drowned.
In blessed peace she does possess her kingdom where the law
Does flourish with the faith of Christ, and hold her realm in awe.
Who has not of her mother tongue the only fluent phraze:
And yet there in her eloquence the learned does amaze.
But presently she can discourse in speeches eight or nine,
In Latin, Greek, French, Spanish, Dutch, Scottish, and Florentine.
That for her birth, Imperial Rome does plead with Greece and France,
And Rhene and Arnus with all three, make mickle variance.
Bright Northren Pearl, daughter of Mars, or else well Mars his master,
The Muses and the liberal Arts, continue still to foster.
And if my verses ever chance to fly ore Ocean Maine,
Into the I Will where fair Eliza princely Nimphe does reign,
And fortunate may be to fall into those milkewhite hands,
Which sway the Scepters righteously, of many mighty lands.
Behold them with a gracious look: This favor once I crave:
Think: who your praise will pen aright, your eloquence must have.


Truly this Bartasius was a man of a rare spirit.

True it is that this Princess has governed her Kingdom in great prosperity
for the space of thirty four years, during the troubles and ruins of other
countries, having with her people been preserved from infinite dangers: and has
the tongues mentioned by the Poet very ready at command: and besides at this
present day by a singular favor of God, is known to be the Northern Perle,
recognished for a fortunate Princess in battle; her victories and happy
success being most memorable and fresh, deserve to be registered in an whole
history that the posterity shall have in reverence for ever.

God keep her majesty in his holy safeguard, bless her, and prosper her long
time, according to his good pleasure.

Sir it is time that I retire to my lodging.

I commend me unto you then.

I kiss your hands, Adue.

FINIS.
ORTHO-EPIA GALLICA. Or Le Parliament des Babillards: Id est: The Parliament of
Pratlers. M. Eliots first Book: Wherein is showed his double new Invention,
which teaches Englishmen to speak truly, speedily, and volubly the French
tongue.
Le Lever au matin. Chap. 1.
HAu garcon, dors tu vilain? debout, debout: ie te resueilleray tantost auec un
bon baston.

Ie me leave, monsieur.

Quelle heure est il?

Il est six heures.

Donnez moy mes chausses de velours verd.

Lesquelles?

C'est tout un, mes chausses rondes de satin rouge.

Baille moy vne chemise blanch premierement.

Attendez monsieur que ie la seiche au feu.

Espousette bien mon chapeau and mon manteau.

Nettoye mes souliers.

Tens moy mon pourpoint de Satin noir, car ie le veux porter auec mes chausses,
de velours cramoisin a la Venicienne.

Voyla voz chausses vostre pourpoint and vostre chemise, monsieur.

Tu m'as apporte vne chemise a femme, vilain, tu ne scais pas ce que tu fais.

Pardonnez moy, monsieur, s'il vous plaist, ie me suis abuse, c'est la chemise
de mademoiselle.

Garcon maladuise, tu me feras resentir la chemise a femme tout ce iourd huy
and demain.

Voyla la vostre monsieur.

Ou sont mes bas de chausses?

Mes souliers ou sont ils?

Les voyla mons.

Voulez vous porter vos souliers a simple semelle auiourd'huy?

Non, non, ie veux porter mes souliers a double and triple semelle.

Quel temps fait il dehors?

Il y fait fort beau temps.

Donnez moy donc mes mulles and mes escarpins, mais ou sont mes chaussons?

Ie les vay cercher.

Va me querir le chausse-pied.

I'ay bless mon pied, il me faut aller mes souliers en pantofle.

Ou as tu mis ma ceinture and mes iartiers?

Les voyla en la fenestre derriere le mirouer.

Aid moy attacher mes esguillettes.

Apporte vne aiguiere de l'eau net pour me la uer les mains, la face and mes
yeux.

La touaille pour essuyer mes mains?

Tenez monsieur, en voyla vne.

Asteure que ie suis habille, me voyla pressed a desieusner.

Le Lever o mateen. Chap. 1.
HO garssoon, dortu veelein? deboo, deboo: ziete reue-lhere tan-tot-tauec-keun
boon batoon.

zIe me leveh moonseewr.

Ke-leur et-til?

Il-e see-zewres.

Done moe' mes shosseh de veloor vert.

Le-keles?

Set-toot-tewn, mes shosseh roondeh de sateen roo-zieh.

Ba-lheh moe' vneh shemee-zeh blaun-sheh pre-mheremant.

Attande moonseewr ke zie la se-sho few.

Epoozetteh bee-en moon shapeaw e moom manteaw.

Nettoyeh mes soolierz.

Tan moe' moom poorpoin de Sateen noe'r, car zie le view porter-auec mes shosseh
de veloor cramoe'zeen-a la Veneesee-anneh.

Voe'la vos shosses, voter poorpointe voter shemeezeh, moonseewr.

Tu ma-zapporte vneh shemeeza fammeh, veelein, tu ne s'e pas se ke tu fez.

Pardonne moe' moonseewr, sil voo plet, zie me sweezabuze, se la shemeezeh de
mad'moe'zeleh.

Garssoon mal-a-vee-ze tu me fera resanteer la shemeeza fammeh too-se zioordwee
e demein.

Voe'la la voter moonsewr.

Oo soon me ba de shosses?

Mes soulier-zoo soont-ilz?

Le voe'la mons.

Voole voo porter vos soolier-za seemple semelo zioordwee?

Noon, noon, zie view porter mes soolier-za dooble treeple semeleh.

Kel tan fet-til dehors?

Il-ee fe for beaw tanz.

Done moe' donc me mu-le-ze mez-escarpeenz: me-zoo soon mes shossoons?

zIe le ve shersher.

Va me kereer le shosse-pee-e.

zIe bless moom pee-e, il me fo-tal-ler mes soolier-zan pantofle.

Oo a-tu me ma seenture me-ziartierz?

Le voe'la an la feneter derrhe-reh le mee-roo-er.

Edeh moe' attasher me-ze-gee-lhe-tes.

Apportu-ne-gee-ereh de leaw netteh poor me laver le meinz, la fase me-zeewz.

La too-a-lheh poor-esswee-er me meinz?

Tene moonseewr, an voe'la ew-neh.

Asteur ke zie swee-za-bee-lhe, me vla pret-ta de-ziewner.

Pour saluer les hommes. Chap. 2.
BOn iour a tous mes bons seigneurs.

Bon iour and bon an seigneur Claude.

Bon soir and bonne sante a trestous.

Dieu vous doint bon iour compere.

Bon iour boniour compagnon d'eschole.

Ie vous en rends pour quatre quatorze and pour cinq cinquante,

Bon iour a vostre seigneurie tresexcellente.

Comment se port monsieur le Prince de Conde auec madame la Princess?

Comment se sent Monseigneur le Duc de Nemours and madame la Duchess?

Monsieur le Marquis de Saluce auec Madame la Marquise se portent-ils bien?

Monsieur le Comte de Soissons, and Madame la Comtesse sont-ils en bon estat?

Monsieur le Marshall d'Anuille and son friar le Seneschal de Lyonnois se
recommendent bien humblement a la bonne grace de vostre tres-illustre
seigneurie.

Et comment vous portez vous seigneur Nicho^as? Comment vous va? Comment vous
est-il?

Ie me port tresbien la Dieu mercy, and vous?

Ie me sens malade de la bourse, bien dispos de corpse and de la bouche.

Comment se port la sante?

Ie suis tout galiard and dispos asteure, sauf que i'ay eu un acces de fiebure
qui m'a fort debilite.

Courage* courage, vous vous porterez bien par la grace de Dieu.

Ie suis pressed a vous fair plaisir.

Et vous, vous sentez vous bien aussi?

Ie me sens enter l'enclume and le marteau. Comme vous voyez.

Sain comme un poisson pourri.

Il me plaist certes de vous veoir en bonne disposition.

Ie vous en mercy bien humblement.

Ie vous en rends graces tresaffectueusement.

Ie vous en remercie autant qu'il m'est possible.

Tous noz bons amiss se portent ils bien?

Ils se portent tresbien trestous auec tous leur petits enfans and parents.

Si ie peu fair quelque chose pour vous commandez moy franchement.

Ie vous baise les mains mons. Ie suis le vostre, ie suis a vostre gentil
commandment and service.

Et moy au vostre certes. Venez a la Court, ie vous y feray le plus grand
honneur qu'il me sera possible.

Ie seray arrouse auec l'eau beniste de la Court, c'est a dire, i'auray un
deluge de ceremonies, mais autant des queues de singes que de disners and
desieuners.

Les tonneaux vuides font tousiours plus de bruit que les pleins.

A folles parolles oreilles sourdes.

Le pourmeiner. Chap. 3.
ALLons nous pourmeiner.

Ie veux desieusner deuant que sortir de la maison.

Allons, allons, nous desieunerons quand nous sommes de retour.

Rien, rien, ie veux manger un morceau du pain, and boire un doigt du vin, puis
apres allons y la ou voudriez.

Vous deburiez desieuner deuant que soyez leave. Ce seroit vne coustume nouuelle.

Pardonnez moy, plusieurs dames de Londres font de mesme, and quand else ont
bien desieusne se recouchent pour s'en rendormir la dessus.

Pensez vous que i'eusse remarque leur mode en cela?

Ie n'en scay rien.

He! le Diable vous emporte, vous estes un gaudisseur, vous estes un bavard.

Vous estes un porc d'espi pour tout potage.

Pour vous confesser la verite: c'est a craindre que tells femmes planteront
les corns au front de leur maris, s'ils ne se donnent bien guard.

Ou auez vous veu un coronard seul enter mill hommes?

Non pas un seul, mais bien un cent.

Ou cela?

En ce microcosme des corns and coronards.

Les boeufs portent corns, and les veaux cornettes.

Vous estes clerc, ie voy bien: mais a propos ou irons nous pourmeiner?

A la montagne de la Tour.

Aux champs saint George de la l'eau.

A la Dogane pour entrer la charge d'vne nauire.

A un village pour manger de la cresme.

Au Cemitiere saint Pol pour achepter un liver nouueau.

A la Cour, a la halle blanch.

Au ieu de paume pres les Carmes.

A la chasse d'vne biche.

A la cour de Finances.

Au Palais de Ooest-minster, pour parler a un aduocat, pour prendre aduis d'vn
conseillier.

A l^ test Moresque pour liurer vnes lettres.

A la prison de Neuue-porte pour donner l'ausmone aux pauures prisonniers pour
l'honneur de Dieu A la Bourse pour entendre les nouuelles de France.

Ou vous trou-veray-ie enuiron les douze heures?

Ie seray la bas au Change, ou me pourmeinant parmi les Italiens, ou troquant
auec les Francois, ou deuisant enter les Anglois, ou beuuant d'autant auec les
Flamands au chapeau Cardinalesque: and si ie ne suis pas en ces endroitz, vous
me trouuerez la haut en la salle quadrangulaire folastrant auec les belles
lingieres.

Adieu iusques a tantost donc.

Iusques a reuoir, Adieu.

Le poormener. Chap. 3.
ALLoon no poormener.

zIe view de-ziewner deuan ke sorteer de la mezoon.

Alloon, alloon, no de-ziewneroon kan noos soommeh de retoor.

Ree-en, ree-en, zie view man-zier-ewn morseaw du pein, e boer-ewn doe' du veen,
pui-za-prez-alloonzee la oo voodriez.

Voo devrie de-ziewner deuan ke soye leave. Se seroe't-tu-neh cootumeh nooveleh.

Pardonne moe', pluzeewr dameh de Loondre foon de memeh, e kant-elezoon bee-en
de-ziewne se recoosheh pour s'an randormeer la dessewz.

Panse voo ke ziewsseh remarke lewr modan sela?

zIe nan se ree-en.

He! le Dee-able voo-zamporteh, voo-zette-zewn godissewr, voo-zette-zewn
bavart. Voo-zette-zewn porc depee poor too pota-zieh.

Poor voo confesser la verite, set-ta creinder ke te-leh fameh planteroon le
corne-zo froon de lewr mareez, sil ne se donneh bee-en gardeh.

Oo ave voo view un coronar sewl-anter millommes?

Noom pa-zewn sewl, me bee-en-ewn sant.

Oo sela?

An se meecrocosmeh de corne-ze coronarz.

Le bewf porteh corns, e le veaw cornettes.

Voo-zetteh clerc, zie voe' bee-en, me-za propo-zoo ee-roon no poormener?

A la moontannieh de la Toor.

Oz shanz sein zIeor-zieh dela leaw. A la Doganeh poor-antrer la shar-zieh
du-neh naveereh. A un veela-zieh poor man-zier de la cremeh.

O Semeetiereh sein Pol poor-asheter-ewn leever nooveau.

A la Coor, a la halleh blaunsheh.

O ziew de Pomeh pre le carmes. A la shasseh d'vneh beesheh.

A la Coor de Feenaunses.

O Pale de Oo-et-meenster, poor parler-a ewn-na vocat, poor prandra-vee d'ewn
coonse-lheer.

A la teteh moreskeh poor leevrer-ewneh letterz.

A la pree-zoon de Neuveh-porteh poor doonner l'omono pover preezonnierz poor
lonnewr de Deew.

A la Boorseh pour-antander les noovelleh de Fraunseh.

Oo voo troo-uere-zie anveeroon le doo-zewres?

zIe sere la ba-zo shan-zieh, oo me poormenan parmee le-zeetalianz, oo
trokan-tauec le Franssoez, oo deueezant-anter le-zangloez, oo bu-van
dotant-auec le Flamanzo shapeaw Cardeenaleskeh, e see zie ne swee
pa-zansez-androez, voo me troovere la haut-an la saleh kadrangulereh
folastrant-avec le beleh leen-zieres.

A deew ziewke-za tanto donc.

zIewke-za reuoe'r, Adeew.

La Bourse.
Englishman. God morrow to you all my masters. Castilian. Buenos dias ayan
vuestras mercedes* Portugois. Sennores hablemos todos buen Cristiano. Italian.
Buon Giorno e buon anno Signori. French. Ie n'entends pas Latin, monsieur.
NE scauez vous pas parler Francois?

I'en scay quelque peu monsieur.

Quelles nouuelles par la France?

Pas autre chose que ie scache: tousiours la guerre.

Qui bruit par le monde?

Ie n'entends rien que ce soit.

Scauez vous rien de nouueau?

Que dit-on de Barbary, d'Italie, d'Espagne, de Turquie?

N'y a il rien de bonnes nouuelles?

Lon parle de la grand' Carraque que noz Anglois prindrent l'autre iour des
Espagnols retournants des Indes Orientalles.

Me scauriez vous dire quand les nauires doibuent fair voyle verse la Russie?

L'embassadeur est il parti pour Constantinoble?

La flotte est elle revenue de Bourdeaux?

Vous n'entendez rien des nauires de Tripoli and Axanthe?

Ou demeure la post ordinaire a Calais, a Bruges, a Anuers?

Il demeure en la rue des Iuifs. A quelle enseigne?

Au Lion blanc, au singe marmottant.

Est ce pas vis a vis le Lycorne?

C'est un petit plus outre: deca la cheure and le cheual rouge, tout contre le
Taureau noir pres la test du chien au pot.

Comment pourray-ie fair pour luy liurer un packet des lettres?

Vous le trouuerez sur la Bourse enuiron les onze heures and demye.

Mais quand s'en ira il, le scaues vous?

Il s'embarquera paraduenture auec la premiere maree.

Ou est le vent? Il est en midy. Il luy est donc contraire: il estoit a ee
matin enter l'oueste and le Nord.

Il me faut quarente lingots d'estaing de Cornouaille pour enuoier en Barbary,
and deux cents draps larges pour enuoyer a un merchant Focquer d'Alemagne.

Voyci un merchant Anglois qui vous en fournira bien.

Messer Paolo, quelz commoditez apporte le Gallion de Venice?

Sa charge est des huiles, des vins, des soyes and draps de soye.

N'y a il point des Orenges, Limons, Cytrons, Figues and raysins?

Tout cela vient d'Espagne non pas de l'Italie.

Me voulez vous vendre dix tonneaux du Muscadel a term?

I'aymeroye mieulx les auoir donnez a Palerme.

Quand seray-ie pay pour les huiles que vous eustes de moy dernierement.

Apres pasques: si pouuez auoir la patience.

Cancaro madonna stiamo fresch^.

Argent, argent, ou gage, ou ie vous feray mettre en cage. Ie n'entends pas
vostre langage.

Voyla vne belle lettre d'assignation.

Ie demand pleige, caution, argent content, non pas obligation.

Voyla donc vostre argent: contez le, voyla des beaux Angelots. Cecy me semble
un demon, cestuyla est rongne.

Pour combien me donnez vous cest Angelot rongne?

Pour deux diablottins.

Au Diable soit le Diable. Ie n'en veu point.

Voyla vne autre piece d'or. Elle ne pese pas. Ce Souueraing est soude. Ces
realles d'Espaigne ne sont pas de bon alloy.

Pour combien me payez vous ceste Portugaise?

Pour deux Espagnolles. Pour combien cest escu au soleil?

Pour deux targues.

Il est trop legier de six grains.

Pour co^bien ce noble a la Rose?

Pour deux vilains.

Il est de bas or. Pour combien ce double-doublon?

Pour deux simples baronnages Pour co^bien ce Philippusd'or?

Pour deux Henricus a la barbe longue.

Il semble ex tribu Leui. Il est trop court. Il n'est pas de mise. Il est faux.

Ie ne l'ay pas forge. Ie vouldrois que les oreilles du fauxmonnoyeur qui les a
falsifiez fussent cloves a ce pilier.

Changez moy ces pieces legieres. Ie n'en veux point de ces monnoyes.

Vous estes bien curieux a receuoir argent. Voyla d'autre argent. Que i'aye vne
quittance de vostre main.

La voyla.

Ie suis pay asteure. Adieu.

La salle de la Bourse. Chap. 5.
MOntons au dessus pour marchander quelque chose de ces belles filles.

Que cerchez vous monsieur?

Venez-ca mon amy. Regardez icy des belles frases, des rabatz, mouchoirs,
chaussons, des coiffes, and manchettes requamees d'or and d'argent.

Ay-ie rien qui vous duise? ie vous y feray a bon march.

Demandez vous toils fines d'Hollandres? De la lingerie de Cambray: I'ay de
fort fines sorts, and a tous prix.

Escoutez mamie voulez vous prendre vne pint du vin?

Mercy-monsieur, non pas asteure.

Voyci fins mirouers de Venice, iartiers de France, gants parfumez d'Espagne,
cousteaux de Flandres, beaux bas de soye de l'Italie.

Que vous faut il madamoyselle? que demandez vous?

Monstrez moy un bas d'estamet, couleur de Peschier.

Voyla un bas fort fin, le prix est au dernier mot un angelot.

Voulez vous un noble?

Ie ne scauroye certes. Voyla vne pair d'incarnat, prenez les pour huict
chelings.

Vous estes trop cher.

Voulez vous veoir un bon chapeau sire?

Demandez vous un bon chapeau ou un bonnet?

Ie cerche un de castor ou bieure.

Voyla un qui est iustement vostre cas, auec la plumache.

Ie ne port pas de pennache.

Il vous sied fort bien.

Il m'est trop large and trop grand.

C'est a la Babilonesque, and la plume a la Polonesque.

C'est la facon d'auiourd'huy.

Monstrez-moy un autre a la Francoise, auec le coupeau plat.

Voulez vous veoir un de lain Hespagnolle? band de crespes, pique de soye and
bien mignonnement fait a la modern?

Monstrez le veoir.

Accordons du prix.

Le prix est raisonnable: donnez moy un Philippus d'or. Ouvrez la main, vous
n'aurez ne plus ne moins.

Prenez vous de double doublons?

Voyci ie vous payeray en Portugaises, ou en monnoye de Singe.

Hem! Ho! Escoutez, Venez-ca, Acheptez quelque chose de moy bon homme du Nord.

Ha, mamie ie n'ay pas de la monnoye assez pour y employer.

Hau sire, qu'est-ce qu'il vous faut?

N'ya il point des haults souliers icy a lentour?

Venez-ca mon amy: en voyci vne pair qui vous sera bien propre.

Voulez vous achepter vne belle fille pour emporter a vostre pais?

May foy non.

Que demandes tu garcon Gaulois?

Tu as menti, ie suis Picard.

Bourguignon, bon homme des Gauls, acheptez quelque chose de moy.

Tout beau gallant.

Tout beau Francillon.

Vous faschez messieurs du Parliament.

Que demandez vous sire?

Qu'achepteriez vous Madame?

Que vous fault il compagnon?

Que vous plaist-il achepter Monsieur?

Que cerchez vous bon-homme?

Venez-ca: venez a moy:

Ie vous y feray a bon march.

Ie ne demand rien.

Ie n'achepteray rien.

Ie ne cerche rien.

Ie ne veux rien de vous I'attends icy quelq'un.

Ie me pourmeine icy pour mon plaisir.

La saleh de la Boorseh Chap. 5.
MOoon-toon-zo dessew poor marshander kelkeh shozeh de se beleh fee-lhes.

Ke shershe voo moonseewr?

Venessa moon-amee. Regarde-zeesee de beleh-frazes, de rabaz moo-shoerz,
shossoonz, de coeffes, e manshetteh rekameeh dor-e dar-ziant.

E-zje ree-en kee voo dweezeh? zje voo-zee fere a boon marshe.

Demand voo to^'leh feeneh d'Ollanderz? De la leen-zjeree' de Cambrey. zIe de
for feenes sorts, e a too preez.

Ecoote mamee', voole voo prandruneh peenteh du veen?

Mersee moonseewr noom pa-zastewreh.

Voe'see feen meeroo-er de Veneeseh, zjartier de Franseh, began parfume
despanieh, coo-teaw de Flanderz, beaw ba de soe' de leetalee-eh.

Ke voo fo-til madmoe'zeleh? ke demand vooz?

Moontre moe' ewn ba destamet, coolewr de peshee-er.

Voe'la ewn ba for feen, le pree-zet o dernier mot-ewn-anzielot.

Voole voo-zewn noble?

zIe ne soroe' sertes. voe'la vneh pereh dincarnat, prene le poor we sheleenz.

Voo-zetteh tro sher.

Voole voo voer-ewn boon shapeaw seereh?

Demand voo-zewn boon shapeaw oo ewn bonnet?

zIe shershewn de castor-oo biever.

Voe'la ewn kee e ziewsteman voter cas, avec la plumasheh.

zIe ne porteh pa de pannasheh.

Il voos see-e for bee-en.

Il met tro larzie tro grant.

Setta la Babeeloneskeh ela pluma la Poloneskeh.

Se la fassoon dozioordwee.

Moontre moe' ewn-notra la Frans-soe'zeh, auec le coo-peaw plat.

Voole voo voer ewn de lenespaniolleh, band de crepes, peeke de soy' and
bee-en minnionneman fetta la moderneh?

Moontre le voer.

Accordoon dupreez.

Le pree-ze rezoonnable? done more ewn feeleeppews dor Oo-vre la mein, voo nore
ne plu ne moinz.

Prane voo de dooble doobloonz?

Voesee zie voo payere an Portugezes, oo an monnoyeh de Seen-zieh.

Ham! ho. eccootez, Venessa! Ashette kek-shozeh de moe' bon-nom du Nort.

Ha mamee' zie ne pa de la monnoy-asse poor-ee amployer.

Ho seereh kessekil voo for?

Nee a il poin de hoz soolierzeesee a lantoor?

Venessa moonna-mee an voesee ewneh pereh kee voos sera bee-en propre.

Voole voo-zashetteru-neh be-leh fee-lheh poor-amporter-a voter pa-eez?

Ma foe'noon.

Ke demandeh tu garssoon Goloez?

Tu a mantee, zie swee Peecart.

Boorgweennioon, boonnom de Goles, ashete kel keh shozeh de moe'.

Too beaw gallant.

Too beaw Fransilhoon.

Voo fashe messeewr du Parlemant.

Ke demand voos seereh?

Kasheteree-e voo Madameh?

Ke voo fo-til companioon.

Ke voo plet-til-asheter Moon-seewr.

Ke shershe voo boon nommeh?

Venessa: veneza moe'.

zIe voo-zee fere a boon marshe.

zIe ne dema^deh ri-en.

zIe nashetere ree-en.

zIe ne shersheh ree-e^.

zIe ne view ree en de vooz. zIattan-zeesee kek-ewn.

zIe me poormenee-see poormoom plezeer.

Le Banquet des Yvrongnes. Chap. 6.
HO que ie suis bien ayse!

Il faut rire and fair ripaille. Faisons bonne chere.

Laissons toute melancholy.

ca qu'on face bon feu.

Rince les verres.

Chasse les chiens.

Taille les souppes.

Perce vne nouuelle piece du vin.

Enuoye les pauures.

Baille leur ce qu'ils demandent.

Met des chaires.

Boute la nappe.

Couure la Table.

Turn la broche.

Apporte des seruiettes blanches.

Arrouse le rosti.

Le disner est il pressed?

Voyci noz hosts qui viennent.

Monsieur vous venez fort attendu: en bonne heure.

Oui mais i'ay fait comme un vilain: car i'estoye inuit a disner, and non
point pour vous fair attendre.

Soyez tous les bien venuz messieurs.

Entrez, s'il vous plait Madamoyselle, ma soeur, ma tente, ma grandmere, ma
niepce.

Entrez, entrez, ces femmes sont ceremonieuses: bien venues certes.

Entrez de par Dieu ma cousine.

Pourquoy n'auez vous pas apporte mon petit cousin auec vous?

Ma belle-soeur monstrez le chemin, les autres vous suivront.

Ne me poulsez pas: ie suis enceincte.

Isabeau, Ieanne, Sibille, attaindez icy a vostre uncle un bassin d'eaue and un
essuoir. Lauons trestous ensemble

ca messieurs a Table. Asseoyez vous mes damoiselles magnificques.

O petit garzon dites nous la benediction.

Dieu nous doint sa grace:

Et en son Paradis place.

Desguainez voz cousteaux.

Aidez ceste dame. Mettez la le paste de Venaison.

De quelles chairs sent ces pastez?

Cestuy-ci est de chair de cerf.

Cestuy-ci est de chair de dain.

Et cestuy-la comme ie pense est venaison de sanglier.

La la! commencez ou il vous plairra.

Vous voyez vostie chere. Bien venus trestous.

Apportez le rosti: ceste piece de boeuf est crude. Ostez la.

Que n'apportez vous autre chose de la cuisine? vous nous faites icy bien
attendre.

Aidez vous mesmes cependant.

Entamez ce liepure.

Mangez de ce coq d'Inde. Descouurez ce paste de Pigeons.

Coupez de ceste espaule de mouton.

Desmembrez ce Chappon. Depeschez ces lappins.

Mets par order sur table les Poulets, perdrix, connils, les Grues, Phaisans,
Alouettes and Beccasses.

Quelle saulse aurons nous a ces mets?

Voyla des Orenges, Citrons, and des Olives gardees en saumure.

Que fera lon de ces grandes bestes, l'oye, le cigne and le paon? Il n'y a plu
s de place pour les y mettre.

Monstre les seulement and les rapporte a la cuisine.

Ho un Paon! Ou est Quintus Hortensius qui l'aimoit tant?

Taille moy un morceau ou deux de ce iambon, afin que ie boiue plus alaigrement
ce premier voirre. O le bon iambon! Cu est il? Il est invisible. Ie ne le voy
pas. C'est un iambon de Maience.

Tens icy le plat aux Olives: I'ay veu un quidam qui deuoroit les noyaux
d'oliues comme vne Austruche le fer.

Asteure ie boy a trestous and soyez les tres-bien venuz.

Ou sont noz voirres de Crystal? Voulez vous boire a la Grecque dans ce grand
goblet?

Ie veux boire a la Francoise dans un voirre. Et moy a l'Anglo^se d'vnhanap
d'argent. Apporte moy dedans ceste phiole de terre de Samos un peu de ceruoise,
laquelle i'estime estre fort profitable en ceste challeur pour rafreschir le
corpse.

De quelle ceruoise donc? De la plus simple que soit: car les autres re^dent
les esprits plus gros, pesants and lourds, and font engraissir le corpse.

Versez ceste tasse pleine. A vous ma cousine Geneuiefue. Ceste fille se
hontist: elle fait la nimphe ou la dame des nopces. Il ne vous desplairra
monsieur, ie boy a vous.

Ie vous y feray raison icy.

Quel vin vous plaist il boyre monsieur?

En voulez vous boire du vin de Gascongne?

D'ou vient ce vin tant rouge and noir? C'est vin d'Orleans. Ie vouldroye
plustot boire de ce petit vin de la Rochelle.

Voyla d'vn fort bon claret: qui fait tourner le molinet.

Que vin buuez vous ma cousine? D'vn sec d'Espaigne: qui bien mouille and
baigne.

I'aymeroye plustost le vin de Rhin: car il fait bien parler Latin.

Il n'y a chose plus griefue que mourir de soif en un banquet.

Du vin ho! Dernierement que ^'estoye a Rome, ie beu chez le Cardinal Caraffa
des vins fort excellents en sa cave. Ie beu de Romanesque, de Grec, de la larme
de Christ: du vin doux, du piquant, d'amiable and du brusque car i'estoye fort
prive du Sommelier.

Le muscadel me plaist grandement.

Aussi fait-il aux dames Angloises.

Ce vin commence a se decliner, a s'enaigrir and a moisir.

Les vins d'Espagne and d'Italie portent bien l'eaue, and si sont de guard.

Verses moy de l'eau iusques a mi-verre.

Vous baptisez vostre vin and le faites bon Chrestien.

Cela n'est pas mal fait.

Vous gastez le vin y mettant trop de l'eaue: Ie ne boyray pas auec vous. Ie
l'aime quand il est simple pur, and net, non pas brouille comme on fait en
plusieurs endroits du monde pour fair d'vn tonneau deux.

C'est peu de cas cela.

Pis font les Tauerniers de Londres qui mettent de la chaux, du soulphre, de
miel, de l'alun, and autres chooses plus laides a dire, and n'y a rien plus
dommageable aux corpse humains: lesquels on deuvroit chastier publiquement comme
larrons and meurdriers: car de la viennent infinies maladies and
principallement les gouttes.

Messieurs vous ne mangez rien. Ie vous pry de boire and me fair rayson
d'autant.

Beuuons amiss: il fait certes hui beau boire: aussi fait il tous les iours.

Beuuons, ie boy de bien bon coeur a vous and soyez les tresbien venus.

N'ayez pas peur que vin and viures icy faillent: car quand le ciel seroit
d'airain and la terre de fer, encores le vin ne nous fandroit pas, fust-ce pour
sept voire huict ans, plus long temps que ne dura la famine en Aegypte.

Beuuons donc ensemble par bon accord en charity.

Ie suis a vous. Vous estes a moy. Ie boy a vous, vous me ferez raison, s'il
vous plaist.

Hem, ehem!

Il est bon and frais assez, comme vous diriez sur le commencement du second
degree:

A chacun n'est octroye de boire de si bon:

A chacun n'est octroye d'habiter Corinthe.

(...), c'est a dire, En vin verite.

Escoutez mon amy, ie te diray vne chose a l'oreille: Ne le die a person, si
tu m'aimes: Il demeurera secret enter nous deux: c'est* que ie trouue le vin
meilleur and plus a mon goust sauoureux que ne soulois: plus que ne soulois ie
crains la rencontre du mauuais vin: and pour vous en dire la pure verite
l'odeur du vin combien plus est friant, riant, priant, tant plus celeste and
delicieux est il que l'huile.

C'est parle en clerc cela. Ie vous en conteray bien d'autres. Attendez un peu
que ie hume quelque traict de ceste bouteille: voyci mon vray and seul Helicon.
Voyci ma fontaine Caballine. C'est icy mon unique Enthusiasme.

Icy beuuant ie delibere, ie discourse, ie resouls and concluds. Apres
l'Epilogue ie ry, i'escry, ie compose, ie boy.

Ennius le pere des Poets latins beuuant escriuoit, escriuant beuuoit.

Aeschylus (si a Plutarque foy auez in Symposiacis) beuuoit composant,
composoit beuuant.

Homere iamais n'escriuist a ieusne.

Caton iamais n'escriuist qu' apres boire. Afin que ne me dites ainsi viure
sans exemple des bien louez and mieux prisez.

Ya il quelq'un qui veut disputer auec moy de ces problemes insolubles de la
soif and beuuerie: Ie n'ay moins estudie la Magie, la Negromancie, l'Alchimie,
la Caballe, and la Geomancie que la Philosophy d'Hermes Trismegiste.

Ces sont haultes matieres and sciences profondes.

Saint Dame il faut rire: Tire, baille page, vin, boutte, de par le Diable
boutte, ie veux boire pour ma part plus de vingt cinq ou trente trois muis
deuant que mourir.

N'y a il plus vin? Nous sommes donc au sec: and aux deserts de l'Arabie.

Il fait chaud. O que suis altere. Sicut terra sine aquae.

Ie croy que person de vous autres Beuueurs n'en doubt.

Y a il force vins en Gascogne stannee?

I'espere donc que nous autres Anglois trouuerons remedes infallibles contre
toutes alterations and soifs.

Ie boy a tous. Vous me semblez vrays Chrestiens: car ie ne boy point a ces
chiens des Turcs, Mahometains, ie les renie and renonce pour des villains.

La raison pourquoy?

Ie vous conteray comment ces diables des Turcs sont bien malheureux de ne
boire goutte du vin. Si autre mal n'estoit en l'Alcoran de Mahomet, encores ne
me mettrois-ie point de sa loy.

Digne d'eternelle memoire and louange sempiternelle fut le saint homme Noah
(auquel sommes obligez and tenuz dece qu'il nous planta la vigne, don't nous
vient ceste nectarique, delicieuse, celeste, ioyeuse, deifique liqueur. (Le
pauure homme estoit trompe en le beuuant, car il ignoroit la virtue and
puissance d'iceluy.) Auez vous bien le tout e^ tendu?

Beuuez donc un bon coup sans eau: car si ne le croyez, non fay-ie sit-elle.

Ou sont ces diables des Gregeois qui au temps d'Alexandre furent beuueurs
tres-illustres? O les pauures hairs sont morts.

Nous lisons que ces gentiles demons Italiens ont bien beu autre fois: and
principalement au temps de Iules Caesar quand ilz firent leurs cheuaux, muletz,
and iuments boire d'autant.

Ie suis, croyez moy, bon gautier, and bon compagnon.

I'ayme boire net, and ie mange volontiers sale, and si i'ayme boire du
meilleur, si fait tout homme de bien dea.

Iamais homme noble ne hait le bon vin.

Beuuons, beuuo^s donc, comme font les chameaux and dromadaires en la Carauane,
beuuants pour la soif passee, pour la soif present, and pour la soif future.

Ainsi feist Hercules.

Treues de soif, treues de faim.

Ie ne suis plus fasche Dieu mercy and vous. Ie suis gay comme un Papegay,
ioyeux comme un esmerillon, alaigre comme un Papillon.

Veritablement il est escrit par vostre beau Euripides, and Silenus beuueur
memorable le dit: Furieux est and de bon sens ne iouist:
Qu conque boit and ne s'en resiouist.


Veu qu'il y a long temps que i'ay verse a l'eschole d'Apollon, and du font
Cabalin beu a plein godet enter les ioyeuses Muses: depuis ce temps la ie
trouue ce nectar divine, ce vin precieux, ce muscadet delicat.

Compere tout beau, vous faites rage de humer.

Ie done au diable: tu n'as pas trouue tes petits beuuereaux de Londres qui ne
beuuent en plus qu' un poincon.

Vous auez bon gosier pour bien aualler.

O compagnon si ie montasse aussi bien que i'aualle, ie fusse desia au dessus
la sphere de la Lune auec Empedocles.

Mais ie ne scay que Diable cecy veut dire: Ce vin est si fort bon and
delicieux. Plus i'en boy, plus i'ay soif.

Ie croy que l'ombre de ces hanaps engendre les alterez comme la Lune fait les
catarreux, Ceste test de leuraut, est bonne pour les goutteux.

Nous ne mangerons guere d'oisons ceste annee.

I'auois bien desieusne: mais pource ne mangeray-ie point moins. Car i'ay un
estomac paue and creux comme la botte saint Benoist.

Ha mon amy, baille de ce cochon.

Diauol, il n'y a plus de moust, ie renie ma vie, ie meurs de soif.

Tire, baille, turn, brouille, boute a moy sans eaue, ainsi mon amy, fouettez
moy ce verre gallantement. Ha fausse fiebvre, ne t'en iras-tu pas?

Par my fie commere ie ne puis entrer en mes bettes.

Vous estes morfondue, mamie. Voire. Parlons de boire. Ie ne boy qu' a mes
heures, comme la mule du Pape I'ay grand foif.

Qui fut le premier, soif ou beuuerie? Beuuerie. Car Priuatio praesupponit
habitum.

Ie suis clerc, vous di-ie.

Foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?
Chantons, beuuons, entonnons, ou est mon entonnoir?

Quoy? ie ne boy que par procuration.

Mouillez vous pour seicher, ou seichez vous pour mouiller?

Par ma foy, ie n'entends pas la Rhetorique. De la prattique ie m'en aid
quelque peu.

Baste, ie mouille, ie humecte, ie boy and tout de peur de mourir.

Beuuez tous-iours vous ne mourrez iamais.

Si ie ne boy, me voyla mort.

Pour conclusion de mon harangue ie vous diray, que quant a moy ie cuide que
soye descendu de quelque rich Roy ou Prince au temps iadis. Car onques ne
veistes homme qui eust plus graude affection d'estre Roy and rich que moy,
afin de fair grande chere, pas ne trauailler, point me soucier and bien
enrichir mes amiss and tous gens de bien and scauoir.

C'est assez beu pour vne fois. Mangeons, mangeons, estendez les bras, ne
craigniez pas le boucon de Lombard Nous auons assez mange pour vne fois certes.

Vous auez fait un banquet fort sumptueux.

On n'a pas touch ces chappons rostis.

Ne mangez vous pas d'un faisandeau* messires?

Ma grand-mere n'ayme vous pas ceste test de leuraut? Que ferons nous de ces
Pigeonneaux?

Ces lappins and lappereaux ne sont pas trop mauuaise viande. Goustez de ce
cigoigneau. Ie croy queces cailles and cailleteaux vous offensent l'estomac.

Person ne trinchera ces Perdriaux, ie vouldroye qu'ilz fussent aux champs
and forests derechef.

Mets icy cest esturgeon: ouurez ce paste de Saumon. Tastez ces gouions frits:
ceste escreuice de mer est vne viande tres-exquise.

Ah! des poissons and de la chair en vne mesme table! La mer se meslera par mi
la terre, les medecins le defendent.

Mais les medecins le veuillent.

I'ay failli, ie deuoye dire que la medecin le defend, and non pas les
medecins.

Quant a moy ie parleray des poissons, ie n'en mangeray pas.

Deseruez la table, ho: and apportez le fruit, Il y a vne merueilleuse variete
en la nature des pais. L'Indie enuoye l'yuoire (dit Virgile) and les Sabeens
leur encens.

Voyla un pesche coing.

Voyci certes des belles pommes and des poires delicates.

Faites bonne chere messieurs, and soyez allaigres and ioyeux.

Seruez vous mesmes, car ie ne sers person.

Aions de fromage.

Il faut que ie mange un peu de fromage.

En voyla de fort bon. cestuy-ci est de iument.

C'est du laict d'Asnesse Phrygienne ou Sicilienne.

Ce fromage combien qu'il soit d'Angleterre est plein des troux and vermineux.

Il serabon aux Flamands donc.

Ce Parmesan est bien amasse and plus frais que cestuy-la d'Ollande, qui est
creux aussi.

Il n'est pas de Parme, ains de Plaisance.

O que ce fromage done bien l'appetit a boyre.

Buvons donc pour gaigner les pardons.

Messieurs si i'eusse este seur de vostre venue. Vous auez fait trop de despens.

Le meilleur est que vous estes trestous les tres-bien venuz, and ie vous
remercie de ce qu'auez prins la peine de me venir veoir.

ca qu'on oste la table: apporte icy vne ay guiere d'eaue net: vous plaist il
lauer messires?

Love soit le bon Dieu de Ciel, pour ses graces. Bon prou vous face messieurs a
trestous. Ayons des carts and des detz pour nous esbatre icy vne heure ou deux
aupres du feu.

Les Ieux. Cha. 7.
ORca est il question de passer le temps and deviser un peu?

Ho messieurs! vous vous endormez?

Esbatons nous a quelque ieu.

Allons pourmeiner.

Il y fait beau pourmeiner vrayment, les rues sont si sales and vilaines.

O qu'il fait beau temps pour estudier aupres du feu auec vne pair de carts
neuues.

I'eusse pense que vous voulustes dire quelque liver nouueau.

Ie dis des carts neuues.

Iouons plustot aux tabliers.

Ie n'ay apprins iamais a iouer aux tabliers.

Iouons aux detz.

Ie n'entends rien aussi.

Iouons doncques aux eschets ou a dames.

Non: mais nous iouerons auz carts.

Aux carts soit.

Il n'y a que le hasard en tous ieux.

Ie n'oseroye iouer a vous Maistre-mousche, vous estes un trop fin galland.

Vous estes un homme prompt a courroux, rioteux, criard, calumniateur, and qui
pour peu de cas faites de grandes noyses.

Vous reniez, vous iurez: vous pariurez,

Vous estes un iaseur, and mentez par la gorge, en disant cela: Ie iou^ plus
beau ieu que toy.

Si est ce pourtant que nous autres ne voulons point de vostre compagnie. Car
vous auez mauvais bruit.

Dequoy? D'estre vne escornifleur, un affronteur, lon dit d'aduantage que vous
portez tousiours quant and vous vne carte large en la pochette pour affronter
les gens.

Quiconque l'aura dit, meant par sa gorge.

Adieu mon amy, ie seroye mary de iouer en ta compagnie: car tu ne fais que
quereller and crier tousiours.

Pif, mon amy mon homme s'en est all.

Quel compagnon? vous l'auez enuoye auec vne puce en I'oreille.

Orsus, iouerons nous asteure? Mais toy Lancelot, incontinent que* tu as gaigne
cinq solz, vous delaissez ceux auec qui vous iouez.

Cela est plustost tromper and se mocquer, que iouer.

Vous dites vray.

Car si ie perds vne fois cinq solz, ie suis attache au ieu tant que i'ay un
denier en la bourse.

Seons nous donc comme nous auons accoustume en croix Bourguingnonne.

Donnez moy ceste chair afin que ie perds plus a laise.

Dressez les carts.

Coupez.

Celuy donnera qui coupera la plus haute carte.

Ie donneray.

Iouons nous a Premiere.

Non, nous iourons a la Triumfle d'Espagne.

Fi, c'est le ieu commun de toutes les cabarrettes d'Angleterre.

A Cent donc.

Non, de par Dieu, nous iourons a la

Lansquenette.

Bien soit* Coupez les carts.

Estienne, vous coupez a vne carte large.

Ie n'entends rien certes.

Tien pour toy, Antoyne, vne dame sans blame.

I'ay un Roy sans royaulme.

Voyla qui est a moy.

Heu! monsieur le varlet des trefles, vous estes le bien venu.

Me voulez vous gaigner cinq solz?

Voyci un dix, un neuf, un ar, le quattre de carreaux, le trois de piques, le
deux de coeurs.

Diable, ie ne feray pas vne de ces carts.

Ie croy qu'il n'y en a plus des Roys ou Roynes en ces carts.

O voyci le friar de Robin Houd.

Vous auez perdu le ieu. ca cinq solz a moy. ca dix a moy.

Ie gageray si i'eusse cent escus en ma bourse, ie les fricasseroye en iouant
au iourd'huy.

Cessez tes speculations, si tu veux iouer, mettez au jew.

Ie scay bien que si i'eusse un royaume ie le perdroye asteure.

Ne iouez plus donc.

Encore faut il que ie jove.

Donnez les carts de par le Diable.

Diatre, ie perdray autant auiourd'huy que my lord Maieur est vaillant. voyla
pour vous un huit.

Ie mettray sur cest huict, huict escus.

Ie veux donc quitter les carts.

Mettez y cinq seulement, and ie les tiendray.

Iouez donc. donnez vne carte a vous mesme.

Vous auez un cinq.

Iouez beau ieu compagnon sans regarder la carte de dessous.

Qu'est cecy de par Dieu?

Dieu ne fut onques ioueur aux carts.

La Fortune me veuille, fauoriser a ce coup-cy.

O un cinq asteure pour me gaigner cinq escus.

Le voyla par Dieu.

Cecy est a moy.

Laissez la mon argent, compagnon.

Et pourquoy?

A d'autre, a d'autre, vous di-ie.

Par le sang de ma vie vous n'emporteras pas mon argent.

Et pourquoy?

Pource, vous di-ie.

Ie veux estre judge.

Dites compagnon, a il jove leallement?

Ie le pense certes.

N'a il pas prinse la carte de dessoubs?

Ie me rapporte a luy.

Non certes: l'argent est gaigne a luy and perdu pour vous.

Prenez le donc.

Ces carts sont tacheez au dos.

Tu les cognois toutes.

La plus part certes: Ie les cognois ainsi a la face: quand ie les voy.

Paraduenture aussi par derriere.

Ie veux ietter ces carts au feu.

Else ne me perdront plus d'argent.

Comment auez vous tout perdu a un coup des carts?

C'est tout un pour cela: ie ne veux plus iouer a carts.

I'ay perdu assez pour un coup.

Le zIewz. Cha. 7.
ORsa et-il kestion de passer le tanz-e deueezer-ewm peu?

Ho messeewrs! voo voo-zan-dormez.

Ebatoon noo-za kelkeh ziew.

Alloon poormener.

Il ee fe beaw poormener vremant, le ru-es soon see saleze veelenes.

O kill fe beaw tan-za etudier-o-pre du few auek ewneh per de carteh neuves.

zIewsseh panse ke voo vooluteh deereh kelkeh leever noo-veaw.

zIe dee de carteh neuves.

zIoo-on plutot-o tableerz.

zIe n'appreen ziameza zioo-er-o ta-bleerz.

zIoo-on-zo dez.

zIe nantan ree-en-ossee.

zIoo-oon don-ke-zo ze-shezoo a dau-mes.

Noon: me no zioo-eroonzo carts.

O carts so^t.

Il nee a ke le hazart-an too ziewz.

zIe no-ze-roe' zioo-er-a voos Me-ter moosheh, voo-ze-te-zewn tro feen gallant.

Voo-zette-zewn-nom-meh pronta coorrooz, ree-ottewz, cree-art, calewmnee-atewr,
e kee poor pew de cafeteh de gran-deh noe'zes.

Voo renee-ez, voo ziewrez: voo par-ziewrez,

Voo-ze-te-zewn ziazewr, e mante par la gorzian deezan cela: zie zioo' plu beaw
ziew ke toe'.

See-esse poortan ke noo-zoter ne vooloon point de voter companieh.

Car vooza-ve move bruit.

De-koe'?

De-trewn-e-cornifleur, ewn-naffroonteur, lon dee dauantazieh ke voo port
tooziour kante voo-zewn' carteh lar-zian la po-shetteh poor-affroonter le zians.

Keekonkeh lora deet, man par sa gor-zieh.

Adeew moonnamee zie seroe' maree de zioo-eran ta companee-eh: car tu ne fe ke
kereler-e cree-er toozioorz.

Peef, moon-namee, moonnomeh sanet-talle.

Ke companioon? voo lave-zanvoy-e auek-ewneh pusan lore-lheh.

Orsuz, ziooroon-noo-zastewreh?

Me toe' Lanselot, incoonteenan ke tu a ga-nhe seenq sooz: voo deleslez
sewzauek kee voo zioo-ez.

Sela e plutot tromper-e se mocker, ke de zioo-er.

Voo deeteh ure.

Car see zie perzewn' foe' seenq sooz, zie sui-zattashe o ziew-tan ke zie ewn
denee-er an la boorseh.

Se-oon-noo donc commeh nooza-voon-zaccootume an croe' Boorgeenni-onneh.

Done moe' setteh sherafeen ke zie per plu-za lezeh.

Dress le car-tes.

Coo-pez.

Seluy donnera kee coopera la plu-hoteh car-teh.

zIe donnere.

zIoo-oon nooza Premie-reh.

Noon, no zioo-roonza la tree-omfle d'espe-nheh.

Fee, se le ziew commewn de tooteh le cabarretteh d'angle-terreh.

A San donc.

Noon, de par Deew no ziooroon-za la Lanskenetteh.

Bee-en, soet. Coope le carts.

Etee-an, voo coopeza ewneh carteh larzieh.

zIe nantan ree-en sertes.

Tee-en poor toe' Antoe'neh ewneh daumeh san blameh.

zIe ewn Roe' san royawmeh.

Voe'la kee etta moe'.

Hew, moon-seewr le varle de trefles, voozeteh le bee-en venu.

Me voole voo ga-nher seenq sooz?

Voe'see ewn deez, ewn newf, ewn nar, le katter de carreawz, le troe' de
peekes, le dew de kewrz.

Dee-able, ziene fere pazewneh de se carts.

zIe croe' kill nee ana plu de roe'-zoo Roe'-nezan se carts.

O voe'see le frereh de Robeen Hoot.

Vooza-ve perdu le ziew.

Sa seenk sooz-a moe'. Sa deeza moe'.

zIe ga-zie re si ziewsseh santekewzan ma boorseh, zie le fre ecasseroe' an
zioo-an-to zioordwee.

Sesse tes speculasionz, see tu view zioo-er, mette-zo ziew.

zIe se bee-en ke see ziewssewn roy-o-meh, zie le perdroe' astewreh.

Ne zioo-e plu donc. Ancoreh fo-til ke zie zioo-eh.

Done le carts de par le Dee-able.

Dee-ater, zie perdre otant o-zioordwee ke mee-lor-May-ewre val-hant.

Voe-la poor voo-zewn-weet.

zIe mettre sur se-tweet, weete-kewz.

zIe view donc keetter le carts. Mettezee seenk seulemant, e zie le tee-andre.

zIoo-e donc, don-ne-zewneh carta voo me-meh.

Voozave-zewn seenk.

zIoo-e beaw ziew compani-oon san regarder la carteh de dessooz.

Kessesee de par Deew?

Deew ne fewtonkeh zioo-ewrocartes.

La fortuneh me vew-lheh fauoreezer-a se coo-see.

O ewn seen-kastewr' poor me ga-nher seenkekewz.

Le voc'la par Deew.

Se-see et-ta moe'.

Less la moon ar-ziant, compani-oon.

E poorkoe'?

A doter, a doter, voo dee-zie.

Par le sang de ma vee' voo n'amportera pamon ar-ziant.

E poorkoe'?

Poorseh, voo dee-zie.

zIe vewzeter ziewzie.

Deeteh companioon a il zioo-e leallemant.

zIe le panseh sertes.

Natee pa preenzeh la carteh de dessooz?

zIe me rapporta luy.

Noon sertes: lar-ziante ga-nhe a luy, e perdu poor vooz.

Prane le donc.

Se carts soont tashee-zo doz.

Tu le connoe' tootes.

La plupar sertes: zIe le conoe'-zeensee a la faseh: kan zie levoe'.

Parauantu-rossee par derrhe-reh.

zIe view zietter se cartezo few.

Elleh ne me perdroon plu dar-ziant.

Commantave voo too perdu a ewn coo de carts?

Settoot-tewn poor sela: zie ne view plu zioo-era carts.

zIe perdu ass poor-rewn coop.

Le ieu des dets. Chap. 8.
ALLons au berlan pour hasarder chacun son escu.

Ie n'ay qu'vn demy-escu a perdre.

Si ie pensoye perdre, ie ne iouroye pas un Liard.

Apportez des dets icy.

Voyciles boeufs, les osselets!

Iouons a la chance a trois dets.

Ie veux iouer a la raffle, ou a la chance a deux dets.

Que iouez vous compagnon?

Ce quart d'escu seulement.

Ie l'ay gaigne.

Non, non, nous ne iouons pas de bon encores.

Ie l'ay gaigne, and le veux auoir.

Tu n'emporteras pas mon quart d'escu ainsi Pourquoy?

Pource que ie l'ay perdu seulement par un point.

C'est assez pour perdre d'vn point.

Par un point Saint Martin perdist son manteau.

Par dieu vous me payerez pourtant.

Il y a bien autre chose.

Et quoy?

Vous estes un pipeur des dets.

Ces dets sontrongnez, ils sont faux.

Ils sont pleins de Mercure, ou d'or au dedans.

Que diable de larron es tu?

Que canaille voyci?

N'es tu pas un gueu pour affronter les gents ainsi?

Regardez, ces dets ne font que les bas points.

Ils sont hauts and taillez en bihay.

Vous estes un fin ladre.

Allez au diable.

Oste toy d'icy, larron, ou ie te perceray la main auec mon poignard.

Ne retournez plus ceans, si me voulez accroire, auec voz bar-quatre-trois:

Via, camina alla forca.

La Paulme. Cha. 9.
VOulons nous fair vne party a la paulme? vous and moy?

Allons au ieu de Ballon pres la Halle blanch.

Ou est le maistre du ieu de pauline?

Me voicy, monsieur: que vous plaist-il?

Baille icy des souliers de cuir souple and mol.

Apporte des raquettes and des esteufs Orca, iouez.

I'ay quinze.

Vne fault, marquez ce chasse la.

Quinze and quinze.

Ceste raquette ne vault pas un choux.

Baille icy des autres raquettes.

Orca ruez.

Ie ne peux prendre un esteuf de volee, ny du premier bond.

I'ay gaigne la chasse.

I'ay trente.

Trente and trente.

Demandez, ie ne I'ay pas touch.

Quarante cinq.

A deux de ieu.

Iouez: i'ay l'auantage.

I'ay gaigne le ieu.

Ie banderay un esteuf plus de six vingt pas auec la raquette que vous refusez.

Agard.

Diatre! que coup est-cela?

Vous auez un bras de fer.

La Pomeh. Cha. 9.
VOoloon no fer' ewn' partee a la pomeh? vooze moe'?

Alloon-zo ziew de Balloon pre la Halleh blansheh.

Oo e le meter du ziew de pomeh,

Me voesee, moonseewr: ke voo plet-til?

Ba-lhee-see des soolier de qweer soople mol.

Apporteh de rakette-ze de-zetewfz.

Orssa, zioo-ez.

zIe keen-zeh.

Ewneh foteh, mark se shasseh la.

Keenze keenzeh.

Setteh raketteh ne vo pazewn shoo.

Ba-lhee-see dezoter ra-kettes?

Orsa ru-ez.

zIe ne pew pran-drewn-netewf de vole-eh, nee du premier boont.

zIe ga-nhe la shasseh.

zIe tranteh.

Trante tranteh.

Demandez, zie ne le pa tooshe.

Karanteh seenk.

A dew de ziew.

zIoo-ez, zie lauantazieh.

zIe ga-nhe le ziew.

zIe bandere vn-ne tewf, plu de see veen pa-zauek la ra-ketteh ke voo refuzez.

A-gar.

Dee-ater! ke coopessela?

Voo-za-ve-zewn bra de fer.

La Chasse. Chap. 10.
LE deduit de la chasse me delecte sur tous autres ieux.

I'ay un levrier nompareil.

Et moy vne lyce qui me tuera un lieure en son giste.

Il n'y a point du plaisir en cela.

I'ayme veoir les braquets chasser and leuriers courir.

Vous auez un beau mastin, que scait il fair?

Lapper, iapper, vrler, and abbayer du matin.

Le chien abbayant est le plus souuent couard, and ne mord pas.

On doibt toutefois croire I'abbay d'vn vieil chien.

Nous accouplerons mon leurier and vostre mastin ensemble.

Mon mastin ne va pas en less.

Il est difficil d'accoustumer un vieil chien a la less.

De couplons noz braquets, ils traceront la routte and suivront les erres.

Le lieure est maintenant en son giste, mais du soir il sera a cost de ste
forets pour viander.

Laissez entrer vostre furet en la taniere.

Il n'y a point de conils en ceste garene.

Ce viandi est plein de crottes and de laisses de sangliers, cerfs, biches, and
faons.

Espions premierement le her pail.

O que belle prise de pouuoir attraper le conil a la croup e.

Nous attrape^ons plustost vne roupie.

Voyci vne hard de bestes sauuages!

Sonnez vostre cornet, laschez vostre mastin. Trantranez vostre cor: redoublez
vous huees. Tendez voz lacqs, filets and retz.

Ou sont voz brachets?

Voyla un beau cerf a dix corns.

Voyez vous sa chamber icy, picquons, hastons, pour l'attraper auec vostre
mastin.

Laissons le aller, laissez le courir.

Il s'en gardera bien de noz chiens, and noz cheuaux sont quasi las desia.

Le fauconnier. Chap. 11.
FAuconnier, ou est vostre Gerfau?

Ie l'ay en mon charnier.

Allons voler a Perdriceaux.

Acharnez vostre leurre.

Quel oiseau de proye est cela?

Lon me l'ha vendu pour un faulcon.

C'est un hibou, ou chat-huant.

Non monsieur c'est un laisnier.

Il duira pour prendre les oiseaux a la pipee.

Ie sue fort, ie suis las I'ay grand' faim, and suis tout en eau,

Moy ie n'ay point de faim, mais i'ay grand' soif.

Il me fasche aussi de chasser and rien prendre.

Son ton cor, braconnier: sonnez, car i'ay perdu tous mes chiens.

Lon dit communement:

D'oiseaux d'armes, de chiens, and d'amours:

Pour un plaisir, mill douleurs.

Le focoon-nheer. Chap. 11.
FOconnee-er, oo e voter zier-fo.

zIe le an moon sharnier.

Alloon voler-a Perdree-seawz.

Asharne voter lewrreh.

Kel-oe'zeaw de proe' essela?

Lon me la vandu poor-ewn focoon.

Settewn heeboo, oo shahuant.

Noon moon-seewr set tewn lenier.

Il dweera poor prander lezoe'-zeaw-zala pee-pe-eh.

zIe such fort, zie swee las. zIe gran feen, e swee tootan-eaw.

Moe' zie ne poin de feen, me zie gran soe'f.

Il me fa-shossee de shas-sere ree-en prander.

Sonneh ton cor, brasson-nier: Sonnez, car zie per-du too mes shee-ens.

Lon dee communemant:

Doe'-zeawz, darmes, de shee-ens, e damoorz,

Pour ewn ple-zeer mee-leh doolewrz.

Le Barbier. Chap. 12.
QVe fait le gentil Barbier?

Bien venu monsieur.

Ie viens pour me fair la barbe and les cheueulx.

Mettez vous la: on vous accoustrera tantost.

Me voulez vous lauer, car i'ay grand' haste?

Attendez un peu, i'ay quasi fait auec ce bon seigneur.

ca donnes moy des linges blancs.

Que did vostre calendrier, Barbier?

Que la Lune est en vraye eclypse de pecune.

Quand fait-il bon saigner?

Quand-il y a des escus a gaigner.

Vous estes auaricieux en Diable.

Ie demand que tousiours fante: bourse pleine d'argent, belle amye pour amor,

Et Paradis a la fin de mes iours.

Vous auez la barbe bien herisee and touillee.

Detouillez ma perruque auec ce peigne.

Ne frottez pas si rudement.

Frottez tout bellement.

Vne Pomade and du sauon, ho.

Haulssez ce bassin.

Mouillez moy doucement.

Vous couperay ie les cheueux?

Voulez vous fair raser la barbe?

Vous laueray ie le col, la poictrine and l'estomac?

Vous nettoyeray-ie les dents?

Garcon, ou sont mes-cizeaux?

Baillez moy ce peigne d'Iuoire.

Aiguisez un peu le rasoir.

Vous coupperay-ie les moustaches?

Vne cure-dent and cure-oreille ho.

Vous estes quasi accoustre.

Prenez le miroir, and mirez vous.

Me voyla bien.

Sambredeigne, ie port vne mine bien fiere and felonne.

Tien pour ton vin. Adieu.

The vprising in the morning. Chap. 1.
WHat boy, slepest thou villain? up up: I shall wake thee by and by with a
good cudgel.

I rise sir.

What a clock is it?

It is six a clock.

Give me my green velvet breeches.

Which?

It is all one, my round red satin ones.

Give me a clean shirt first.

Stay sir, till I air it at the fire.

Brush well my hat and my cloak.

Make clean my shoes.

Reach me my black Satin doublet, for I will wear it with my erimsin
velvet venitians.

There be your breeches, your doublet, and your shirt, sir.

Thou have brought me a smock villain, thou know not what thou do.

Pardon me sir if it please you, I am deceived, it is my mistress smock.

VVretchlesse boy thou will make me smell of the smock all to day and to
morrow.

There is your shirt sir.

Where be my netherstocks?

Where be my shoes?

There they are sir.

Will you wear your single-soled shoes to day?

No, no, I will wear my shoes of double and three soles.

What wether is it abroad?

It is very fair weather.

Give me then my pumpes and my pantofles: but where are my sockes?

I go to seek them.

Go fetch me the shooing horn.

I have hurt my foot, I must go slip-shood.

Where have thou laid my girdle and my garters?

There they are in the window behind the looking glass.

Help me to tie my points.

Bring a basin of fair water to vvash my hands, face and mine eyes.

The towell to dry my hands.

Here sir, there is one.

Now that I am dressed, I am ready to go to breake-fast.

To salute men. Chap. 2.
GOod morrow to you all my masters.

Good day and good year to you signior Claudius.

God night and a thousand to every body.

God give you good morrow Gossip.

Goodmorrow goodmorrow Scholefel^ow.

I give you again fourteen goodmorrowes for four, and for five fifty.

God-morrow to your excellency.

How does my Lord the Prince of Condy, with madame the Princess?

How does my Lord the Duke of Nemours, with my Lady the Duchess feel
themselves?

Mounsieur the Marquis of Saleuce with Madame the Marquise are they in good
health?

My Lord the Count Soissons, with my Lady the Countess, are they well?

Monsieur Martial D'anuille and his brother Lord Steward of the Province of
Lions, have them heartily commended to your most renowned excellency.

And how do you seignior Nicholas,? How goes the world with you? How is it
with you?

I do very well, God be thanked, and you?

I feel my self sick in my purse, lusty of body, and ready to go to
breakefast.

How does your body? I am all gallant and lusty now, saving that I have had a
fit of an Ague, which has pulled me down.

Courage, courage, man, you shall do well by Gods grace.

I am ready to do you a pleasure.

And you, are you lusty man?

I am in a pecke of troubles. As you see.

As whole as a rotten fish.

I am glad truly to see you in good health.

I thank you most heartily.

I thank you with all my soul.

I thank you a thousand times.

All our good friends are they well?

They are all very well, with all their little barnes and kindred.

If I may do any thing for you command me freely.

I thank you sir. I am yours, I am at your gentle commandment and service.

And I at yours truly. Come to the Court, I will do you the greatest credit
that I may possibly.

I shall be sprinkled with the Court holy water, that is to say, I shall have
a deluge of ceremonies, but as many apes tails as dinners and breakefasts.

Empty tons make more noise then full vessels.

To foolish words stopped ears.

The walking. Chap. 3.
LEt us go walk.

I will break my fast before I go a step out of doors.

Come, come, we will go to break fast when we come again.

Not I, I will eat a morsel of bread and drink a little wine, then have
with you whether you will.

You should break fast before you be up. That were a new guise.

Not so, many London mistresses do so, and when they have well broken their
fast, lay themselves down again to take a nap upon it.

Think you that I had marked their manner therein?

I can not tell.

Go go, the Dill take you, you are a scoffer, you are a frumper, you are a
hedgehogge for all sauce.

To tell you the troth, it is to be feared that such women will plant horns
on their husbands foreheads if they look not unto them well.

Where have you seen one cuckold alone among a thousand men?

Never one alone but one hundred.

Where I pey you?

In this microcosme of horns and cuckolds.

Oxen have horns and calves cornets.

You are a clarke, I perceive well, but to the purpose, where shall we go
fetch our walk?

To Tower Hill.

To saint Georges fields beyond the water. To the Custom House, to enter the
lading of a ship.

To a village to eat some cream.

To Paul's churchyard to buy a new book.

To the Court, to White Hall.

To the Tennis-court in Blacke-friers.

To the hunting of a Stagge.

To the Exchecker office.

To Westminster hall to talk with an Attornie, to take counsel of a
Counselor.

To the Sarasens head to deliver a letter.

To the prison of Newgate, to give alms to the poor prisoners for Gods sake.

To the Exchange, to hear the news out of France.

Where shall I find you about twelve a clock?

I will be below in the Change, either vvalking among the Italians, or troking
with the French, or prattling amongst our English, or carroussing with the
Flemings at the Cardinals hat: And if I be not in these places, you shall find
me above in the Pawn, devising with the fair Semsters.

Farewell then, till by and by.

Till we meet, Adieu.

The Exchange. Chap. 4.
CAn you not speak French?

I can a little, sir.

What news in France?

None that I can tell, still war, war.

What bruit in the world?

I hear nothing at all.

Know you no news?

What say they from Barbary, Italy, from Spain, and Turkey?

Is there no good news?

They talk of the great Carricke which our English took the other day of the
Spaniards, coming from the East Indies.

Can you tell me when the ships shall set sail toward Moscouie?

The Ambassador is he departed toward Constantinople?

Is the Fleet returned from Bourdis?

You hear no news of the Tripoly and Xanthe ships?

Where dwells the ordinary post to Calis, to Bruges, to Antuerpe?

He dwells in the Iewrie.

At what sign?

At the white Lion, at the grenning Iackanapes.

Is it not right over against the Unicorn?

It is a little further, on this side the Goat and the red horse, just over
against the black Bull, near the Dogs head in the pot.

How shall I do to deliver him a packet of letters?

You shall find him upon the Exchange about half an hour after eleven a
clock.

But when will he depart, can you tell?

He will embarke peradventure with the first tide?

Where is the vvind? It is in the South. It is against him then, it was this
morning North North-east.

I want forty blocks of tin of Cornwall, to send into Barbary, and two
hundred broad Clothes to send to a Focquer merchant of Germany.

Here is an English merchant, who will furnish you very well.

Signior Paulo what commodities brings this Gallion from Venice?

His lading is of oils, of vvines, of silks and veluets.

Is there no Oranges, Lemmons, Cytrons, Figs, and raisins?

All that comes from Spain, not from Italy.

Will you sell me ten tons of Muscadine for term?

I had rather have given them away at Palermo.

When shall I be paid for the oils that you had of me last?

After Easter, if you can have the patience.

Cancaro madonna stiamo fresci.

Argent, argent, or gage, or I will make you go to cage. I understand not your
language.

There is a fair letter of Attornie.

I demand pledge, bail, ready money, no obligation.

There is then your money, count it, there be fair Angels. This seems to me a
Demon, that is clipped.

For how much give you me this clipped Angel?

For two little devils.

The Devil take the Devil. I will none of them.

There is another piece of Gold. It is not weight. This Souueraigne is
saudred. These Spanish reals are not good metal.

For how much pay you me this Portegue?

For two spanish gentlewomen.

For how much this French Crown?

For two sheilds.

It is to light by six grains.

For how much this Rose noble?

For two villains.

It is of base Gold. For how much this double Ducate?

For two simple baronries.

For how much this bald pate?

For two Henry long beards.

It seems to lack weight. It is to light. It is not to be put away. It is
false.

I have not falsified it. I would that the ears of the coyner who has
falsified them were nailed to this pillar.

Change me these light pieces. I will none of these small moneys.

You are very curious in receiving of money. There is other silver. Let me have
a quittance of your hand.

There it is.

I am paid now. Farewell.

The Pawn. Chap. 5.
LEt us go above to buy some thing of these fair maidens.

What seek you sir?

Come here my friend: see here fine ruffes, falling bands, handkerchers,
sockes, coiffes, and cuffes, wrought with gold and silver. Have I nothing
which likes you? I will use you well. Would you have any fine Holland? Any
Cambricke, I have very fine, and of all prices.

Hark my love will you take a pint of wine?

Thanks sir, not now.

Fine Venice Glasses, French garters, Spanish gloves, sweet, Flanders knives,
fine Silk stocks of Italy.

What want you Gentlewoman? what lack ye?

Show me a Peach colored Netherstocke.

There is a very fine hose, the price is an Angel, at at word.

Will you take a noble?

I cannot truly. There is a pair of incarnate take them for eight shillings.

You are too dear.

Will you see a good hat sir?

Lack you a good hat or a cap?

I seek for a Beuer.

There is one which will fit you just, with the feather.

I wear no plume.

It becomes you very well.

It is too large and too great for me.

It is after the Babilonian fashion, and the feather after the Polonian flant.

It is all the fashion now a days.

Show me another after the French fashion, with a flat crown.

Will you see one of Spanish wool? with a Cypres band, pinkt with taffetas,
and finely trimde on the new cut.

Let me see it.

Let us come to a price.

The price is reasonable: give me a baldpate.

Hold your hand, you shall have neither more nor less.

Take you any double Ducates?

Come, I will pay you in Portegues, or in lack an Apes pence.

Hem! ho: hear ye?

Come hither, buy something of me, Northren man.

Ah my love, I have not money enough to bestow.

You sir, what want ye?

Is there no high shoes here abouts?

Come here my friend: here is a pair which will fit you just.

Will you buy a pretty wench to carry into the North with you?

By my troth I no.

What lackest thou welsh boy?

Thou liedst, I am a Pilchard.

Wallon, you honest man of Wales, buy something of me.

Soft and fair gallant.

Soft and fair French Pig.

You anger my Lords of the Parliament.

What want ye sir?

What would you buy mistress?

What lackst thou fellow?

What will it please you to buy Gentleman?

What seek you honest man?

Come hither: come to me.

I will sell you a peniworth.

I want nothing.

I will buy nothing.

I seek nothing.

I will have nothing of you. I stay here for one.

I walk here for my pleasure.

The drunken men's Banquet. Chap. 6.
HO that I am glad! we must laugh and be merry. Let us make good cheer.

Let us cast away care.

Come make a good fire.

Wash the glasses.

Hunt out the dogs.

Cut bread for the potage.

Set abroach a new pipe of Wine.

Set packing the poor.

Give them that they would have.

Set some chaires.

Lay the cloth.

Cover the Table.

Turn the spit.

Bring clean napkins.

Baste the roast meat.

Is the dinner ready?

See our guestes where they come.

Sir you come looked for. In good time.

Yea: but I played the villain: for I was bidden to dinner, and not to make you
stay for me.

Be ye all the very velcome masters.

Come near, if it please you mistress, sister, Aunte, Granmother, my Niece.

Come in, come in. Here Is much ado with these wives: welcome truly.

Cousen come in for Gods sake.

Why have ye not brought my little couzin with you?

Sister show them the way, the other will follow you.

Do not push me for I am with child.

Tib, Jane, Sib, reach your uncle here a basin of water, and a towell. Lets
wash all together.

Come to Table masters. Sit down my magnificent Damoisels.

O little boy say us grace.

God give us of his grace:

And in his Paradise a place.

Draw your knives.

Help that Gentlewoman. Set there the Venizon pastie.

What are these pasties of?

This is of Stags flesh.

This is of a Do: and that as I think is venison of a vvilde boar.

There, there, begin where it shall please you.

Ye see your cheer. Welcome all.

Bring the roast. This piece of beef is raw. Take it away.

Why bring ye nothing else out of the kitchen? Ye make us stay well here.

Help your selves in the mean time.

Cut up this Hare.

Eat of this Turkey Cock. Open the lid of that Pigeon pie.

Cut of that shoulder of mutton.

Dismember that Capon. Be doing with these Rabbets.

Set in order on the table the Hens, Partridges, Conies, Cranes, Feasants,
Larkes, and Woodcockes.

What sause shall we have for these dishes?

There is Orenges, Citrons, and Olives kept in pickle.

What shall we do with these great birds, the Goose, the Swan, and the
Peacock? There is no more place to set them in.

Show them only and carry them back to the kitchen.

What a Peacock? Where is Quintus Hortensius who did love it so well?

Cut me a bit or two of this gammon, to the end that I^ drink more
courageously this first glass. O the brave gammon of ba^^n! where is it? It Is
invisible. I see it not. It Is a Moguntine gammon.

Reach hither the dish with Olives: I saw a man who did swalow down these
Oliue-stones, as an Estridge does iron.

Now I drink to you all, and be ye the very well welcome.

Where are our Crystal glasses? Will you drink after the Greeks guise in
this great goblet? I will drink after the French fashion in this glass, And
I after the English manner out of this silver cup.

Bring me a little beer in this Samian viole: The which I take to be very
good this hot vveather, to refresh the body.

Of what beer then? Of the smallest that is: for the strong make the wit
dull, heavy and gross, and do feed the body too fat.

Power this cup full. To you cousin Geneuefa.

This damsel is shamefast. She brides it.

No displeasure to you sir,

I drink to you.

I will pledge you here.

What wine pleases it you to drink sir?

Will you drink Gascon wine?

Whence comes this so bloody and black wine? It Is Orleans wine. I would
rather drink of this small wine of Rochell.

There Is very good claret: which turns the vvind mill near it.

What wine drink ye cousin? A sack of Spain: which wets well, and washes
the brain.

I had rather drink a cup of Rhenish wine: for it make a man speak Latin fine.

There Is nothing more grievous then to die for thirst in a banquet.

Some wine here h^! when I was at Rome, I drank of most excellent vvines in
the Cardinal Caraffaes Celler. I drank Romanesco, Greco, lachryma Christi:
sweet wine, sharp, mild, and green, for I was very familier with his
yeoman of Celler.

Muscadine likes me very well.

So does it our English dames also.

This wine begins to wane, to be sour, and wax mustie.

The wine of Spain and Italy bear well their water, and will keep well
beside.

Power me my glass half full of water.

You christen your wine, and make it a good Christian.

That's not done amiss.

You mar the wine, putting too much water in: I will not drink with you. I
love it when it is simple, pure, and neat, not brewed, as they do in many
parts of the world, to make of one tun two.

That is a small matter.

Worse do the vintners of London, who put in lime, brimstone, honey, allume,
and other more beastly things to be spoken, and nothing is more hurtful to
men's bodies, whom men ought to chastise publicly as thieves and murderers:
for thence proceed infinite maladies, and specially the goutes.

Masters ye eat nothing, I pray you drink and pledge me a carouse.

Lets drink ho: truly it is to day a fair weather to drink in, so is it every
day.

Drink we, I drink to you with all my heart, and be ye the very well welcome.

Fear not least wine and victuals fail here: for when the heaven should be
of brass, and the earth iron, yet wine should not want us, were it for seven,
yea for eight years, A longer time then the famine lasted in Egypt ywis.

Let us drink then together by good accord in charity.

I am yours, You are mine, I drink to you, you shall pledge me, if you please.

Hem, ha-hem.

It is good and very fresh, as you would say, in the beginning of the second
degree:

To every one it is not allowed to drink so good,

To every one it is not granted to dwell at Corinthum.

In wine is truth, that is to say, In wine is truth.

Hark my friend, I will tell thee a thing in thine ear, tell no body if thou
love me, it shall rest secret between us two: it is, that I find the wine
better and more pleasant to my taste then I was wont: more then I was wont I
fear the meeting of a bad cup of wine, and to tell you the plain truth, the
odor of wine how much more it is delicious, smirking and surpassing, by so
much more celestial and delicate is it then oil, That is spoken like a man of
learning. I will tell other stories. Tarry a little that I deduce a dram out
of this bottell: Lo here my very and sole Helicon. See here my Fountain
Caballin^. This is mine only Enthusiasmos.

Here drinking, I deliberate, I discourse, I resolve and conclude. After the
conclusion, I laugh, I write, I compose, I drink.

Ennius, the father of Latin Poets, drinking did write. writing did drink.

Aeschylus (if you give credit to Plutarchus in his bankets) did drink
composing, did compose drinking.

Homer never wrote fasting.

Cato never took pen in hand, but after drinking. To the end that you say not
that I live without example of men laudable and best accounted of.

Is there any one that will dispute with me of these intricat problemes of
thirst and drinking: I have no less studied Magic, Negromancie, Alchimie,
the Caballisticke science and Geomancie, then the Philosophy of Hermes
Trismegistus.

These are high matters, and profound sciences.

By our holy Lady, we must be merry: Draw, bring boy, fill wine, ho devil,
pour, I will drink for my part more then five and twenty or thirty three
tuns, before that I die.

Is there no more wine? we are then aground, and in the deserts of Arabia.

It Is vvhot. O how dry I am: As a land without water. I believe that none of
you drinkers doubt of it.

Is there good store of vvines in Gascony this year?

I hope then that we Englishmen shall find infallible remedies against all
alterations and thirsts.

I drink to ye all. You seem to me true Christians: for I drink not to these
dogs the Turks, Mahometains, I deny and renounce them for villains.

The reason why?

I will tell you how these devil Turks are accursed to drink no drop of
wine. If no other mischief were in the Alcoran of Mahound, yet would I
never be of his law.

VVorthie of eternal memory and everlasting praise was the holy man Noe (to
whom we are bounden and greatly beholding for that he planted the vine,
whence flovveth this Angelical, delicious, celestial, ioious, deifying
liquor. (The poor man was deceived in drinking it, for he knew not the virtue
and power thereof.) Have you understood me all this while?

Drink then a good draught without water, for if ye believe it not, here is a
fig for my God-son.

Where are these devil Greeks, who in Alexanders days were renowned
drinkers? O the poor goblins are dead.

We read that these fine Italian demons have drunk well heretofore: and
especially in Julius Caesar's time, when they made their horses, mules, and
mares drink carousse.

I am, believe me a good fellow and a boon companion.

I love to drink neat, and I eat willingly salt meat, and moreover I love to
drink of the best, so does every honest man ywis.

Never noble man hates the good wine.

Drink we, drink we then, as do the camels and dromedaries in the Carauana,
drinking for the thirst past, for the thirst present, and for the thirst to
com^.

So drank Hercules.

Truce of thirst, league of hunger, I am no more angry I thank God and you. I
am gay as a Papingeay, perke as a sparhawke, merry as a butterfly.

Truly it is written by your goodly Euripides, and Silenus the famous
carowsser speaks it.

Mad is the man, and stark out of his wit:
Who drinks carrouse, and laugheth not a whit.
Considering that it is a great while since I was a scholar in Apollos
school, and drank my fill of fount Caballine, among the merry Muses, since
that time I find this nectar divine, this wine precious, this muscadel
delicate.

Gossip fair and softly, your rage in your quick swallowing.

The dill take me, thou have not found thy little sippers of London, who
drink but out of one pipe.

You have a good throat to swallow down.

O fellow mine, if I could mount up as well as I can pour down, I should
already be above the sphere of the Moon with Empedocles.

But I know not what the diue^l this means. This wine is so good and
pleasant. The more I drink, the more thirst I have. I believe the shadow of
these cups, does engender dry mouths, as the moon does merrigalds.

This Liuerots head is good for those that have the gout.

We shall eat few green geese this year.

I had broke my fast well: but therefore will I eat never the less. For I
have a stomach paued and hollow as saint Benets boot.

Ha my friend, give me some pigge.

Diabolo, there is no more liquor, I renounce my life, I die for thirst.

Draw, give here, turn, broile, pour to me without water: so my friend,
firke me this glass finely. Ha false fever vvilt thou not pack hence?

By my fe Gossip I cannot enter into my bets.

You are a cold. my love. I marry, lets speak of drinking. I drink not but at
my hours, as does the Popes mule.

I have great thirst.

Which was first thirst or drinking? Drinking. For Priuatio praesupponit
habitum.

I am a clerk, I tell you, Foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum.


Lets sing, lets drink, lets pour it in, where is my tonnell?

What? I drink but by ae letter of Attornie.

Wet you to dry, or dry you to wet? By my fay I understand not the
Rhetoric. With the pratticque I help my self a little.

Courage, I wet, I moisten, I drink, and all for fear to die, Drink
alvvayes, you shall never die.

If I drink not, I am dead.

For conclusion of mine oration, I will say unto you, that as for me, I think
I am descended of some rich King or prince in old time, For you never saw man,
who had a greater desire to be a King, and rich, then my self to the end to
make good cheer, to take no pains at all, to care for nothing, and to enrich
my friends and all honest and learned men. We have drink enough for one time.

Go to, go to, make a long arm, fear not the Lumbards bit.

We have done well for once truly.

You have made a very sumptuous banquet.

Ye have not touched these roasted capons.

Eat you not of a young phesant Gentlemen?

Granmother do you not love this Lyurots head? What shall we do with these
young Pigeons.

These young suc^ing Rabbets are not the vvorst meat. Taste of this young
Storke. I believe these quails and quailchicks stand against your stomach.

No body will carue up these Partriges, I would they were in the fields and
forests again.

Set here this Sturgion: open this Salmon pie.

Taste these fride gogions.

This sea-crafish, is a most dainty dish.

Ah! fish and flesh at one table.

The sea shall mix it self with the land, the physicians forbid it.

Nay, the physicians will have it so.

I am deceived, I should say that physic forbids it, and not the physicians.

For my part I will speak of fish, I will eat none.

Take away, ho: and bring the fruit.

There Is a marvelous variety in the nature of countries. India (says Virgill)
sends yuorie, and the Sabeans their encens.

There Is a Peach.

See here truly sine apples and delicat pears.

Masters make good cheer, and be merry and frolic.

Serve your selves, for I serve no body.

Lets have some cheese.

I must eat a little cheese.

There is very good.

This is mares cheese.

It is of the milk of a Phrigian or Sicilian shec-asse.

This cheese although it be of England, is full of eyes and worms.

It shallbe good for Flemings then.

This Parmesan is well gathered, and fresher then that Holland cheese, which
is full of eyes also.

It Is not cheese of Parma, but of Placentia.

O that this cheese makes me have a good appetit to drink.

Lets drink then to gain the pardons.

Masters if I had been sur^ of your coming: You have been at too much cost.

The best is, that you be all the very well welcome, and I thank you that you
have taken the pains to come and see me.

Come take away the table: bring here an ewer full of clean water: does it
please you to wash gentles?

Blessed be the good God of heaven for his graces. Much good do you all masters.
Lets have cards and dice to disport our selves here an hour or two by the fire
side.

Pastimes* Cha. 7.
ARe you disposed to be merry and sport the time away alittle?

What sirs! are you all asleep?

Let us go to some game.

Lets go walk.

It Is fine vvalking indeed, the streets are so foul and filthy.

O what fine weather it is to study near the fire side on a pair of new
cards.

I had thought you would have said on some new book.

I say, on a new pair of cards.

Lets rather go to tables.

I could never yet play at tables.

Lets to dice.

I cannot dice it neither.

Lets play at draughts, or at chests then.

No: but we will play at cards.

At cards, be it.

At all plays, there is but the hazard.

I dare not play with you, Tripit-taintie, you are a little too crafty a
companion.

You are a fretter, a vvrangler, a brangler, a foulemouthed villain, and for
nothing you will take exceptions, and quarrel.

You tear, you swear, you forswear.

Thou art a prating rascal, and lie in thy throat in saying so. I play
fairer play then thou do.

By your sleue ye^ we will none of your company: For you have an ill report.

For what? To be a cornifler, a coozener, they say to, that you carry always
with you a bung card in your pocket to coosen simple companions.

Whosoever shall say so, lies in his throat.

Farewell my friend, I would be leath to play in thy company, for thou do
nothing but pick quarrels and vvrangle.

Whiff, my friend, my man is fluced away.

What a companion? you have sent him away with a flea in his ear.

Well, shall we too it now?

But thou Lancelot, so soon as thou have gotten sixpence, you do give them
over, with whom you play.

That is rather to deceive and mock, then to play.

You say true indeed: For if I loose once sixpence, I am tied by the foot till
the Cow come home.

Let us sit down then as we were wont to do, crosse-legged, ho.

Give me this chair, to the end I may loose at more ease.

Shuffle the cards.

Cut, He shall deal who lifts the highest card, I shall deal.

Lets play at Primero.

No, no, we will play at Spanish triumph.

Fie upon it, it is every common alehouse game in England.

At Sant then.

No, for Gods sake, we will play at the Lance-knights game.

Well it is done, cut the cards.

Steven you cut at the boung card.

I know not what it means truly.

There Is for thee Antonie, a dame without blame.

I have a king without a kingdom.

Look this is mine own.

What, master knave of clubs, you are vvelcome.

Will you vvin me six pence?

Here is a ten, a nine, an ace, the four of spades, the three of pickes, the
two of hearts.

A plague of the cards, I shall not turn up one of these cards.

I think that there is no more kings or queens in the deck.

O here is the brother of Robin Hood come.

You have lost the game.

Come six pence for me.

Come a shilling to me.

I Will lay a wager, if I had a hundred crowns in my pursse, I should set them
packing to day at play.

Leave thy prating, if thou vvilt play, stake.

I know if I had a kingdom I should loose it now.

Play no more then.

Yet must I needs play.

Deal the cards with a plague.

What a vengeance, I shall loose as much to day, as my Lord mayor is vvorth.

There Is an eight for you.

I will lay on this eights head, eight crowns. I will then cast up the cards.

Play but six only, and I will hold them.

Play then, Take a card for your self, Thou have a five.

Play fair play and be hanged, look not on the bottom card.

What Is this in the name of God?

God was never plaier at cards.

O fortune happy now be luckie.

One five fingers now, to get me five crowns.

Here it is by God.

This is mine.

Let my money alone companion.

And why?

Go to, go to, I say.

Sblood, you shall have none of my money.

And wherefore?

Therefore, I say.

I will be judged.

Say companion, has he played fair play?

I think so surely.

Did not he take the bottom card?

I will be judged by him.

No truly: he has won the money, and you have lost it.

Take it then.

These cards are marked on the backs,

Thou know them all.

The greatest part of them truly, I know by the faces when I look upon them.

Peradventure also by the backs.

I will cast these cards into the fire.

They shall loose me no more money.

What have you lost all at one cut of cards?

It Is no matter, I will play no more at cards.

I have lost enough for one sitting.

Dicing. Chap. 8.
LEts go to a dicing house to hazard every man his crown.

I have but half a crown to loose.

If I thought to loose, I would not play a farthing.

Give us dice here.

Here are the oxen, the little bones.

Lets play at Gresko.

I will play at passage, or at hazard

What set you companion?

But this one Kar-de-kew.

I have won it.

What, what, we play not yet a good.

I have vvoon it, and I will have it.

You shall not carry away my Kar-de-kew, so Why so?

Because I have lost it but by one ace only.

One ace is enough to loose.

One ace only, lost S. Martin his cloak.

By God you shall pay me for all that.

There Is another matter in it.

And what?

You are a cogger of dice.

These dice are horned, they are false.

They are full of quicksilver, or gold within.

What a villainous thief art thou?

What a rogue is this?

Art not thou a rascal, to coosen men in this manner.

See me these dice run low.

They are highmen, and cut by-ace fashion.

You are a coosening mate.

Go to the Gallows.

Be gone fellow fellon, or I will stob thee through the hand with my poignard.

Come no more here, if thou will believe me, with thy bar-kater-treas.

Go walk to the gallows.

The Tenise-play. Cha. 9.
SHall we play a set at tenise you and I?

Lets go to the great Bracke at White Hall.

Where is the master that keeps the tenis

Here I am sir, what is your pleasure?

Give us some soft and gentle shoes here.

Rackets and bals bring here ho.

Well, play.

I have fifteen.

A loss, mark that chase there.

Fifteen all.

This racket is not vvorth a rush.

Some more rackets ho.

Now give me a fair ball.

I cannot take a ball above hand, nor at rebound.

The chase is mine.

I am thirty.

Thirty all.

Ask standers by, I touched it not.

Forty five.

At dews then.

A ball, I have the advantage.

The set is mine.

I will band a ball more then six score paces mounting, with this racket
which you refuse.

Look here.

O devil! vvat a firking stroke is that.

You have an arm of iron.

Hunting. Chap. 10.
I Like the pastime of hunting above all other sports.

I have a fine grayhound.

And I a bitch that will kill a hare in her form.

There is no pleasure in that.

I love a life to see the beagles hunt and grayhounds run.

You have a fair mastiffe, what can he do?

Lap, bowl, howl, and bark in the morning.

The barking cur is often fearful, and biteth not.

One should for all that believe the barking of an old dog.

We will couple my Grayhound and your mastiffe together.

My mastiffe will not be led in a lease.

It is a hard matter to use an old dog to a s^^ing.

Let us uncouple our beagles, they shall follow the tracke, and trace after the
footing.

The hare is now in her form but in the evening she will come to relief under
this forest.

Thrust your Ferret into the bury.

There are no conies in this warren.

This pasturage is full of the dunging of vvild boares, stags, hinds, and fawns.

Lets discover first the heard.

What a fine pray it is, a conie in a brake to enclose.

We shall catch rather a vvoodcocke at the nose.

Look what a heard of vvild beasts here is.

VVind your horn, let slip your mastif. Bugle your horn, vvind him double,
Set your snares, grins, and purs-nets.

Where are your beagles?

See a goodly stag with ten horns.

Behold here his bracke, lets gallop, lets spur cut to catch him with your
mastiffe.

Let him go, let him run.

He will escape from our dogs well enough, and our horses are almost tired
already.

The Falkener. Chap. 11.
FAlkoner, where is your Gerfalcon.

I have her in my m^w.

Lets go fly at Partridge.

Bait your lure.

What bird is that?

She was sold to me for a falcon.

It Is an owl, or a Gilwhooter.

No sir, it is a Lanard.

She will serve to take birds with a call.

I sweat, I am vvearie. I am very hungry, and all on a water.

I am not hungry, but I am very dry.

I am also vvearie of hunting, and to catch nothing.

VVind thy horn huntsman: blow a blast of thy horn, for I Have lost all my
dogs.

It Is a common proverb:

Of birds, of arms, of dogs and love:

For one pleasure many woes we prove.

The Barber. Chap. 12.
WHat does the gentle Barber?

Welcome, sir.

I come to trim my beard and my hair.

Sit you down there: you shall be trimd by and by.

Will you vvash me, for I have great have.

Stay a little, I have almost done with this gentleman.

Come give me some clean clothes.

What says your Almanacke Barber?

That the moon is just in the eclipse of money.

When is it good to bleed?

When there are any crowns to be gotten.

You are as covetous as the Devil.

I ask nothing else always: but health and a purseful of money, for my
paramour a pretty conie, And Paradise at the end of my days.

You have your beard tangled and knotty.

Undo my locks with this comb.

Rub not so hard.

Rub softly.

A Pomander and some soape, ho.

Hold up this basin.

VVash me gently.

Shall I cut your hair.

Will you have your beard shaven?

Shall I wash your neck, breast and stomach?

Shall I pick your teeth.

Boy, where be my Cizars.

Give me this Iuorie comb.

Sharpen a little the rasor.

Shall I cut your mustaches?

An eare-picker, and a tooth-picker, ho.

You are almost trimmed.

Take the glass and behold your self.

I am well.

Santie dear, I look with a fierce and fellon looks.

There Is to drink, Adieu.

LE SECOND METHOD DE la vraye and naifue prononciation Francoise s'ensuit,
deduit en vingt chapitres par les plus difficiles lettres and voyelles
Francoises, qui sont mises a la marge auec leur valeur Angloise vis a vis les
deuis familiers des mestiers fort delectables a lyre. Le Libraire. Cha. 1.
ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'n eh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke


ACheptez quelque liver nouueau, mons. voyla les dernieres nouuelles de France.

Quelz livers acheptez vous?

Tenez, regardez si vous scauriez fournir ce bulletin.

Le Papillon de Belleau: la mousche de Lucian: Ouide de la puce and le noyer,
Ronsard en louange de la fourmi, son liver de la Grenouille and Freslon.
Phauorin des Febvres quartes.

Combien tous ces gros volumes ensemble?

Ne vous faut il pas auoir des autres livers monsieur?

Monstrez moy la Description des Indes Occidentalles, en Espagnol. Que ie voye
la premiere and second sepmaine du Bartas en Francois. Les Oeuures de
Petrarque, and les Iournees du Iean Boccace en Italien: les Commentaires du
Iulles Caesar en Latin: l'Histoire d'Heliodore en grec: le nouueau Testament en
la Syriacque: l'Alchoran des Turcs en l'Arabesque, and le Thalmud des Iuifs en
Hebrieu.

Les voulez vous de l'impression de Lion ou de Paris?

Imprimez a Basle ou a Venise, si voulez. Iem'en vay voir par la cemitiere si
ie les peux trouuer.

Il faut que ie les aye necessairement pour mon retour a l'Vniuersite. ai
sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short
eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person plur. of
the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oy oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-we om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gn nnh gua ga
gue ge gui gee gneu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dte fre pre tree ble
gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Homme de bien quel liver demandez vous?

Il me faut achepter un certain liver, mais il ne m' en souuient pas du nom.

Est-ce en verse ou en prose? Non non, c'est vne histoire. N'auez vous pas
quelque ioly. petit liver pour lyre au coing de la cheminee?

Voyla les sept sages de Greece: and voyla les sept sages maistres de Romme: and
voyci les sept Sages de Gotham qui noyerent l'anguille en la mer.

C'est cestuy la mesme que ie cerche.

Il est mignonnement rely en veau, mons.

C'est bien dit friar Tibaut.

Combien, combien, and qu'ayons qu'vn mot.

Ie n'ayme pomt de barguigner: prenez le pour un sol.

Ma foy ie vous en donneray trois beaux deniers.

Vne maille dauantage, c'est a vous.

Pas un liard, prenez l'argent si voulez.

Bien bien venez-ca, reuenez vne autre fois: puisque c'est a vous, vous ne
l'aurez pas asteure, vous di-ie:

Vous vous mocquez de moy donc: adieu.

Le Merchant du drap de Soye. Chap. 2.
QVe demandez vous monsieur, i'ay icy bon velours broche de Gennes, Satins de
Lucques and de Cypres, du Camelot sans ondes, du drap d'or, drap d'argent, du
damas para las damas, taffetas d'Espaigne, Fustaynes de Milan, Ostades de
Norwich.

Ie voudrois veoir un bon velours noir.

Voyla vne piece de fort bonne estoffe.

Est-ce de trois poils ou de deux? N'est il pas gomme?

Non ie vous en asseure sur ma foy.

De quel prix est il? de vingt and trois solz la verge.

I'en ay bien que ie vous vendray a dix huict, mais il n'est pas fi bon que
cestuy-ci.

Monstrez moy vne piece de satin tanne.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio ion zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Voyla un satin plein de soye. Que vous en semble?

N'est il pas bon and de belle couleur?

La couleur est fraische and belle: toutesfois i'en ay veu du meilleur satin.

Ie le croy a grand'peine.

Monstrez moy quelque autre couleur plus vifue.

Ie vous en monstreray de toutes couleurs, de toutes sorts and a tous prix que
voudriez.

Que demandez vous madamoyselle? Que cerchez vous seigneur, mons. homme de
bien? Venez-ca.

Escoutez mon amy, ie vous voudrois dire un mot a l'aureille: me voulez vous
fire le satin d'vn pourpoint, and du velours pour me fair un haut de chausses?

Que dites vous? parlez plus haut. Ie ne vous entends pas asteure. Me voulez
vous fair credit and fire?

Fi-fi, le fire engendre fiebure.

Est donc l'amitie si froide enter nous deux?

L'amour fait beaucoup: and l'argent fait tout.

Adieu, donc, ie me recommende.

L'Orfebvre. Chap. 3.
DE quoy auez vous envy belle fille?

Monstrez moy vne saliere doree: un goblet cisele, vne couppe bien garnie.

Voyla de belle argenterie: de tres-riches vasselles, tres-fines, bien brunies
and tres-belles.

Mamie vous venderay-ie vne belle bague, un anneau auec un diamant enchasse?

Est-il massif?

Il pese un escu and demi en or.

Combien beau sire?

A peu des parolles huict escus.

Ie m'en garderay tres-bien.

Dites monsieur, combien payeray-ie pour ce pendent d'aureille?

Ce pendent, mamie, il est de pierrerie en vigne bien vnie, ai sound. e ay e
ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille
e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an eut 3. person plur. of the
verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh
oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille olheh u ew un ewm um
ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue
ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre
tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


a un mot deux escus.

Vous le surfaictes de beaucoup.

Qu'en offrez vous donc?

Ce que ie vous ay dit.

Nous sommes bien long du march.

Vne seule Arondelle ne fait pas le printemps: ny le march un seul merchant.

I'aymeroye mieux un pendent noir de Calamite a la mode de France.

Monstrez moy un quarquant.

Mons. Ie suis Orfebvre, ie ne vends pas des ioyaux.

Pardonnez moy, s'il vous plaist, I'eusse pense que fussiez un distillateur des
meulines.

Ie demand la boutique d'vn Lapidaire.

Allez a l'enseigne de corn du veneur.

Dieu vous guard monsieur de la corn.

Bien venue mademoiselle de la cornette.

N'auez vous pas quelque belle Topase mise en or?

Non, mais i'ay vne fort belle Turquoise.

Est elle Orientalle?

Ie l'ay recouvre n'agueres au plus outre le pais des Iapanois en l'Asie
septentrionalle?

Ou, en China?

Oui, non gueres loing de la en Quinsay ville Imperialle enter les Chinois.

Est il possible? Que ie voye ceste pierre de touch.

Voyla vne belle Esmeraude.

Ce Diamant ou a il este taille?

Il a les points bien exquises and a este taille en Caire ou en Canarie, a
Venise ou en Alexandrie.

Combien vendez vous ce collier la?

Pour trois cens escus.

Combien des chainons contient il?

Quelque cinq cens cinquante.

Ne veistes vous iamais de ces petits anneaux a Londres qu'on vend a Venise,
dedans le chaton desquels est soubs un fin Crystal enchasse un petit Scorpion
de fer mouuant sa queue fort dextrement?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


I'ay este en Italy and en ay veu plusieurs de mesme facon.

Me ferez vous un de semblable?

Oui: pour dix escus.

Ne faillez donc pas pour demain, quand ie repasseray par icy. a dieu.

Le Peintre. Chap. 5.
DIeu te guard Peintre.

Bien venuz mes gentilz compagnons.

Quelle pourtraicture est cela que tu peignez la? Du sage Aesope.

O quelles leures, and narines de singe il a.

Il est oreille comme un Asne.

Que dites-vous de ceste figure?

Ie die que si c'est Venus, elle n'a pas le visage bien peint. C'est un
Harlequin Italien.

Il est, croyez moy, tresbien contrefaict pour un sot.

Il n'est pas trop bien pourtrait pour un sage.

Qu'y a il a dire?

Il est bossu and tortu, and a le nez aquilin.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Les Perses adoroyent ceux qui avoyent le nez aquilin, a cause de Cyrus, lequel
ilz disent auoir eu le sien de form d'un chausse-pied.

Il a les mains fort crochues and glueuses.

Il n'est pas toutes-fois larron.

Que scait-il fair?

Il scait taire and tenir son secret.

Il est donc plus sage que plusieurs sots.

De quoy a cest homasse la face si rouge and enflambee?

Honte le saisit auec horreur des meschancetez, abominations and vilainies
commises par le monde, ou plustost de veoir les aueugles iuger de couleurs.

Partez vous d'icy, car vous n'achepterez rien, ie voy bien. Allons, allons:
virtue Dieu! quels merchants?

Mais nous en voulons achepter, moyennant que tu nous laisses fair le prix a
nostre fantasy.

Voy la un beau march. Il y a long temps que ie suis embrouille de vous.

Ostez vous d'icy, ie vous en pry.

Nous ne faisons point de mal.

Quelle image est cela?

C'est l'image de la vierge MARIE.

Abbaissez moy ce Tableau.

Est-ce pas nostre Seigneur IESV CHRIST?

Qui est icy pourtrait and tire si vifuement?

C'est Tyberius Caesar Romain de tres-haute memoi^.

L'Image est d'vne extremement belle taille.

Lon trouue par escrit Tyberius Caesar auoir eu les noeuds des doigts si fermes
que d'vn doigt il percoit tout outre vne pomme fraische.

Aussi feray-ie bien moy.

Voire d'vne pomme pourrie donc.

Il a la palm de sa main bien large.

As-tu apprins la chiromancie?

Ie l'ay bien ouy nommer. Pourquoy donc?

Tu nous eusses divine icy quelque chose par les lignes de ses mains. ai sound
e ay e ain ein ain^ eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh
eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person plur. of
the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe' oine
oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um
eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee g^ nnh gua ga
gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre
tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Ie suis fort ignorant de tell abus.

Voyez vous ceste Mappe-Monde? Ie la voy bien.

Qu'est-ce, vne mer? Ie n'y voy qu'vn peu d'eaue, qui n'est plus grande que la
Thamise.

Ie m'ebais que le Roy de France ne fait pas fair un beau pont pour passer
d'vn pais a l'autre.

La mer enter la France and l'Angleterre n'est elle plus large que cela? Ma-foy
ie tyreray vne flesche donc aysement du Chasteau de Doure iusques aux arenes
blanches de Calais.

Regardez icy la grand mer Oceane.

Est-ce la mer Oceane, Cela? Est celle-cy la terre?

On dit que le Sieur Francois Draec, le Seigneur Candich, and Magellanes ont
este quasi trois ans a enuironner and circuir la Terre and la Mer, Par may foy,
pour gaigner vne bonne pint du vin claret, en moins d'vne iournee, en un bell
apresdisne, ie les circuiray bien a beau pied sans cheual, asne, mule, nauire,
basteau ou fuste.

Tes febures quartaines, tu n'en feras rien.

Regard icy Couillon! Voy l'Asie. Icy sont Tygris and Euphrates. Voyci Quinzay
ville tant renommee enter les Asiatiques: and a douze mill ponts de pierre
soubs lesquels les nauires passent a pleines voiles sans abbaisser toutes-fois
leurs maz.

Voy l'Afrique! Icy est la montagne de la Lune: vois-tu les palus du Nil? Voycy
la mer rouge. Regard le grand Caire! Deca est Europe. Ce couppet icy tout
blanc sont les mo^s Hiperborees. Icy sont les Alps par ou lon va descendre en
Italy: La sont les Appennins: and voicy les Pyrenees par ou vous pouuez aller
tout fin droit en Espagne.

Voy icy ou est la ville de Londres. Voy le clochier S. Pol, Vous ne faites que
saller and souiller ma merchandise, and n'achepterez rien, ^e voy bien.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee g^ nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Monstrez moy quelque ioly petit Tableau pour pendre en mon Cabinet.

En voyla un qui est bien gentil, painct and transsumpt de l'ouurage iadis fait
a l'aiguillon par Philomela exposante and representante a sa soeur Progne,
comment son beau friar Tereus l'auoit depucellee, and sa langue couppee, a fin
que tell crime ne decelast.

C'est vne paincture galante and mirifique.

Elle ne me plaist pas, monstrez moy vne autre.

Voyci au vif painctes les Idees de Platon.

Voyci les Atoms de Epicurus.

Voyla Echo representee selon son naturel.

Contemplez la la vie and gestes d'Achilles en soixante and dix huict pieces de
tapisseries a hautes lisses, longues de quatre larges de trois toises, toute de
soye phrygienne, requamee d'or and argent.

Ou est le commencement?

La tapisserie commence aux nopces de Peleus and Thetis, continuant la natiuite
d'Achilles, sa ieunesse descrite par Stace Papinie, ses gestes and faits
d'armes celebrez par Homere: sa mort and exeques descrits par Ouide and Quinte
Calabrois: finissant en l'apparition de son ombre and sacrifice de Polixene
descrit par Euripides.

Combien, combien, ie vous en pry.

Dix mill escus.

C'est trop cher pour moy cela.

Qu'est cecy?

C'est le pourtraict d'vn varlet qui cerche maistre.

Il a le visage painct au vif.

Il est portraict certes en toutes qualitez requises, gestes, maintien, moins,
alleures, phisionomie and affections.

Combien vous donneray-ie pour ce Tableau.

Quatre escus.

Tenez, vous n'aurez plus ne moins: ie vous payeray en monnoye de cinge, ou en
beaux escus au Palais,

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-we om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Ostez vous d'icy, marchez vous dis-ie, descendez, vous vous mocquez de moy, ie
voy bien.

N'auez vous pas assez iase and caquete encore?

Ostez vous d'icy, vous dy-ie.

Adieu, adieu, Peintre adieu.

L'Armurier. Chap. 6.
OV recouvriray-ie vne espee a deux mains?

Que voulez vous tuer quaremeaux?

Ie ne tue person, sinon que ie me veux mettre sur mes gardes.

Comment, auez vous quelques ennemis secrets?

Ie ne peux marcher enter onze and douze heures de nuict, sans que monsieur le
Conestable de nostre guard m'enuoye en un message a la Contre en la
Poullaillerie.

Quoy fair? achepter des poules?

Ma foy pour paier ma rencon.

Ie done au diable, si ie r'encontre: ie le feray homme de bien.

Monstrez moy un glaiue tranchant, si vous voulez.

Voyla vne vieille lame, que maints corpse a separe de l'ame.

Ce glaiue est certes trop dangereux pour un homme tout cholere comme moy: car
il est trop affile, empoysonne and tres-aigu.

Il n'a pas bonne guard.

La guaine ne vaut rien.

Combien le voudrez vous vendre?

Pour quatre beaux-escuz.

Vous le surfaictes d^ beaucoup.

Si un larron l'auoit desrobbe, si vaut il d'avantage.

Ie voy bien vous ne le voulez pas vendre.

I'ay merois plustost le vendre que donner.

Ie vous en croy bien.

Ie vous asseure quec'est vne lame de Vienne en Daulphine. Monstrez voir, ie
gage que c'est vne focile de Ferrare, ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille
a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew
eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij
ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu
ew oui oo-we om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci
see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m
fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci
see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


un estoc de Tolede, ou un braguemard d'Escosle ou de Bilbao.

Tu as bien divine, va.

Combien ce cimittre Turquesque?

Cinquante escuz.

Asteure scay-ie bien le prix, vous en demandez cinquante escus, ie vous en
donneray cinq.

Bien, c'est a vous donc.

On n'a pas si tossed parle qu'il n'est pris.

Mon amy on prend les hommes a la parolle, and les oiseaux a la pipee.

Pourquoy auez vous achepte ce trenchant?

Pour espouuenter mes ennemis and defendre me amys.

Lon ne doibt mettre le glaiue en la main d'vn enfant, d'vn fol, d'vn
yuvrongne, d'vn brigand, ou d'vn villain.

L'Apothicaire. Chap. 7.
A Pothicaire auez vous compose mon breuuage?

Qui vous a ordonne ce Recipe?

C'est monsieur le Docteur.

Quel Docteur?

Voulez vous s^auoir? Ne cognoissez vous pas la main?

Non certes.

Albertus Magnus en est l'autheur, ie l'ay transcript de ses oeuures des
secrets des damoiselles.

Croyez vous ce grand bourdeur?

Est il si grand menteur?

Il dit qu'il y a virtue es pierres, es herbs, and es parolles.

pour fair les hommes s'enamourer des dames, and les dames des hommes. Non*
non, c'est vne autre chose que ie veux fair.

Ie veux coniurer un esprit and veux aller invisible.

Que ie voye vostre receipte. Li^ezla.

Prens la langue d'vne grenouille, and du sang d'vn chauuescuris.

Et comment les en faut il vser? broyez les en un mortier ensemble. ai sound.
e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh
eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of
the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine
oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew un
ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua
ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble
gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Fait il restraindre ou laischer?

Oy, oy and tresbien chier.

Prenez donc vne Phiole and bouchez la bien.

Qu'est-cela dans cette boite la.

C'est de poyure ou gingembre.

Qu'auez vous dedans ce gran sac?

Ce sont cloux de girofles, noix de muscades, saffron, canelle and amandes.

Quelles fines drogues sont dedans ces boites-la peintes des figurez d'Harpies,
liebvres, cheuaux, and cerfs volants? Il y a dedans baume, ambre-gris, amomom,
musc, ziuette, pierreries, and autres drogues precieuses.

N'auez vous pas quelque preseruatif contre le mal? vous m'entendez bien quel.

Appliquez un emplastre.

Il ne faut point d'autre triacle pour cela.

Ie ne m'oseroye purger, car le temps n'est pas propre.

Auez vous le ventre dur?

Ie suis tousiours quasi constipe du ventre, apportez moy un clystere demain au
matin.

Ie vous entends bien asteure, laissez moy fair.

Adieu iusques a demain-matin.

L'Escuier. Chap. 8.
VOyez vous ce gentil escuier-la? c'est un voltigeur de Ferrare.

Il est gentilhomme Italien and chevauche mieulx vne garce qu'vn guildin.

Il est monte pourtant sur un beau roussin, sur un genet, sus un cheual barde.

Que vous en semble de son cheual, n'est ce pas un gentil coursier?

Ie vous dis mons. que c'est un cheual Hongre ou Turc.

Saufla vostre c'est un grand cheual du pais de Frise ou de Dennemarc.

Ie gageray que c'est un coursier de Naples de Mantoue ou de Ferrare. ai
sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short
eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur.
of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine
oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew un
ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua
ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. ^ or z bre cre chre dre fre pre
tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Pour vne quarte du vin c'est un cheual moresque, ou un genet de Espagne.

Il va merueilleusement bien le trot: agard, agard, il reprend ses ambles. Il
est terriblement courageux and haultain.

Il est fort ^eune Ce n'est encore qu'vn pol^in. Il est gras and bien pense. Il
est couuert d'vn beau caparasson.

Cela n'aide rien a la bonte du cheual.

Il a des grands and beaux yeulx, and se jove sans cesse a son mords bauant and
escumant.

Il monstre que le mords n'est pas son maistre.

Eh! que son train est doux. Il est bien adroit a la main. Le voyez vous
marcher tantost de trauers, tantost a gauche, tantost a dextre and ne touch
qu'vn petit en terre du bout de l'ongle seulement?

O que ce cheual legier fait des beaux saults: il est legier comme vne plume
and court de grande vistesse.

O qu'il s'embride bien, comment il fronce le col, portant la test haulte and
l'aureille droicte.

Voyez comme il remue^ de fierte and d'ardeur ses sourcilz and many ses
members brauement.

Regardez voir comme l'escuier le fait voltiger en l'air, franchir le fosse,
sauter le palis, court tourner en un cercle, tant a dextre comme a senestre.

Voyci un traquenard d'Irlandres.

Tu as bien divine, va, c'est un haquene d'Angleterre.

Mais voyez un peu le lourdault qui le cheuauche.

Il me semble un guenon sur le dos d'vn ours.

Il ombrage and bronche a chaque pas. Il fera tomber son escuier tantost, il
regimbe, il trotte, galoppe, saulte, court and bondist^le pauure rosse est bien
maigre, il n'a que les os, il est borgne d'vn oeil, il cloche d'vne iambe, il a
toutes les corns des pieds gastees.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eeille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie ie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Il seroit fort propre a courir la post.

Scaymon mon host. Allons, allons.

Le Tailleur. Chap. 9.
DIeu guard Cousturier. Bien venu mons.

Combien d'aulnes de satin me faut il achepter pour me fair un pourpoint?

Quatre aulnes and un quarteron, mons.

Et combien de velours pour mes chausses?

Si les voulez fair fair a l'Espagnolle, il vous y faudra trois aulnes and
demye.

Combien de drap large m'en faudra il pour me fair vne cappe a la Romanesque
ou vne ferrarolle a la mode d'Allemaigne?

Il vous en faut auoir guere moins de cinq aulnes and demye, pour y fair vne
assez large pour vous auec un coqueluchon du mesme drap.

Sus, sus prenez la mesure donc.

Dressez vous and n'en bougez pas.

Comment vous aggree la chaussure Italienne?

La guise Venicienne me plaist tresbien.

Que dites vous a la mode de France?

Ie suyvray la facon d'Angleterre.

Chacun se deguise a sa guise.

Faites la brayette a la Courtisane ou a l'antique.

Ho, laissez fair a Marcantoyne.

Pour quand seront ces habits faits?

Entre-cy and dimanche. Pour Noel, pour Pasques, pour Pentecoste.

Adieu donc. Attendez mons. Ie n'ay pas prins la mesure de vostre bourse encore.

Voyla un escu pour achepter du passement, de la soye and des boutons.
Desrobbez la moitie: Ie vous en pry.

Monsieur ie suis Cousturier, ie ne suis pas larron.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
ort. eh ceille e-lheh ^lle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie ie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Vous auez deux mestiers en besoing:

Ie n'ay qu'vn mons.

Vous estes un Tailleur par vostre art, and un larron par vostre estat, allez.

Qui ne scait l'art si serre la boutique.

Le Cordouannier. Chap. 10.
HO Sauatier ou estes vous. Que command vostre seigneurie? Mettez un taccon a
mon soulier.

Il vous constera donc un denier.

Cordonnier, monstrez moy des souliers a double ou a triple semelle, des mules
and des escarpins de marroquin. Que ie voye des bottes.

Mettez vous sur ce banc. A quantes points vous chaussez vous?

Si voulez un soulier bien propice a vostre iambe prenez cestuy-ci. Que ie
l'essaye.

Baille icy un chausse pied.

Voyla un soulier, de beau luster.

Il vous durera quetrop long temps.

It n'y si a beau soulier qui ne deuienne sauatte.

Combien ceur-cx? Demy-escu. Ie ne ne rabattray pas vne pite.

Or dites moy en bonne foy, Cordonnier, ne vous est il onques aduenu, qu'apres
auoir si bien tire les souliers a quelqu'vn, comme a present m'auez, il s'en
soit all sans payer ou prendre son conge autrement?

Nenny certes.

Et s'il vous aduenoit maintenant, que feriez vous?

Par Dieu ie voudrois courir apres. Le dites vous a bon escient? Ma foy, iele
dis, and si le penserois ie fair.

Orsus donc, ie le veux experimenter vne fois, voyci l'auant-cours: suyvez moy
aussi vistement que vous y aymez voz souliers. ai sound e ay e ain ein aine
eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh
ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia
ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo ^^ ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo
oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce
ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu
m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse
sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Tenez le larron. Tenez le larron.

Ne m'empeschez pas messires. Ie course pour vne gageure: pour un flascon du vin.

Il est eschappe du Cordonnier, mais il n'est pas eschappe du larron.

Pourquoy cela? Il portera le larron auec soy par tout ou il s'en yra.

C'est tout un, si ie le peux attraper, ie luy veux imposer de larrecin.

Le Debteur. Chap. 11.
HOla! hau! Monsieur, passez vous ainsi sans parler?

Ie parle seulement a ceux que ie cognoy.

Ne me cognoissez vous pas?

Ie ne vous vey oncques de ma vie que ie scache?

A vez vous oublie que vous eustes dernierement merchandise de moy? De vous?
Comment auez vous nom?

Ie m'appelle Renard le Loup.

Il y a plus d'vn loup and deux Renards au bois.

Il ne vous en souuient pas? I'ay la memoire fort court.

Voyez donc vostre cedule.

Ie ne voy goutte sans lunettes. Que ie la voye: attendez, elle me semble
escrite en Syriacque.

Ie n'y entends pas un mot.

Vous me deuez trois cens cinquante escuz: payez moy ou ie vous y feray
adiourner.

Sur ma foy vous les aurez demain ou apres.

Le iurement est l'arme propre d'vn menteur.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Ie vous promets que si trouuez encore fault en moy de vous payer au double.

Le payeur double me fasche and trouble.

Ne voulez vous pas fire a un Gentilhomme digne de foy quand il iure sa foy.

La foy sans ^euure est morte.

Si vous ne voulez pas fair a moy comme ie fay aux autres, faites le pis que
vous pouuez, ie ne m'en sonci pas un ciron.

Faites vous payer d'iceux qui vous doibuent.

Voire! and quand les gents n'ont point d'argent, que leur feray-ie pour en
recouurer.

Faites les arrester: ilz en trouueront moyen.

On ne doit pas estre si rigoreur. Nous debuons auoir compassion l'vn de
l'autre, selon ce que Dieu nous a command.

On a bien presche auiourd'huy a nostre eglise.

O Dieu les hommes Chrestiens se monstrent de vrais

Iuifs, beaucoup pis que les Turcs, Mores, Arabiens, Tartres, Payens, Sarasins,
Idolatres, sans aucune cognoissance ou crainte Dieu, qui ne sont pas si cruels
and barbares en leur espece comme sont ces nations Chrestiennes qui couppent la
gorge les vns aux autres, pour un Diable d'or and d'argent, qui tire tout le
Monde apres de luy.

Vous saultez du coq a l'asne. Me voulez vous payer?

C'est chose royalle que de deuoir.

Il n'est pas bon Chrestien qui ne doibt.

Le Roy de France me doibt aussi bon que dix mil escuz and les Focquers
d'Allemagne guere moins.

Tout cela n'est rien a moy.

Ie veux estre pay incontinent.

Attendez un peu: Dieu m'en guard d'estre si incontinent horse des debtes.

Qui rien ne priest est creature laid and mauuaise: Creature du gran vilain
diantre d'enfer. ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun
au o e long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an
ent 3 person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo
iu ziew oi oe' oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom
on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t
ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka
que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre
cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Quoy! Debtes! O chose rare and antiquaire!

Il n'est pas bon Chrestien qui ne doibt rien.

Deportons nous de ces contes.

Me voulez vous payer ou non?

Donnez moy encore trois mois.

Vous ne faites que mocquer de moy de iour en iour.

Escoutez un mot a l'aureille. Parlons ensemble.

Le Sergeant. Chap. 12.
IE vous arreste de par la Royne: de par le Roy.

Monsieur le Sergeant (car il est gentilhomme par son office) ie vous pry
faites, moy ce faueur de venir auec moy icy pres a la prochaine rue, iusques a
la maison d'vn merchant mien amy, qui demeurera pleige pour moy.

Depeschez donc: baillez moy un demy-escu de vous.

Tenez, voyla deux solz.

Allons y donc a la tavern pour boire vne quarte du vin: and nous enuoyerons
ce pendant pour vostre amy.

Escoutez monsieur, vostre homme ne vient pas.

Mon amy, il est vray, que ie vous puisse constituer prisonier.

Vous auez prins mon argent pour vne heure.

Ie perds quarente solz en un autre endroit, i'ay des autres affairs plus
vrgens, que voulez vous que ie face? Baillez moy cinq solz and ie vous y
meneray par la ville iusques a cinq heures du soir.

Monsieur, ie suis pauure homme charge de femme and enfans.

C'est tout un pour cela. Baillez moy encore pour ma peine, autrement vous
verrez bien tossed ce que ie veux fair. ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille
a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew
eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij
ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu
ew oui oo-we om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci
see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m
fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci
see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Mon Dieu que feray-ie?

Ie suis mange tout vif.

Quelz oiseaux de proie! quelz cor beaux sont ceux-cy?

Quelle rayson ou conscience auez vous de prendre un escu d'auantage?

Virtue Dieu, demandez vous cela? Allons, allons, allons: par Dieu monsieur vous
entrerez en cour pour voir vostre process: ie ne puis moins fair par mon office
and serment.

O vous voyla en Cappadoce asteure: adieu homme de bien adieu. Il faut que
chantiez un peu la parmy les oyseaux Canariens.

Le Chemin. Chap. 13.
BElle fille ou est le chemin a la fontaine, a l'eglise, a la riuiere?

Tout droit deuant vous.

Hau paisant, villageois, villageoise, belle femme, monstrez moy le chemin a
Romme, ie vous en pry.

Nostre Dame a Romme, monsieur, il est bien loing iusques la. Quant a de moy ie
n'y fu iamais, mais pour y aller, il vous faudra passer par plusieurs grandes
villes and petits bourgades. Allez vous en d'icy premierement a Paris, and de
la demandez le grand chemin a Constantinoble: de la il y a cinq cens bonnes
heues and demye iusques en Jerusalem. Embarquez vous la pour prendre la routte
de Venice ou Marseilles, and vous trouuerez compaignie assez tous les iours
pour vous y conduire iusques a Romme.

C'est a mon aduis un peu le plus loing.

Par ou me faut il aller pour le plus court and le plus droict d'icy a Romme?

Passez d'icy a Paris, de Paris a Lions il n'y a que dix iournees: de la
iusques a Turin en Piedmont que sept, ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille
a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew
eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii
ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui
oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew un ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch
sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph
f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x
fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


de Turin iusques a Florence que douze, and de Florence en Romme que trois.

Le chemin est un peu fascheux a tenir sans vne guide.

Demandez aux bergiers and bergieres qui trouuerez en cheminant.

Le chemin est il sec, sablonneux, beau and ayse a tenir?

Il est pierreux and plein des dangiers a cause des brigands qui sont aux bois.

C'est un bon pais qui n'a pas vne lieue du mauuais chemin.

Fait on bonne justice en ces quartiers-cy?

Comme en tout autre lieu.

Lon en pend les laronneaux: mais les gros larrons s'en gardent bien.

Mettez moy en mon droit chemin, ie vous en pry.

Voyez vous vne potence la haut? ne l'approchez pas si vous estes sage, passez
le pont, suyuez le paue, tenez la champaigne, laissez la montaigne, costoyez la
vignoble, trauersez le pres, and vous auez tousiours le grand chemin deuant
vous.

Ie doubt bien de m'esgarer. On faille le chemin souuent en allant a Romme.

Mon Dieu, ie suis las and ne puis marcher plus auant.

Retournez en a Londres and montez vous sur le sommet du clochier saint Pol,
and de la prenez le premier vol a la Tour de Londres, de la volez au chasteau
de Dovre, de la au bastion de Calais en France, de la a la bastille de la
grande ville de Paris: de la a la fortress qui est sur les murailles
d'Orleans, de la a la Cittadele de Lion, de la au grand chasteau de Milan, de
la a l'arsenal de Venice, de la a l'amphitheatre de Verone, de la iusques au
Theater de Pise, ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun
au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an
ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo
iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon
ouille o-lheh u ew un ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge
zie ^i ziee g^ nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que
ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z
bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


de la au chasteau saint Ange, and vous y serez bien tossed en Romme.

Comment voulez vous que ie vole, ie n'ay point des aisles?

Allez y par mer.

Ie me veux doncques embarquer pour le destroit de Gilbraltar, puis apres
singlant par la cost de Catalogne, de Maiorque, Minorque, Sardeigne and
Corsique, ie prendray port a Ciuita Vecchia, and dela en un iour ie
cheuaucheray un mulet ou un asne iusques a Rome.

L'Asney sera donc si tossed ^ Romme que vous.

Et moy aussi tossed que mon asne.

Allez y doncques tous deux ensemble, ie vous en sou-hais un bon voyage.

Le Larron. Chap. 14.
QVi va la? Demeurez la. Ventre Dieu, sang Dieu, ca la bourse, viste, viste,
depeschez, rendez vous, descendez, ou ie vous tireray un boulet au ventre.

Ou est ta gibbeciere?

Vous me deuez trois cens cinquante escus, and m'en paierez asteure.

Il n'y a rien icy. O virtue de ma vie, il faut tuer ce vilain.

Ne me veus tu pas dire, ou sont tes escus?

Monsieur, prenez tout ce que i'ay, mais espargnez ma vie.

Qu'est-ce que tu ports en ta bougette?

C'est mon argent, monsieur, sauuez moy la vie and prenez le hardiment.

Ie le vous done.

Tu as bien d'auantage cousu dans ton pourpoint. N'as tu pas? di vilain, ie te
sauueray la vie.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun an o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee g^ nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Compagnon baillez moy le licol de ta manche.

Ne criez pas villain, car ie vous couperay la gorge.

Mot! mot! Iusques a ce que nous sommes bien loing d'icy.

Il est bien garrotte asteure.

Orca donc! compagnon larron, montons, gaingnons le haut.

O^ voulons nous aller? En France.

Hastons nous a Doure donc, car si sommes prins, nous serons penduz. Allons.

Le Matalot. Chap. 15.
GEns de bien qui se veut embarquer pour Calais, qu'il se haste: A Calais ho.

Abord ho.

Le vent est il propre?

Le vent est de la tramontane: nord and nord-oueste.

Combien prenez vous pour homme?

Un escu solei^: un couple d'escuz pour homme and Cheual.

La nef est elle bien armee: car i'ay peur de ces corsaires de Donkerke.

Ne les craigniez pas: car la nauire est bien equippee d'Artillerie and
Munition.

Mettez vous en prove. Faisons voile de par Dieu: Il fait calm and ne vente
grain.

Nous aurons le vent tantost en pouppe, ie voy bien aux nuees.

La maree croist: voyez les ondes saulter.

La mer commence a s'enfler and tumultuer du bas abisme.

Voyez comment ces fortes vagues battent les flan^s de nostre vaisseau.

Escoutez moy ces terribles bourrasques, comment ils sifflent a trauers noz
antennes. ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e
long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3.
person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew
oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre
chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Il fera bien tossed orage: la tempeste fait grand bruit.

Le ciel commence a tonner du haut.

Il foudroye, il esclaire, il pleut, il gresle:

Il vaut mieulx caller les voiles and lascher les chables.

Au Tillac ho: au Timon! Ceste vague nous emportera a tous les Diablez.

O Dieu le Seruateur:

O mes amiss: O que trois and quatre fois heureux sont ceux qui sont en terre
ferme plantans les Febues.

Dieu nous soit propice and nostre Dame de Lorrette.

Bou, bou, bous, bous: paisch, bo-bo-bous:

Be-be-be-bous: ho-ho-ho-zalas-helas!

Dieu nous soit en aid and la vierge Marie.

Paisch, be-be-bous, bou-bou-bous, bo-bo-bous.

Zalas-zalas, Hu-hu-hu-bou-bou-bous-bous-bous.

O Saint Jacques! Saint Pierre and Saint Christof^e!

O Saint Michel, Saint Nicholas, a ceste fois and iamais plus.

O Dieu nous sommes au fonds de la mer asteure.

Ie done dix-huict cent mill escus de reuenu a qui me mettra en terre.

Prenons icy port: desembarquons nous:

Ie vous donneray tout ce que i'ay au monde pour me mettre en terre.

Voulez vous prendre port au milieu de la mer Oceane?

Quelle horrible tempeste?

Virtue Gris qu'est-ce cy?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Prendrons nous sepulture icy enter ces vagues? Ie ne voy ny ciel ny terre.

Il faut que piss un peu. Ie pardonne a tout le monde: Ie meurs mes amys.

Adieu a trestous.

La tempeste est finie. O qu'il fait beau temps derechef.

Vrayement voyci bien esclaire and bien tonne.

Ie croy, que tous les Diables sont deschainez au iourd'huy, ou que Proserpine
la bonne Dame est en trauaille d'enfant.

Croyez que tous les cinq cent mill centaine millions des Diables dansent a
sonettes.

Tonnez Diables, pettez, rottez, fientez.

Bren pour la vague. Nous sommes au port de Calais, Iettons les anchres.

Canonier, tirez vne piece d'Artillerie: nous sommes sauuez. Ie m'en voy loger
chez mon hostess aux trois Roys, ou au Dragon verd.

Le Malade. Chap. 16.
DIeu y soit. Dormez vous?

Si ie pouuoye dormir, ie seroye a demi gueri.

Vous souspirez comme un porceau amoureux d'vne truye.

Ie ne fay que resuer, toussir, cracher, and esternuer.

C'est bon sign, si vous en eschappez.

I'ay aussi la foire chaude and froid flux du ventre.

Quel autre mal auez vous?

I'ay aussi la gratelle, la petite o^ la gross verolle qui m'escrolle.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Un mal vient rarement seul.

O que la test me fait aussi grand mal.

C'est donc le mal de Naples.

O qui me deliurera de mes douleurs?

Attendez i'ay icy un cemittre qui fera l'office.

Qui ont este voz medecins?

Les plus experts du monde es Vrines: Car ils m'ont mis de mal sepmaine en mal
an, and m'ont change un chancre Francois en un biscancaro Napolitain.

Vous estes vous fait saigner?

Le Barbier m'a tire trois onces de sang de la vein capitalle, and le medecin
dix de la vein crumenalle, and m'a ordonne un Recipe Pullos Septem, etc.

Que dist-il de vostre mal?

Ie dit que c'est le mal d'Italie, de France, d'Espaigne, d'Allemaigne and
d'Angleterre.

Quel mal est cela?

Le mal Catholic, le mal commun, le gran mal.

Ne scauez vous pas autre nom?

On l'appelle la verolle en France: Ie ne scay comment on l'appelle en
Angleterre.

Parlez bas, voycy Monsieur le Docteur.

Mon amy ouurez la bourse: ie die la bouche. Marchez un peu.

Tout bellement: Sans cholere: prenez patience: tout ira bien. Prenez ces
pillules demain au matin and vous vous porterez bien par la grace de Dieu.

Iaymeroye plustost manger vne merde que de mascher and aualler ces pillules,
tant else sont ameres.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Vous auez tort de vous mescontenter de bonnes receiptes and medecines, prens
bon courage, adieu.

Adieu mons. le docteur. O que ie suis malade?

Patience, helas! que ie vous plains bonhommeau.

Il n'y a remede asteure.

Courage, courage, vous serez gueri bien tossed.

Le mal vient tousiours a cheual and s'en return a pied.

Le Drapier. Chap. 4.
MOns. sire, seigneur, homme de bien. Quel drap voulez vous veoir? Demandez
vous bonnes sorts des draps. Venes-ca, ie vous y feray a bon march.

De quelle couleur en demandez vous?

Monstrez moy un beau escarlat, vne frise gauloise, un revesche d'Irlandres.

Auez vous un beau tanne de France? Que ie voye un verd de Londres. Monstrez
moy un Cramoysi bien fin and large. I'en ay le meilleur de Londres pour vous.

En voyla un de bonne laise. Regardez le bien a la l^miere. Maniez le. La
couleur en est seure.

Elle ne se deschargera point.

Combien vendez vous la verge, l'aulne, la piece entiere, la demy-verge, le
drap d'vne robe, le drap d'vn manteau?

En un mot ie le voudrois vendre dix solz six deniers la verge, quinze solz
l'aulne, saize solz huict deniers l'aulne and le demy-quartier.

Bien mesurez cinq aulnes and demye. Faites bonne mesure, ie vous ^n pry.

Empreud, deux, trois, quatre, cinq, and demye, a bonne mesure.

Que vous plaist il auoir, mademoiselle? un estamet pour vous fair un
cotillon, ou un pourpre pour un deuant de robe? De quelle couleur en voulez
vous auoir? du blanc, du noir, du gris, ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh
aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee
eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie
ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo
oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce
se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn m^h gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu
m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ^sa sce sse
sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


du violet, du verd, de la couleur meslee, de la couleur de rat ou brebis, du
iaulne, du bleuf, de l'orenge, de pourpre, cramoisi, bleu celeste, leonat, etc.
I'ay de toutes couleurs and a tous prix.

Combien gracieuses and rondes sont les langues de ces ieunes drapiers en
Watling-street?

L'Hostelerie. Chap. 17.
DIeu vous guard mon host. Bien venu monsieur.

Seray-ie logeicy pour meshuy?

Combien estes vous?

Harry, ma best, Roncin and moy.

Vous serez bien traicte. Entrez s'il vous plaist, on vous tyrera les bottes
and les esperons tantost.

Vallet d'estable, ie te pry, frotte bien mon cheual, and luy baille un
botteau de foin, and un picotin d'auoyne.

Ie luy penseray bien monsieur: n'en doubtez pas.

Mon host, quand souperons nous? I'ay bon appetit.

Quand il vous plairra mo^sieur, le souper est pressed. Or auant lauons les mains.

Sus sus a table messieurs.

N'attendrons nous pas les autres?

Si ferons comme l' Abbe attend ses moynes: ascauoir en mangeant tant qu'il
peust.

Messieurs mangez s'il vous plaist. Beuuez a la ronde, Vous n'estes pas ioyeux.

Faites bonne chere de ce que vous auez. C'est iour de ieusne au i^urd'huy.
C'est la vigile de nostre dame. Voyla des oeufs en l'escaille, au beurre,
pochez and frits Il faut que ie mange de la chair, car ie n'ayme point les
oeufs, ny le poisson.

Voyla donc un bon chapponet. C'est vne viande bien friande. Scaymon, quand
l'estomac est* en bonne disposition.

Ie suis d'opinion qu'vn chappon rosti vault mieux a manger, qu'vn gigot de
mouton crud.

ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew un ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Et moy i'aymeroye plustot boire du vin que de l'eau.

Voyla un chappon gras, vne poule d'Inde, vne oye grass: vne douzaine
d'alouettes, un couple des bons and gras lapins, commencez la ou voudrez.

Et voyci vne test de veau.

Que vault vne bonne test auec un bon cerueau?

Elle est inestimable: mais la test sans langue ne feist oncques bonne
harangue.

Qui veut manger du poisson? voyla vne bonne lamproye, C'est la proye d'vn roy,
and voyci vne trenche de Saumon, qui vault l'auoir de Solomon.

Chair fait chair and poisson fait poisson and le bon vin fait bon vin and
vinaigre.

Voyla des grenouilles and des escargotz.

On les en mange bien en France and en Italy, mais en Angleterre on n'en tient
pas conte.

Ho friar Iean, ne mangez vous pas de ce bon poisson?

Pour vous en dire la rayson, il y a tell saison, que le poisson est poison.

Tastez de ceste truite: humez de ce broued d'anguilles, cela vous eschauffera
les boyaux, and les lauera doucement pour fair bon ventre.

De tous oyseaux ie n'ayme point l'oye ny l'oyson.

De tous poissons i'estime l'anguille poison.

De tous poissons frais fors la tenche, prens l'aisle de la perdrix, ou la
cuisse d'vne nonnain.

Ie aim fort le blanc d'vn chapon. En cela vous ne ressemblez point aux
Renards, car des chapons, poules, and pouletz qu'ils prennent, iamais ne
mangent ilz le blanc. Pourquoy? pource qu'ilz n'ont point des cruisiniers a les
cuire.

Lacquay du vin, versez a moy. A vous mon host, a vous mon hostess, ie vous y
feray rayson icy.

Ie croy qu'il gele, il fait si grand f^oid Leuons nous messires and approchons
nous du feu.

Le bon Dieu de Parady,
Soit pour tous ces biens beny.
ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew un ewm um ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Le coucher. Chap. 18.
IE me sens un peu mal dispos apres souper.

L'estomac me fait mal.

Mon host ie me veux aller reposer. I'ay grand envy de dormir. Le sommeil
m'est tomb des-ia dedans mes yeux. Qu'on me monstre ma chamber.

Quand vous voulez, la fille vous y monstrera le chemin. Bon soir mon host,
bon soir bon-nuict mon hostess. Dieu vous doint bonne nuict and bon repos a
trestous.

Il vous faut monter par icy monsieur. Voicy vostre chamber, voicy vostre lict,
voyla les priuez, and voyci un pot de chamber.

Ridez les courtines. Prestez moy un couure-chef ou vne coiffe. I'ay un bonnet
de nuict en mon sein.

Voz linceux sont netz.

Regardez, qu'ilz soient bien secs, ie vous pry.

Ie les ay seiche au pres du feu.

Tirez mes chausses* Couurez moy de ma rob.

I'ay peu de couerture. Donnez moy un autre oreiller, ie ne puis coucher si bas.

Estes vous bien asteure? en voulez vous encore de couuerture? Ne vous plaist
il autre chose?

Nenny pour le present. Dormezbien.

Escoutez Gaudinette, baisez moy vne fois mamie, deuant que vous en allez.
Plustost mourir, que baiser un homme en son lict.

Baisez moy, and ie vous rendray voz braceletz, que ie vous ostay l'autre iour
en iouant auec vous.

Ne me parlez plus, ie vous en pry de baiser n'y d'amour, mais rendez moy mes
bracelets, car autrement que me diront mon pere and ma mere? Ils se
courrouceront a moy.

Non feront, non feront.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded, after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Si feront, ie vous asseure: mais c'est tout un* ie leur diray qu'vn larron me
les a desrobbez.

Escoute ie te pry, Gaudinette dys moy vne chose: lequel de nous deux aim
plus l'autre: ou vous moy, ou moy vous?

Quant est de moy, ie ne vous hays point: car comme Dieu command i'ayme tout
le monde.

Mais a propos n'estes vous pas amoureuse de moy?

Ie vous ay ia dit tant de fois, que vous ne me tenissiez plus tells parolles,
si vous m'en parlez encore, ie vous monstreray que ce n'est pas a moy que vous
vous deuiez addresser.

Vous estes fort obstinee, ie voy bien.

Rendez moy mes bracelets donc, si vous voulez.

Comment mamie voz bracelets? Non feray par mon serment: mais ie vous en veux
bien donner d'autres: En aymerez vous mieulx vne ceincture de soye? Escoutez,
on me son. Non fait.

Gaudinette, que faites vous la haut, si longs temps?

Ie viens incontinent ma mere.

Ne me voulez vous pas baiser auant que partir?

C'est pour vne autre fois: lon m'appelle asteure:

Ie seray tancee. Ie ne peux baiser les hommes.

Mon pere sera fasche* Ma mere vient. Que voulez vous fair? Laissez moy aller:
lon me tuera tantost.

Dieu vous doint bon soir, and bonne sante Monsieur. Bon soir la belle: bonne
nuict Gaudinette.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Les Spadacin. Chap. 19.
BOn iour ait vostre Seig. Seigneur Vespasien.

Ma foy les amiss se rencontrent plus souuent que montaignes.

Foy de Gentilhomme ie suis bien aise de veoir vostre magnificence en bonne
sante.

Que ie vous face vne accollade. He Seigneur Valerien! mon grand amy, mon grand
cousin. ca couillon que ie t'estreigne les couillons a force de t'accoller les
cuisses. Touchez la.

L'amour pass le gant and l'eau le houseau.

Vous ne tenez plus conte de petits compagnons.

Non, non, ie ne vis sinon auec les Princes and enter les grands Seigneurs.

D'ou vient la Seigneurie vostre?

Ie viens de veoir les dix-sept terres du pais bas.

Vous estes deuenu trop rich.

Bren pour l'argent, ie n'en auray quelque iour que trop: car i'ay vne pierre
Philosophalle qui m'attire l'argent des bourses comme l'aymant attire te fer.

Vous estes malade a ce que ie voy a vostre physiognomie and i'entends le mal.

Quel de grace? Vous auez un flux de bourse aussi bien que moy.

Ne vous en souciez pas: i'ay encore six solz and maille qui ne veirent oncq
pere ny mere, and ne vous faudront non plus que la verolle en vostre necessite.

Tes males mules, poltron. I'ay plus d'argent que tu ne penseras pas. ai sound
e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short eh
eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person plur. of
the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew ^i oe' oine
oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um
eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga
gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2
vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre
tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Car i'ay soissante and trois manieres d'en recouurer tousiours en mon besoing.

La plus honorable and plus commune est en vollant sur le chemin.

Que le Chancre te demange vilain. Die, n'as tu point d'argent pauure Diable?

Quoy done? La Fortune me veut fauoriser un iour, d'auoir vne bourse longue
d'vn bras, pleine de beaux Augelotz ou des Escuz au soleil.

Vous auez parle masque. Que veux tu dire a un homme qui te monstrera dix ou
douze bougettes pleines des vieux nobles a la Rose, chichinos and ducats
d'Hongrie.

Si tu me les monstres, ie me veux creuer les yeulx.

Agard, agard vilain. Seignes-toy, fais-le sign de la croix a ton nez.

Ie croy que tu as plus des couillons que des escuz.

Car ce sont des iectons ou des escuz au palais que tu tiens la. Mon amy,
escoute, tu n'as passetemps aucun en ce monde: ie n'ay plus que le Roy, and si
voulois t'allier auec moy nous y ferions Diables.

Non, non! par Saint Adauras: car tu seras vne fois pendu.

Qui doibt pendre ne sera iamais noye.

He gross pecore!

Crains-tu le pendre? Tu seras vne fois enterre, lequel est plus honorable ou
l'air ou la terre?

I'aimeroye plustost perir en l'eau enter les arenes dorees de la riuiere de
Plata es Indes Occidentales.

Veux-tu venir en Flandres auec moy?

Quoy fair?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci sce ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. e f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


A battre la strade? Nous y ferons la poudre voler, croyez.

Seigneur Boniface me veux-tu changer un escu?

Croyez moy ie n'ay pas de la monnoye.

Ie veux des testons ou des quarts d'escus.

Ie ne te changeray pas ny liard ny maille par Dieu.

Prestez moy donc cinq solz a la pareille.

Ie n'ay point d'argent chez moy, vous dis-ie.

Si est-ce pourtant qu'il faut que me prestiez cinq solz pour payer mon
ordinaire, vueillez ou non.

Par le sang Bieu ie ne l'ay pas.

Allez vous en, vous estes un gueux pour tout potage.

Va tu es vilain toy mesme.

Voulez vous dire que ie suis un vilain.

Il est vilain qui fait de vilennye, ou qui n'a point d'argent a boire auec ses
amiss, and si vous estes noble monstrez ta gentilesse: payez pint tant
seulement.

Ie ne voy goutte, vous dis-ie.

De quoy vis-tu asteure?

De l'air comme fait l'Esturgeon.

Si ie ne craignois mentir contre mon honneur ie dirois que vous fussiez homme
de bien.

Si vous diriez autrement ie vous feroye mentir par la gorge.

Ne me desmentez pas ie vous pry compagnon.

Ne prenez pas en mal part ce que i'ay dit.

Mort de ma vie ne me donnez pas le dementir: car ie vous y donneray un coup de
poignard dans la gorge.

Le dites vous? Il y a belle place icy.

Mets la main a l'espee, ie vous romperay la test en neuf endroits.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi eo' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. e f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


cap de saint Arnauld vous passerez par mes mains asteure, ca coquin, ca, boute,
boute.

Hau saint Siobe cap de Gascogne, sus ho hillot de tous les Diable^, defendez
vous.

Par la chair ie renie: par le sang ie renague, p^^ le corpse ie renonce ma part
de Papimanie, si vous eschappez mes mains asteure, ie vous tueray comme un
Porceau.

Auise que mon verdun ne soit plus long ^^e ton espade: ie hais pis que la mort
celuy qui combatte sur l'aduantage des cousteaux.

Sus, sus, boutons, battons nous gaillards and bien au point frottons nostre
lard.

Ie ne veux pas combattre, allons plustot boire sur noz espees.

Ie ne m'en soucye pas. Si tu veux battre, battons, si tu veux boire beuuons.

Nous sommes bien arriuez ensemble, un aueugle meine l'autre.

Il y a dangier que ne tombions tous deux en quelque tavern.

On nous donneroit a boire donc pour nous en fair sortir.

N'auez vous nulle part credit?

I'en ay tant que le Roy, mais c'est loing d'icy.

Ie croy que c'est plus outre les colomnes d'Hercules, ou au royaume de Perse.

En deca un peu, en Polongne ou en Prussie.

Ouy, oui en Cracouie.

Il y a iusques-la sur mon serment, plus de cinq cens lieues de France.

Allons y, fust-ce bien si loing comme aux

Indes Orientales.

Allez y donc tout seul, car ie ne vous tiendray pas compagnie.

Voyci un drosle, il payera tousiours pint, chopine, ou quarte, nous
droslerons tantost.

Dieu vous salve seigneur, ie rencontray l'autre iour vostre ennemy capital, ai
sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short
eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person plur. of
the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oy oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. o or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


and luyfey la figue soubs la cappe brauement: ie luy baillay aussi un estoc a
trauers du bras dextre qui luy passa tout outre so^ pourpoint iusques au could
senestre, and le cuy day tuer tout a fait. Ie le fey par Dieu en vostre
querelle, and pour l'amour de vous, car autrement entendez, ie ne m'eusse pas
hazard pour cinq cens escuz.

Allons boire, allons boire au soleil en ca la Port boyteuse.

Madame de ceans qu'on nous tire chopine.

Monsieur, ie boy a vous.

Seigneura vostre bonne grace. Granmercy mon bon captain, ie vous y feray
raison icy.

He monsieur mon amy, vous scauez bien que ie vous ay tousiours aim and tenu
pour vray homme de bien.

Nous sommes par Dieu amiss and demeurerons tant que viurons au despit du grand
diable d'enfer.

Ie vous iure Styx and Acheron en vostre presence, que voyla un espee, a propos
si vous en auez affair, elle est bien a vostre gentil commandment, corpse and
biens tripes and boyaux.

Vous auez certes vne espee bien gentile.

Voyez bien ceste lame, regarde^ la bien, ie vous iure que c'estoit l'estoc
propre du prince de Parme* and de son flanc propre il me l'a baille enter mes
mains propres.

Pour quelque service que vous l'auiez faict paraduenture.

Or bien vous plaist il me commander quelque chose que ie puisse fair pour
vous? car ie m'en vay monsieur.

Vostre seigneurie se contentera me fair ce plaisir de me prester cent escuz
iusques a mon retour de Venice.

ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi eo' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew un ewm um ewm y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Par la barbe, que ie port, si ie les auoye, vous les auriez de bon coeur.

Vostre seigneurie me priest donc un cheual.

Ie n'ay, croyez moy, ny mule, ny iument, ny monture, ny page, ny vallet.

O patience des aueugles! Orca adieu donc iusques a reuoir.

Ie pry le dieu Mercure auec Dis le pere aux escuz longuement en sante vous
conseruer.

Le Braggard. Chap. 20.
SAint George, ca qu'on m'apporte ma lance, mon espee a deux mains, and mon
corpse de cuyrasse, ie veux estre arm de pied en cap.

Vrayement il y a de la belle besongne taillee icy pour gens de guerre. Asteure
qu'il fallust marcher contre ce chien de Thrace, Mahumet Dieu des Turcs and des
Arabes, nous en sommes semonduz en France pour donner secours au roy de France
contre ces Saracins des Ligueux. O pleust a Dieu que Charles le quint fust en
vie.

O que test martiale! O quel Roland furieux! Ie debvrois este honestement
discipline es affairs militaires, ayant command vingt cinq ans captain
general enter les Hongres and Polonois, and hasarde ma propre person en plus
de trente sanguineuses batailles.

ca, ca armures de malice, ie dis, de milice.

Le preux soudart ne doibt estre moms arm d'aduis que des armures.

Ou ie ne puis preualoir du cuir de Lion, i'appliqueray la peau de Renard.

Considerez les cas de hasard sagement, iamais il ne les fault pas poursuiure
iusques a leur periode: car il conuient a tous cheualiers reuerentement
traicter leur bonne fortune sans la molester ny gehenner. ai sound. e ay e ain
ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh
elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i
ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou
o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c
ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee
gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z sca ssa
sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Tousiours deuant que marcher ie delibere de ce qu'est a fair* a sin que ie ne
ressemble aux Atheniens qui ne consultoyent ^amais, si non apres le cas faict.

Ie suis sage. Vous l'estes.

Ie suis cheualeureux and preux soudard. Vous l'estes.

Ie suis courageux, vertueux, magnanime.

Vous l'estes.

Ie suis resolu, noble, genereux and magnific.

Vous l'estes.

Ie suis loyal, honorable, bien arm, haut-monte, bien delibere, hasardeux,
audacieux, heroique, fin, and cauteleux comme le serpent qui tenta Eve.

Vous l'estes.

Ie suis extraict de race noble. Car m'entendez vous bien, il y auoit un
certain Chalbrot, qui engendra Sarabrot, le beau-pere de Nembrot, non pas de
celuy qui bastit la tour de Babel, ains d'vn autre de la race de Gallafre, le
cousin de Bruslefer, qui fut friar a Maschefain, l'ayeul de Sortibrant de
Conymbres, le nepueu d'Atlas, qui auec ses espaules garda le ciel de'tomber:
iceluy Atlas estant ne and naitif de Marocco en Barbary, (vous autres messires
l'auez bien cognu) fut cousin germain a Gemmagog qui auec ses deux mains mist,
il y a long temps, les deux montaignes de croye aupres de Cantabrige,
university tres-fameuse en Angleterre, afin que les escholiers y allassent
quelques fois passer leur temps la, cestuy-ci fut compere a Fierabras, duquel
escrit Merlin Coccaie en son liver de la patrie des Demons, qu'il fut le
premier de ce monde qui ioua aux detz auec ses besicles au nez. Don't
descendirent apres le grand geant Oromedon, le pere du

Briaire qui auoit cent mains, and Offot le fillieul de Corinee, duquel vous
pouuez voir l'image au Palais de Londres, qui m'est parent de loing: car de son
noble lignage i'en suis descendu. ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille
a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew
eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii
ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui
oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch
sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph
f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t
x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




I'ay leu de voz ancestres es gestes de quatre fills d'Aymon.

Ne trouuez vous pas qu'ilz ont este tres-illustres par leurs horribles faits
d'armes?

Ilz ont faits de belles prouesses certes contre les Sarrasins.

I'enrage Diables, i'enrage, tenez moy, Diables, tenez moy.

Hau viet-daze grand Diable d'Enfer, esueillez tes endormis Cyclopes: Toy
Vulcan qui clopes, auec tes cousins Asteropes, Brontes, Steropes, Polypheme and
Pyracmon. Ie vous y mettray en besongne. Ie m'en done a cent pipes de vieulx
Diables, en cas que si ne voulez pas combatre, si ie ne vous y face manger les
deux oeufs de Proserpine.

Vrayement Hercules n'est rien a vous, qui estant au berceau tua les deux
Serpents: car les dits Serpents estoyent bien petits and fragiles.

Ou est ce tant furieux Hercules? Ie le vouldrois combatre pour un petit quart
d'heure.

Il vous feroit chier vinaigre deuant ^out le monde.

Ou est Hector ce garcon Troyen? I'ay grand envy de rompre vne lance contre sa
cuyrasse.

Ou est Alexandre le grand yuurongne de Greece?

Ie le feray boire d'autant. A gens de guerre ne faut bon vin espargne^.

Ou est Achilles le Gre^ Captain des Myrmidoniens? i'enuoyeroye son ame quant
and quant en Enfer.

Ou est ce petit compagnon Ulysses? Il me feroit un message a I'luton.

Ou est ce peureux and chetif couard Iulles Caesar? Ie luy cheuaucheroye a
grand coup* de picque and de Lance.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Vous contez sans vostre host.

I'ay grand peur que devant qu'il soit nuict, on vous estrillera a grand coup
de Musquette and d'Arquebouse.

Hon! que ie ne suis roy de France pour quatre vingts dix ou cent ans: par Dieu
ie vous mettrois en chien courtaut messieurs les fuyarts de Pauie.

Ie hay plus que poison un homme qui fuist quand il faut iouer des cousteaux.

Ie crains la mort non plus qu'vn Papillon, ou la morsure d'vne pulce a
l'aureille: and quant a moy ie ne crains pas de combattre a vne armee entiere,
si ce n'est de ces mescreants Tartres, Cannibales, Indiens, and Moscouites, qui
tirent a tort a trauers, deca de la, par cy par la, de long de large, dessus
dessoubs.

A la verite les prouesses de Camille, Scipion, Pompee, Caesar and Themistocles
ne sont pas si grandes que les vostres.

Ie tue les gens comme Diomedes tuoit les Thraces, and comme Vlyxes ie mets les
corpse es pieds de mes cheuaux, ainsi que raconte Homere.

Ie suis pourtant d'aduis que si les ennemis se rendent que les y preniez a
mercy and rencon. Car clemence est vne vraye virtue royale.

Ho mord boeuf, sang boeuf. Par la virtue mon amy si ie ne boute tout a feu and
a sang ie renie ma vie.

Vous m'effrayez a ainsi iurer.

Tu es vne best de la montagne.

Ce ne sont que parolles heroiques and couleur^ de la Rhetorique martiale pour
aorner mon langage.

De leur mettre tous a fill d'espee: c'est chose trop cruelle cela.

Ie suis homme martial, que voulez vous? ca, ca, ca, combien sont ces,
canailles, racailles?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ^sa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Par la mort d'vn veau ie les estime moins qu'vn Chappon rosti, car: Ce ne sont
que bragards de France,
Hardis a la bouteille and fuyards a la Lance.


Mon amy ie choque si rudement sur les ennemis, que ie les renuerse comme
porcs: aux vns quant and quant i'escarbouille la ceruelle, aux autres ie romps
les bras, aux autres ie taille les nez, poche les yeux, fends les maschoires,
enfonce les dens en gueule, and si aucun se veult sauuer en fuyant, a iceluy ie
fay la test voler en cinq cens quatre vingts and neuf pieces.

Si quelcun cry Saint George: Ie luy mets le pied sur la gorge: S'il cry
Saint Barbe, ie luy arrache la barbe. Si nostre Dame de Lorrette: ie luy
taille la test.

Mettez vous en order, les ennemis s'approchent.

Ie suis arm a l'aduantage, la lance au poing, monte comme un Saint George.

Voyez le camp des ennemis. Ils sont campez sur vne montaignette. O ce n'est
qu'vn microcosme des mousches ou guespes.

Ilz ne sont pas en si grand nombre comme auoit Xerxes, sont ilz?

Il auoit, si croyez a Herodote and Troge Pompee, trente cent mill
combattants, and toutes-fois Themistocles a peu des gens les desconfist.

Baste, ie les vous y rendray a rostir ou bouillir, a fricasser ou mettre en
paste. Or escoute le tambour: le camp des ennemis n'est gueres loing.

Les battailles sont rengees: le combat martial commence pesle-mesle.

L'artillerie commence a foudroyer les murailles.

Voyla un coup de canon qui a emporte l'auantgarde au Diable.

L'alarme commence a s'eschauffer. Les trompettes sonnent a la retraicte.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am an an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci sce ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


L'Infanterie est toute quasi desfaicte.

Les guidons des cheuaux legiers se retyrent.

Ils prennent carriere verse moy: O que pluye de plomb! O que fumee de foudre
and de feu? Ie fuiray par Dieu.

Demosthenes dit que l'homme fuyant combattera derechef. I'ay grande peur
d'estre tue and massacre a ce coup.

Qu'est ce fuiart la? Qu'est-ce couard-la?

Courage, courage, pourquoy tremblez vous?

Ie crainds de mourir.

Ca, ca, ca, tuez, tuez.

O messieurs sauuez moy la vie. I'ay le mot de guet: ie suis de vostres. Ie
suis amy.

Qui estes vous? D'ou estes vous? Que faites vous icy?

Ie suis le Seigneur Cocodril. Ha! que dis tu?

Messieurs ie suis pauure Diable, ie vous requiers qu'ayes de moy mercy: i'ay
encores quelqu'escu pour payer ma bien-uenue.

Vous estes un espion, ie vous couperay la gorge.

Ha Mons. mon amy, c'est moy, ie me rends a vous.

Il te sera bien force te render vilain, car ensemble tu rendras l'ame a tous
les Diables.

Helas! Ie suis cruellement naure, ie suis mort, tue, massacre. Ie m'en vay
reprendre le chemin du premier hospital.

La conclusion du parliament des Babillards.
REposons nous icy un peu soubs l'ombre de ceste arbre: a la fraischeure.

Ie me veux asseoir sur ceste piece du bois.

Et moy vis a vis de toy Antoyne.

Ou te mettras tu Pierre?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo we om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Moy? ie me mettray sur ceste pierre.

Ostez vous de la: vous m'empeschez de veoir les passants.

Ie voy vne nauire qui faict voile verse nous.

C'est vne Carraque de deux mil tonneaux.

Voyez vous ce petit garcon auec la bannirolle en sa main?

S'il tomb en la mer, il sera noye.

Non seroit, car il scait bien nager.

O qu'il glisse par les cordeaux.

Le mast de ce nauire est fort grand and espais.

Ie croy qu'il est creu aux Indes Occidentales.

Comment le scauez vous? Auez vous este aux Indes auec les Espagnolz?

Comme si lon ne pouuoit rien scauoir d'vne region, si on ny a este? Ie voy
bien saint Paul d'icy.

Il y a me semble quelques pigeons sur le sommet du clochier.

Ils sont des hommes, fol and sot garcon, mais ils y semblent a les contempler
des corbeaux, ou plustost des moyneaux.

Escoute, on son la trompette la dessus, quel sot est cela.

Il son un point de guerre pour les dames de Londres. O que le temps est
beau! Il ya a bien du plaisir parmy ces champs verdoyants.

Escoutez moy ceste alouette qui chante. O qu'elle monte bien haut iusques aux
nuees! Il me souuient asteure du Bartas le Poet Francois, qui a compose quatre
verse tresexcellents sur son chant: La gentile Alouette auec son tyre-lire
Tirel'yre a l'ire, and tiri-lyrant vire
Verse la voute du Ciel, puis son volvers ce lien
Vire, and desire dire, adieu Dieu, adieu Dieu.


O que la petite chanteresse fait bien trembler sa voix!

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Ou es tu Line tresdoux musicien auec ton luc d'luoire? Ou es tu Amphion
tresdocte harpeur de la Greece? ou es tu Orpheus, auec ton cystre d'argent? ou
es tu Arion auec ta musicque qui feist dancer les poissons en la mer? Venezca,
apprenez icy des lecons nouuelles. Certes ces quatre qui sont celebrez en tous
autheurs Grecs and Latins pour auoir este tresexcellents musiciens n'ont iamais
sceu contrefaire ceste petite musicienne.

Escoutez, voyla bien un autre oiseau qui chante as^eure.

C'est un merle ou un Rossignol.

Le Rossignol ne chante que du soir and matin.

Ou est il, ie vous pry?

C'est un Rossignol ie l'entends bien.

Ne le voy tu pas pose sur un rameau?

O qu'il chante melodieusement: sans se donner relasche: and ne cesse point!

Il ne se faut point esmerueiller s'il chante doucement, veu qu'il est
d'Athenes, ou les vagues de la mer flottent aussi contre les riuages par mesure.

Pline escrit qu'il chante deuant les hommes plus longuement and plus
soigneusement.

Qu'en est la cause? Ie te la deceleray.

Le Coucou and le Rossignol chantent en mesme saison de l'an, ascauoir, au
printemps depuis la mi-Auril iusqu'a la fin de May ou enuiron. Ces deux oiseaux
vindrent en different de la douceur de leur chant, on cherche un judge, and par
ce que la dispute estoit du son, l'asne fut trouue fort commode a ceste
cognoissance, lequel plus que toutes les autres bestes a les oreilles grandes.
L'asne ayant repousse le Rossignol, duquel il disoit n' entendre la harmony,
adiugea la victoire au coucou, le Rossignol en appella par deuant l'homme,
lequel quand il le voit, incontinent il meine sa cause, and chante diligemment,
a fin de fair sa cause bonne pour se venger du tort que l'asne luy avoit fait.

ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


I'entends maintenant vne chose digne d'vn poet.

Quoy donc? en attendois tu vne digne de philosophe? Demand la a ces nouueaux
maistres es arts de l'vniuersite.

Plusieurs d'eux sont philosophes quant aux robes seulement and non pas de
cerueau.

Di donc que ce sont docteurs de Valence auec robes longues and court science.

Mais escoutez encore nostre Rossignol.

Ie vous raconteray quelque chose du chant de Rossignol traduite d'vn bon
autheur.

Qui est l'homme au monde (dit il) tant grossier, lourd stupide ou hebete, qui
ne s'estonne, and qui ne soit raui d'vne incroyable delectation, escoutant la
melody, qui sort du Rossignol, and comme vne voix si hautaine and harmonieuse
peut issir d'vn si petit tuyau? Outre qu'il persevere si obstinement en son
chant que la vie luy defaudra aussi tossed que la voix: de sort qu'il semble,
qu'il ait este instruit de quelque maistre a chanter en music, car il
contrefait tantost le bas, tantost le haut, tantost la taille, tantost le
dessus, and apres qu'il est bien ennuye de gringoter il contrefait sa voix, and
iugeriez que c'est un autre oiseau qui ne chante plus que le plain chant: puis
tout en un coup il penetre si haut, qu'il se passionne, se pasme, and demeure
quasi extatique par vne infinite de melodieux passages, qui rauissent l'ame
iusques au ciel, non seulement des hommes, mais des autres petits oiselets,
lesquels il charm and arreste de son chant, and les conuie par sa douceur a
l'escouter and tascher a le contrefaire, and luy desrober quelque chose de sa
melody. Et non content de cela vous le verrez instruire ses petits, les
prouoquer a semblable harmony, leur apprenant tantost a obseruer leur tons, a
les conduire d'vne mesme haleine, les vns en longueur aspirer, les autres
tantost courber les notes entieres, soudain les muer par fainctes, puis les
distinguer and couper en minimes crochues, tantost fait trembler sa voix,
tantost la transform en tant de sorts, ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh
aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee
eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie
zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu
ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci
see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m
fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse
sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


qu'il n'y a artifice human qui la sceust contrefaire.

Ie suis quasi raui certes.

Sans doubt les hommes ont apprins la Music des oiseaux.

Democrite a este auditeur du Rossignol, tesmoing Aristophane en sa comedy du
chant des oiseaux.

I'ay prins vne saulterelle auec vne main, and vne petite grenouille auec
l'autre.

Que ie les voye de grace?

Ie les mettray en ton sein Antoyne.

Ne faites pas, ie vous pry.

Pourquoy t'en fuys tu? Vien ca, te di-ie, ie ne te feray point de mal.

Helas, les pouures prisoniers! laissez les aller, laissez les saulter.

Agard, quel beau sault voyla?

Ilz se sont sauuez pauures animaulx dedans l'herbe.

Ce monceau de terre est plein des fourmis.

Ils me piquent les fesses.

Ilz sont entrez par ma brayette. I'ay plus de mill en mes haut-des-chausses.

Les sentez vous piquer en bonne foy?

I'ay arrache les testes de plus d'vne vingtaine.

Ne les tuez pas, laissez les viure.

C'est vne gentile vermin.

Vous auez trouble messires de leur parliament, qui sont assemblez en ce monceau
de terre pour les affairs de leur republique. Ilz se sont faschez contre vous.
Ilz vous piqueront a bon escient.

Retyrons nous ailleurs en quelque part.

Mettons nous a l'abri dessoubs ceste muraille.

Ostez vous de la mon friar Nathanael. Pourquoy?

Ne voyez vous pas la gross Araignee qui pend par un petit filet?

O le gros vilain! Il est brave chasseur a mousches and papillons.

N'auez vous iamais veue le combat enter L'araignee and la Mousche? ai sound e
ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille
e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the
verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh
oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un
ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge
gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z
sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.




Non: vous n'auez donc iamais veue la battaille donnee enter Caesar and Pompee.

Pourquoy, sont ils si braues guerroyeurs?

Beaucoup plus que le Rat and la grenouille es Fables d'Aesope.

Regardez ce diable de Tyran. Combien des mousches a miel, des mouscherons and
papillons il a tue.

Regardez les corpse morts dedans ses rets.

C'est vne chose merueilleuse de la Nature de cest animal.

Contez nous en quelque chose gentil babillard.

C'est vne chose presque monstreuse en nature de la nature de ces Araignees, de
qui les f^mmes and filles sont disciples, and ont app^ins d'elles a filer and a
fair leur toils, and les pescheurs a fair leur rets. Mais else ont beaucoup
meilleure grace and plus grand advantage en leurs industries: La femme and la
fille font les toiles and filetz, and le mary chasse d'autre part pour leur
nourriture, and est aux aguetz cache dans quelque trou en la muraille pour
attendre and surprendre vne best pour la fair tomber en ses retz: and encore
que son corpse ne soit gueres plus gros qu'vn pois, il a toutefois tant de
viuacite and industry qu'il prend quelque fois de grosses mousches and petits
lezars en ses retz, and si observe si bien la saison de chasser qu'il semble
estre astrologue: il est au contraire de nous qui attendons le beau temps: mais
il chasse quand le temps est nubileux, qui nous est un presage de pluye selon
les deux grands Philosophes Aristote and Pline.

Entends tu les grenouilles croquer?

C'est sign de la sayson temperee, ou de la pluye, o^ de vent, ou de
tourmente, ou de rien.

Voyez vous ce chien la, qui piss contre la muraille?

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


C'est, comme dit Platon, au second liver de sa Republique la best du monde
plus Philosophe.

Mais veistes vous onques un chien rencontrant quelque os medullaire: si veu
l'auez, vous auez peu noter de quelle devotion il le guette, de quel soing il
le guard: de quelle ferueur il le tient, de quelle police il met ses pieds la
dessus, de quelle prudence il l'entamme, de quelle affection il le brise, and
de quelle diligence il le succe.

Qui l'a induit a ce fair? Quel est l'espoir de son estude? Quel bien pretend
il?

Rien plus qu'vn peu de mouelle. Vray est que ce peu plus est delicieux que le
beaucoup de toutes autres.

La rayson pourquoy? Pour ce que la mouelle est aliment elaboure a parfection
de nature, comme dit Galenus 3. lib. fac. Not. and 11. de vsu Partium

De toutes les bestes il n'y a pas vne plus sage ny plus subtle que le singe.

O la meschante best. Il ne fait que s'en mocquer de tout le monde: and montre
le cul a tous venans: Il ne guard point la mayson comme un chien: il ne tire
pas la charrue comme le boeuf: il ne produist ny laict ny lain comme la
brebis: il ne port pas son maistre comme le cheual: il ne port pas de faix
comme l'asne. Ce qu'il faict est tout conchier and desgaster, qui est la caus^,
pourquoy de tous il recoit tant des bastonnades and mocqueries.

Scauez vous que m'a dit mon compagnon Maximilien?

Et quoy, ie te pry?

Que Hierosme Pierruche est merueilleusement amourache d'vne belle fille: and
que son friar Iean, ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an
aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en
an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou
zioo m ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on
oon ouille o-lheh u ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge
zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que
ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre
cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


cestuyla qui ioua a la fossette auec nous, fait estat de merchandise, ayant
quitte les lettres: c'est, que des cheuaulx il est descendu aux Asnes.

Qu'est ce que i'oy.

Ce Hierosme vous l'auez bien cognu gros and gras, d'vn visage vermeil, en bon
point, ioyeux, d'vne face luysante, plaisant, raillard: maintenant il est
maigre, descolore, d'vne pasle couleur and comme meurdrie, foible, hideux,
songeard, aymant la solitude, and fuyant la compagnie des hommes: tellement que
null d'iceux qui l'auoit veu auparauant ne le scauroit recognoistre.

O le pouure and miserable ieune homme! D'ou luy vient son mal?

D'amour. D'amour? Dites vous?

Maintenant il est enrage: il est fol: souuentesfois il se pourmeine tout seul:
mais tousiours sans parler, tousiours ou chantrouillant ou gringotant quelque
chose, and escrit des carmes en vulgaire a son amoureuse.

O chetif garcon!

Maintenant vous le verrez feindre vne mer des larmes, un lac des miseres,
redoubler ses cris, accuser le ciel, mauldire a la terre, fair vne anatomy de
son coeur, geler, ardre, adorer, idolatrer, admirer, feindre des paradis,
forger des Enfers, fair le Sisiphe, iouer l^ Tantale, contrefaire le Titie.
Tout quant and quant il exalte en ses verse celle Diane qu'il aim: ses cheueux
ne sont autre que fill d'or, ses sourcils arches and voutes d'Ebene, ses yeulx
astres iumeaux, ses regards esclairs, sa bouche coral, ses dents perles
d'Orient, son aleine basme, ambre, musc, sa gorge de neige, son col de laict,
ses mammelles qu'elle a sur l'estomac montagnes ou pommes d'Alabastre.

Tout le rest du corpse n'est plus qu'vne prodigalite and thresoir du ciel and
de la nature qu'elle auoit reserve pour co^bler de toute parfection sa
maistresse and bien-aimee.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo m ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um eum un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre
pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Il y a grand dangier qu'il deuie^dra frenetique en la fin.

O que le pauure passionne est bien eclipse! Tantost vous le verrez tout confit
en pleurs and larmes, fair l'air retentir de souspirs, plainctes, murmures,
rages, imprecations: l'autrefois s'il a eu quelque bon regard de sa Deesse,
vous le verrez gay, esmeraude and gaillard: les autres fois vous le verrez
trauerser, passer and repasser cinq ou six fois le iour par vne rue, pour
espier s'il peut auoir quelque traict d'oeil de celle qu'il aim mieux.

Que me donnerez vous si ie vous y monstre vnes lettres qu'il escriuist a son
amoureuse.

Ie te pry mon mignon, fay moy ce faueur que ie les puisse veoir.

Ie les veux lyre hautement: Escoutez:

Madamoyselle, vostre beauty est tant excellent, tant singuliere, tant
celeste, que ie croy que Nature l'a mise en vous comme un paragon pour nous
donner entendre combien elle peust fair, quand elle veut employer toute sa
puissance and tout son scauoir. Ce n'est que miel, ce n'est que succre, ce
n'est que manne celeste de tout ce qu'est en vous. C'estoit a vous a qui Paris
deuoit adiuger la pomme d'or, non a Venus, non, ny a Juno, ny a Minerue, car
oncques n'y eut tant de magnificence en Juno, tant de prudence en Minerue, tant
d'Elegance en Venus comme y a en vous. O Dieux and Deesses celestes, que
heureux sera celuy a qui ferez celle grace de vous accoller, de vous baiser,
and de coucher auec vous: Ie ne scay si ie suis predestine des Phees: parquoy
ie me reccommends a vostre bonne grace and vous baisant bien humblement les
blanches mains, ie vous dis, Adieu sans Adieu.

Il entend desia la Rhetorique courtesane.

Le pouure garcon est aueugle and son bon sens luy default.

Il se remettra un iour au bon chemin.

ai sound^ e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee ^ between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final, sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Ie seray bien ioieux certes pour l'amour de luy.

Ie me retire a la ville. Car nous auons trop icy demeure.

Allons a S. Pol pour veoir les Antiquitez.

Montons la haut verse le choeur.

Qui est ensepuely dans ceste muraille?

C'est Seba Roy des Saxes qui conquesta ce pais d'Angleterre.

Voyla un beau tombeau certes. Qui est icy entombe?

Iean de Gand duc de Lancastre, and filz du roy Henry le troisieme.

Voyla sa lance and sa targue de corn.

Quel epitaphe est cecy?

Du Sieur Philip Sidney paragon nompareil des lettres and des arms.

Lisons le, ie vous en pry: Angleterre, Flandres, les Cieulx, and les Arts,
Les Souldarts and le Monde ont fait six parts
Du tres-noble Sidney: car null ne iugera
Qu'vn petit mont de terre son corpse cachera.
Angleterre a son corpse, elle le nourrissoit,
Flandres son sang, repandu pour son droit:
Les Arts son renom, le Ciel tient son ame,
Tous preux soldards sa perte, and l'Vniuers sa Fame.


C'est grand' pity de la mort de ce ieune gentilhomme.

Il est mort, and c'est trop tard de luy r'appeller des morts.

De qui sont ces armoiries nouuelles?

Du feu milord le grand Chancelier, homme qui meritoit beaucoup, plus que n'en
scaurois dire a present.

Qui est ce noireau-cy?

C'est monsieur Iean Collet qui bastit l'eschole en la cemitiere S. Pol.

ai sound e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3 person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ij ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oy oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille
o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce ce ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi
ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui
kee s between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Certes ceste Eglise est bien longue.

Elle est plus longue de cinq pas que la Nostre Dame de Paris.

Comment le scauez vous?

Ie les ay mesure toutes deux, mais ceste-cy n'est pas si large ny bastie si
nettement.

Si est-ce que les Anglois les ont basties toutes deux.

Allons promeiner un peu plus bas en l'eglise.

Quel monument est-cecy si ancien?

C'est, comme lon dit, d'Homfrid due de Glocestre qui est icy enterre?

On dit qu'il a coustumierement son lieutenant icy en S. Pol, pour scauoir s'il
y a des nouuelles de France ou d'autres pais estranges.

Il est vray mon amy, and si a il bien son maistre d'Hostel qui inuit les gens
qui apportent ces nouuelles pour prendre la peine a disner chez sa grace.

Tient il maison magnificque?

Maison ouuerte depuis cinq heures au matin iusques a les six du soir.

Mais pour les estrangers ie dis.

Pour les estrangers comme pour ses domestiques, and ceux de la ville.

Voyla trois compagnons qui s'endorment en ce coin la sur vne piece du bois. Ie
ne scay s'ilz sont gens a pied ou voyageurs sans cheuaulx.

Ils sont de train du Duc.

Ce sont cheualiers du posteau.

Vous estes un bailleur de baliuernes en matieres des cinges* verds.

Escoutez, si vous auez affair de respondant ou caution, pour cinq solz
ceux-cy vous presteront un serment fausse pour vous cautionner s'il fust pour
dix mil escus.

Vous estes un vray Iuif, allez.

Et vous estes un mangeur des serpents.

ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre
fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Cognoissez vous cest homme qui promeine la vestu de satin? Il a mange son bled
en herb.

Il a fait donc de belle saulse verde. Regardez comme il taille de
l'historiographe. Il est Alquemiste a sa mine, and a tout multiply en rien. Il
a donc bien soufle, and vit asteure comme le poisson de l'air.

Ie m'esbais fort d'vne chose, and c'est, qu'il y a tant de faux-monnoyeurs en
ce pais-cy and si peu d'Alquemistes.

Les Alquemistes ne sont pas faux-monnoyeurs.

Non, mais les sophisticateurs des mettaulx sont faux compagnons.

Ie soustiens que les Chimiques sont gens de bien.

Ie ne die ne bien ne mal d'eux, qu'ilz multiplient tant qu'ilz veuillent.

N'auez vous iamais estudie l'Alquemie?

Non, car c'est vne vanite.

O la belle science! O la rich receipte, pour fair la pierre philosophale.

Comment la pourroit on fair? Ie veux essayer de la trouuer.

Il faudra souffler fort toutes sorts des mettaulx.

Laissez moy fair doncques, est ce le tout de bien souffler?

Pour vous en dire la verite, ce secret a este descouuert anciennement and de
nostre temps aussi, mais par deux ou trois seulement:

Quos Jupiter aequus amauit.

Comment appellez vous ce secret?

On l'appelle sang humain: l'eaue de vie, le dragon, corbeau, Elixir, le
mercure des philosophes: l'eau seiche, l'esprit multipliant, le bois de vie,
l'eau viue, la semence de l'or, le remede a toutes langueurs.

Dites moy, ie vous en pry, quelles sont les proprietez de ceste pierre?

Ceste pierre est de tell virtue que si lon en mesle vne part parmi mill
parts, voire dix-mille parts de vif argent, ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh
aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee
eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie
zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu
ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci
see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m
fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse
sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


ou d'estaing, de plomb, de fer, de cuiure bien prepare, else seront
incontinent and en un instant conuerties en or pur, fin and de meilleur alloy
qu'aucun or naturel ou fossile.

N'a elle pas d'autres vertus?

Mill: car en moins de rien elle guerira toutes maladies, empesche celles qui
veulent venir: allonge la vie, voire en tell sort que qui vsera de cest or
viura plusieurs centaines d'annees comme les Patriarchs.

Auez vous cognu quelqu'vn quia sceu ceste receipte la?

L'empereur tient un homme prisonier a Prage en Boheme, qui l'a sceu bien
fair. Quoy?

Quoy? L'or, la pierre philosophale, l'elixir, la poudre de proiection, le
grand oeuure and secret des chimiques.

Pourquoy est il prisonier donc?

A cause qu'il a faict l'or plus pur par art qu'il n'a este par nature.

C'est grand dommage certes, mais iasons un peu ie t'en pry, deuant que nous
allons plus auant.

Ie suis content.

Voyez vous cest homme-la? il n'est ni trop petit ny trop grand.

Non, car il est de moyenne stature.

Il est bien galand homme de sa person, and n'a autre fault sinon qu'il est
larron, beuueur, pippeur, ioueur aux detz, ribbleur, si onques en fust a
Londres.

Il a les doigts faits a la main comme Minerue ou Arachne, and a cry le
theriacle autrefois, and en sum c'est le plus sin maistre-mousche
d'Angleterre, and port tousiours un pelican en sa pochette, don't il n'y a
port qu'il ne crochetera, Ne le laissez pas approcher aux coffres de vostre
pere, si vous estes sage.

ai sound. e ay e ain ein aine eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e
short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person
plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe'
oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u
ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh
gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s
between 2 vowels. z sca ssa sce sse sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre
dre fre pre tree ble gle
final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
sound in the end of a word, as if an h sounded after them.

Rule of two Cons.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


Il a soixante trois manieres de trouuer tousiours argent: mais il a deux cens
quatorze de le despendre.

Retournons asteure au logis: nous irons par Cheapsid and par la Bourse.

Nous regarderons en passant les belles faces.

Fi, a pied: ce sera des-honneur a moy qui suis ieune Academicien.

Voyla vne belle fille qui pass. Elle a la face luysante and Angelique.

Ie ne la veux point contempler: car c'est a mon aduis chose des-honorable
pourles ieusnes estudiants de s'amuser apres des filles sottes and ineptes.

Vois-tu ceste Croix?

C'est un des plus beaux monuments de la Ville de Londres.

C'est un ornament a la grande, large and la plus belle rue de la Ville. Elle
est toute doree par dehors.

Ie n'ay iamais veu de semblable.

Elle a couste plus de dix mill escus le bastir and parement.

C'est beaucoup cela. Ie croy que tu ments asteure.

N'as tu pas veu la Pyramide qui est en la cemitiere de S. Pierre a Rome?

Non: car ie n'y fu iamais.

Moy, i'ay este la, and si l'ay veu: and ie die que la croix de la Cheapsid
apporte plus de beauty and bien-seance a la Ville de Londres que ne fait point
la Pyramide de Iulles Caesar a Romme.

Voyez l'Estendard de la Chepsid tout aupres.

Ie le voy bien: C'est un Conduit d'eau.

On dit qu'il a demeure cautionneur and pleige pour plusieurs bons compagnons,
quand ilz ont eu gueres d'argent en la bourse, ai sound e ay e ain ein aine
eneh aille a-lheh am aum an aun au o e long e short. eh eille e-lheh elle eleh
ei ee eu ew eoi oe' em am en an ent 3. person plur. of the verb et i ee ia zia
ie zie ii ziee io zio iou zioo iu ziew oi oe' oine oe'neh oin oin ou o or oo
oeu ew oui oo-wee om oom on oon ouille o-lheh u ew um ewm un ewn y ee c ss ce
se ci see ch sh d final. t ge zie gi ziee gn nnh gua ga gue ge gui gee gueu geu
m fin. n ph f q k qua ka que ke qui kee s between 2 vowels z sca ^sa sce sse
sci see th t x fin. s or z bre cre chre dre fre pre tree ble gle.
Final sound their vowels almost in the midst of the sillabl. c f g l m n q r
Sound in the end of a word as if an h sounded after them

Rule of two Consonants.

Rule of two vowels.

Accent.


and peu d'amis pour donner pour eux pleige and caution.

Nous nous sommes rendus a la Bourse asteure.

La Bourse fut bastie l'an 1567 par le Seigneur Thomas Gressam; qui donna aussi
des reuenuz a la ville de Londres pour maintenir un College, and des Regents
pour y lire publiquement les sept Arts liberaulx.

Londres donc sera Academie.

Cela s'entend. Mais Dieu y scait quand. Regardez les femmes des merchants qui
se pourmeinent icy.

Else sont alaigres and gracieuses certes.

Cognoissez vous pas la pellerine qui passe-la?

Elle est ieune, frisque, elegante, galante, gracieuse par trop enuers ses
voysins: vous n'auez iamais veu vne dame plus docte a la main, and a l'aiguille
que ceste-cy.

Regardez la belle medaille d'vn coqu qui l'embrasse.

Vrayement on pourra d'oresnauant prendre les lions par les iubes, les cheuaux
par les crins: les ours par les nareaux: les beuffles par les museaux: les
loups par les queues: les oyseaux par les pieds: les asnes par les oreilles:
les cheures par la barbe: les hommes par les parolles.

Et par ou prendrez vous les boeufs and coronards donc?

Par les corns.

C'est assez iase, caquete, and babille. Allons de ca: allons de la: allons,
allons.

La louange de France traduite des oeuures de Guillaume de Saluste Seigneur du
Bartas.
O Mill and mill fois terre heureuse and ^econde!
O perle de l' Europe! o Paradis du Monde!
France ie te salve, o mere des guerriers,
Qui iadis ont plant leurs triumphans lauriers
Sur les riues d' Euphrate, and sanglante leur glaiue
Ou la torche du iour and se couche and se leave:
Mere de tant d'ouuriers, qui d'vn hardi bon heur
Taschent comme obscurcir de Nature l'honneur:
Mere de tant d'esprits qui de scauoir espuisent
Aegypte, Greece, Rome, and sur les doctes luysent
Comme un iaune esclattant sur les palles couleurs,
Sur les astres Phoebus, and sa fleur sur les fleurs.
Tes fleuues sont des mers, des Provinces tres Villes,
Orgueilleuses en murs, non moins qu'en moeurs ciuiles.
Ton terroir est fertile, and temperez tes airs:
Tu as pour Bastions and deux monts, and deux mers.
Le Crocodile fire tes riuages n'infeste,
Des piolez Serpents la race porte-peste
Sur le verd de tes fleurs a rompu-dos rempant,
N'aulne de sa longueur la longueur d'vn arpent.
Le Tigre aux pieds volants ne fait ses brigandages
Dans tes monts cauerneux, le Lion ses carnages
Dans tes bruslants deserts: and le Cheual de l'eau
Ne train tes enfans soubs un vagueux tombeau.
Que si le rich flot de tes fleuues ne roll
L'or auec ses caillous: si de tes monts ne coule
Un argent espure: si nous ny trouuons pas
Le Grenat, le Ruby, la Perle a chaque pas:
Tes Toiles, ton Pastel, tes Laines, tes Salines,
Ton Froment and ton Vin, sont d'assez riches mines
Pour te fair nommer Reine de l'Vniuers.
La se^le paix te manque. O Dieu qui tiens ouuers
Tousiours les yeux sur nous, de l'eau de ta Clemence
Amorti le brasier qui consume la France:
Balaye nostre ciel: Remets o Pere doux,
Remets dans ton carquois les traicts de ton courroux.
FINIS.
THE SECOND METHOD OF the true and natural prononciation of the French,
follows dilated in xx. chapters, by the most difficult French letters and
vovvels, which are set in the margin, with their English value just against
the familiar talk of Trades, very delectable to read. The Booke-seller. Chap.
1.
BVy some new book sir, there are the last news from France.

What books buy you?

Hold see if you can furnish me this note.

The Butterfly of Bellauius. The fly of Lucian. Ovid of the Flea and the
Nut-tree. Ronsard in praise of the Ant his book of the Frog, and of the Waspe.
Phauorin of fevers quartane.

How all these great volumes together?

Want you no other books sir?

Show me the description of the West Indies in Spanish. Let me see the first
and second week of Bartas in French. The works of Petrarque, and the
Iornataes of John Boccace in Italian: the Commentaries of Julius Caesar in
Latin. The history of Heliodore in Greek. The new Testament in the Assirian
tongue: the Alchoran of the Turks in the Arabian: and the Thalmud of the Jews
in Hebrew.

Will you have them of Lions or Paris print? imprinted at Basil or at Venice,
if you will? I go to see in the Churchyard if I can find them.

I must needs have them against my return to the University.

Honest man what book lack you?

I must buy a certain book but I cannot hit of the name of it.

Is it in verse or in prose? No no, it is a history. Have you not some pretty
little book to read in the chimnie corner?

There are the seven sages of Greece, and there are the seven wise masters of
Rome: and here are the seven wise men of Gotham, who drownded the Eele in the
sea.

That is the very same that I seek for.

It is finely bound in Calfes leather sir.

Well said brother Tibald.

What Is price, how, and let us have but one word.

I love not to make many words, take it for a shilling.

By my fay I will give you a fair piece of three pence.

One half penny more it is yours.

Not a farthing, take money if you will.

Well, well, come hither, come again another time, seeing that it is to you,
you shall go without it now, I tell you.

You mock me then, Adieu.

The Mercer. Chap. 2.
WHat lack you sir? I have here good wrought velvet of Geanes, Sattins of
Lucques and of Cypres, Chamblet without waves, cloth of gold, cloth of silver,
damask for damsels, Spanish taffataes, Millan fustians, Worsteds of Norwich.

I would see a good black velvet.

There is a piece of very good stuff.

Is it three piled or two piled? Is it not gummed?

No I assure you of my faith.

Of what price is it? Of 23. shillings the yard.

I have some that I will sell you for eighteen, but it is not so good as this.

Show me a piece of tawnie satin.

There is a satin full of silk. What say you?

Is it not good and of a fair color?

The color is fresh and fair: yet I have seen a better satin.

I think hard and skant.

Show me some other more lively color.

I will show you of all colors, of all sorts, and of all prices that you will.

What lack you Gentlewoman? what seek you, Gentleman, sir, honest man, come
hither.

Hark my friend, I would speak a word in your ear: Will you trust me the
satin of a doublet, and velvet to make me a pair of breeches?

What say you? speak higher. I cannot understand you now. Will you trust me
and give me credit?

Fy-fi, trusting engendereth the Fever.

Is then between us two the love so small?

Love does much, and money does all.

Farewell then, I commend me to you.

The Goldsmith. Chap. 3.
What lack ye fair maiden?

Show me a gylden salt, a carved goblet, a cup finely garnished.

There is fair plate, very rich vessel: most fair stuff well burnished, and
exceeding rich.

My love, shall I show you a fair jewel, a ring, with a diamond enchased in
it?

Is it weighty?

It vvaigheth a crown and half in gold.

What is the price good sir?

At few words eight crowns.

I dare not give so much.

Say sir, what shall I pay for this jewel to hang in the ear?

This pendent my love is of pearl wrought in manner of a vine: at a word two
crowns.

You ask too much a great deal.

What offer you then?

That which I told you.

We are far from bargaining.

One Swallow makes not the spring.

nor one only merchant the market.

I had rather have a black pendent of Iett after the manner of France.

Show me a Carkenet.

Sir, I am a Goldsmith, I sell no Jewels.

Pardon me if you please, I took you for a distiller of milstones.

I ask for a Lapidaries shop.

Go to the sign of the Hunters horn.

God save you sir of the Horn.

Welcome mistress of the Cornet.

Have ye not some fair Topase set in gold?

No but I have a very fair Turquois.

Is it Oriental?

I recovered it of late beyond the country of the Iapans in the Northren Asia.

Where in China?

Yea mary not far from thence in Quinzay the imperial State among the Chinos.

Is it possible? Let me see a touchstone.

Lo there is a fair Emerawde.

This Diamond where was it cut?

It has the points very sharp, and was cut in Cairo or in Canaria, at Venize
or in Alexandria.

How sell you that chain of gold?

For three hundred crowns.

How many linkes contains it?

Some five hundred and fifty.

Did you never see any of these little rings at London, that they sell at
Venice, in the Collets whereof, is set under a fine Crystal a little Scorpion
of iron wagging the tail very artificially.

I have been in Italy and have seen many of the same making.

Will you make me such a one?

Yea: for ten crowns.

Fail not then against to morrow when I shall come again this way. Adue.

The Painter. Chap. 5.
GOd bless you Painter.

Welcome my fine laddes.

What portraicture is that thou paintest there? Of Esope the sage.

O what lips and no sethrils of an Ape he has!

He is eared like an Ass.

What say you of this figure?

I say that if it be Venus, she has not her face well painted. It is an
Italian Harlekin.

He is believe me, very well counterfeited for a fool.

He is not very well shadowed for a wise man.

What wants there?

He is crump-shouldered and crooked, and has a Hawkesnose.

The Persians adored those who had an Aquiline nose, for Cyrus sake, who they
say, had his of form like a shooing-horne.

He has his hands very crooked and limy fingerd, For all that he is not a
thief.

What can he do?

He can hold his peace and keep his own counsel.

He is then wiser then many fools.

Wherefore has this dwarf his face so red and fiery?

The shame and horror seaseth him of the villainies, wickedness and
abominations committed by the world, or rather to see the blind judge of
colors.

Be gone hence, for you will buy nothing, I see well, pack, pack: Gods Lord!
what merchants!

But we will buy so that thou will let us make the price at our pleasure.

There is a fair bargain. It Is a long while that I am troubled with you.

Be gone hence I pray you.

We do no harm, What image is that?

It Is the image of the Virgin MARIE.

Set me down this Table.

Is not this our Lord JESUS CHRIST?

Who is portraited and pictured so lively here?

It Is the Roman T. Caesar of famous memory.

The image of an exceeding passing workmanship.

We find written, that Tyberius Caesar had the joints of his fingers so strong,
that with one finger he did pierce through a green Apple.

So also can I.

I through a rotten Apple then.

He has the table of his hand very large.

Have thou learned Chiromancie?

I have heard it spoken of. What then?

Thou should have diuined here some thing by the lines of his hands.

I am very ignorant of such abuse.

See you this Map of the world? I see it well.

What Is this a Sea? I see but a little water, which is not greater then the
Thames.

I marvel the French King does not make a fine bridge to pass from one
country to another.

The Sea between France and England is it no broader then that? By my faith I
will then easily shoot an arrow from Dover Castle to the white sands of Cales.

See here the huge Ocean Sea.

Is that the Ocean Sea? That, Is this the earth?

They say that sir Francis Drake, master Candish, and Magellanes, have been
almost three years in compassing the earth and the Sea.

By my troth to win a good pint of claret wine, in less then a days iourny,
in a fair afternoon, I will go round about them on foot without Horse, Ass,
Mule, Ship-boat or Brygandine.

Thy fevers quartanes thou will not.

Look here Cullion! See Asia. Here are Tygris and Euphrates. See here Quinzay,
a City so famous amongst the Azians: and has xij. thousand stonebridges,
under which the ships pass with full sail, and never pull down their masts.

See Afric! Here is the mountayn of the Moon!

See thou the Fennes of Nyle? Lo here the red Sea.

Look upon the great Caire! On this side is Europe.

This top here all white, are the Hyperborean mountains. Here are the Alps,
over which we go down into Italy. There are the Appenines: and here are the
Pyrenaean hills, by which you may go directly into Spain.

See here where is the City of London. See Powles steeple, You do naught but
soil and foul my merchandise, and will buy nothing I see well.

Show me some fine pretty Tablet to hang in my counting house.

There is one which is a fine piece of work, painted and drawn out of the
work, long since wrought by Ph^lomela, setting forth and showing her sister
Progne, how her brother in law Tereus had defloured her, and cut out her
tongue, to the end that she should not tell.

It Is a most gallant and wonderful sumptuous piece.

This likes me not, show me another.

See here lively painted the Id^es of Plato.

See here the Atoms of Epicurus.

See there Echo after her nature represented.

Behold there the life and gests of Achilles in seventy and eight pieces of
Tapistrie with broad lists, long full four, broad three fathoms, all of
Phrygian silk, embrodered with gold and silver.

Where is the beginning?

The Tapistrie begins at the marriage of Peleus and Thetis, going on with the
nativity of Achilles, his youth written by Stacius Papinius, his gests and
feats of arms celebrated by Homer: his death and burial pend by Ovid, and
Quint Calabrian, ending in the apparition of his shadow, and the sacrifice of
Polixena written by Euripides.

How much? what is the price I pray you?

Ten thousand crowns.

It Is too dear for me that.

What Is this?

It Is the shape of a man that lacks a master.

He has his face lively painted.

He is drawn truly just in all qualities, fit in all gesture, behavior,
looks, gate, phisiognomie and affections.

How much shall I give you for this same Table?

Four Crowns.

Hold, you shall have no more nor less: I will pay you in lack-an-apes pence,
or in fair crowns of the Palace.

Away, away, march I say down, you mock me, I see well enough.

Have you not prated and tatled enough yet? away from hence I say.

Adieu, adieu, Painter adieu.

The Armorer. Chap. 6.
WHere shall I find a two hand-sword?

What will you kill Iacke-a-Lent?

I kill no body, but only that I will stand upon my guard.

What, have you any secret enemies?

I cannot march between eleven and twelve a clock at night, but master
Constable of our ward sends me on a message to the Counter in the Poultrie.

What to do? to buy hens?

By my faith to pay my ransom.

I give to the devil, if I meet him, I will make him an honest man.

Show me a two-edged sword, if you will.

There Is an old blade that has sent many souls to God or the Dill.

This sword is truly too dangerous for a man that's all choler, as I, for it is
to keen, empoysoned, and a shauer.

It has a naughty hilt.

The sheath is worth nothing.

For how much would you sell it?

For four fair crowns.

You ask too much a great deal.

If a thief had stolen it it is worth more.

I see well you will not sell it.

I had rather sell it then give it.

I believe you well.

I assure you it is a Vienna blade in Dalphine.

Let me see it* I Will lay a wager it is a falcion of Ferrara, a Tucke of Toledo, a
Whineyard of Scotland or a Bilbow blade.

Thou have hit the nail on the head, go.

How much this Turkish cem^torie?

Fifty crowns.

Now I know the price, you ask fifty crowns, I will give you five.

Well it is yours then.

A man has no sooner spoken but he is taken at his word.

My friend men take men by their words, and birds by a call.

Why have you bought this Tranchant?

To fear my foes and to fend my friends.

One should not put a sword into the hand of a child, of a fool, of a
drunkard, of a thief, or of a villain.

The Apoticarie. Chap. 7.
POticarie, have you made my drink?

Who prescribed you this receipt?

It Is master Doctor.

What Doctor?

Will you know? Know you not the hand?

No truly.

Albertus Magnus is the author, I have translated it out of his works of the
secrets of damsels.

Do you believe this monstrous liar?

Is he so great a liar?

He says that there is virtue in stones, in herbs, and in words, to make men
in love with women, and women with men. No, no, it is another thing that I
will do.

I will conjure a spirit, and will go invisible.

Let me see your Receipt. Read it.

Take a Frogs tongue, and the blood of a bat.

And how must I use them? beat them well together in a mortar.

Does it bind or loose?

Yea, yea, and make a man go to the etc. lustily.

Take then a violl and stop it well.

What Is that within that box there?

It Is pepper or Ginger.

What have you within this great sack?

They are cloves, nutmegs, saffron, cynnamon and almonds.

What fine drogues are within these boxes there bepainted with shapes of
Harpies, of hares, of flying horses and flying hearts? There is within them,
balm, ambre, amomum, musk, ciuet, perles, and other precious drugs.

Have you no preservative against the disease? you know what I mean.

Lay an emplaister to it.

You need no other Treacle for that.

I dare not purge, for the time is not good.

Have you a hard belly?

I am always bound in my belly almost, bring me a glister to morrow morning.

I understand you well now, let me alone.

Farewell till to morrow morning.

The Horseman. Chap 8.
SEE you that fine horesman there? he is a Prauncer of Ferrara.

He is an Italian gentleman, and rides better a girl then a gelding.

He is mounted for all that on a brave nag, on a gennet, on a barded horse.

How like you his horse, is he not a fine courser.

I tell you sir that he is a Hungarian or Turkish horse.

By your leave it is a great horse of the country of Frize, or of Denmark.

I will lay a wager that it is a courser of Naples, of Mantua or of Ferrara.

For a quart of wine it is a Barbarian horse, or a Gennet of Spain.

He trotteth marvelous well. See, see he falls to his amble again. He is of
a most fierce courage and proud.

He is very young. He is but yet a colt. He is fat and well liking. He is
covered with a fair Capparison.

That helps nothing to the goodness of the horse.

He has great and fair eyes, and plaieth without cease with his bit
froathing and foming.

He shows that the bit is not his master.

Ah! what a mincing pace he has? He is quick in managing. See you him go one
while overthwart, now on the left side, then on the right, and touches the
ground but a very little, with the tip of his hoof only?

O that this light horse fetches fine friskes, he is as a light as a feather,
and runs very swift.

O that he raineth well, how he frounceth his neck, carrying his head aloft
and his ear upright.

See how he moves with fierceness and heat his brows, and trampleth with
all his members bravely. Behold how the sitter makes him fluce in the air,
leap the ditch, skip over the pales, turn round in a circle as well to the
right hand as to the left.

Here is an Irish Hobby.

Thou have hit the nail on the head. It Is an English Hackny. But view a little
the slouen who rides him.

He is like an Ape on a Bears back.

He starteth and stumbleth at every foot. He will show his sitter a tumbling
cast. Weehe, he kicketh: he trotteth, galloppeth, leapeth, runs, and
reareth. The poor Jade is very lean, he has nothing but bones, he is blind
of an eye: he is lame of a leg: he has all the hoofes of his feet spoiled.

He were good to run post.

True mine host. Come, along.

The Tailor. Chap. 9.
GOd speed Tailor. Welcome sir.

How many else of satin must I buy to make me a dubblet?

Four else and a quarter sir.

And how much velvet for my breeches?

If you will have them made after the Spanish fashion, you must have three
else and a half.

How much broad cloth must I have to make me a cloak after the Roman
fashion, or a riding cloak after the Dutch manner?

You must have little less then five else and a half, to make one large
enough for you with a coxcombado of the same cloth.

Well, well take measure then.

Stand upright and stir not.

How like you the Italian breech?

The Venetian guise likes me best.

What say you to the French fashion?

I will be of the English cut.

As pleases best his eyes, every one does himself disguise.

Make the codpeece of the Courtisan cut, or of the Antique manner.

Ho, let Marcantony alone.

For when shall these clothes be made?

Between this and Sunday, against Christmas, against Easter, against
Whitsontide.

Farewell then. Stay sir, I have not yet taken the measure of your purse.

There is a crown to buy lace, silk, and buttons. Steal the one half, I
pray you.

Sir I am a Tailor, I am not a thief.

You have two sciences for a need.

I have but one sir.

You are a Tailor by your trade, and a thief by your occupation. Go.

He that knows not the art, let him shut up his shop and go to cart.

The Shoemaker. Chap. 10.
WHat Cobbelero, where are you? What commands your signiory? Set a patch on my
shoo.

It shall cost you then a penny.

Shoemaker, show me some good two soled or three soled shoes, some pumps or
pantofles of Spanish leather. Let me see some boots.

Sit down on this form. Of what length is your foot?

If you will have a shoo very easy for your foot, take this same. Let me
assaie it.

Give me a shoing horn.

It will last you but too long.

There Is no so fair shoo, but comes to be a slipper.

How these? Half a crown, I will not rebate a mite.

Now tell me in good sooth, Shoemaker, did it never chance unto you after you
had so well shooed any one, as at this present you have done me, that he is
gone away without paying, or taking his leave otherwise.

No truly.

And if it should chance now, what would you do?

By God I would run after. Do you speak in good earnest. In faith I speak
it, and besides would think to do it.

Go to then, I will try once, see here is abase: follow me as quickly as you
love your shoes.

Hold the thief. Stop the thief.

Stay me not masters, I run for a wager, for a bottle of wine.

He is escaped from the Shoemaker, but he is not escaped from the thief.

Why so? He shall carry the thief with him every where, where he shall go.

It Is all one, if I can overtake him, I will lay felony to his charge.

The Debtor. Chap. 11.
WHat! ho! Sir are you gone by thus without speaking?

I speak only to those that I know.

Do you not know me?

I never saw you in my life that I can tell.

Have you forgotten that you had vvares of me lately? Of you? what is your
name? I am called Renard Wolf.

There is more then one Wolf and two Renards in the wood.

You cannot remember it? I have a weak memory.

See then your writing.

I cannot see without spectacles a whit: let me see it, soft, me thinks it is
written in Syrian.

I understand not a word.

You owe me three hundred fifty crowns: pay me, or I will cause you to be
arrested.

Of my faith you shall have them to morrow or after.

The oath is the proper arms of a liar.

I promise you if I miss now, to pay you double.

The paier double, does me vex and trouble.

Will you not trust a gentleman to be trusted, when he swears by his faith.

Faith without work is dead.

If you will not deal with me as I deal with others, do the vvorst that you
can, I care not a straw for you.

Make them that owe you pay you.

You say true, and when men have no money what shall I do to them to get money?

Cause them to be arrested, they will make shift.

Men should not be so rigorous, we ought to have compassion one of another, as
God has commanded us.

There was a good sermon made to day at our church.

O God, Christian men show themselves very Jews, far woorser than the Turks,
Moors, Arabians, Tartarians, Pagans, Sarasens, Idolaters, without any
knowledge or fear of God, who are not so cruel and barbarous in their kind as
are these Christian nations, who cut one another throat, for a devil of gold
and silver, which draws all the world after him.

You go from the text, will you pay me?

It Is a princely matter to be in debt.

He is not a good Christian who owes nothing.

The king of France owes me as good as ten thousand crowns, and the Focquers
of Germany little less.

All that is nothing to me.

I will be paid incontinent.

Tarry a little, God save me from being so incontinent out of debts.

Who lends nothing is a filthy and wicked creature, a Creature of the great
Hobgoblin of hell.

What! debts! O rare and ancient thing!

He is no good Christian who owes nothing.

Leave we these counts.

Will you pay me or not?

Give me yet three months day.

You do nothing but mock me from day to day.

Hark a word in your ear, lets talk together.

The Sergeant. Chap. 12.
I Arrest you in the Queens name, in the kings name.

Master Sergeant (for he is a gentleman by his office) I pray you do me this
favor to come with me hard by to the next streat, to the house of a Merchant
my friend, who will be suertie for me.

Dispatch then, give me half a crown from you.

Hold, there is two shillings.

Come lets go then to the Tavern to drink a quart of wine, and we will send
in the mean while for your friend.

Hark you sir, your man comes not,

My friend it is true that I can mark you prisoner.

You have taken my money for an hour.

I leese forty shillings in another place,

I have other more weighty business, what will you that I do? Give me five
shillings, and I will bring you along the City till five of the clock at
night.

Sir, I am a poor man charged with wife and children.

That's all one. Give me yet for my pain or else you shall see quickly that
which I will do.

My God what shall I do?

I am devoured alive.

What birds of pray! what crows be these?

What reason or conscience have you to take a crown more?

Gods Lord ask you that? Come, come, come along. By God sir you shall enter
into the court to see your action, I can do no less by mine office and oath.

O now you are in Cappaedocia, farewell honest man adieu, you must sing there a
little among the Canarie birds.

The Way. Chap. 13.
Fair maiden, where is the way to the well, to the church, to the river?

Right before you.

Ho pesant, countriman, countrilasse, fair woman show me the way to Rome I
pray you.

By our Lady to Rome sir, it is a great way thither. As for me I was never
there, but to go thither you must pass by many great cities and little
villages. Go your ways from hence first to Paris, and then ask the high way
to Constantinople, from thence it is five hundred good leagues and a half unto
Jerusalem. Embarke there to come for Venice or Marseilles, and you shall find
company enough every day to bring you to Rome.

It Is in mine opinion a little the farthest way about.

Which way must I go for the shortest and the directest way from hence to Rome?

Go from hence to Paris, from Paris to Lions it is but ten days iourny. From
thence to Turin in Piemont but seven, from Turin to

Florence but twelve, and from Florence to Rome but three.

The way is very hard to be kept without a guide.

Enquire of sheapheards and sheapheardesses whom you shall meet in traveling.

Is the way dry, sandy, fair, and easy to keep?

It is stony, and full of dangers by reason of thieves who lie in the vvoods.

It Is a good country that has not one mile of naughty way.

Do they do justice well in these quarters here?

As every where else.

They hang up the little thieves, but the great thieves escape well enough.

Set me in my right way I pray you.

See you the gallows there on high? Come not nere it if you be wise, pass
over the bridge, follow the pauement, hold the champaine ground, leave the
mountain, go along the vines, cross over the meddow, and you have always the
high way before you.

I doubt I shall miss my way. Men miss their way many times in going to Rome.

O God I am weary and cannot march any further.

Go back to London, and get up to the top of Paul's steeple, and from thence
take your first flight to the Tower of London, from thence fly to the castle
of Dover, from thence to the bastion of Calais in France, thence to the
Bastillia of the great city of Paris, thence to the fortress on the walls of
Orleans, thence to the citadell of Lions, thence to the great castle of
Millan, thence to the Arsenall of Venice, thence to the amphitheatre of Verona,
thence to the Theater of Pise, thence to the Castle Saint Angelo, and you shall
be quickly in Rome.

How will you that I fly, I have no vvings?

Go by Sea.

I will then embarke my self for the Straight of Gibraltar: then sing-lyng
along the coast of Catalonia, Maiorica, Mynorica, Sardinia, and Corsica, I
will land at Ciuita Vecchia, and from thence in one day, I will ride on a Mule
or an Ass to Rome.

The Ass then shall be as soon at Rome as you.

And I as soon as mine Ass.

Go then both together: I wish you a happy voyage.

The Thief. Chap. 14.
KIuala? Stand. Sblood! Swoundes!

Yield thy purse: quick, quick, dispatch, yield, alight, or I will shoot
this bullet into thy belly.

Where is thy port mantle?

You owe me three hundred fifty crowns, and shall pay me now.

Here Is nothing here? O heart I must kill this villain.

Will thou not confess where thy crowns are?

Sir, take all that I have, but spare my life.

What is that thou carriest in thy budget?

It Is my money, sir, save my life, and take it hardly, I give it you.

Thou have more sowed in thy dubblet,

Have thou not? Confess villain, I will save thy life.

Fellow give me the halter out of thy sleeue.

Cry not villain, for I will cut thy throat.

Not a word, till we be gone a great way out of sight.

He is fast bound now.

Come then fellow thief, lets mount and spur cut, lets away amain.

Whether will we go? Into France.

Let us hie us to Dover then, for if we be taken, we shall be hanged. Away.

The Mariner. Chap. 15.
HOnest men who will go for Calis, let him make have. To Calice ho.

Aboard ho.

Does the vvinde serve?

The vvinde is at Norde, North and

North West.

What take you for a passenger?

A French Crown: two Crowns man and Horse.

The ship is it well armed: for I have fear of those Pirates of Donkerke.

Fear them not, for the ship is very well equipped with Artillery and
Munition.

Go into the Prove. Lets hoyse sail on Gods name, it is calm, and blows not
a whit.

We shall have the wind by and by in Pupp: I see by the rack.

The Tide swells. See the waves mount.

The Sea begins to rise, and rage from the very bottom.

See how these huge waves beat against the sides of our ship.

Here ye these terrible whirlwindes, how they sing over our saile-yardes.

We shall have by and by a storm. The tempest makes a great noise.

The heaven begins to thunder from above.

It thundreth, it lightneth, it raineth, it haileth: it is best to strike
sail, and to vire the cables.

To the Deck ho: to the Stern: This wave will carry us to all the Devils.

O God the Savior.

O my friends: O thrice and four times happy are those who are on firm land
setting of beans?

God be merciful unto us, and our Lady of Lorretto.

Dish, dash, plash, crack, rick-rack, thwack, bounce, flounce, rounce, hizze,
pizze, vvhizze, sowze, O God help us and the Virgin Marie.

Paish, flish, flash, rowze, rittle, rattle, battle, rish, rash, clash, swish,
swash, robble, hobble, bobble. O Saint James, Saint Peter, and Saint
Christopher.

O Saint Michael, Saint Nicholas, now and never more.

O God we are now at the bottom of the Sea.

I give eighteen hundred thousand crowns of revenue to him who will set me a
land.

Lets land here: let us go a s^ore.

I will give you all that I have in the world to set me a shore.

Will you go a shore in the midst of the Ocean Sea?

What a horrible tempest?

By Saint Grison what means this?

Shall we take our sepulture here among these waves? I see neither heaven nor
earth.

I must make water a little. I pardon all the world. I die my friends.

Fare you all well.

The tempest is now ended.

O that it is fair weather again.

Truly it has lightened and thundered lustily.

I believe that all the Devils are unchained to day, or that the good Lady
Proserpina is traveling of childbirth.

Believe that all the five hundred thousand hundred millions of Devils dance
the morris.

Thunder Devils, fart, fist, fissell.

A fig for the wave. We are in the haven of Calice.

Let us more Ancres.

Cannonier, shoot of a piece of Artillery.

We are saved: I go to lodge with mine hostess at the three Kings, or at the
green Dragon.

The sick man Chap. 16.
GOd be here. Sleep you?

If I could sleep, I should be half whole.

You groan like a Hog in love with a Sow.

I do but rave, cough, spit, and sneeze.

It Is a good sign if you escape it.

I have also the squirt and the bloody flux.

What other disease have you?

I have also the itch, the great or small pockes which does fox me.

One disease comes sildome alone.

O that my head aketh cruelly.

It Is then the disease of Naples.

O who shall deliver me from my greefs?

Tarry, I have a Cemitorie which shall do the office.

Who have been your Phisicians?

The most expert of the world in vrines, for they have brought me out of an
ill week into an evil year, and have changed me a French Shanker into a
double Neapolitan Cancro.

Did you cause your self to be let blood?

The Barber has drawn three ounces of blood out of the capital vain, and
the Physician ten out of the crumenall, and has bid me take seven
Cock-chickens, etc.

What says he of your disease?

He says that it is the disease of Italy, of France, of Spain, of Germany,
and of England.

What disease is that?

The Catholic disease, the common sickness, the great malady.

Know you no other name?

They call it the pox in France, I cannot tell what they call it in England.

Speak softly, see here master Doctor.

My friend open your purse, I mean your mouth, use your legs a little.

Fair and softly, without choler, be patient, all shall be well. Take these
pills to morrow morning and you shall do well by Gods grace.

I had rather eat a baow, than to chaw and swallow down these pills, they are
so bitter.

You have wrong to find fault with good receipts and medecines, be of good
cheer, adieu.

Adieu master Doctor. O that I am sick.

Patience, alas! that I pity you pretty fellow.

There is no remedy now.

Couragio, couragio, you shall be well quickly.

Sickness comes always on horseback, and goes away on foot.

The Draper. Chap. 4.
GEntleman, sir, signior, honest man, what cloth will you see? want you any
good sorts of clothes?

Come hither, I will use you well.

Of what color will you have?

Show me a fair scarlet, a welsh frise, a good Irish rug.

Have you a fair French tawnie? Let me see a very fine London green. Show me
a Crimsin very fine and large.

I have the best in London for you.

There is one of a good breadth, look upon it well in the light. Handle it,
the color is in grain.

It will not loose color.

How sell you the yard, the elle, the whole piece, the half yard, a
gowne-cloth, a cloake-cloth?

At a word I would sell it, ten shillings six pence the yard, fifteen
shillings the elle, sixteen shillings eight pence the elle and the half
quarter.

Well measure out five else and an half, make good measure I pray you.

One, two, three, four, five, and a half, good measure.

What would you have mistress, a stammell to make you a petticote, or a purple
for a kertle? Of what color will you have, of white, black, gray, violet,
green, of medlie color, of rats or ships color, yellow, blew, orange,
purple, crimsin, sky color, lions hair, etc. I have of all colors, and of
all prises.

How gracious and glib are the tongues of these young drapers in Watling-street?

The Inn. Chap. 17.
GOd save you mine host. Welcome sir.

Shall I be lodged here for this night?

How many are you?

Harrie, my beast, Ronsin and I.

You shall be used well. Come in if you please, they shall draw off your boots
and spurs by and by.

Hostler, I pray thee rub my horse well and give him a bottle of hay and a
pecke of oats.

I will look to him well sir, doubt not of it.

Mine host when shall we sup? I have a good stomach.

When it shall please you sir. The supper is ready. Well let us wash our hands.

Come come to table masters.

Shall not we stay for the other?

Yes we will, as the Abbot stays for his monks, to wit, in eating as fast as
he can.

Gentlemen eat if you please, drink round, you are not merry.

Make good cheer of that which you have, it is fasting day to day, it is our
Ladies even, There are eggs in the shell, butterd, poched, and fride. I must
eat some flesh, for I love not eggs nor fish.

There is then a very good caponet.

It Is a very dainty meat.

True, when the stomach is in good disposition.

I am of opinion that a roasted capon, is better to be eaten then a raw leg of
mutton.

And I had rather drink wine then water.

There is a fat capon, a Turkie-cocke, a fat goose, a dosen of larkes, a couple
of good fat rabbets.

Begin where you will.

And here is a calves head.

What is a good head with a good brain worth?

It is inestimable: but the head without the tongue, never made oration long.

Who will eat any good fish? There is a good Lamprey. It is the pray of a king,
and here is a good side of Salmon, which is worth the having of Solomon.

Flesh makes flesh and fish makes fish, and good wine makes good wine and
vinagre.

There is Frogs and snailes.

They eat them in France and in Italy.

But in England they care not for them.

Ho Friar John eat you not of this good fish?

To tell you the reason, there is such a season, that fish is poison.

Taste of this trowt, sup of this Eele-broath, it will heat your guts, and wash
them sweetly, to bring your belly in temper.

Of all birds I love not the goose nor the gosling.

Of all fishes I esteem the Eele poison. Of all fresh fish except the tench,
take the wing of a Partridge, or the buttocke of a Nun. I love woonderfully
the white of the capon. Therein are you nothing like Foxes, for of capons,
hens and chickens that they take, they never eat the white.

Why so? because they have no cooks to dress them.

Boy some wine, fill to me. To you mine host To you mine hostess. I will
pledge you here. I believe it freeseth, it is so cold, let us rise masters,
and draw near to the fire.

The God of Paradise that's best,
Be for all these graces blessed.
The going to bed. Chap. 18.
I Feel my self a little ill after supper.

My stomach greeueth me.

Mine Oast I will go to rest. I have great desire to sleep. The sleep is
already fallen into mine eyes.

Let some body show me my chamber.

When you will my daughter shall show you the way.

God night mine Ost. God night, God-night hostess.

God give you good night and good rest every body.

You must mount this way sir. See your chamber.

See your bed. There are the priuies, and here is your chamber pot.

Draw these curtines. Lend me a kercheffe or a coiffe: I have a night cap in my
bosom.

Your sheets are clean.

Look that they be very dry I pray you.

I have ayred them at the fire.

Pull of my hosen. Cover me with my gown.

I have too little covering.

Give me another pillow, I cannot lie so low.

Are you well now? will you have yet more heling? would you nothing else?

Not now. Seepe well.

Hark Gaudinetta, kiss me once my sweet heart, before thou depart. I had
rather die, then kiss a man in his bed.

Kiss me, and I will give you your bracelets again, that I took from you the
other day playing with you.

Speak no more to me, I pray you of kissing nor of love, but give me my
bracelets again, for otherwise what will my father and my mother say to me?

They will be angry with me.

They will not: they will not.

But they will I assure you: but it is no matter, I will say that a thief has
stolen them from me.

Hark, I pray thee, Gaudinetta, tell me one thing, which of us two loves one
another better: whether you me, or I you?

As for me I do not hate you: for as Gods commandes, I love all the world.

But to the purpose, are you not inamoured of me?

I have told you so many times, that you should not use any such speeches to
me, if you speak any more to me, I shall show you that it is not to me, that
you should address your self.

You are very obstinate, I see well.

Give me my bracelets again then if you will.

How now my love your bracelets? I will not, I swear a great oath: but I
will give you others.

Had you not rather have a silken girdle, etc.

Hark some body calls me.

They do not.

Gaudinetta what do you above so long?

I come by and by mother.

Will you not kiss me before you depart.

Another time. I am called now. I shall be chidden. I cannot kiss men.

My father will be angry. My mother comes.

What will you do? Let me go. I shall be killed by and by.

God give you good night, Sir. God night fair maiden. God night, Gaudinetta.

The Slasher. Chap. 19.
GOd morrow to your Seignorie, Seignior Vespasian.

In faith friends meet oftener then mountains.

By the faith of a Gentleman I am very glad to see your magnificence lusty.

Let me give you an accollado. What Signior Valerian my dear friend, my near
cousin. Come, cullion let me crush thy callibisters with accoling thy
buttockes. Shake hands.

Love passes the glove, and the water goes, clean through the bootehose.

You make no more reckoning of petty compagnions.

No, no, I live with but with Princes and among great Lords.

Whence comes your signorie?

I come from seeing the seventeen lands of the low countries.

You are grown too rich.

A fig for money, I shall have one day but too much: for I have a Philosophers
stone which fetches money to me out of men's purses, as fast as the Adamant does
draw iron unto it.

You are sick as far as I see by your phisiognomie, and I know your disease.

What I pray thee? you have a flux of the purse, as well as I.

Care not you for that, I have yet six pence half pen^e, which never saw
father nor mother, which shall want you no more then the Griegoes in your
necessity.

Thy male Mules, poultron. I have more money then thou vvottest of: for I have
three score and three ways to recover money always at my need.

The most honorable and common is, in robbing by the high way side.

The Canker claw thee villain: Tell, have thou no money poor Devil?

What then, Fortune will favor me one day to have a purse as long as mine
arm, full of fair Angels or French Crowns.

You have spoken mask. What will thou say to a fellow who will show thee ten
or twelve budgets full of old Rose nobles, Chikinoes, and Hungary Ducates?

If thou show them me, I will pick out mine eyes.

See, look here villain. Bless thee, make the sign of the cross on thy
nose.

I think thou have more callibisters then Crowns.

For those are counters or palace pence that thou have there. My friend hark,
thou have no pastime at all in this world. I have more then the King.

And if thou would consort with me, we would play the Devils.

No, no, by Saint Adauras, for thou shall be hanged once.

He that's borne to be hanged, shall never be drownde. Ah great sheep!

Fear thou hanging? Thou shall be buried, which is more honorable, the air
or the earth?

I had rather perish in the water among the golden sands of the river of
Plata, in the West Indies.

Will thou come along into Flanders with me?

What to do?

To beat the pauement: we will make the dust fly.

Seignior good face will thou change me a crown?

Believe me I have no small money.

I would have testons or kardekews.

I will not change you a halfepen^e nor a farthing by God.

Lend me then six pence, I pray you.

I have no silver about me believe me.

Yet you must needs for all that lend me sixpence to pay mine ordinary whether
you will or not.

By Gogs nownes I have it not.

Go you are no better then a rogue.

Go thou art a villain thy self.

Will you say that I am a villain?

He is a villain which does any villainy, or who has no money to spend with
his friends, and if thou be noble show thy gentilitie, pay but only a pint.

I am as blind as a beetle I tell thee.

Of what live thou now?

Of the air as does the Sturgion.

If I did not fear to lie against mine honor, I would say that thou were an
honest man.

If you should say any otherwise, I would make you lie in your throat.

Give not me the lie I pray you companion.

Take not in evil part that which I have said.

By the death of my life give not me the lie, for I will stob thee into the
throat.

Say you so, here is a fair place.

Draw, I will break thy head in nine places.

Cap de saint Arnauld, you shall pass through my hands now. Come rogue, come,
push, push.

Ho saint Siobe cap de Gascoigne, come good fellow devil defend your self.

By the flesh I renounce, by the blood I deny, by the body I refuse my part of
Papimanie, if you escape my hands now, I will stick thee like a hog.

See that my rapier be no longer then thy sword, I hate worse then death him
that fights upon the advantage of knives.

Come, come, push, let us fight gallant, and lustily rub our bacon.

I will not fight, let us rather drink on our swords.

I care not, if thou vvilt fight, lets fight, if thou vvilt drink lets drink.

We are well met together, one blind man leads another.

It Is danger least we fall both into some Tavern.

They would give us drink then to be rid of us.

Have thou credit no where?

I have as much as the King, but it is far hence.

I think it is beyond the pillars of Hercules, or in the kingdom of Persia.

On this side a little, in Polonia or in Spruceland.

I, I, in Cracouia.

It is thither of mine oath more then five hundred leagues of France.

Lets go, were it as far as the East Indies.

Go you then alone, for I will not bear you company.

See here a drole, he will pay always pint, shopin, or quart, we shall
dominier by and by.

God save you sir, I met the other day your capital ennemie, and gave him the
fig under his cappuche bravely, I gave him also a stoccado through his right
arm, which ran clean through his doublet into his left elbow, and had almost
slain him outright. I did it by God in your quarrel, and for the love of you,
for otherwise understand, I had not hazarded my self for an hundred crowns.

Lets go drink, lets go drink at the Sun on this side Criplegate.

Mistres let some body draw us a shopine.

Sir I drink to you.

Seignior to your good grace. Thanks my good captain, I will pledge you here.

Ha monsieur my friend, you know well that I have always loved you, and taken
you for a very honest man.

We are friends by God, and will be as long as we live in despite of the
great devil of hell.

I swear unto you by Styx and Acheron in your presence, that there is a blade,
to the purpose, if you stand in need, it is at your gentle commandment, my
carkase and goods, tripes and bowels, and all.

You have truly a very fine sword.

Look well upon that same tool, look on it well, I swear unto you that it
was the very tucke of the prince of Parma, and from his own proper side he
gave it me into mine own proper hands.

For some piece of service that you had done him peradventure.

Well does it please you to command me any thing that I may do for you? for I
am going sir.

Your seigniorie will be content to do me this favor to lend me an hundred
crowns till my return from Venice.

By my beard, if I had them you should have them willingly.

Your seigniory lend me then a horse.

I have, believe me, neither mu^e nor mare, neither man, boy, nor beast.

O patience of pennilesse mates! then adieu till we meet again.

I pray the god Mercury, with Dis the father of crowns, in saunty long time
to conserve your seigniorie.

The Bragger. Chap. 20.
SAint George, come, some body bring me my lance, my two-hand sword, and my
cuirasse, I will be armed from top to toe.

Truly here is fair work cut out for martial men, now we should march
against that Thracian dog, Mahound God of Turks and of Arabians, we are called
away into France to aid the French king against those Saracine leaguers. Oh
would to God that Carolus quintus were alive.

O what a marciall head! O what a mad Rowland! I should be sufficiently
instructed in military affairs, having commanded twenty five years
captain general among the Hungarians and Poles, and hasarded my proper person
in more then thirty bloody battles.

Come, come, mine arms of malice, I say of maile.

The brave soldior ought to be armed no less with advise then with armor.

Where I cannot prevail with the skin of the Lion, I will use the case of
Renard the Fox.

Consider vvisely the chaunses of hasard: one must never prosecute them to
their period: for it behooves all Caualiers, reverently to entreat their good
fortune, without racking or tormenting it at all.

I take advise always before I march, of that which is to be done, to the end
that I be not like to the Athenians, who did never go into counsel til^ after
the deed was past.

I am wise. You are so.

I am full of chivalry and a spruce soldier. You are so.

I am courageous, virtuous, and magnanimious.

You are so.

I am resolute, noble, generous and magnificent.

You are so.

I am loyal, honorable, well armed, high mounted, well disposed, hasardous,
audacious, heroical, crafty, and cawtelous as the Serpent which tempted Eve.

You are so.

I am come of a noble race: For mark me well: There was a certain Chalbrot
who engendered Sarabrot, the father in law of Nymbrot, not of him who built the
Tower of Babell: but of another of the race of Gallafre, the cousin of
Brulefer, who was brother to Maschefain, grandsire of Sortibrand of Conymbria,
the Nephew of Atlas, who with his shoulders held up the heaven from falling.
The same A^las being bred and borne in Marocco in Barbary. (You Gentlemen knew
him well) was cousin german to Gogmagog, who with his two hands set, it is long
since, the two hills of chalk near Cambridge a most famous University in
England, to the end that the scholars should walk thither some times to pass
their times about them.

The same was gossip to Fierabras, of whom Merlinus Coccaius writes in his
book of the country of devils, that he was the first in this world that played
at dice with spectacles on his nose, of whom descended afterward the great
Giant Oromedon, father of Briareus, who had a hundred hands, and Offot the god
son of Coryneus, of whom you may see the image in the Yeeld-hall of London:
who is my kinsman a far of: for of his noble lineage am I descended.

I have read of your ancestors in the Iestes of the four sons of Aymon.

Find you not that they have been very famous for their horrible feats of
Arms?

They have showed their singular prowess truly against the Sarasins.

I rage, Devils I rage, hold me Devils, hold me.

Ho Caetzo great Devil of hell, awake thy sleepie Cyclopes: Thou Vulcan who
limpest with thy cosins Asteropes, Brontes, Steropes, Polyphemus and Pyracmon.
I will set you a work. I give my self to an hundred pipes of old Devils, in
case that if you will not fight, if I do not make you eat the two eggs of
Proserpina.

Truly Hercules is nothing to you, who being in the cradle, killed the two
Serpents: for the said Serpents were very little and vveake things.

Where is this so furious Hercules? I would fight with him for a little
quarter of an hour.

He would make you piss vinegre before all the world.

Where is Hector that Trojan Lad? I have a great desire to break a Lance
against his Cuirace.

Where is Alexander, the great drunka^d of Greece?

I will make him drink a carouse. To marciall men we must not spare good
wine.

Where is Achilles the Grig, Captain of the Mirmidons, I would send his soul
by and by into hell.

Where is this petty companion Ulysses? He should do me a message unto Pluto.

Where is this quaking-quiuering coward Julius Caesar? that I might horse him
on the end of my Pike and Lance.

You count without your host.

I am afraid that before it be night, you will be firked with Musket and
Harquebus shot.

Ho! that I am not a king of France for four score and ten or a hundred
years: by God I would make curtald curres of you Gentlem^n that ran away
from Pauy.

I hate him more then poison, who runs away when it is come to slashing with
knives.

I fear death no more then a butterfly, or the tickling of a flea in mine
ear: and as for me, I fear not to fight with a whole Army, if it be not of
these mescreant Tartarians, Canniballes, Indians, and Moscouites who shoot
forward, backward, sideling, this way, that way, every way, at long, at
large, over, under.

Of a troth the prouesse of Camillus, Scipio, Pompey* Caesar, and Themistocles,
are nothing comparable to yours.

I kill men, as Diomedes killed the Thracians, and as Vlyxes, I tie their
carcasses to my horse heels, as Homere recounteth.

I vvish you for all that, if the enemies yield themselves, that you take them
to mercy and ransom, for clemency is a very royal virtue.

Ho death of a louse, blood of a bat, by the virtue, my friend if I put not all
to fire and sword, I renounce my life.

You affright me with swearing so much.

Thou art a beast of the mountain.

These are but heroical words, and colors of martial Rhetoric to adorn
my language.

To put them all to the edge of the sword, it is too cruel a thing that.

I am a martial man, what would you have? Sassassa, how many are these
quistrell-scummes?

By the death of a Calfe, I esteem them less then a roasted Capon, for They
are but bragging fools of France,
Hardy at the bottle, and cowards at the Lance.


My friend, I shock so rudely upon the enemies, that I overthrow them like
hogs: to some by and by I spatter their brain, to others I break their arms,
to others I cut off their noses, pick out their eyes, cleave their jaws,
strike their teeth into their head, and if any will save himself in running
away, I make his head fly in five hundred four score and nine pieces.

If any one cry Saint George, I set my foot upon his gorge: If he cry Saint
Barbara, I pull off his beard: If our Lady of Loretto, I cut off his head.

Make you ready, the enemies are at hand.

I am armed at advantage, the Lance in rest, mounted as a S. George.

See the Camp of the enemies: they are encamped on a molehill. O it is but a
microcosme of flies or vvaspes!

They are not in so great number, as had Xerxes, are they?

He had, if you credit Herodotus and Trogus Pompeius, thirty hundred thousand
fighting men, and nevertheless Themistocles with a handful of men discomfited
them.

It is enough, I will bring you them to roast or to boil, to fry or to put in
paste. But hear the Drum: the enemies Camp is not far hence.

The battles are ranged. The martial combat begins pel-mell.

The Artillery begins to play against the walls.

There is a Cannon shot which has carried away quite the vangard to the Devil.

The alarm begins to be very hot. The Trumpets sound the retraict.

The Infanterie is almost all overthrown.

The cornets of light horse retire.

They fetch their carrier toward me. O what rain of lead! what a smoke of
lightening and fire! By God I will run away. Demosthenes says that the man
that runs away will fight again. I am afeard to be slain and murdered.

What runaway is this? what coward is this?

Courage, courage, why tremble you?

I am affeard to die.

Sassassa, kill, kill.

O masters save my life. I have the word.

I am of your side, a friend.

Who are you? whence are you?

what do you here?

I am the seignior Crocodill.

Ha what say thou?

Masters I am a poor devil, I beseech you have pity on me, I have yet a
crown to pay my bienvenu.

You are a spy, I will cut your throat.

O monsieur my friend, I yield me to you.

Thou shall be feign to yield villain, for thou shall also yield thy soul to
all the devils.

Alas, I am cruelly vvounded.

I am dead, slain, massacred. I go to take the way of the first hospital.

The Conclusion of the Parliament of Pratlers.
Come hither ho, let us sit down a little in the shade under this tree, in the
cool air. I will sit upon this block.

And I over against thee Antonie.

Where will thou sit Peter?

I? I will set my self upon this stone.

Sit away from thence, you let me that I cannot behold the passers by.

I see a ship which sayleth toward us.

It Is a Caracke of two thousand tuns.

See you the little boy with a flagge in his hand.

If he fall into the sea he will be drowned.

No I warrant you, for he can swim.

O how he slides down the tackling.

The mast of this ship is very great and thick.

I think it grew at the West Indies.

How can thou tell, have thou been in India with the Spaniards?

As if one can know nothing of a country, if he have not been there. I
discern Powles from hence.

There are me thinks some pigeons upon the top of the steeple.

They be men, fond and foolish boy, but they seem to them that see them so far
off to be crows, or rather lacke-dawes.

Hark some body sounds a trumpet on the steeple, what an ass is that?

He sounds a point of war for the mistresses of London.

O what fine weather here is! it is pleasant being among these green fields.

Give ear to that Lark which sings. O how she mounteth on high up to the
Clouds! I remember now Bartasius the French Poet, who wrote these four most
excellent verses of her note, The pretty Lark man's angry mood does charm
with melody,
Her Tee-ree-lee-ree Tee-ree-lee-ree chippring in the sky,
Up to the court of love sweet bird, mou^ting with flickering wings,
And down again, my Jove adieu, sweet Jove adieu, she sings,


O how this little pretty chippering Lark quauereth her voice.

Where art thou Linus most harmonious musition with thine yuorie lute? where
art thou Amphio^ the finest* fingrer of an harp in all Greece? where art thou
Orpheus with thy silver sitterne? where art thou Arion with thy melody that
made the fishes danse in the sea? come hither, learn new lessons. Truly these
four who have been so famous by report of all Latin and Greek authors, for
that they were most excellent musitions, have never been able to counterfeit
this little bird singing her note.

Hark, hark, it is some other bird that sings now.

It Is a blacke-bird or a Nightingale.

The Nightingale sings not but evening and morning.

Where is she I pray thee?

It Is a Nightingale I heard her record.

See thou not her sitting on a sprig?

O how sweetly she sings without any stop, and cease not!

We must not marvel though she sing sweetly, for that she is of Athens, where
the waves of the sea flote also against the shores by measure.

Pliny vvriteth that she sings before men longer, and more sweetly a great
deal.

What is the reason thereof? I will tell it thee.

The Cookow and the Nightingale sing at one season of the year, to wit, in
the spring time, from the midst of April to the end of May, or thereabout.
These two birds contended about the sweetness of their song, they seek a
judge, and because their dispute was of notes, there was found fit to judge
this controversy the Ass, who has above all other beasts his ears long.
The Ass having put back the Nightingale, whose music he said he did not
understand, judged the victory to the Cookow. The nightingale appealed before
man, whom when she saw, she pleads her cause and sings sweetly, to make
her cause good, and to be revenged of the vvrong that the Ass had offered her.

I hear now a thing worthy of a poets vain.

What then? did thou look for something smelling of a philosophers brain?
Seek that of these new magistri inertes of the university.

Many of them are philosophers in their gowns, and by their wits country
clownes.

Say then that they are doctors of Valentia, with long gowns and little
scientia.

But harken me yet our Nightingale.

I will tell thee something of the song of the Nightingale, translated out of a
good author.

What man in the world (says he) is so gros headed, so dull spirited, so
blockish or doltish, that is not astonished and ravished with an unspeakable
delight, hearing the melody of the nightingale, and how such a shrill and
harmonious voice may issue out of so small a trunk? beside that he perseuereth
so earnestly in his song, that his life shall so soon fail him as his voice:
so that it seems that he has been taught by some master musition to sing
his prick-song: for one while he faineth the base, another while he quauereth
the contretenour, by and by he counterfeiteth the mean, anon he sings the
treble. And being weary with recording, changes quickly his note, that you
would guess him to be some other bird that sings but the plain song. Then
suddenly he chaunteth such shrill notes, that he astonieth himself, and
remains as it were in a sweet trance, charmed by an infinity of his
melodious passages, which ravish the spirits up to the heavens, not only of
men, but also of other little fine birds, whom he inchanteth and takes
prisoners there by his voice, and makes them through his sweet note to harken
to him, and to steal away a lesson or two of his music. And not content with
this, you shall see her instruct her young ones, entising them to imitate her
note, to keep tune with her, to make the same stops, to quauer in length, one
while to run upon crochets, by and by to take a new tune by fainings, then to
descant and semiquauer it with courbed minims, quickly trembles her voice and
transformeth it into so many sorts of musical points, that no artifice of man
can tell how to counterfeit her note.

I am almost ravished truly.

Without doubt men have learned Music of Birds.

Democritus was the Nightingales scholar, witness Aristophanes in his
Comedy of the song of Birds. I have caught a Grasse-hopper in one hand, and a
little Frog in the other.

Let me see them I pray thee!

I will put them into thy bosom, Anthony.

Do not, I pray thee.

Why runnest thou away? Come hither, I will do thee no harm.

Alas! the poor prisoners! let them go: let them leap.

Look! what a fine skip there is?

The poor beasts have saved themselves in the grass.

This bank is full of Pisse-mires.

They sting me by the buttockes.

They got in at my codpeece. I have more then a thousand in my breeches.

Do you feel them sting in good faith?

I have pulled off the heads of more then twenty.

Kill them not, let them live. It Is a pretti^ kind of vermin.

You have troubled the Lords of their Parliament, which are assembled in this
hillocke for the affairs of their common wealth. They are angry with you.

They will tickle you indeed.

Let us go to some other place.

Let us sit in the Sun under this wall.

Sit away brother Nathanael. Why?

See you not the great Spider that hangs by a little Spider-webbe?

O the great thief! He is a brave hunter for Flies and Butter-flies.

Have you never seen the combat fought between the Spider and the buzzing Fly?

No: then you have never seen the battle fought between Caesar and Pompey.

Why are they such brave vvarriours?

Far greater then the Rat and the Frog in Aesops Fables.

Behold this cruel Tyrant! How many Bees, Flies and Butterflies he has killed?

See their carcasses lie dead in his nets.

It Is a strange thing of the nature of this Animal.

Come tell us something of him my fine prattling slave.

It Is a thing almost monstrous in nature, of the nature of these Spiders, unto
whom women and maidens are scholars, and have learned of them to spin, and to
weaue linen cloth, and the fishers also to make their nets: but they have a
far greater grace and expedition in their industries: The spinner the spiders
wife, and her daughter the young spidreffe they spin and make thrids and cobwebs
for the toil and the snare, whilst her husband hunteth abroad some where for
his and their living: and is lurking secretly in some little hole in the wall,
to vvatch and to catch some beast to en^rap him in his net. And although his
body be little bigger then a peaze, yet has he for all that such spirit and
liveliness that sometime he takes great buzzing flies and little lezards in
his nets, and marketh so well his time to chase, that he seems to be an
Astrologian: he is contrary to us that tarry for fair weather, for he chaceth
when it is cloudie and darkesome, which presageth unto us rain, according to
the opinions of the two great Philosophers Aristotle and Pliny.

Hear thou the Frogs croke?

It Is sign of fair vveather or of rain, or of vvind, or of storm, or of
nothing.

See you that dog there, who pisseth against the wall?

He is as Plato says, in his second book of his Commonwealth, the most
Philosophicallest beast in the world.

But did you never see a dog meeting with a mary-bone, if you have seen him,
you might note with what devotion he does vvatch it: with what care he keeps
it: with what zeal he holds it: with what policy he sets his seete on
it: with what wisdom he tameth it: with what affection he bruseth it, and
with what diligence he sucketh it.

What moves him to do so? what is the hope of his study? what good pretends
he?

Nothing more then a little marrow. True it is, that this little is more
delicious then a great deal of all other things.

The reason why: because that the marrow is a meat labored to the perfection
of nature.

As says Galenus 3. lib. fac. etc.

Of all beasts there is none more sage, nor more subtle then the lack-anapes.

O the vilanous beast! He does nothing but mock every body: and shows his
tail to every one that goes by: he keeps not the house as the dog: he
draws not the plough as the Ox: he yields neither milk nor wool as the
sheep: he carries not his master as the Horse: he bears no burden as the
Ass. That which he does is but to defile and mar all: which is the cause
why he receives of every one so many blows and mowes.

Can you tell what my fellow-companion Maximilian told me?

What I pray thee.

That Ieronimo Pierruche is miserably inamoured of a pretty wench, and that
his brother Jack, he that played at nineholes with us, is bound with a
merchant, having quite left his learning: that is, he is promoted from the hall
into the kitchen.

What is this I hear?

This Ieronimo you knew him well fat slave, cherrie cheeked, fair and well
liking, merry, with a slicke face, pleasant, disposed, and a tratling
companion: Now he is lea^e, won, pale, looking like one half dead, vveake,
ugly, dreaming, loving to be alone, and cares for no bodies company: so that
none of those that had seen him before, could now know him again.

O the poor and wretched young man! Of what proceeds his grief?

Of love. Of love? Tell troth.

Now he is mad: he is foolish: oftentimes he walks alone: but will never
speak to any body: always mumbling or recording some thing in English verse,
that he has made to his sweete-heart and minion.

O caitiffe boy!

One while you shall see him feign a sea of tears, a lake of miseries, wring
his hands and vveep, accuse the heaven, curse the earth, make an anatomy of
his heart, to freeze, to burn, to adore, to play the Idolater, to admire, to
feign heavens, to forge hels, to counterfeit Sisyphus, to play the Tantalus, to
represent Titius Tragedy.

And by and by he exalts in his verses that Diana whom he loves best: her
hair is nothing but goldwire, her brows arches and vautes of Ebenus: her eyes
twinkling stars like Castor and Pollux, her looks lightnings: her mouth
Coral: her neck Orient-Pearle: her breath Baulme, Amber, and Musk: her
throat of snow: her neck milke-white: her dugs that she has on her breast,
Mountains or Apples of Alablaster. All the rest of her body is but a
prodigality and treasure of heaven and of nature, that she had reserved to
work the perfection of his mistres and dear.

It Is great danger least he fall beside himself in the end.

O the poor passionate is cruelly eclipsed! One while you shall see him drowned
in tears and lamentations, to make the air echo with his sighs, complaints,
murmurings, rages, imprecations: otherwhiles if he have got but a glaunce of
his goddess, you shall see him gay, glistering like an Emerawd, and pleasant,
sometime you shall see him cross, pass and repasse five or six times a day
through a street that he may have but one friendly look of her eye that he
loves best.

What will you give me if I show you a letter that he wrote to his sweet-hart.

I pray thee my minion do me this favor that I may see it.

I will read it out aloud, hearken.

Mistress your beauty is so excellent, so singular, so celestial, that I
believe Nature has bestowed it on you as a sampler to show how much she can do
when she will employ her full power and best skill. All that is in your self
is but honey, is but sugar, is but heavenly ambrosia. It was to you to whom
Paris should have judged the golden apple, not to Venus, no, nor to Juno, nor
to Minerua, for never was there so great magnificence in Juno, so great wisdom
in Minerua, so great beauty in Venus, as in you. O heavens, gods and
goddesses, happy shall he be to whom you grant the favor to col you, to kiss
you, and to lie with you. I cannot tell whether I am predestined by the
Fairies, wherefore I commend me to your good grace, and kissing your white
hands, humbly I take my leave without Adieu.

He understands already the courtisane Rhethoricke, the poor boy is blind,
and out of his best wit.

He will call himself home one day.

I shall be very glad for his sake truly.

I retire into the City, for we have been too long in this place.

Let us to go to Powles to see the Antiquities.

Let us go up into the Quire.

Who is buried within this wall?

It is Seba king of Saxons, who conquered this country of England.

See what a goodly toombe there is truly. Who is entombed here?

John of Gant duke of Lancaster, and son to king Henry the third.

See there his lance and his target of horn.

What Epitaph is this?

Of sir Philip Sidney, the peerless paragon of letters and arms.

Let us read it I pray you: England, Netherland, the Heavens, and the Arts,
The Soldiers, and the World, have made six parts
Of the noble Sydney: for none will suppose,
That a small heap of stones can Sydney enclose.
His body has England, for she it bred,
Netherland his blood, in her defense shed:
The Heavens have his soul, the Arts have his fame,
All Soldiers the grief, the World his good name.


It Is great pity of this young gentleman's death.

He is dead, and it is too late to call him from the dead.

Whose new arms be these?

Of my lord Chancellor of late memory, a man who deserved much more then I
can speak of at this time.

What black fellow is this?

It Is master John Collet, who built the school in Paules-churchyard.

Truly this Church is very long.

It is longer by five paces then our Lady Church at Paris.

How can you tell?

I have measured them both, but this is not so large nor built so neatly and
finely.

Yet did Englishmen build them both.

Let us go walk below in the body of the Church.

What ancient monument is this?

It is, as some say, of duke Humfrie of Gloucester who is buried here.

They say that he has commonly his Lieftenant here in Paul's, to know if there
be any news from France or other strange countries.

It Is true my friend, and also he has his Steward who inuiteth the bringers of
these news to take the pains to dine with his grace.

Keeps he a magnificent house?

Open house from five a clock in the morning till six a clock at night.

But for strangers I mean.

For strangers as well as for those of his own household and for citizens.

See me there three companions who are asleep in that corner upon a block. I
cannot tell whether they be footmen or travelers without horses.

They are of the dukes train.

They be knights of the post.

You are a skoffing companion, in matters of green apes faces.

Hark, if you stand in need of bale or surety: for five shillings these
fellows will lend you a false oath to bale you if it were ten thousand crowns.

You are a very Jew go.

And you are an eater of Serpents.

Know you that fellow who walks there clothed in satin? He has eaten his
corn in the^ grass.

He has made then fine greene-sauce. See how he squareth it like an
Historiographer. He is an Alchymist by his mine, and has multiplied all to
mooneshine.

He has then blown fair, and lives now as fish by the air.

I monder much at one thing, and it is, that there are so many false coyners of
money in England, and so few Alchymists.

Alchymists, I trust, are not coyners.

No, but sophisticators of metals are false lads.

I Will stand to it, that Chimistres are honest men.

I say neither good nor bad of them, let them multiply till their hearts ache,
and their purses crake.

Have you never studied Alchymistrie?

No, for it is a pure vanity.

O the sweet science! O the rich deceit to make the folosophers stone!

How might one do to make it? I will say to find it out.

You must bestow much blowing on all kind of metals.

Let me alone then, is it all in blowing well?

To tell you troth, this secret has been discovered in old time, and in our
days also, but by two or three only: Who were God-a-mighties godsonnes.

How call you this secret?

It Is called humane blood, the water of life, the dragon, the crow, the Elixir,
the mercury of the Philosophers, the drie-water, the multiplying spirit, the
tree of life, the living water, the seed of gold, the holy remedy of all
diseases.

Tell me, I pray you, what are the virtues of this stone?

This stone is of such virtue, that if men mix one part among a thousand
parts, yea ten thousand parts of quicksilver or of Tin, of lead, of iron,
of copper well prepared, they shall be incontinent and in a moment turned into
pure gold, fine, and of better alloy then any natural, or myner all gold can
be.

Has it no other properties?

A thousand: for in less then a minute it heal^th all diseases, preuenteth
those that would come: prolongeth the life: and in such wise, that whosoever
shall use of this gold, shall live many hundred years, as did the holy
Patriarchs.

Have you ever known any that had that receipt?

The Emperor keeps a man prisoner at Prage in Bohemia, who could make.

What? Gold: the Philosophers Stone: the Elixir, the powder of Proiection: the
great work and secret of the Chymisters.

Why is he prisoner then?

Because he has made gold purer by Art, then it was by Nature.

It Is great pity truly. But let us prate a little more before we go any
further.

Content.

See you that man there? He is neither too little, nor too big.

No: for he is of an indifferent stature.

He is a fine man of his person, and has none other fault but that he is a
thief, a drunkard, a cogger, a dicer, a cutter, if there were ever any in
London.

He has his fingers made for the nonst as Minerua or Araohne, and bath
heretofore cried Triacle, and in sum, is the finest maister-flie in England,
and carries always a picklocke in his pocket, wherewith he will pick open
any door. Let him not come near your fathers Coffers if you be wise.

He has threescore and three ways to find out money always, but he has two
hundred and fourteen ways to spend it.

Now let us return to our lodgings: we will go through Cheap Side and by the
Bourse.

We shall see as we go some fair faces.

Fie villain, that shall be dishonor to me who am a young Academike.

See where a fine girl passes by: she has a smug and a glistering face.

I will not look upon her: for in my mind it is a most filthy thing for young
Students to stand gazing after foolish and fond girls.

See thou this Cross?

It Is one of the fairest monuments of the City of London.

It is the Ornement of the great, large, and the fairest street of the City.
It Is all gilden without side.

I never saw the like.

It cost more then ten thousand crowns the building and trimming.

It Is much that, I think thou lie now.

Did thou never see the Pyramides which is in Saint Peter's Churchyard at
Rome?

No: for I was never there.

I have been there: and I have seen it too: and I say that the Cross in
Cheap brings more beauty and ornament to the City of London, then does
Julius Caesar's Pyramides to Rome.

See the Standard of Cheap Side hard by.

I see it well: it is a Condit of water.

They say it has been surety and pledge for many good fellows, when they
have had small store of money in their purses, and few friends to put in any
pledge and bale for themselves.

Now we are got to the Change.

The Exchange was built in the year 1567. by the Knight sir Thomas Gressam;
who has also given large revenues to the City of London, for the
maintenance of a College and Schoole-maisters to read therein the seven
liberal Sciences.

London shall then be an University.

That's true: but God he knows when. Look the Merchants vviues which walk
here. They are very pleasant, and beautiful truly. Know you not the
Pilgrimesse who passes there?

She is young, frisking, elegant, gallant, too too gracious toward her
neighbors: you never saw a more proper woman, a finer minion, more quick at
her hand and her needle then this is.

See a fine counterfeit of a Cuckold who embraces her!

Truly one may hereafter take Lions by their crags, Horses by their maines:
Bears by their nosthrils: Buffes by their mussels, Wolves by their tails:
Goats by their beardes:

Birds by their feet: Asses by their ears: men by their words.

And where will you take hold of Oxen and Cuckolds then?

By the horns.

It Is pratled, chatted, and babbled enough. Lets go this way: lets go that
way: Along, along.

The praise of France, translated out of the works of William Salustius, Lord
of Bartas.
O Fruitful France! Most happy Land, happy and happy thrice!
O pearl of rich European bounds! O earthly Paradise!
All hail sweet soil! O France the mother of many conquering knights,
Who planted once their glorious standards like triumphing vvights,
Upon the banckes of Euphrates where Titan Day-torch bright
Rises, and bloody swords vnsheathd where Phoebus drounds his light.
The mother of many Artist-hands whose workmanship most rare
Dimmes Natures works, and with her fairest flowers does compare.
The Nurse of many learned wits who fetch their skill divine
From Rome, from Greece, from Egypt far, and ore the learned shine,
As does the glymmering-Crimsin-dye over the darkest gray:
Titan ore stars, or Phoebus flowers ore marigolds in May.
Thy floods are Ocean Seas, thy Towns to Provinces arise,
Whose civil government their wales has raisd to lofty skies.
Thy soil is fertill-temperate-sweete, no plague thine air does trouble,
Bastillyons four borne in thy bounds: two Seas and mountains double,
The Crocodile fierce-weeping-teares annoyeth not thy maine,
The speckled-race of crawling Serpents hant not thy domaine,
Not in one Acre of thy land that cursed seed is seen,
Backs-venimous-twinding to and fro t'infect thy meadows green.
The Tigre-swift of-foote prays not within thy mountains hollow,
Nor hungry-foming ore thy Plains enraged his chase does follow.
No Lions in thy deserts lurk: no Seahorse monster-rumbling,
Swimmes to thy maine, and steals thy infants under waves them tumbling.
If in thy streaming-riuers-rich-swift-gliding be not rold
The golden sands mong Pibble-stones, nor ore of massiue gold:
If silver pure dropping from down thy mountains be not found,
And every step Pearl, Ruby, Diamond, Grenate in thy ground,
In countre-change thou art as rich in Wadde, in Wool, in Wines,
In Salt Pits, Sindon fine, good Grain: which are sufficient mines
To make thee far and near renound of earthly Kingdoms Queens.
It Is only Peace, thou lackst, Alas! O God whose Eyes have seen
Our blessings and our miseries, thine Eyes of mercy glance
Upon our present State and quench the flames consuming France:
Sweet father turn our storms to calmes: Thy heavy hand retire,
Hide quickly in the Quiver all the Arrows of thine Ire.
FINIS.

