THE BOOK NAmed the Governor, devised by sir Thomas Elyot knight.

1534

The proheme of Thomas Elyot knight unto the most noble and victorious prince
king Henry the eight king of England and France, defender of the true faith,
and lord of Irelande.
I LATE CONSIDERING (most excellent prince and mine only redoubted sovereign
lord) my duty, that I owe to my natural country, with my faith also of
alligeance and oath, wherewith I am double bound unto your majesty, more over
thaccompte that I have to render for that one little talent delivered to me, to
employe (as I suppose) to the increase of virtue, I am (as god judge me)
violently styred to deuulgate or set forth some part of my study, trusting
thereby to acquit me of my duties to god, your highness, and this my country.
Wherefore taking comfort and boldness, partly of your graces most beneuolent
inclination toward the universal weal of your subjects, partly inflamed
with zeal, I have now enterprised to describe in our vulgar tunge, the form
of a just public weal: which matter I have gathered, as well of the
sayings of most noble autors (greeks and latyns) as by mine own experience: I
being continually trained in some daily affairs of the public weal of this
your most noble realm almost from my childehode. Which attemptate is not of
presumption to teach any person, I my self having most need of teaching: But
only to the intent that men, which will be studious about the weal public, may
find the thing thereto expedient co^pendiously written. And for as much as this
present book treats of the education of them, that hereafter may be demed
worthy to be governors of the public weal under your highness (which Plato
affirms to be the first and chief part of a publyke weal, Solomon saying
also, where governors be not, the people shall fall into ruin.) I therefore
have named it the Governor, and do now dedicate it unto your highness as the
first fruits of my study: verily trustinge that your most excellent wisdom
will therein esteem my loyal heart and diligent endeavor, by the example of
Artaxerxes, the noble king of Persia: who rejected not the pore husband man,
which offered to him his homely hands full of clean water, but most
graciously received it with thanks, estemynge the present not after the
value, but rather to the will of the gyuer. Semblably king Alexaunder retained
with him the poet Cherilus honorably, for writing his history, all though
that the poet was but of a small estimation: which that prince did not for
lack of judgment, he being of excellent lernyng, as disciple to Arystotell:
but to thentent that his liberalite employed on Cherilus, should animate or
give courage to others much better lernid, to contend with him in a semblable
enterprise. And if, most virtuous prince, I may perceive your hyghnes to be
herewith pleased, I shall soon after (god gyuynge me quietness) present your
grace with the residue of my study and labors. Wherein your highness shall well
perceive, that I nothing esteem so much in this world, as your royal
astate (my most dear souerayn lord, and the publyke weal of my country)
protestynge unto your excellent majesty, that where I commend herin any one
virtue, or disprayse any one vice, I mean the general description of the one and
the other, without any other particular mening to the reproach of any one
person: to the which protestation I am now driven through the malignitie of
this present time, all disposed to malicious detraction. Wherefore I most humbly
beseech your highness, to dayne to be patron and defendour of this lyttelle
warke, again the assaults of malign interpretours: which fail not to rent
and deface the renoume of writers, they them selfs being in nothing to the
publyque weal profitable: which is by no man sooner perceived, than by your
highness, being both in wisdom and very nobility equal to the most
excellent princis, whom I beseech god ye may surmounte in long life and
perfect felicity.

Amen.
The Chapyters contained in the first book.
THe signification of a publyke weal, and why it is called in latin
Respublica. Cap. 1. fol. 1. That one sovereign governor ought to be in a
public weal, and what damage has happened by lackyng one soueraygne
governor. Cap. ii. fo. 6. That in a publyque weal ought to be inferior
governors calledde magistrates. cap. 3. fol. 13. The education or form of
bringing up the child of a gentle man, which is to have authority in the
public weal. ca. 4. fo. 15. The order of learning before the child comes to
thage of.vii. years. cap. v. fo. 17. When a tutour should be provided, and what
shall app ertayne to his office. Ca. vi. fo. 19. In what wise music may be
unto a noble man necessary. cap. 7. fol. 20. That it is commendable in a gentyl
manne to paynte or carue exactely, if nature do thereto induce him. Cap. 8. fo.
23. What exact diligence should be in chosing of masters. Cap. ix. fo. 26.
what order should be in lernyng, and which autours should be first radde. Ca.
x. fo. 28. The most necessary studies succedynge the lesson of Poets. cap.
xi. fo. 33. why gentylmenne in this present time be not equal in doctrine to
the ancient noble men. Cap. xii. fol. 40. The second and third decay of
learning. Cap. xiii. fo. 43. How the students in the laws of this realm may
take excellent commodity by the lessons of sundry doctrines. ca. xiiii. fo.
50. The causes why in England be few perfect schole masters. Ca. xv. fo.
56. Of sundry fourmes of exercise necessary for a gentylman. Cap. xvi. fol.
57. Exercises whereof comes both recreation and profit. Cap. xvii. fo. 59. The
ancient huntyng of greeks Romans and Persians. cap. xviii. fo. 62. That all
daunsynge is not to be reproved. Cap. xix. fol. 67. The first beginning of
daunsyng, and the old estimation thereof. Ca. xx. fo. 69. wherefore in the good
order of daunsynge a man and a womanne do daunse together. Cap. xxi. fo. 77.
How daunsynge may be an introduction into the first moralle virtue called
Prudence. cap. xxii. fo. 79. Of providence and industry. cap. xxiii. fo. 81.
Of circumspection. ca. xxiiii. fol. 83. Of election, experience, and modestye.
cap. 25. 86. Of other exercyses, which moderatelye used, be to every astate of man expediente. ca. xxvi. fol. 88. That shotyng in a long bow is principal
of all other exercises. cap. xxvii. fo. 91.
The chapiters contained in the second book.
What thing he that is elected to be a governor of a public weal ought to
premeditate. cap. pri. fo. 94. what majesty is. ca. ii. fo. 96. Of apparaile
belonging to a governor or great counsaylour. ca. iii. fo. 101. what very
nobility is. cap. iiii. fo. 103. Of affability and the vtilite thereof. ca. v.
106. How noble a virtue placabilite is. ca. vi. 111. That a governor ought to
be mercyfulle, and the dyuersytie between mercy and vain pity. cap. vii. fo.
116. The three principalle parts of Humanity. cap. viii. fol. 121. Of what
excelle^ce beneuole^ce is. ca. ix. 122. Of beneficence and liberality. cap. x.
fo. 130. The true definition of amity, and between what persons it happens.
cap. xi. fo. 132. The wonderful history of Titus and Gisyppus, wherein is the
image of perfect amity. cap. xii. fol. 136. The diuisyon of Ingratitude and
the dysprayse thereof. cap. xiii. fo. 152. The election of friends, and the
diversity of flatterers. cap. xiiii. fo. 154.
The chapiters contained in the third book.
OF the most excellent virtue named Justice. capi. i. fol. 158. The first
part of Justice distrybutyfe. cap. ii. fo. 159. The three notable councelles of
Reasone, society, and knowledge. cap. iii. fo. 163. Of Fraud and Deccite,
which be again Justice. Cap. iiii fol. 167. That Justice ought to be between
enemies. cap. v. fol. 170. Of faith called in latin Fides. ca. vi. fo. 171 Of
promise and couenaunte, and of what importance oaths were in old time.
Capitul. vii. fol. 178. Of the noble virtue Fortytude, and the two extremities
thereof audacitie and timerosytie. Cap. viii. fol. 181. In what acts fortitude
is. Cap. ix. fo. 184. Of peynefulnesse a companyon of Fortitude. Cap. x. fo.
185. Of the fair virtue patience, and the true defynition thereof. Cap. xi.
fol. 188. Of patience in susteynynge wrongs and rebukes. Cap. xii. fo. 189. Of
repulse or hynderaunce of promotion. Capi. xiii. fol. 190. Of magnanimity,
which may be named valiant courage. Cap. xiiii. fo. 193. Of obstinacy, a
familyar vice following magnanimity. Cap. xv. fo. 196. Of a perilous vice
called a^bition. xvi. fo. eo. The true signifycation of abstinence and
contynence. Cap. xvii. fol. 199. Examples of Contynence given by noble men
Cap. xviii. fol. 202. Of co^stance called also stabilite. C. xix. 204 The true
sygnification of Temperaunce Cap. xx. fol. 207. Of moderation a spyce of
Temperaunce. Cap. xxi. fol. 208. Of Moderation in diete called sobriety. Ca.
xxii. fo. 211. Of sapience and the definition thereof.xxiii. 215. The true
sygnification of understanding. Cap. xxiiii. fol. 222. Of experience precedynge
our time with a defense of hystories. Ca. xxv. fo. 226. The experience
necessary for the person of every governor. Cap. xxv. fo. 230. Of detraction
and the image thereof made by Apelles the noble paynter. Ca. xxvi. 233. Of
consultation and Counsel, and in what form they ought to be used. ca. xxvii.
235. The principal considerations to be in every consultation. Cap. xxviii. fo.
237. The second consideration with the co^clusyon of this warke. Cap. xix. fol.
239.
Tabula Alphabetica.
ABsteining from rewardis. 199 Adolescency. fol. 103. Alexa^ds music. 21.
Alexaunders cruelty. foli. 108. Amity. fo. 121. Ambition. 198. Archa federis.
74. Art of Rhetoric in motyng. 53. Audacitie. 182. Ancient robes. 104.
Arundell a horse. 62.
B
Be. fol. 7. Beneuole^ce. 121. 126 Beneficence. 130. A Braule in daunsynge.
fo. 80. Bucephal a horse. 61
C
Ca^pus Martius. 61. Cards. fol. 91. Celeritie, or quickness. fol. 80.
Ceremonies. fo. 162. Chesse. fol. 91. Charity. 121. 125. Civil wars. fo.
11. Comedies. 47. Commodities that do happen by aduanceme^t of good me^. 191.
Choribantes. 69. Cesars tyranny. 108. Continence. 204. Confydence. 206.
Constaunce egall to Justyce. 205. Cosmographie, and the commodities there of.
fol. 35. Consideration. 82. Consideration in giuynge. 130. Cou^saylours disers.
fol. 90. Cou^cellors. 163. 238 Cruelty. 113. 116. Churches material and
ornamentis. 161. Curates. 69. Courage. 193. Couetise. 198. Consideration of go
uernours. 95. Consultation. 235. Counsel. 235. 137. 238 Counsel proved by iii.
things. 236.
D
Damage ensuynge lack of liberty of speech. 109. Decay of archers. 93 Decii
and their auowe. 105. Defense with weapons. fol. 61. Devotion. 160. Dimocratia.
fo. 6. Dionise the tiran. 18. Discretion. 87. Disobedience. 95.
E
Education of noble wits. fo. 15. England divided. 11. Election. 86.
Eloquence. 44. 4^. Epistol of king ^^ilip to Aristotle. ^^. Esops fables.
eode^. Aequalitie in sowles and corporalle substance. fo. 164. Estimation of
disers folio. 90. Experyence or execution. fol. 86. Exercises for preser uyng
of health. 92.
F
Faithful tutor. 177. Faithefulnes in subjects. 177. Faith neglectid. 172
Festina lent. 81. Fidelity. 172. 173. Flattery. 156. Flatterers. 157. Form
of an oath. 179. Friends. 157. Fraud and deceit. 167. 168. 169. Frugalitie.
212. Frendeshyppe. 150. 151. 154.
G
Gentilmen. fo. 14. Gelo king of Sycyle. 72. Gentle countenance. fol. 107.
Gouerna^ce. 166. 181 Gouernesse. 15.
H
Honor. fol. 4. 159. Histories. 36. 175. 226. 227. Haukynge. 66. Hangynges and
plate mete for a noble man. fol. 102. Haut cou^tena^ce. 106 Henry beau clerk,
king of England. folio. 40. Honesty. 170. Huntyng of Persyans, Greeks, and
Romans. 64. 65, 66.
I
Infancy. 16. Instruction in infancye. fol. 18. 28. Industry. 82. Idelnesse.
88. Iuell custom. 9. Ire, or wrath. 111. Justice. 123. 158. 167. Iniuurie. fo.
167. Incontinence. 208. Image of detraction. fol. 134.
K
Kings of Romans. fo. 10. King Edgar. 12. King David daunfynge openly. 74.
King Henry the seventh. fo. 85. King Xerxes. 89. King Codrus. 125. Kyndenesse
in beasts. 152. Knowledge. 162. 164 166.
L
Leonidas. fo. 20. Lisippus. 25. Liberality. 88. 121. Liberty in speking.
108. 109. Liberal man. 122. 130. 131. Loyalty. 173. 174. Logike. fol. 33.
Love. 121.
M
Majesty. fo. 10. Man's qualities. 78. Maturitie. 80. Mansuetude. 88. Mercy
showed by Augustus to his en nemye. 117. Mercy and gentylnesse. fo. 119.
Modesty. 87. 88. Moral philosophy. folio. 38. Moderation of wrath fol. 210.
Musis. 219.
N
Nources how they should be chosen. 15. Name of a king whe^s it proceeded. 158.
Nobility. 103. 104. Numa king of Romans. ibidem. Nygardshyp. 213.
O
Office of a tutor. 20. Occupation. 12. Opinion. 189, Opportunity. 86. Order.
fol. 2. Oaths. 179.
P
Patience. 125. 189. 191. Pattern of a perfect governor. 187. Peinfulnes in
herig controversies. 187. Perjury. 179. Playeng at dice. 89. Phoenix Achilles
tu tour. fol. 19. Plebs. fol. 2. Plebeii. codem. Poets. 33. 46. Policy of
Anniball. 186. Placabilitie. 114. Populus. fo. 1. Profit. eodem. Providence.
81. Prudence. 79. Prodigalite. 131. 132. Princis of Greece. 9. Public weal. 1.
Public. ibide^. Public and common. 2 Preparation of governors. 95. Promise.
181. Puissaunce lackinge benevolence. 129.
R
Respublica. fol. 1. Rennynge. 59. Rhetorike. 33. Reprinse in daunsynge. fo.
83. Remedy against impacience. 190. Rydinge and vauntynge of horses. 61.
S
Sapience word is to governors. 96. Sapience. 221. Sharpness of Justyce.
fol. 123. Science. fo. 221. Singles in da^sing. 81 Simplicity. 169. Shotyng in
a long bow. 92. Sobriety. 212. Slownesse. 80. Swimming. 61.
T
Tables. fol. 90. Table to hang in governors chambres. fol. 98. Temperaunce.
208. Tenyse play. 92. Timorositie. 182. Tullies officis. 38. Treatorie of
Lucyfer. fol. 89. Tolleration of Fortune good and bad. 109 Treason. 170.
Trust. 173.
U
Uayne pity. 119. Virtue. 130. Uengeance for treason. 178. Ualiant man. 182.
184 Understandyng. 4. Wrastlynge. 59.
FINIS TABVLAE.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The signification of a publyke weal, and why it is called in latin Respublica.
A Public weal is in sundry wise defined by philosophers, but knowing by
experience, that the often repetition of any thing of grave or sad
importance, will be tedyous to the reders of this warke, who perchance for
the more part have not ben trained in lerning containing semblable matter: I
have compiled one definition out of many, in as compendious form, as my poor
wit can deuyse: trusting that in those few words the true signification of
a public well shall evidently appear, to them whom reason can satisfy.

A public weal is a body living, compact public weal.
or made of so^dry astates and degrees of men, which is dysposed by the order
of equytye, and governed by the rule and moderation of reason. In the latin
tongue it is called Respublica, of the which the Respublica.
word Res, has diverse significations, and does not only betoken that, that
is called a thing, which is distinct from a person, but also signyfieth
astate, condityon, substance, and profyt.

In our old vulgar, profytte is called profytte.
weal. And it is called a welthy countray, wherein is al thing that is
profitable: And he is a welthy man, that is rich in money and substance.
Publyke (as Uarro says) publyke.
is diriuied of people: which in latin is called Populus. wherefore it seems,
that men have been long abused, in calling Rempublicam, a commune weal. And
they which do suppose it so to be called, for that, that every thing should
be to all men in commune, without discrepaunce of any astate or condition, be
thereto moved more by sensualite, than by any good reason or inclination to
humanity. And that shall so one appear unto them, that will be satysfied
either with authority, or with natural order and example.

First the propre and true signification of the words, Public and Comune,
which be borrowed of the latin tongue, for the insufficiency of our own
langage, shall sufficiently declare the blyndenes of them, which have hitherto
holden and meynteyned the said opinions. As I have said, publyke took his
beginning of people, which in latin is Populus: in which word populus.
is contained, all the inhabytantes of a realm or city, of what astate or
condition so ever they be.

Plebs in englisshe, is called the communaltie, plebs.
which signifies only the multitude, wherein be contained the base and
vulgar inhabitants, not auaunced to any honor or dignity: which is also
used in our daily comunication. for in the city of London, and other cities,
they that be none aldermen, or sheriffs, be called communers. And in the
country, at a sessions, or other assembly, if no gentle men be there at, the
saying is, that there was none but the co^munaltye, which proves, in mine
opinion, that Plebs in latin, is in english communaltie: and Plebeij be
communers. plebeii.


And consequentely there may appear, like diversity to be in english,
between a publyke weal, and a commune weal, as publyke and commune.
should be in latin, between Res publica, and Res plebeia. And after that
signification, if there should be a commune weal, either the communers only
must be welthy, and the gentyl and noble men, nedy and miserable: orelles
excludyng gentylitie, al men must be of one degree and sort, and a new name
provided. For as much as Plebs, in latin, and comminers in english, be
words only made for the discrepance of degrees, whereof proceeds Order:
which Order.
in things, as well natural as supernatural, has ever had such a
preeminence, that thereby the incomprehensible majesty of god, as it were by a
bright leme of a torche or candell, is declared to the blind inhabitants of
this world.

More over, take away Order from all things, what should than remain? Certes
nothing finally, except sum man would imagine eftsoon, Chaos, which of
some is expounded, a confuse mixture. Chaos.


Also where there is any lack of order, needs must be perpetual conflycte.
And in things, subject to nature, no thing of him self only may be
nourysshed: but when he has distroyed that, wherewith he does participate, by
the order of his creation, he him self of necessity must than perysshe,
whereof ensues universal dyssolution.

But now to prove by example of those things, that be within the coumpasse of
man's knowledge, of what estimation Order is, not only among men, but also
with god, all be it his wisdom, bountye, and magnificence, can be with no
tongue or pen sufficiently expressed. Has not he set degrees and astates in
all his glorious warkes?

First in his heavenly ministers, whom, as the Church affyrmethe, he has
constituted to be in diverse degrees, called hierarches. Also Christ says, by
his evangelist, that in the house of his father (which is god) be many
mansions.

But to treat of that, which by natural Elemenes.
understanding, may be comprehended, Behold the four elements, whereof the
body of man is compacte, how they be set in their places, called spheres,
higher or lower, according to the souerayntie of their natures: that is to
say, the fire, as the most pure elemente, having in it nothing, that is
corruptible, in his place, is hygheste, and above other elements.

The air, which next to the fire, is most pure in substance, is in the
second sphere or place: The water, which is somewhat consolidate, and
approaches to corruption, is next unto the earth: The earth, which is of
substance gros and ponderous, is set, of all elements, most lowest.

Behold also the order, that god has put generally in all his creatures,
beginning at the most inferior or base, and assendynge upward: he made not
only herbs to garnishe the earth, but also trees of a more eminent stature,
than herbs: and yet in the one and the other, be degrees of qualities, some
pleasante to behold, some delycate or good in taste, other wholesome and
medycinable, some commodyous and necessary. Semblably in birds, beastis, and
fysshes, some be good for the sustina^ce of man: some bear things profitable
to sundry uses: other be apt to occupation and labor: in diverse is
strength and fiersenes only: in many is both strength and commodity: some
other serve for pleasure: none of them has all these qualities: few have the
more part or many, specially beauty, strength, and profytte. But where any
is found, that has many of the said propreties, he is more set by, than all the other, and by that estimation, the order of his place and degree euidentely
appears. So that every kind of trees, herbs, birds, beastis, and fisshes,
beside their diversity of fourmes, have (as who says) a peculyer dysposityon,
appropered unto them, by god their creator: so that in every thing is order,
and without order may be nothing stable or permanent. And it may not be
called Order, except it do conteyne in it, degrees, high and base, according
to the merit or estimation of the thing that is ordered.

Now to return to the astate of man kind, for whose use, all the said
creatures were ordained of god, and also excels them all, by prerogative of
knowledge and wisdom. It seems, that in him should be no less providence of
god declared, tha^ in the inferior creatures: but rather with a more perfect
order and dysposition. And therefore it appears, that god gives not to every
man like gifts of grace, or of nature, but to some more, to some less, as it
lyketh his divine majesty. Ne they be not in common (as fantastical foles
would have all things) nor one man has not all virtues, and good qualities.
vudersta^dynge.


Not with standing, for as much as understanding, is the most excellent
gift, that man can receive in his creation, whereby he does approach most
nyghe unto the similitude of god, which understanding is the pryncipall part
of the soul: It is therefore congruent, and according, that as one excels
an other, in that influence, as thereby being next to the similitude of his
maker: so should the astate of his person be auaunced in degree, or place,
where understanding may profyt, which is also dystrybuted into sundry uses,
faculties, and offices, necessary for the living and governance of mankind.
And like as the angels, which be most fervent in contemplation, be highest
exalted in glory (after the opinion of holy doctors) and also the fire, which
is the most pure of elements, and also does clarify the other inferioure
eleme^tes, is deputed to the highest sphere or place. So in this world, they,
which excelle other in this influence of understand dynge, and do imploye it to
the deteynyng of other within the bounds of reason, and show them, how to
provide for their necessary living: such ought to be set in a more high
place, than the residue, where they may se, and also be seen, that by the
beams of their excellent wit, showed through the glass of authority,
other of inferior understanding, may be directed to the way of virtue and
commodious living.

And unto men of such virtue, by very equity apperteineth Honor, as their
just Honor.
reward and duty: which by other men's labors, must also be meynteyned,
according to their merytes. For as much as the said persons, excellinge in
knowledge, whereby other be governed: be mynysters for the only profit and
commodity of them, which have not equal understanding: where they, which
do exercise artificial science, or corporal labor, do not travail for their
superiors only, but also for their own necessity. So the houseband man
fedethe him self and the clothe maker: the clothe maker apparayleth him self
and the housebande: they both socour other artificers: other artificers them:
they and other artificers, them that be governors.

But they that be governors (as I before said) nothing do acquire by the said
influence of knowledge for their own necessities, but do imploye all the powers
of their wits, and their dylygence, to the only preservation of other their
inferiors. Among which inferiors also behooves to be a disposition and
order, according to reason: that is to say, that the slothful or idell
person, do not participate with him, that is industrious, and takes pain,
where by the fruits of his labors, should be diminisshed, wherein should be
none equalite, but thereof should proceed dyscourage, and finally dysolution,
for lack of prouysion. Wherefore it can none other wise stand with reason, but
that the astate of the person in preeminence of living, should be esteemed, with
his understanding, labor, and policy: where unto must be added an
augmentation of honor and substance, which not only impresseth a reverence,
whereof proceeds due obedience among subjects, but also inflameth men,
naturally inclined to idelnes, or sensual appetite, to coueyte like fortune,
and for that cause, to dis pose them to study or occupation.

How to conclude my first assertion or argument. where al thing is comune,
there lacks order: and where order lackethe, there all thing is odyouse, and
uncomely. And that have we in daily experience. for the pannes and pottes,
garnysshe well the ketchyn, and yet should they be to the chamber none
ornamente. Also the beds, testars and pyllowes, beseme not the hall, no more
than the carpettes and kusshines become the stable. Semblably the potter and
tynker, only perfect in their craft, shall littell do, in the ministration of
Justice. A ploughman or carter, shall make but a foble answer to an
ambassador. Also a wayuer or fuller, should be an unmeet captain of an army,
or in any other office of a governor. wherefore to conclude, it is only a
publyke weal, where, like as god has dysposed the said influence of
understanding, is also appointed degrees and places, according to the
excellency thereof, and thereto also would be substance convenient, and
necessary, for the ornamente of the same: which also impresseth a reverence
and due obedience to the vulgar people or co^munaltie, and without that, it
can be no more said, that there is a public weal, than it may be affyrmed,
that a house without his propre and necessary ornaments, is well and
sufficiently furnyshed.

That one soueraygne governor ought to be in a publyke weal. And what damage
has happened, where a multitude has had equal auctorite without any
soueraygne. Cap. ii.
Like as to a castle or fortres, suffiseth one owner or soueraign, and where
any mo be of like power and authorite, seldom comes the warke to perfection,
or being all ready made, where the one diligently ouerseth, and the other
neglects, in that conten tion all is subverted and comes to ruin, In
se^blable wise does a public weal, that has no chief governors than one.
Example we may take of the Greeks, among whom in diverse cities, wear diverse
fourmes of publyke weals, governed by multitudes: wherein one was most
tolerable, where the governance and rule was always permitted to them, which
excelled in virtue, and was in the Greek tongue called Aristocratia, in latin
Optimorum Potentia, in english, the rule of me^ of best disposition. which the
Chebanes of long time observed.

An other publyque weal was among the Atheniensis, where equalytye was of
astate among the people, and only by their hole consent, their City and
dominions were governed: which moughte well be called a Monster with many
heedes, nor never it was certain or stable, and often times they banisshed, or
slew the best cytezins, which by their virtue and wise dome, had most
profited to the publyke weal. This manner of governance was called in greek
Dimocratia, in latin, Popularis Dimocratia.
potentia: in english, the rule of the comminaltie. Of these two gouernances,
none may be sufficient. For in the first, which consists of good men, virtue
is not so constant in a multitude, but that some being ones in authority, be
incensed with glory, some with ambition, other with couetise and desire of
treasure or possessions, whereby they fall in to contention, and finally, where
any achiueth the superiority, the hole gouerna^ce is reduced unto a few in
nombre, which fearing the multitude, and their mutabilitie, to the intent to
keep them in dread to rebel, rules by terror, and cruelty, thinking
thereby, to keep them self in suertie. Not withstanding, rancour coarcted, and
long deteyned in a narowe room, at the last brasteth out, with intolerable
vyolence, and brings all to confusion. For the power, that is practiced, to
the hurt of many, can not continue.

The popular astate, if it any thing do vary from equality of substance, or
estimation, or that the multitude of people, have over much liberty, of
necessity one of these inconuenie^ces must happen, either tyranny, where he
that is to much in favor, would be eleuate, and suffer none equality, or else
in to the rage of a communaltie, which of al rules is most to be feared. For
like as the communes, if they feel some severity, do humbly serve and obey,
so where they embracing a license, refuse to be brydeled, do flyng and plunge:
and if they ones throw down their governor, they order every thing without
justice, only with vengeance and cruelty, and with incomparable diffycultie,
and uneath by any wisdom, be pacified and brought again into order. Wherefore
undoubtedly, the best and the most sure gouerna^ce, is by one King or Prince,
which rules only for the weal of his people: and that manner of guernaunce
is best approved, and has longest continued, and is most ancient. For who
can deny, but that all thing in heaven and earth is governed by one god, by one
perpetual order, by one providence? One son rules over the day, and one
Moon over the night. And to descend down to the earth.

In a little beast, which of all other is most to be maruayled at, I mean
the Be, Be.
is left to man by nature, as it seems, a perpetual figure, of a just
guernaunce or rule: who have among them, one principal Be, for their
governor, which excels all other in greatenes, yet has he no prick or
stinge, but in him is more knowledge, thanne in the residue. For if the day
following shall be fair and dry, and that the bees may issue out of their
stalles, with out peril of rain, or vehement wynd, in the morning erely he
callethe them, making a noise, as it were the sown of a hurne, or a trumpet,
and with that, all the residue pre pare them to labor, and flees abroad,
gatherynge nothing, but that shall be sweet and profitable, all though they
sytte often times on herbs, and other things, that be venomous and stynkynge.
The capirayne him self, labors not for his sustynaunce, but all the other
for him: he only sees, that if any drane, or other unprofitable be, enters
in to the hyue, and consumes the honye, gathered by other, that he be
immediately expelled from that company. And when there is a another nombre of
bees increased, they semblably have also a captain, which be not suffered to
continue with the other. Wherefore this new company, gathered in a swarm,
having their captain among them, and enuir onynge him, to preserve him from
harm, issue forth, sekinge a new habitation: which they find in some tree,
except with some pleasant noise, they be alured and conveyed unto an other
hyue.

I suppose, who seriously beholds this example, and has any commendable wit,
shall thereof gather much mattyer, to the fourmyng of a public weal. But
because I may not be long therein, considering my purpose, I would the reder
hereof, if he be learned, should repair to the Georgikes of Uirgile, or to Plini,
or Collumella, where he shall find the example more ample, and better declared.

And if any desires to have the governance of one person, proved by
histories, let him first resort to the holy scripture, where he shall find,
that almyghtye god commanded Moises only, to bring his elected Moises.
people out of captivity, giuinge only to him that authority, without
appoyntinge to him any other assystence of equal power or dignity: except in
the message to king Pharao, wherein Aaron, rather as a Raron.
minister thanne a companyon, went with Moises. But only Moises conducted the
people through the red see, he only governed them forty years in deserte.
And because Dathan and Abiron disdayned his Dathan and Abiron.
rule, and coueted to be equal with him, the earth opened, and fire issued out,
and swalowed them in, with all their holle familye, and confederates, to the
no^bre of. 14700. And all though Hietro, Moses father in law, counseled him
to depart his importable The counsel of Hietro.
labors, in continual iugeme^tes, unto the wise men, that were in his company:
he not withstandyng, still retained the souerayntie, by goddis commandment,
until a little before he died, he resigned it to Iosue, assigned by god to be
ruler after him.

Semblably after the death of Iosue, by Iosue successor to Moises.
the space of. 246. years, succeeded from time to time, one ruler among the
Jews, which was chosen for his excellency in virtue, and specilly justice.
Wherefore he was called the judge, until the Israelites desired of almighty god,
to let them have a king, as other people had: who appointed to them Saul, to
be their king, who exceded Saul.
all other in stature.

And so successively one king governed all the people of Israel, unto the time
of Roboaz, son of the noble king Salomo^: who being unlike to his father in
wisdom, Roboaz
practiced tyranny among his people. Wherefore. ix. parts of them, which
they called Tribus, forsook him, and elected Hieroboam, late servant to
Solomon, to be their king, only the.x. part remaining with Roboaz. And so
in that realm were contynually two kings, until the king of Mede had
depopulate the country, and brought the people in captiuytie to the city of
Babylon: So that during the time, that two kings rayned over the jews, was
ever continual battle among them selfs: where if one king had always rayned
like to David or Solomon, of like lyhode the country should not so sone have been brought in captivity.

Also in the time of the Machabeis, as long as they had but one busshop, which
was their ruler, and was in the stead of a prince, they valiantly resysted the
gentiles: and as well the Romans, than great lords of the world, as
Persians, and diverse other realms, desired to have with them amity and
aliaunce: and all the inhabitants of that country, lived in great weal and
quietness. But after that by symonye and ambition, there happened to be two
bysshoppes, which divided their authoryties, and also the Romans had divided
the realm of Judea to four princes, called Tetrarchas, and also constytuted a
Romayne captain or presidente over them: among the heddes there never cessed
to be sedition, and perpetual dyscorde: whereby at the last the people was
dystroyed, and the country brought to desolation and horrible barrennes.

The Greeks, which were assembled to revenge the reproach of Menelaus, that he
took of the Trojans by the rauisshynge of Helene his wife, did not they by
one assente elect Agamemnon to be their emperor or captain: obeying him as
their sovereign, during the siege of Troy? all though that they had diverse
excellent princis, not only equal to him, but also excellyng Princes of Greece.
him, as in prowes Achilles, and Ajax Thelemonion: in wisdom Nestor, and
Ulisses, and his own brother, Menelaus: to whom they moughte have given equal
authority with Agame^non: but those wise princes considered, that without a
general captain, so many persons as were there, of diverse realms gathered
together, should be by no means well governed wherefore Homere calls
Agame^non Agsmemnon.
the shepeherd of people. They rather were contented to be under one man's
obedience, than severally to use their auctorites, or to join in one power and
dignite, whereby at the last should have sourded discention among the people,
they being seperately inclined toward their natural sovereign lord: as it
appeared in the particular contention, that was between Achilles and Agamemnon
for their co^cubines, where Achilles, renouncing the obedience, that he with
all other pryncis had before promised, at the battle first enterprysed
against the Troyans. For at that time no little murmur, and sedition was
moved in the host of the greeks, which not withstanding was wonderfully
pacified: and the army vnscatered, by the majesty of Agamemnon, Majesty?
ioynynge to him counsailours, Nestor and the wytty Ulisses. Nestor. Ulisses.


But to return again. Athenes and other cities of Greece, when they had
aba^doned kings, and concluded to live as it were in a co^munaltie, which
abusifly they called equality: how long time did any of them continue in
peace? Yea what vacation had they from the wars? or what noble man had they,
which auaunced the honor and weal of their City, whom they did not banishe
or slay in prison? Surely it shall appear to them, that will read Plutarche, or
Emilius probus, in the lives of Milciades, Cimon, Themistocles, Aristides, and
diverse other noble and valiant capitaynes: which is to long here to rehearse.
Kings in Rome.


In like wise the Romans, during the time that they were under kings,
which was by the space of. 144. years, were well governed, nor never was among
them discord or sedition: But after that by the persuatio^ of Brutus and
Colatinus, whose wife (Lucretia) was rauyshed by the son Lucrecia.
of Tarquine, king of Romans, not only the said Tarquine and all his
posterytie, were exiled out of Rome for ever, but also it was finally
determined among the people, that never after they would have a king reygne
over them. Consequently the co^munaltie more and more encroched a license, and
at the last compelled the Senate to suffer them to chose yearly among them,
governors of their own astate and condition, who^ they called Trybunes: under
Tribunes.
whom they resceyued such audacytie and power, that they finally opteyned the
highest authority in the publyke weal: in so much, that oftentimes they did
repele the acts of the Senate, and to those Tribunes might a man appele from
the Senate, or any other office or dygnitie. But what came thereof in
conclusion? Surely when there was any difficulte war imminent, they were
constrained to elect one soueraygne and chyefe of all other, whom they named
Dictator, as it were commander, Dictator.
from whom it was not laufull for any man to appele. But because there appeared
to be in him the prystinate auctorytie and majesty of a king, they would no
longer suffer him to continue in that dignity, than by the space of.vi.
months, except he than resigned it, and by the consent of the people
eftsoon did resume it. Finally until Octauius Augustus had distroied Anthony,
and also Brutus: and finished all the Civil wars (that were so called because
Civil* wars
they were between the same self Romayn citezins) the city of Rome was never
long quiet from factions or sedicions among the people. And if the nobles of
Rome had not be^ men of excellent lerning, wisdom, and prowess, and that the
Senate, the most noble counsaylle in all the world, which was first
ordained by Romulus, and increased by Tullus hostilius, the third king of
Romans, had not continued, and with great difficulty retained their
authority, I suppose verylye, that the City of Rome had been utterly desolate
sone after the expellynge of Tarquine. And if it had been eftesones renewed,
it should have been twenty times dystroyed, before the time that Augustus
raygned: so much discord was ever in the city, for lack of one governor.

But what need we to search so fer from us, sens we have sufficient examples
nere unto us? Behold the astate of Florence Florence and Gene.
and Gene, noble cities of Italy, what calamite have they both sustened by
their own factions, for lack of a continual governor?

Ferrare, and the most excellent cite of Ferraria.
Uenise, having dukes, seldom suffer damage, except it happen by outward
hostility.

We have also an example at home, which is most necessary to be noted.

After that the Saxons by treasone had England. divided.
expelled out of England the Britons, which were the ancient inhabitauntes,
this realm was divided into sundry regions, or kyngedomes. O what mysery was
the people than in? O how this most noble Isle of the world was decerpt and
rent in pieces? the people pursued and hunted like wolfes, or other beasts
savage: none industry auayled, no strength defended, no riches profited. Who
would then have desired to have been rather a man than a dog, when men either
with sword or with hu^gre peryshed, having no profit or sustynance of their
own corn or catell, which by mutual war was contynually distroyed? Yet the
dogs, either taking that that men could not quietly come by, or fedynge on
the deed bodies, which on every part lay scatered plentously, did satisfye
their hungre.

Where find ye any good laws, that at that time were made and used? or any
commendable monumente, of any science or craft in this realm occupied? such
iniquity seems to be than, that by the multitude of soueraygne governors,
all things had been brought to confusion, if the noble king Edgar had not
reduced the King Edgar.
monarchy to his pristinate astate and figure: which brought to pass, reason
was revived, and people came to co^formitie, and the realm began to take
comfort, and to show some visage of a public weal: and so (lauded be god)
have continued: but not being always in like astate or condition. Al be it, it
is not to be dispaired, but that the king our sovereign lord now reignynge,
and this realm, always having one prince, like unto his highness, equal to the
ancient princis, in virtue and courage, it shall be reduced (god so dysposyng)
unto a publyke weal, excellynge al other in preeminence of virtue, and
abundance of things necessary.

But for as much as I do well perceive, that to write of the office or duetye
of a soueraygne gouernoure or prince, far excedeth the compass of my
lernyng, holy scripture affyrmynge, that the hearts of pryncis be in gods
own hands and dysposition: I will therefore keep my pen within the space
that is discrybed to me, by the three noble masters, reason, learning, and
experience. And by their enseignement or teaching, I will ordynately treat of
the two parts of a publyke weal, whereof the one shall be named due Due
administration.
administration, the other necessary occupation, which shall be divided in to
two volumes. In the first shall be comprehended the best form of education or
bryngyng Occupation.
up of noble children, from their nativity, in such manner as they may be
found worthy, and also able to be governors of a publyke weal. The second
volume, which god grauntinge me quietness and liberty of mind, I will shortly
after send forth: It shall conteyne all the remenant, which I can either by
learning or experience find apt to the perfection of a just publyke weal:
in the which, I shall so endeavor my self, that al men, of what astate or
condition so ever they be, shall find therein occasion to be always virtuously
occupied: and not without pleasure, if they be not of the schools of
Aristippus, or Apicius: of whom the one supposed felycitye to be only in
lechery, the other in delycate fedyng and glotony. From whose sharp talons and
cruel tethe, I beseech all gentle reders to defend these warkes, which for
their commodite is only compiled,

That in a publyke weal ought to be inferior governors called Magistrates,
which shall be appointed or chosen by the soueraygne governor. Capitulo. iii.
THere be both reasons and examples undoubtedly infynite, whereby may be
proved, that there can be no perfect publyke weal, without one capital and
soueraygne governor, which may long endure or continue. But sens one mortal
man can not have knowledge of all things done in a realm or large dominion,
and at one time discuss all controuersics, refourme all transgressions, and
exploite al co^sultations, concluded as well for outward, as inward affairs:
it is expedyente, and also needful, that under the capytall governor be
sundry mean auctorities, as it were aydynge him in the dystribution of justice
in sundry parts of a huge multitude: whereby his labors being leuigate, and
made more tolerable, he shall govern with the better advise, and consequently
with a more perfect governance. And as Jesus Sirach, Sapi. vi.
says, The multitude of wise men is the wealth of the world. They which have
such auctorities to them committed, may be called inferior governors, having
respect to their office or duty, wherein is also a representation of
governance: All be it they be named in latin Magistratus. And herafter I
intend to call them Magistrates, lac king an other more convenient word in
english: but that will I do in the second part of this warke, where I
purpose to write of their sundry offices, or effects of their authority.

But for as much as in this part, I intend to write of their education and
virtue in manners, which they have in common with princes, in as much as
thereby they shall as well by examble, as by authority, order well them, which by
their capital governor, shall be to their rule committed, I may without
anoyance of any man, name them governors at this time, apropryatinge to the
soueraygnes, names of kings and princis, sens of a long custom, these names,
in common form of speking, be in a higher preemynence and estimation than
governors. That in every common weal ought to be a great nombre of such
manner of persons, it is partly proved in the chaptre next before written, where
I have spoken of the commodity of order.

Also reason and commune experyence plainly declare, that where the dominion
is large and populouse, there it is convenient, that a prince have many
inferior governors: which be named of Aristotel, Politic. li. iiii.
his eyes, ears, hands, and legs: which if they be of the best sort (as
he further more says) it seems impossible, a cou^ tree not to be well governed
by good laws. And except excellent virtue and lernyng do inhable a man of
the base astate of the communaltie, to be thought of al men worthy to be so
much auaunced, else such governors would be chosen out of that astate of men,
which be called worshypfull, if among them may be founden a sufficient
nombre, ornate with virtue and wisdom, mete for such purpose: and that for
sundry causes.

First it is of good congruence, that the superiors in condition or hauiour,
should have also preeminence in administration, if they be not inferior to
other in virtue.

Also they, having of their own reuennues certain, whereby they have
competente substance to live without taking rewards: it is lykely, that
they will not be so desirous of lucre (whereof may be engendered corruption) as
they, which have very lytteli or nothing so certain.

More over, where virtue is in a gentyl man, it is commonly myxte with more
sufferance, Gentilme^.
more affability, and myldenes, tha^ for the more part it is in a person
rural or of a very base lynage, and when it happens other wise, it is to be
accounted loathsome and monstrous.

Furthermore, where the person is worshyppefull, his governance, though it be
sharp, is to the people more tolerable, and they therewith the less grutche
or be dysobedient.

Also such men having substance in goods by certain and stable
possessions, which they may aporcionate to their own living and bringing up
of their children in learning and virtues, may (if nature repugne not) cause
them to be so instructed and furnyshed toward the administration of a publyke
weal, that a poor man's son, only by his natural wit, without other
help, never or seldom may atteyne to the like. Toward the which
instruction, I have prepared this warke.

The education or form of bringing up of the child of a gentylman, which
is to have authority in a publyke weal. Capitulo. iiii.
FOr as much as al noble authors do conclude, and commune experyence proves,
that where the governors of realms and cities be founden adourned with
virtues, and do employ their study and mind to the publyke weal, as well to
the augmentation there of, as to the establysshynge and long continuance of
the same: there a publyke weal must needs be both honorable and welthy. To
the intent to declare, how such personages may be prepared, I will use the
polycie of a wise and cunning gardener, who purposynge to have Education of
noble wits.
in his gardeine a fine and preciouse herb, that should be to him and all
other, repayrynge thereto, excellentely commodious, or pleasant: he will syrste
search througheout his gardeyne, where he can find the most melowe and
fertyle earth, and therein will he put the sede of the herb to grow, and be
norysshed, and in most diligent wise attend, that no weed be suffered to
grow or approach nyghe unto it: and to the end it may thryue the faster, as
scone as the form of an herb ones appears, he will set a vessel of water by
it, in such wise, that it may contynually distyll on the rote sweet dropes:
and as it spryngeth in stalk, under set it with some thing, that it break
not, and always keep it clean from wedes. Like order will I ensue, in the
fourmynge the gentle wits of noble men's children, who from the wombes of
their mother, shall be made propise or apt to the governance of a publyke weal.

First they, unto whom the bringing up of such children apperteyneth, ought
against Norcies* how they ought to be chosen.
the time that their mother shall be of them delivered, to be sure of a
nourise, which should be of no servile condition, or vice notable. For as
some ancient writers do suppose, often times the child souketh the vice of
his nourise, with the milk ofher pappe. And also observe, that she be of
mature or ripe age, not under. xx. years, or above. xxx. her body also being
clean from all sykenes, or deformyte, and having her complexion most of the
right and pure sanguine. For as much as the milk thereof cominge, excels
all other, both in swetenes and substance.

More over, to the nouryse should be appointed A gonernes or drynoryce
an other womanne, of approved virtue, dyscretion, and gravity, who shall not
suffer in the childs prescence to be showed any act or tatche dyshoneste, or
any wanto^ or unclean word to be spoken. And for that cause all men, except
phisytyons only, should be excluded and kept out of the nursery.

Perchance sum will scorn me, for that I am so seryous, saying that there
is no such damage to be fered in an infant, who for tenderness of years, has
not the understanding, to decerne good from yuell. And yet no man will deny,
but in that innocence he wyldecerne milk from butter, and breadde from pappe,
and er he can speak, he will with his hand or countenance sygnyfie, which
he desires. And I verily suppose, that in the brains and hearts of young
children, which be members spirytuall, whiles they be tender, and the little
slyppes of reason begin in them to burgyne, there may hap by yuell custom,
some pestyferours dew of vice to perse the said members, and infecte and
corrupt the soft and tender buddes, whereby the fruit may grow wild, and
some time conteyne in it feruente and mortal poison, to the utter destruction
of a realm.

And we have in daily experience, that Enfanc^e.
little infantes assaye to follow, not only the words, but also the faictes,
and gesture of them, that be prouecte in years. For we daily here, to our
great heaviness, children swear greatte oaths, and speak lascivious and unclean
words, by the example of other, whom they here: whereat the leude parents do
rejoice, sone after, or in this world, orels where, to their great pain and
tourmente. Contrary wise, we behold some children, knelynge in their game
before images, and holdyng up their little white hands, move their pratye
mouths, as they were prayeng: other going and syngyng, as it were in
procession. whereby they do express their dysposition, to the imitation of
those things, be they good or yuel, which they usually se or here. Wherefore
not only princis, but also all other children, from their nurises pappes, are
to be kept diligently from the heryng or saying of any vise or yuell tache.
And in continent, as soon as they can speak, it behooves with most pleasant
allurynges, to instill in them sweet manners and virtuous custom.

Also to provide for them such companions and play fellows, as shall not do
in their presence any reprocheable act, or speak any unclean word or oath,
ne to ad uaunte them with flattery, remembrynge their nobylytie, or any other
like thing, wherein they moughte glory: onles it be to persuade them to virtue,
or to with draw them from vice, in the remembering to them the danger of their
yuell example. For noble men more grievously offend by their example, than by
their deed. Yet often remembrance to them of their astate, may happen to
radicate in their hearts intolerable pride, the most dangerous poison to
noblenes. wherefore there is required to be there in much cautele and sobrenes.

The order of learning, that a noble man should be trained in, before he come
to thaige of seven years. Cap. v.
SOme old auctours hold opinion, that before the age of seven years, a child
should not be instructed in letters, but those writers were either greeks or
latins: among whom all doctrine and scyences were in their maternall tongues,
by reason whereof they saved all that long time, which at this days is spente
in understanding perfectely the greek or latin. Wherefore it requires now a
longer time to the understanding of both. Therefore that infelycitie, of our
time and country compels us to encroche somewhat upon the years of children,
and specially of noble men, that they may sooner attain to wysedowe and
gravity, than private persons: considering, as I have said, their charge
and example, which above al things is most to be esteemed. Not withstanding I
would not have them enforced by violence to learn, but according to the
counsel of Quintilian, to be swetely allured thereto, with praises, and such
pratye gifts as children delight in. And their first letters to be painted or
lymned in a pleasant manner: wherein children of gentle courage have much
delectation. And also there is no better allectiue to noble wits, thanne to
induce them in to a contention with their inferior companions: they sometime
purposely suffrynge the more noble children to vainquy she, and as it were
gyuynge to them place and soueraintie, though in deed the inferior children
have more lernyng. But there can be nothing more convenient, than by little and
lyttel to train and exercise them in speaking of latin: infourming them to
know first the names in latin of al things that come in syghte, and to name
all the parties of their bodies: and giving them some what that they couete or
desire in most gentle manner, to teach them to ask it again in latin. And
if by this means they may be induced to understand and speak latyne, it
shall afterward be less grefe to them in a manner, to learn any thing, where
they understand the langage, wherein it is written. And as touching grammar,
there is at this day better introductions, and more facile, than ever before
were made, concerning as well greek as latin, if they be wisely chosen.

And it is no reproach to a noble manne, Instruction in infa^cie.
to instruct his own children, or at the least ways, to examine them by the
way of dalyaunce or solace, considering that the emperor Octauius Augustus,
dysdayned not to read the warkes of Cicero, and Uirgile, to his children and
neuewes. And why should not noble men rather so do, thanne teach their
children how at dyse and cards they may connyngly lose and consume their
own treasure and substance?

More over, teaching represents the auctorytie of a pyrnce. wherefore Dionyse,
Dionise the tirra^te
king of Cicile, when he was for tyranny expelled by his people, he came in to
Italy, and there, in a commune schole taught gra^ mer: where with when he was
of his enemies embraided, and called a schole master, he answered them, That
although Sicilians had exiled him, yet in despite of them all he reigned:
notynge thereby the authority that he had over his scholars. Also when it was
of him demanded, what auailed him Plato, or philosophy, wherein he had been
studious, he answered, That they caused him to sustain adversity patiently,
and made his exile to be to him more facile and easy. which courage and
wisdom considered of his peoble, they eftesones restored him unto his realm
and astate royal, where if he had procured again them hostility, or wars,
or had returned into Sicile with any violence, I suppose the people would
always have resisted and kept him in perpetual exile: as the Romans did the
proud king Tarquine, whose son ravished Lucrece. But to return to my
purpose.

It shall be expedient, that a noble man's son, in his infancye, have with
him continually, only such, as may accustom him by lyttel and lyttel to
speak pure and elegant latin. Semblably the nourises and other women about
him, if it be possible, to do the same: or at the least way, that they speak
none english, but that, which is clean, polite, perfectly, and articulately
pronounced, omittynge no letter or syllable, as folyshe women often times do of
a wantonness, whereby diverse noble men, and gentylmens children (as I do at
this day know) have atteyned corrupt and foul pronuntiation. This industry
used in fourmynge little infantes, who shall dout, but that they (not lacking
natural wit) shall be apt to receive lerninge, when they come to mo years?
And in this wise may they be instructed, without any violence or inforsynge:
using the more part of the time, until they come to the aege of.vii. years,
in such die sportes as do apperteine to children, wherein is no resemblaunce or
similitude of vice.

At what age a tutour should be provided, and what apperteyneth to his office
to do. Capi. vi.
AFter a child is come to seven years of age, I hold it expediente, that he
be taken from the company of women: saving that he may have one year or two
at the most, an aunciente and sad matrone attendynge on him in his chaumbre,
which shall not have any young woman in her company: For though there be no
peril of offense in that tender and innocent age, yet in some children nature
is more prove to vice than to virtue, and in the tender wits be sparks of
voluptuositie: which norisshed by any occasion or obiecte, increase often
times in to so terrible a fire, that therewith all virtue and reason is
consumed. wherefore to eschew that danger, the most sure counsaylle is, to
withdraw him from all company of women, and to assign unto him a tutor,
which should be an aunciente and worshypfull man, in whom is approved to be
much gentilnes, myxte with gravity, and as nyghe as can be such one, as the
child, by imitation following, may grow to be excellent. And if he be also
learned, he is the more commendable,

Pelcus the father of Achilles, committed the governance of his son to
Phoenix, which was a stranger borne: who as phoenix Achilles tutor.
well in speaking elegantely, as in doing valyauntely, was master to
Achilles, as Homere says.

How much profited it to king Philip, father to the great Alexander, that he
was delivered in hostage to the Thebanes Alexander the great. Epamino^das tutor
to king philip.
where he was kept and brought up under the governance of Epaminondas, a
noble and valyaunte capytayne, of whom he received such learning, as well in
acts martial, as in other lyberall sciences, that he excelled al other
kings, that were before his time in Greece: and finally as well by wisdom as
prowes, subdued all that country?

Semblably he ordained for his son Alexaunder a noble tutor, called Leonidas,
Leonidas tutor to king Alexander.
unto whom for his wisdom, humanytie, and lernyng, he committed the rule and
preemynence over all the masters and servants of Alexander. In whom not with
standing was such a famylier vice, which Alexander apprehendynge in
chyldhode, could never abandon, some suppose it to be fury and hastynes, other
superfluous drinking of wine, which of them it were, it is a good warning
for gentle men, to be the more seryous, inserchyng not only for the
virtues, but also for the vices of them, unto whose tuityon and governance
they will commytte their children.

The office of a tutor is first to know Office of a tutor.
the nature of his pupil, that is to say, where to he is most inclyned or
dysposed, and in what thing he sets his most delectation or appetyte. If he
be of nature curteise, piteouse, and of a free and liberal heart, it is a
pryncypall token of grace (as it is by all scripture determined) Than shall a
wise tutor, purposely commend those virtues, extolling also his pupil, for
having of them: and therewith he shall declare them to be of al men most
fortunate, which shall happen to have such a master. And more over shall
declare to him, what honor, what love, what commodity shall happen to him by
these virtues. And if any have benne of dysposytion contrary, than to express
the enormities of their vice, with as much detestation as may be. And if any
danger have thereby ensued, mysfortune, or punishemente, to agreue it in such
wise, with so vehement words, as the child may abhor it, and fear the
like adventure.

In what wise music may be to a noble man necessary: and what modesty ought
to be therein. Cap. vii.
THe discretion of a tutor, consists in temperaunce: that is to say, that he
suffer not the child to be fatigate with continual study or lernyng: wherewith
the delycate and tender wit may be dulled or oppressed: but that there may
be therewith entrelased and myxte, some pleasant learning, and exercise, as
playeng on instruments of music, which moderately used, and without
diminution of honor, that is to say; without wanton countenance and dissolute
gesture, is not to be contemned: For the noble king and prophet David, king of
Israel (whom almighty god said, he had chosen as a man according to his heart
or desire) duringe his life, delyted in music: And with the sweet harmony,
that he made on his harp, he constrained the iuel spirit, that vexed king
Saul, to forsake him, continuynge the time that he harped.

The most noble and valiant princis of Greece often times, to recrete their
spirits, and in augmentinge their courage, enbraced instruments musical.

Thus did the valiant Achilles (Homere Achilles. Homerus. Iliades primo.
says) who after the sharp and vehement contention, between him and
Agamemnon, for the taking away of his concubine: whereby he being set in a
fury, had slain Agamemnon, emperor of the greeks army, had not Pallas the
gods with drawn his hand. In which rage he all inflamed, departed with his
people to his own ships, that lay at rode, intendyng to have returned in to
his country: but after he had taken to him his harp (where on he had learned
to play of Chiron the Chiron.
Centaure, which also taught him feats of arms, with physic and surgery)
and playeng thereon, had songen the gestis and actis martial of the auncyente
pryncis of Greece, as Hercules, Perscus, Perithous, Theseus, and his cousin
Iaso^, and of diverse other of semblable value and prowess: he was therewith
assuaged of his fury, and reduced in to his first astate of reason: in such
wise, that in redoubing his rage, and that there by should not remain to him
any note of reproach, he reteining his fires and stourdy countenance, so
tempered him self, in the enterteinemente and aunswerynge the messagers, that
came to him from the residue of the Greeks, that they reputing all that his
fires demeanor to be (as it were) a divine majesty, never embraided him with
any inordinate wrath or fury.

And therefore the great king Alexander, Alexanders musyke.
when he had vainquished Ilion, where some time was set the most noble
city of Troy, being demanded of one, if he would se the harp of Paris
Alexander, who rauisshed Helene, he there at gentilly simylynge, answered, It
was not the thing that he much desired, but had rather se the harp of
Achilles, whereto he sange, not the illecebrous dilectatyons of Uenus, but the
valyant acts and noble affairs of excellent princis.

But in this commendation of musyke, I would not be thought to allure noble
men, to have so much delectation therein, that in playinge and singing only,
they should put their hole study and felicity: As did Music reproueable.
the epmerour Nero, which all a long summers day would sit in the Theater (an
open Theater.
place where all the people of Rome beheld solemn actis and plays) and in the
presence of all the noble men and senators, would play on his harp and
sing without cessynge. And if any manne happened by long sitting to sleep, or
by any other countenance, to show him self to be weary, he was sodeynely
bobbed on the face by the scruantes of Nero, for that purpose attendynge. Or if
any person were perceived to be absent, or were seen to laughe at the folly of
the emperor, he was forth with accused, as it were of misprision. Whereby the
emperor found occasion to commyt him to prison, or to put him to tortures. O
what Musyke miserable.
misery was it, to be subject to such a minstrell, in whose music was no
melody but anguishe and dolor?

It were therefore better, that no music were taught to a noble man, than by
the exact knowledge thereof, he should have therein inordinate delight: and by
that be illected to wantonness, abandoning gravity and the necessary cure and
office in the public weal to him committed.

King Philip, when he hard that his King Philipips words. to Alexander.
son Alexander did sing swetely and proprely, rebuked him gentylly,
saying, But Alexander, be ye not ashamed, that ye can sing so well and
connyngly? whereby he mente, that the open profession of that craft was but of a
base estimation. And that it suffysed a noble man, having therein knowledge,
either to use it secretelye, for the refreshynge of his wit, when he has
time of solace: orels only herynge the contention of noble musicyens, to give
judgment in the excellency of their conninges. These be the causes, wherento
having regard, musyke is not only tolerable, but also commendable. For as
Aristotle says: Music in the old time was nombred among sciences, for as
much as nature seeks not only, how to be in busynes well occupied, but also
how in quyetnes to be commendably dysposed.

And if the child be of a perfect inclination and towardnes to virtue, and
very aptly Musyke pro fitable.
disposed to this science, and rypely does understand the reason and
concordance of tunes, the tutors office shall be, to persuade him, to have
principally in remembrance his astate, which makes him exempt from the
liberty of using this science in every time and place: that is to say, that
it only serves for recreation, after tedious or laborious affairs. And to
show him, that a gentylman playinge or singing in a commune adyence,
appayreth his estimation: The people forgetting reverence, when they behold
him in symilitude of a common servant or mynstrel. Yet notwithstanding, he
shall commend the perfect understanding of musyke, declarynge how necessary
it is for the better attaining the knowledge of a publyke weal. which as I
before said, is made of an order of astates and degrees, and by reason thereof
conteyneth in it a perfect harmony: which he shall after ward more perfectly
understand, when he shall happen to read the books of Plato and Aristo. of
public weals: wherein be written diverse examples of musyke and gemetry. In
this form may a wise and cyrcu^specte tutor, adapte the pleasant science of
music to a necessary and laudable purpose.

That it is commendable in a gentyllman to paint and kerue exactly, if nature
there to does induce him. Cap. viii.
IF the child be of nature inclyned (as many have been) to peynte with a pen,
or to form images in stoone or tree: he should not be therfrom with drawn,
or nature be rebuked, which is to him beniuolent: but putting one to him,
which is in that craft, wherein he deliteth, most excellent, in vacant times
from other more serious learning, he should be in the most pure wise
enstructed in payntynge or keruinge. And now per chance some envious reder
will here of take occasyon to scorn me, saying, that I had well hyed me, to
make of a noble man, a mason or peynter.

And yet if either ambition or voluptuouse idelnes would have suffered that
reder to have seen histories, he should have founden excellent princis, as well
in payntyng as in keruynge, equal to noble artificers: Such were Claudius
Citus, the son of Uaspasian, Hadriane, both Antonines, and diverse other
emperors and noble princis: whose warkes of long time remained in Rome and
other cities, in such places, where al men might behold them: as monumentes
of their excellent wits and virtuous occupation, in eschewynge ofydelnes.

And not without a necessary cause, princis were in their chyldhode so
instructed: for it served them afterward for deuysing ofingynes for the war:
or for making them better, that be all ready devised. For as Uitruuius (which
writes of buyldyng to the emperor Augustus) says: Al turmentes of war,
which we call ingyns, were first invented by kings or governors of hosts:
or if they were devised by other, they were by them made much better.

Also by the feate of portraiture or paintynge, a captain may dyscriue the
country of his adversary, whereby he shall eschew the dangerous passages with
his host or navy: also perceive the placis of advantage, the form of
embataylyng of his enemies, the situation of his camp, for his most surety,
the strength or weakness of the town or fortress, which he intends to
assault. And that, which is most specially to be considered, in visitynge
his own dominions, he shall set them out in figure, in such wise, that at
his eye shall appear to him, where he shall employ his study and treasure, as
well for the saufegarde of his country, as for the commodite and honor
thereof, having at all times in his sight the surety and feebleness, auaunceme^t
and hyndrance of the same. And what pleasure and also utility is it to a man,
which in tends to edify, him self to express the figure of the warke that
he purposes, according as he has conceived it in his own fantasy, wherein
by often amendinge and correcting, he finally shall so perfect the warke unto
his purpose, that there shall neither ensue any repentance, nor in the
employment of his money he shall be by other dysceyued.

More over the feate of portrayture shall be an allectiue to every other study
or exercise. For the wit thereto disposed, shall always coueite congruent matter,
wherein it may be occupied, And when he happens to read or here any fable or
history, forthwith he apprehends it more desircusly, and re teyneth it better
than any other, that lacks the said fcate: by reason that he has found
matter apt to his fantasy. Finally every thing that portraiture may
comprehend, will be to him delectable to read or here. And where the lively
spirit, and that which is called the grace of the thing, is perfectely
expressed, that thing more persuades and stereth the beholder, and sooner
instructs him, than the declaration in writynge or speaking does the reder or
hercr. Experience we have there of in learning of geometry, astronomy, and
cosmogrophy, called in english the description of the world. In which
studies I dare affirm, a man shall more profit in one wike by figures and
cartis, well and perfectely made, than he shall by the only redyng or herynge
the rules of that science, by the space of half a year at the least. Wherefore
the late writers deserve no small commendation, which added to the autors of
those sciences apt and propre figures.

And he that is perfectely instructed in portrayture, and happens to read any
noble and excellent history, whereby his courage is inflamed to the imitation
of virtue, he forthwith takes his pen or pensyl, and with a grave and
substanciall study, gatherynge to him all the parts of imagination, endeavors
him self to express lively, and (as I might say) actually, in portraiture,
not only the faicte or affayre, but also the sundry affections of every
personage in the history recited, which moughte in any wise appear or be
perceived in their visage, countenance, or gesture: with like diligence, as
Lysippus made in metal king Lisippus.
Alexander, fighting and struggling with a terrible lion of incomparable
magnitude and fiersenes: whom, after long and dyfficulte battle, with
wonderful strength and clean might, at the last he ouerthrewe and
vainquished. Wherein he so expressed the similitude of Alexander, and of his
lords standinge about him, that they all seemed to live. Among whom the prowes
of Alexander appeared excellynge all other, the resydue of his lords after the
value and estimation of their courage, every man set out in such forwardnes,
as they than seemed more promte to the helpyng of their master, that is to
say, one less aferd than an other.

Phidias the Atheniense, whom all writers Phidias.
do commend, made of yuory the simu lachre or image of Jupiter, honored by
the gentiles, on the high hille of Dlympus: which was done so excellently,
that Pandenus, a counnynge paynter, thereat admaruaylynge, required the craftis
man, to show him where he had the example, or pattern of so noble a warke.
Than Phidias answered, that he had taken it out of three verses of Homere the
poet: the sentence whereof ensues as well as my poor wit can express it in
english.

Than Jupiter, the father of them all
Thereto assented with his brows black,
Shaking his hear, and therewith did let fall
A cou^tena^ce, that made al heaven to quake.
Where it is to be noted, that Thetis the mother of Achilles, desired Jupiter
to incline his favor to the part of the Troia^s.

How (as I have before said) I intend not by these examples, to make of a
prince or noble man's son a commune paynter or keruer, which shall present
him self openly, stained or embrued with sundry colors, or poudered with the
duste of stones that he cutteth, or perfumed with tedyous savors of the
mettalles by him yoten. But verily mine intent and meaning is only, that a
noble child, by his own natural disposition, and not by coertion, may be
induced, to receive perfect instruction in these sciences.

What exact diligence should be in choosing masters. Capitulo. ix.
AFter that the child has be^ pleasauntly trained and induced to know the
parts of speech, and can separate one of them from an other, in his own
langage, It shall tha^ be time, that his tutor or governor do make dilygente
search for such a master: as is exellentely learned both in greek and latyne,
and therwithall is of sobre and virtuous dysposition, specially chaste of
living, and of much affability and patience: lest by any unclean example
the tender mind of the child may be infected, hard after ward to be
recovered. For the natures of children be not so much or sone advanced by
things well done or spoken as they be hyndred and corrupted by that, which
in actis or words is wontonly expressed. Also by a cruel and irous master,
the wits of children be dulled: and that thing, for the which children be
often times beaten, is to them ever after fastidious: whereof we need no better
auctor for wytnes, than daily experience. Wherefore the most necessary things
to be observed by a master in his disciples or scholars (as Licon the noble
gramarien said) is shamfastnes and praise. By shamefastnes, as it were with a
brydell, they rule as well their deeds, as their appetites. And desire of
praise adds to a sharp spur to their dysposition toward learning and
virtue. According there unto Quintilian instructynge an orator, desires
such a child to be given unto him, whom commendation fervently stereth, glory
provoke, and being vaniquisshed, wepeth. That child (says he) is to be
fed with ambition, him a lyttel chyding sore biteth, in him no part of sloth
is to be feared.

And if nature disposes not the chyldes wit to receive lernyng, but rather
other wise: it is to be applied with more dylygence and also polycie, as
choosing some book, whereof the argument or matter approaches most nyghe to the
childs inclination or fantasy, so that it be not exstremely vicious, and
therewith by littel and little, as it were with a pleasant sauce, provoke him to
have good appatite to study. And surely that child, what so ever he be, is well
blessed and fortunate, that fyndeth a good instructour or master. Which was
considered by noble king Philip, father to the great king Alexander, who
immediately after his son was borne, wrote a letter to Aristotle, the prince
of philosophers, the tenor whereof ensues.

Aristotle, we great you well. Lettynge The epistel of king Philip to Aristotel.
you wit, that we have a son borne, for the which we give due thanks unto
god, not for that he is borne only, but also for as much as it happens him
to be borne, you lyuinge. Trusting that it shall happen, that he by you taught
and instructed, shall be hereafter worthy to be named our son, and to enjoy
the honor and substance that we now have provided. Thus fare ye well.

The same Alexander was wont to say opnly, that he ought to give as great
thanks to Aristoble his master, as to king Philip his father, for of him he
took the occasion to live, of the other he received the reason and way to live
well. And what manner a prince Alexader was made by the doctrine of Aristotle,
it shall appear in diverse places of this book: where his example to princis
shall be declared.

The incomparable benefit of masters, have been well remembered of diverse
pryncis. In so much as Marcus Antoninus, which among the emperors was
commended for his virtue and sapyence, had his master Proculus (who taught
him grammar) so much in favor, that he advanced him to be proconsull: which
was one of the highest dygnyties among the Romans.

Alexander the emperor caused his master Julius Fronto, to be co^sul: which
was the highest office, and in astate next the emperor: and also opteyned of
the senate, that the statue or image of Fronton was set up among the noble
princis.

What caused Traiane to be so good a prince (in so much that of late days,
when an Emperor received his crown at Rome, the people with a commune cry
desired of god, that he moughte be as good as was Trayane) but that he happened
to have Plutarche, the noble phylosoper, to be his instructour?

I agree me, that some be good of natural inclination to goodness, but where
good instructyon and exaumple is thereto added, the natural goodness must there
with needs be amended, and be more excellent.

What order should be in learning, and which autours should be first read.
Capitulo. x.
Now let us return to the order of learning apt for a gentle man. Wherein I
am of Quintilians opinion, that I would have him learn greek and latin
authors both at one time, orels to begin with greek, for as much as that is
hardeste to come by: by reason of the diuersytie of tongues, which be five in
nombre, and all most be known, or else uneath any poet can be well
understand. And if a child do begin therein at The first lerninge in
childhode.
seven years of aege, he may contynually learn greek autours three years, and
in the mean time use the latin tongue as a familyar langage: which in a noble
man's son may well come to pass, having none other persons to serve him
or keeping him company, but such as can speak latin elegantly. And what
doubt is there? but so may he as soon speak good latin, as he may do pure
french, which now is brought into as many rules and fygures, and as long a
gra^mer, as is latin or greek. I will not contend, who among them, that do
write grammers of greek (which now all most be innumerable) is the best: but
that I refer to the discretion of a wise master. Always I would advise him,
not to deteyne the child to long in that tedyous labors, either in the greek
or latyne grammar. For a gentyl wit is there with sone fatigate.

Grammar, being but an introduction to the understanding of autors, if it be
made to long or exquisite to the lerner, it in a manner mortifyeth his courage:
And by that time he comes to the most sweet and plesante redynge of old
auctors, the sparks of seruente desire of learning is extyncte, with the
burdone of grammar, like as a litel fire is sone quenched with a gretheape of
small sticks: so that it can never come to the principal logges, where it
should long bourne in a great pleasant fire.

Now to follow my purpose. After a few and quick rules of grammar,
immediately, or interlasynge it therewith, would be read to the child, Esopes
fables in greek: in which argument children much Esopes fables.
delight. And surely it is a much pleasante lesson, and also profitable, as
well for that it is elegante and brefe (and not with standing it has much
variety in words, and therewith much helps to the understanding of Greek)
as also in those fables is included much moral and polytyke wisdom.
Wherefore in the teaching of them, the master dilygently must gather to
gether those fables, which may be most accommodate to the advancement of
some virtue, whereto he perceyueth the child inclyned: or to the rebuke of
sum vice, whereto he fyndeth his nature dysposed. And therein the master
ought to exercise his wit, as well to make the child plainly to understand
the fable, as also declaring the signification thereof compendiously, and to the
purpose. Fore seen allwaye, that as well this lesson as all other auctors,
which the child shall learn, either greek or latin, verse or prose, be
perfectly had without the book: whereby he shall not only atteyne plenty of the
tongues called Copy, but also increase and nourishe remembrance wonderfully.

The next lesson would be some quycke The.ii. lesson to children. Lucianus.
and merry dialoges, elect out of Luciane, which be without ribawdry, or to
much skornynge: for either of them is exactely to be eschewed, specially for a
noble man, the one anoyenge the soul, the other his estimation, concerning
his gravity.

The comedyes of Aristophanes may Aristo.
be in the place of Luciane, and by reason they be in meter, they be the sooner
learned by heart. I dare make none other compari son between them, for
offendinge the friends of them both: but thus much dare I say, that it were
better, that a child should never read any part of Luciane, than all Luciane.

I coud rehearse diverse other poetis, whi che for matter and eloquence, be very
necessary, but I fear me to be to long from noble Homere: from whom as from a
fountain, Homerus.
proceeded al eloquence and lerning. For in his books be contained, and most
perfectly expressed, not only the docume^tis marciall and discipline of arms,
but also in comparable wysedomes, and instructions for polytike governance of
people: with the worthy commendatio^ and laud of noble princis, wherewith the
reders shall be so all inflamed, that they most feruentely shall desire and
coueite, by the imitation or their virtues, to acquire semblable glory. For the
which occasion Aristotle, most sharpest witted, and excellent learned
Philosopher, as soon as he had received Alexander from king Philip his father,
before any other thing taught him the most noble warkes of Homere. Wherein
Alexander found such swetenes and fruit, that ever after he had Homere, not
only with him in all his iourneyes, but also laid him under his pillowe, when
he went to rest: and often times would purposely wake some hours of the
night, to take as it were his pass time with that most noble poet. For by the
redynge of his warke, called Illiados, where the assembly of the most noble
greeks again Troy is recyted, with their affairs, he gathered courage and
strength again his ennemies, wisdom and eloquence for consultations and
perswations to his people and army. And by the other warke, called Odissea,
which recounteth the sundry adventures of the wise Ulisses: he by the example
of Ulisses, apprehended many noble virtues, and also learned to eskape the
fraud and deceytfull imagynations of sundry and subtle crafty wits. Also
there shall he learn to enserche and pceyue the manners and conditions of them
that be his familiars, sifting out (as I might say) the best from the worste,
whereby he may surely commytte his affairs and trust to every person after
his virtues. Therefore I now conclude, that there is no lesson for a young
gentle man to be compared with Homere, if he be plainly and substancially
expouned and declared by the master.

Notwithstanding, for as much as the said warkes be very long, and do require
therefore a great time to be all learned and kanned: some latin auctour would be
therewith myxt, and specially Uirgile: which in his warke called Eneidos, is
most like to Uirgilius.
Homere, and almost the same Homere in latin. Also by the ioining together of
those auctors, the one shall be the better understand by the other. And verily
(as I before said) no one auctour serves to so diverse wits, as does Uirgile.
For there is not that affect or desire, whereto any childs fantasy is dysposed,
but in some of Uirgils warkes may be fou^den matter thereto apt and propise. For
what thing can be more famyliar than his bucolikes? nor no warke so nyghe
approaches to the common dalyance and manners of children, and the praty
controversies of the simple shepeherdes therein contained, wonderfully rejoices
the child that hereth it well declared, as I know by mine own experience. In
his Georgikes, lord what pleasant variety there is, the diverse graynes,
herbs, and flowers, that be there described, that redynge therein, it seems to
a man to be in a delectable gardeyne or paradyse. What ploughe manne knows so
much of housebandry, as there is expressed? who delytynge in good horsys, shall
not be thereto more enflamed, redynge there, of the bredyng, chesyng, and keeping
of them? In the declaration whereof Uirgille leaves far behind him all
breders, hakney men, and skorsers, Is there any astronomer, that more
exactely sets out the order and course of the celestial bodies: or that
more truly does divine in his pronostications of the times of the year, in
their qualities, with the future astate of all things provided by husebandry,
tha^ Uirgile does recite in that warke?

If the child have a delight in hunting, what pleasure shall he take of the
fable of Aristeus? semblably in the hunting of Dido and Eneas, which is
discryued most elegantly in his book of Eneidos.

If he have pleasure in wrestling, renning, or other like exercise, where shall
he se any more plesaunte esbatementes, than that which was done by Eurealus
and other troyans, which accompanied Eneas?

If he take solace in herynge mynstrelles, what mynstrel may be compared to
Iopas, which sange before Dido and Eneas? or to blind Demodocus, that played
and sange most swetely at the dinner, that the king Alcinous made to Ulisses?
whose dityes and melody excelled as far the songs of our minstrelles, as
Homere and Uirgile excel all other poets,

If he be more desirous (as the most part of children be) to here things
maruailous and exquisite, which has in it a visa ge of some things
incredyble: whereat shall he more wonder, than when he shall behold Eneas follow
Sibille into hell? what shall he more dread, than the terrible vysages of
Cerberus, Gorgon, Megera, and other furies and monsters? how shall he abhor
tyranny, fraud, and avarice, when he does se the peines of duke Theseus,
Sisiphus, and such other, tormented for their dissolute and vicious living?
How glad sone after shall he be, when he shall behold in the pleasant fields
of Elisius, the souls of noble princis and capitaynes, which for their virtue
and labors, in aduaunsing the publyke weals of their countryaes, do live
eternally in pleasure inexplycable? And in the last books of Eneidos, shall he
find matter to minister to him audacytie, valiant courage and polycie, to
take and sustain noble enterprises, if any shall be needful for the
assailynge of his enemies. Finally (as I have said) this noble Uirgile, like
to a good norise, gives to a child, if he will take it, every thing apt for
his wit and capacity. Wherefore he is in the order of lerninge to be
preferred before any other author latin.

I would set next unto him two books of Ovid, the one called Metamorphosios,
which is as much to say, as changynge of men in to other figure or form:
the other is intytled De fastis: where the ceremonies of the gentyles, and
specially the Romans, be expressed: both right necessary for the
understanding of other poets. But by cause there is little other learning in
them, concerning either virtuous manners or polycie, I suppose it were better
that as fables and ceremonies happen to come in a lesson, to be declared
abondantly by the master, than that in the said two books, a long time
should be spente and almost lost: which might be better employed on such
autors, that do minyster both eloquence, civil polycie, and exhortation to
virtue.

Wherefore in his place, let us bring in Horace, in whom is contained much
variety of lerning, and quickenesse of sentence. This poet may be enterlaced
with the lesson of Odissea of Homere, wherein is declared the wonderful
prudence and fortitude of Ulisses, in his passage from Troy. And if the child
were induced to make versis by the imytation of Uirgile and Homere, it should
mynister to him much dylectation and courage to study: ne the making of
versis is not disco^mended in a noble man, sens the noble Augustus, and almost
all the old emperors made books in versis.

The two noble poetis, Silius and Lucane, be very expediente to be learned: for
Silius. Lucanus.
the one sets out the emulation in qualyties and prowes of two noble and
valiante capitaynes, one enemy to the other, that is to say, Silus writes of
Scipio the Romayne, and Haniball, duke of carthaginensys: Lucane declares a
semblable matter, but much more lamentable: for as much as the wars were
civil, and as it were in the bowels of the Romans, that is to say, under
the standerdes of Julius Caesar and Pompei.

Hesiodus in greek, is more brief than Uirgile, where he writes of
housebandry, and does not rise so high in philosophy, but is fuller of fables:
And therefore is more illeccbrous.

And here I conclude, to speak any more of poetis necessary for the chyldehode
of a gentle manne: for as much as these (I doubt not) will suffyce, until he
pass the age of.xiii. years, In which time childhode declyneth, and reason
waxes ripe, and apprehends things with a more co^stante judgment.

Here I would have remembered, that I require not al these warkes to be
thoroughly red of a child in this time, which were almost impossible: But I
only dosyre, that they have in every of the said books so much instruction,
that they may take thereby some profytte. Than the chyldes courage Poetis de
fe^ded and prysed.
infiamed by the frequente redynge of noble poets, daily more and more
desires to have experyence in those things, that they so vehemently do
commend in them, that they write of.

Leonidas, the noble king of Spartanes being ones demanded, of what
estimation in poetry Tirtaeus (as he supposed) was: it is written, that he
answering said, That for steryng the minds of young men, he was excellent, for
as much as they being meued with his versys do run into the battle,
regarding no peril, as men all inflamed in martial courage.

And when a man is comen to ripe years, and that reason in him is confyrmed
with serious lernyng and long experience: than shall he, in redyng tragedies
execrate and abhor the intolerable life of tira^tes: And shall contemn the
folly and dotage, expressed by poets lascivious.

Here will I leave to speak of the first part of a noble man's study: And
will write of the second part, which is more serious, and co^teyneth in it
sundry manners of learning.

The most commodious and necessary studyes succedynge ordinatly the lesson of
poets. Capitulo. xi.
AFter.xiiii. years be passed of a chyldes age: his master, if he can, or some
other, study ously exercysed in the art of an orator, shall first read to him
some what of that part of logike, that is called Topica, either of Cicero, or
else of that noble clerk Logike. Topica.
of Almayne, which late floured, called Agricola: whose warke prepares
invention, telling the places, from whens an argument, for the proof of any
matter, may be taken with little study. And that lesson with much and
dylygent lernyng, having myxte there with none other exercise, will in the
space of half a year be perfectely kanned.

Immediately after that, the art of Rhetorike Rhetorik.
would be semblably taught, either in greek out of Hermogines, or of
Quintilian in latin, beginning at the third book, and instructynge dylygently
the child in that part of rheteryke principally, which concerns
persuation: for as much as it is most apt for consultation. There can be no
shorter instruction of Rhetoryke, than the treatise that Tulli wrote unto his
son, which book is named the partycion of rhetorike.

And in good faith, to speak boldly that I think, for him that needs not, or
does not desire to be an exquisite orator, the litell book, made by the famous
Erasmus Erasmus.
(whom al gentil wits ar bounden to thank, and supporte) which he calls
Copiam uerborum and Rerum, that is to say, plenty of words and matters, shall
be sufficient.

Isocrates, concerning the lesson of orators, is every where wonderful
profitable, having almost as many wise sentences as he has words, and with
that is so sweet and delectable to read, that after him almost all other seem
unsavory and tedyous: and in persuadynge as well a prince as a pryuate person
to virtue, the two very little and compe^dious warkes, whereof he made the one
to king Nicocles, the other to his friend Demonicus, would be perfectly ka^ned
and had in continual memory.

Demosthenes and Tulli, by the consent of all learned men, have preemynence and
souerayntie over al orators: the one reignynge in wonderful eloquence in the
publyke weal of the Romans, who had the empire and dominion of all the
world: the other of no less estimation in the City of Athenes, which of
long time was accounted the mother of Sapience, and the palaice of musis and
all lyberall scyences. Of which two orators may be attained, not only
eloquence excellent and perfect, but also precepts of wisdom and gentill
manners: with most commodious exaumples of al noble virtues and policy.
Wherefore the master in redynge them, must well observe and express the parts
and colors of rhetoryke in them contained, according to the precepts of that
art before learned. The vtilytie that a noble man shall have by redyng these
orators is, that when he shall hap to reason in counsel, or shall speak in
a greatte audyence, or to strange ambassadors of great princis: he shall not
be constrained to speak words sudden and dysordred, but shall bestow them
aptely and in their places. Wherefore the most noble Emperor Octauius is
hyghelye commended, for that he never Octauius.
spoke in the Senate, or to the people of Rome, but in an oration prepared and
purposely made.

Also to prepare the child to vndestandynge of histories, which being
replenished with the names of countres and towns unknown to the reder, do
make the historye tedious, orels the less pleasant, so if they be in any wise
known, it increases an inexplicable delectation: It shall be therefore,
Cosmographye and the commodity thereof.
and also for refresshynge the wit, a conuenyent lesson, to behold the old
tables of Ptholomee, wherein all the world is painted, having first some
introduction in to the sphere, whereof now of late be made very good treatises,
and more plain and easy to learn than was wont to be. All be it there is none
so good learning, as the demontration of cosmographie, by materyall fygures
and instruments, having a good instructour. And surely this lesson is both
pleasant and necessary. For what pleasure is it, in one hour to behold those
realms, cities, sees, ryuers, and fountaynes, that uneath in an old man's
life can not be iournayde? what incredible delight is taken in beholdynge the
dyuersities of people, beastis, fowls, fishes, tres, fruits, and herbs? To
know the sundry manners and condition of people, and the variety of their
natures, and that in a warm study or parler, without peril of the sea, or
danger of long and paynfull iourneyes? I ca^ not tell, what more pleasure
should happen to a gentil wit, than to behold in his own house every thing
that within all the world is contained.

The commodity thereof knew the great king Alexander, as some writers do
remember. For he caused the countrayes, whereunto he purposed any enterprise,
diligently and cunnyngly to be dyscrybed and painted, that beholdynge the
pycture, he might perceive, which places were most dangerous, and where he
and his host moughte have most easy and conuenable passage.

Semblably did the Romans in the rebellion of France, and the insurrection of
their confederates, setting up a table openly, wherein Italy was painted, to the
intent that the people lokynge in it, should reason and consulte, in which
places, it were best to resist or invade their ennemies.

I omyt for length of the matter, to write of Cirus, the great king of Perse,
Crassus the Roman, and diverse other valiant and expert capitaines, which
have lost them selfs and all their army by ignorance of this doctrine.
Wherefore it may not be of any wise man denied, but that Cosmographie is to all
noble men, not only pleasant but profitable also, and wonderful necessary.

In the part of Cosmographie, wherewith history is mingled, Strabo reigns,
which took his argument of the divine Strabo.
poet Homere.

Also Strabo him self (as he says) labored a great part of Africa and
Aegipt, where undoubtedly be many things to be maruailed at.

Solinus writes almost in like form, Solinus.
and is more brief, and has much more variety of things and matters, and is
therefore maruaylous delectable. Yet Mela is Wels.
much shorter, and his style (by reason that it is of a more antiquity) is
also more clean and facile. Wherefore he, or Dionisius shall Dionisius.
be sufficient,

Cosmographie being substancially perceived, it is than time to induce a child
to the redyng of histories. But first to set Histories and the form in
redynge of them.
him in a fervent courage, the master in the most pleasant and elegant wise,
expressing what incomparable delectation, vtilitic, and commodity shall
happen to emperors, kings, pryncis, and all other gentyllmen, by redynge of
histories: Showing to him, that Demetrius Phalareus, a man of excellent
wisdom and lerninge, and which in Athenes had been long exercised in the
public weal, exhorted Ptholome king of Aegipt, chiefly above al other studies
to hau^t and embrace histories, and such other books, wherein were contained
precepts made to kings and princis, saying, That in them he should read those
things, which no man durst report unto his person.

Also Cicero, father of the latin eloquence, calls an history the witness
of times, maystres of life, the life of remembrance, of truth the light,
and messager of antiquity.

More over, the sweet Isocrates exhorts the king Nycoles, whom he
instructs, to leave behind him statues and images that shall represente
rather the figure and similitude of his mind, than the features of his body,
signifieng thereby the remembrance of his acts written in hystories.

By semblable aduertisementes shall a no ble heart be trained to delight in
hystories. And than according to the counsaylle of Quintilian, it is best
that he begin with Titus Liuius, not only for his elegancie Titus Liuius.
of writing, which flows in him like a fountain of sweet milk, but also
for as much as by redynge that auctor, he may know, how the most noble
city of Rome of a small and pore beginning, by prowes and virtue, lyttel and
little came to the empire and dominion of all the world.

Also in that City he may behold the form of a public weal, which if the
insolency and pride of Tarquine had not ex cluded kings out of the city, had been the most noble and perfect of all other.

Xenophon, being both a philosopher, Xenopho^.
and an excellent captain, so invented and ordered his warke, named Paedia
Ciri, which may be interpreted the Chyldehode or disciplyne of Cyrus, that he
leaves to the reders thereof an incomparable swetenes and example of living,
specially for the conductynge and well orderyng of hosts or armies. And
therefore the noble Sci pion, who was called Affricanus, as well in peace as in
war, was never seen without this book of Xenophon.

With him may be joined Quintus Curtius, Quintus Curtius.
who writes the life of king Alexander elega^tly and swetely. In whom may be
founden the figure of an excellent prince, as he that incomparably excelled all
other kings and emperors, in wisdom, hardynes, strength, policy, agilite,
valiaunte courage, nobility, liberalite, and courtaisy. Wherein he was a
spectakle or mark for all princis to look on. Contrary wise, when he was ones
vainquysshed with voluptie and pride, his tyranny and beastly cruelty
abhors all reders. The comparison of the virtues of these two noble princes,
equally described by two excellent writers, well expressed, shall provoke a
gentle courage, to contend to follow their virtues.

Julius Caesar and Salust, for their compendious Caesar Salust.
writynge, to the understanding whereof is required an exact and perfect
judgment, and also for the exquisite order of battle, and continuynge of the
history, without any variety, whereby the pain of study should be alleuyate,
they two would be reserved, until he that shall read them, shall se some
experience in semblable matters. And than shall he find in them such pleasure
and commodity, as therewith a noble and gentle heart ought to be satisfied.
For in them both it shall seem to a man, that he is present and hereth the
counsels and exhortations of capitaynes, which be called Conciones, and that
he sees the order of hosts, when they be embatayled, the fyers assaults and
encountringes of both armies, the furyouse rage of that monster called war.
And he shall wene that he hereth the terrible dintes of so^dry weapons, and
ordinance of battle: the conducte and policies of wise and expert
capytaynes, specially in the commentaries of Julius Caesar, which he made of
his exploiture in France and Brytayne, and other countries now rekned among
the prouynces of Germany. Which book is studyously to be read of the pryncis
of this realm of England and their consaylours: considering that thereof may
be taken necessary instructyons concerning the wars, again Irysshe men or
Scotts: who be of the same rudenes and wild disposition, that the Suises and
Britons were in the time of Caesar.

Semblable utility shall be founden in the history of Titus Liuius, in his
third Decades, where he writes of the battayles, that the Romans had with
Anniball and the Charthaginensis.

Also there be diverse orations, as well in all the books of the said auctors,
as in the history of Cornelyus Tacitus, which be Cornelius Tacitus.
very delectable, and for consayles very expedient to be had in memory.

And in good faith I have often thought, that the consultations and orations,
written by Tacitus, do import a majesty, with a co^pendious eloquence therein
contained.

In the lerninge of these autors, a young gentyllmanne shall be taught to note
and mark, not only the order and elegancie, in declaration of the history,
but also the occasion of the wars, the counsels and preparations on either
part, the estymation of the capitaines, the manner and form of their
governance, the continuance of the battaylle, the fortune and success of the
holle affairs. Semblably out of the wars in other daily affairs, the
astate of the public weal, if it be prosperous or in decay, what is the very
occasion of the one or of the other, the form and manner of the go uernaunce
there of, the good and yuell qualities of them that be rulers, the co^modites
and good sequel of virtue, the dyscommodities, and yuel conclusion of vicious
license.

Surely if a noble man do thus seryously and diligently read histories, I dare
affirm, there is no study or science for him of equal commodity and pleasure,
having regard to every time and age.

By the time that the child does come to.xvii. years of age, to the intent his
courage Moral philosophye*
be brydled with reason, it were needful to read unto him some warkes of
philosophy, specially that part that may inform him unto virtuous manners,
which part of philosophy is called moral. Wherefore there would be read to him
for an introductio^, two the first books of the warke of Aristotle, called
Ethicae, wherein is contained the defynitions and propre sygnifications of every
virtue, and that to be learned in Greek: for the translations that we yet have,
be but a rude and gross shadow of the eloquence and wisdom of Aristotle.

Forth with would follow the warke of Cicero, called in latin De officijs,
whereunto Tullies offices.
yet is no propre englisshe word to be given, but to provide for it some manner
of exposition, it may be said in this form, Of the duetyes and manners
apperteynyng to men.

But above al other, the warkes of Plato Plato.
would be most studiously read, when the judgment of a man is come to
perfectyon, and by the other studies is instructed in the form of speaking
that philosophers used. Lord god, what incomparable swetnesse of words and
matter shall he find in the said warkes of Plato and Cicero, wherein is joined
gravity with delectatio^, excellent wisdom with divine eloquence, absolute
virtue with pleasure incredible, and every place is so infarced with profitable
counsel, joined with honesty, that those three books be almost sufficient
to make a perfect and excellent governor.

The proverbs of Salomom, with the books of Ecclesiastes and Ecclesiasticus,
be very good lessons.

All the historiall parts of the bible, be right necessary for to be read of
a noble man, after that he is mature in years. And the residue (with the new
testament) is to be reverently touched, as a celestial jewel or relyke,
having the chief interpretour of those books, true and constante faith, and
dredefully to set hands thereon, reme^brynge that Oza, for putting his hand to
the holy shryne, that was called Archafederis, when it was brought by king
David from the city of Gaba, though it were wauerynge and in danger to fall,
yet was he stryken of god, and fell deed immediately.

It would not be forgoten, that the little book of the most excellent doctor
Erasmus Roter. (which he wrote to Charles, now being emperor, and than
prince of Castile) which book is entitled, the institution of a christen
prince, would be as familiare always with gentylmen, at al times and in every
age, as was Homere with the great king Alexander, or Xenopho^ with Scipio. For
as all men may judge, that have red the warke of Erasmus, there was never
Erasmus of the institution of a christen prince.
book written in latin, that in so little a portion, contained of sentence,
eloquence, and virtuous exhortation, a more compendious abundance.

And here I make an end of the lerning and study, whereby noble men may
attain to be worthy to have auctorytie in a publyke weal.

Always I shall exhort tutours and governors of noble children, that they
suffer them not, to use ingourgytations of meat or drink, ne to sleep much,
that is to say, above.viii. hours at the most. For undoubtedly, both repletion
and superfluous sleep be capital enemies to study, as they be semblably to
health of body and soul.

Aulus Gellius says, that children, if they use to eat and sleep over much,
be made therewith dull to learn. And we se, that there of slownesse is taken, and
the childrens personages do wax uncomely, and grow less in stature. Galen
will not permytte, that pure wine, without alaye of water, should in any wise
be given to children, for as much as it humecteth the body, or makes it
moyster and hotter, than is conueniente: also it fylleth the heed with fume, in
them specially, which be like, as children of hot and moist temperature.
These be well nyghe the words of the noble Galen.

Why gentylmen in this present time, be not equal in doctrine to the ancient
noble men. Capitulo. xii.
Now will I some what declare of the chief causes, why in our time noble me^
be not as excellent in lerning, as they were in old time among the Romans
and greeks. Surely as I have diligently marked in day ly experience, the
principal causes be these. The pride, avarice, and negligence of parents, and
the lack or fewenes of sufficient masters or teachers.

As I said, Pride is the first cause of this inconvenience. For of those
persons be some, which without shame dare affirm, that to a great gentylman,
it is a notable reproach, to be well learned, and to be called a great clerk:
which name they accounte to be of so base estimation, that they never have it
in their mouths, but when they speak any thing in derision. Which perchance
they would not do, if they had ones layser to read our own cronycle of
England, where they shall find, that king Henry beau clerk king of England.
Henry the first, son of Wylliam conqueror, and one of the most noble
princis that ever reigned in this realm, was openly called Henry beau clerk,
which is in english, fair clerk, and is yet at this day so named. And
wheder that name be to his honor, or to his reproach, let them judge that do
read and compare his life with his two brethren, Wylliam, called Rouse, and
Robert le courtoyse, they both not having semblable learning with the said
Henry, the one for his dissolute living and tyranny, being hated of al his
nobles and people, finally was sodeynely slain by the shot of an arrowe, as
he was huntinge in a forest, which to make larger, and to give his dear more
liberty, did cause the houses of.lii. parisshes to be pulled down, the people
to be expelled, and all being desolate, to be turned into deserte, and made
only pasture for beastis savage. Which he would never have done, if he had so
much delyted in good learning, as did his brother. The other brother, Robert
le Curtoyse, being duke of Normandy, and the eldest son of Wylliam Conquer
our, all be it that he was a man of much prowess, and right expert in
martial affairs, wherefore he was elect before Godfray of Boloigne, to have been king of Jerusalem: yet not with standing, when he invaded this realm
with sundry puissaunt armies, also diverse noble men aydynge him, his noble
brother Henry beau clerk, more by wisdom than power, also by lernyng,
adding policy to virtue and courage, often times vaynquysshed him, and did
put him to flight. And after sundry victories, finally took him and kept him
in prison, having none other means to keep his realm in tranquillity.

It was for no rebuke, but for an excellent honor, that the emperor Antonine
was surnamed philosopher, for by his most noble example of lyuinge and
industrye incomparable, he during all the time of his reygne, kept the public
weal of the Romans in such a perfect astate, that by his actis he
co^fyrmed the saying of Plato, That blessed is that public weal, wherein
either philosophers do reygne, or else kings be in philosophy studiouse.

These persons, that so much contemn learning, that they would that
gentilmens children should have no part or very little thereof, but rather
should spend their youth always (I say not only in hunting and haukynge,
which moderately used as solaces ought to be, I intend not to dysprayse) but
in those idle pastymes, which for the vice that is therein, the commandment of
the prince, and the universal consent of the people, expressed in statutes
and laws, do prohibit, I mean playenge at dyce and other games named
unlawful. These persons I say, I would should remember, orelles now learn,
if they never else hard it, that the noble Philyp, king of Macedonia, who
subdued al Greece, above all the good fortunes that ever he had, most
reioysed, that his son Alexander was borne in the time that Aristotle the
philosopher flourysshed, by whose instruction he might attain to most
excellent learning.

Also the same Alexaunder often times said, That he was equally as much
bounden to Aristotle, as to his father king Philip: for of his father he
received life, but of Aristotle he received the way to live nobly.

Who dyspraysed Epaminondas, the most valiant captain of Thebanes, for that
he was excellentely learned and a greatte philosopher?

Who ever disco^me^ded Julius Caesar for that he was a noble orator, and next
to Tully in the eloquence of the latin tongue, excelled all other?

Who ever reproved the emperor Hadriane, for that he was so exquisitly learned,
not only in greek and latin, but also in all sciences liberal, that openly at
Athenes, in the universal assembly of the grettest clerks of the world, he by
a long time dysputed with philosophers and Rheroricyens, which were esteemed
most excellent: and by the judgment of them that were present, had the palm
or reward of vyctorie? And yet by the governance of that noble e^perour, not
only the public weal florysshed, but also diverse rebellions were suppressed,
and the majesty of the empire hugely increased.

Was it any reproach to the noble Germanicus (who by the assigneme^t of
Augustus should have succeeded Tiberius in the empire, if traytorous envy had
not in his flourysshynge youth birefte him his life) that he was equal to the
most noble poetis of his time: and to the increase of his honor and most
worthy commendation, his image was set up at Rome in the habyte that poetis
at those days used?

Finally, how much excellent lerning commends, and not dysprayseth
nobilytie, it shall plainly appear unto them that do read the life's of
Alexander, called Seuerus, Tacitus, Probus, Aurelius, Constantyne, Theodosius,
and Charles the great, surnamed Charlemayne, all being emperors: and do
compare them with other, which lacked or had not so much of doctrine.

Ueryly they be far from good reason in mine opinyon, which couayte to have
their children goodly in stature, deliver, well singing: wherein trees,
beastis, fysshes, and birds, be not only with them equal, but also far do
excede them, And conning, whereby only man excels all other creatures in
earth, they reiecte and accoumpte unworthy to be in their children. What unkind
appetite were it, to desire to be father rather of a piece of flesh, that can
only move and feel, than of a child, that should have the perfect form of a
man? what so perfectely expresses a man, as doctrine?

Diogines the philosopher, seeing one without learning sytte on a stone, said
to them that were with him, Behold where one stone sytteth on an other. Which
words well considered and tried, shall appear, to conteyne in them wonderful
matter, for the approbation of doctrine.

The second and third decay of lerninge among gentylmen. Cap. xiii.
THe second occasion, wherefore gentle men's children seldom have sufficient
lernyng, is avarice. For where their parents will not adventure, to send them
far out of their propre countries, partly for fear of death, which
perchance dare not approach them at home with their father, partly for expense
of money, which they suppose would be less in their own houses, or in a
vyllage with some of their tenantes or friends, having seldom any regard to
the teacher, whether he be well learned or ignorant. For if they hire a schole
master to teache in their houses, they chiefly enquire, with how small a
salary he will be contented, and never do inserche, how much good learning he
has, and how among well learned men, he is therein esteemed: using therein
less dilygence than in taking servants, whose service is of much less
importance, and to a good schole master, is not in profit to be compared.

A gentyllman, er he take a cook in his service, will first examine him
diligently, how many sorts of meats, potages, and sauces he can perfectely
make, and how well he can season them: that they may be both pleasant and
nourishynge. Yea, and if it be but a fauconer, he will scrupulusly enquire,
what skyll he has in fedynge, called dyete, and keeping of his hawk from al
syckenes: also how he can reclaim her and prepare her to flight. And to such
a cook or fauconer, whom he fyndeth expert, he spares not to give much
wages, with other bounteous rewards. But of a schole master, to whom he will
committee his child to be fed with lernyng, and instructed in virtue, whose
life shall be the princypall monument of his name and honor, he never makes
further inquiry, but where he may have a schole master, and with how little
charge. And if one perchance be fou^den well learned, which will not take
peines to teach without great salary: he than speaks nothing more, or else
says, what shall so much wages be given to a schole master, which would
keep me two servants? To whom may be said these words, that by his son,
being well learned, he shall receive more commodity and also worship, than by
the service of a hundred cooks and fauconers.

The third cause of this hyndrance, is negligence of parents: which I note
specially in this point. There have been diverse, as well mean gentle men as
of the nobility, which delytynge to have their sons excellent in learning,
have provided for them conning masters, who substancially have taught them
grammar, and very well instructed them, to speak latin elegantly: whereof the
parents have taken much delectation, but when they have had of grammar
sufficient, and be comen to the aege of.xiiii. years, and do approach or draw
toward the astate of man, which aege is called mature or ripe (wherein not
only the said learning continued by much experyence shall be perfectely
dygested and confyrmed in perpetual remembrance, but also more seriouse
lernyng contained in other lyberall sciences, and also philosophy would than be
learned) the parents, this thing nothing regardinge, but being suffised,
that their children can only speak latin proprely, or make verses without
matter or sentence: they from the^s forth do suffer them to live in idelnes,
or else putting them to service, do as it were banishe them from al virtuous
study, and from exercise of that, which they be fore learned. So that we may
behold diverse young gentle men, which in their infancy and chyldehod,
were wondered at for their aptnes to learning, and prompte speaking of elegant
latin, now being men,: have not only forgotten their congruite (as the
commune word is) and uneath can speak one hole sentence in true latin, but
that wars is, have all learning in derision, and in skorne thereof, will of
wa^tonnesse speak the most barberously that they can imagine.

Now some man will require me to show mine opinion, if it be necessary, that
gentil men should, after the aege of.xiiii. years, continue in study. To be
plain and true, therein I dare affirm, that if the elegante Eloquence
commended
speaking of latin be not added to other doctrine, little fruit may come of
the tongue, sins latin is but a natural speech, and the fruit of speech is
wise sentence, which is gathered and made of sundry lernynges. And he that has
nothing but langage only, may be no more praised than a popiniay, a pie, or a
stare, when they speak featly. There be many now a days in famous schools
and universities, which be so much given to the study of tongues only, that
when they write epistels, they seem to the reder, that like to a trumpet they
make a soune without any purpose, where unto me^ harken more for the noise than
for any delectation that thereby is meued. Wherefore they be much abused, that
suppose eloquence to be only in words or colors of Rhetorike. For as Tully
says, what is so furiouse or mad a thing, as a vain soune of words of the
best sort and most ornate, conteyninge neither conning nor sentence.

Undoubtedly, very eloquence is in every what eloquence is.
tongue where any matter or act done or to be done is expressed in words
clean, pro pise, ornate, and comely, whereof sentencis be so aptly compact, that
they by a virtue inexplicable, do draw unto them the minds and consent of the
herers, being therewith either persuaded, meued, or to delectation induced.

Also every man is not an orator, that can write an epistle or a flattering
oration in latin, whereof the last (as god help me) is to much used. For a
right orator may not be without a much better furniture. Tulli says, that to
him belongs the exply catynge or vnfoldinge of sentence, with a great
estimation, in gyuynge counsaylle concerning matters of great importance: also
to him apperteyneth the sterynge and quickenynge of people, languysshynge or
dyspeyryng, and to moderate them that be rash and unbridled. Wherefore noble
auctours do affirm, that in the first infancy of the world, men wandrynge
like beastis in woddes and on mountains, regarding neither the religion due
unto god, nor the office perteynynge unto man, ordered all thing by bodyly
strength: until Mercurius (as Plato supposes) or sum other man helped by
sapience, and eloquence, by some apt or propre oration, assembled them to
gether, and persuaded to them, what commodity was in mutual couersation and
honest manners.

But yet Cornelius Tacitus descrybeth Corn. Ta. de orat.
an orator, to be of more excellent qualites, saying, An orator is he, that
can or may speak or reason in every question sufficiently, elegantly, and to
persuade proprely, according to the dygnitie of the thing that is spoken of,
the opportunity of time, and pleasure of them that be herers.

Tully before him affyrmed, that a man may not be an orator, heaped with
preise, but if he have gotten the knowledge of all things, and arts of
greatest importance. And how shall an orator speak of that thing, that he
has not learned? And because there may be nothing, but it may happen to come
in preyse or dysprayse, in consultation or judgment, in accusation or defense:
therefore an orator, by others instruction perfectly furnyshed, may in every
matter and learning, commend or dysprayse, exhort or dissuade, accuse or
defend eloquently, as occasion happens. Wherefore in as much as in an orator
is required to be a heap of all manner of learning, which of some is called
the world of science, of other the circle of doctrine, which is in one word
of Greek ENCYCLOPEDIA, therefore at this day, may be founden but a very few
orators. For they that come in message from pryncis, be for honor named now
orators, if they be in any degree of worship: only poor men, having equal
or more of learning, being called messagers.

Also they, which only teach rhetorike (which is the science, whereby is
taught an artisiciall form of spekyng, wherein is the power to persuade,
move, and delight, or by that science only do speak or write without any
admynistratyon of other scyences) ought to be named rhetoriciens, de
clamatours, artificial speakers (named in Greek Logodedali) or any other name
than orators.

Semblably they that make verses, expressing Poets.
thereby none other learning, but the craft of versifienge, be not of ancient
writers named poets, but only called versifyers. For the name of a Poet
(whereat now, specially in this realm, men have such indignation, that they
use only poets and poetry in the contempt of eloquence) was in ancient time
in high estymation: in so much that all wisdom was supposed to be therein
included. And poetry was the first philosophy that ever was known, whereby men
from their chyldhode were brought to the reason, how to live well, learning
thereby not only manners and natural affections, but also the wonderful warkes
of nature, myxtyng serious matter with things that were pleasant: as it shall
be manyfeste to them that shall be so fortunate to read the noble warkes of
Plato and Aristotle: wherein he shall find the authority of poets frequentely
alleged: ye and that more is, In poetis was supposed to be science mystical
and inspired: and therefore in latyne they were called VATES, which word
signifies as much as prophets. And therefore Tulli in his Tusculane Ci. Tusc.
quest. ^.
questions supposes, that a poet can not abundantly express verses
sufficient and complete, or that his eloquence may flow without labor,
words well sounyng and plentuouse, without celestial instincio^, which is
also by Plato ratified.

But sens we be now occupied in the defense of Poets, it shall not be
incongruent to our matter, to show what profytte may be taken by the
dyligente redynge of ancient poets: contrary to the false opinion that now
rayneth, of them that suppose, that in the warkes of poets is contained
nothing but baudry (such is their foul word of reproach) and unprofitable
leasynges. But first I will interpret some verses of Horace, wherein he
expresses the office of poets, and after will I resort to a more plain
demonstration of some wisdoms and counsaylles contained in some verses of
poets. Horace in his second book of epistles, says in this wise, or much
like,

The poet facioneth by some pleasant mean, Horat. ep. li. ii. ep^a ad Augustum.

The speech of children tender and unsure:
Pulling their ears from words unclean,
Gyuinge to them precepts that are pure:
Rebukynge envy and wrath, if it dure:
Things well done he can by example commend,
The nedy and sick he does also his cure
To recomforte, if aught he can amend.
But they, which be ignorant in poets, will perchance obiecte as their manner
is, against these verses, saying, that in There^ce and other, that were
writers of comedies, Ouide, Catullus, Martialis, and all that route of
lascivious poets, that wrate epistles and ditties of love, some called in
latin Elegiae, some Epigra^mata, is nothing contained, but incitation to
lechery.

First comedies, which they suppose to be a doctrinall of rybaudry, they be
undoubtedly Comedies
a picture, or as it were a mirror of man's life: wherein yuell is not taught,
but dyscouered, to the intent that men, beholding the promptnes of youth unto
vice, the snares of har lottis and baudes, laid for young minds, the disceipt
of servants, the chances of fortune, contrary to men's expectation, they
being thereof warned, may prepare them self to resyste and preuente occasion.
Semblably remembrynge the wysedomes, aduertysementes, counsayi^es, dissuasyon
from vice and other profitable sentences, most eloquently and familiarly
showed in those comedyes, Undoubtedly there shall be no lyttel fruit out of
them gathered. And if the vices in them expressed, should be cause, that minds
of the reders should be corrupted: than by the same argument not only
enterludes in english but also sermones, wherein some vice is declared, should
be to the beholders and herers like occasion to encreace sinners. And that by
comedies, good cou^saylle is ministered: it appears by the sentence of Parmeno,
in the second comedy of Therence.

In this thing I triu^phe in mine own co^ceipte, Therent. in Euneu.

That I have fou^den for all young me^ the way,
How they of harlots shall know the deceit,
Their wits, their manners, y^ thereby they may
Them perpetnally hate: for so much as they
Out of their own houses be fresh and delicate,
Fedynge curiousely: at home all the day
Living beggarly, in most wretched ast ate.
There be many mo words spoken, which I purposelye omytte to translate, not
with standing the substance of the hole sentence is herein comprised. But
now to come to other poets. what may be better said, thanne is witten by
Plautus in his first comedy?

Verily virtue does all things excelle. Plautus ^ Amphit. Alc. loqtur

For if liberty, health, living, and substance,
Our country, our pare^tes and children do well,
It happens by virtue, she does al advance.
Virtue has all thing under governance,
And in whom of virtue is fouden great ple^tie,
Any thing that is good may never be deinte.
Also Ouidius, that seems to be most of al poets lascivious, in his most
wanton books, has right commendable and noble sentences: as for proof
thereof, I will recyte some that I have taken at adventure.

Time is in medicine, if it shall profytte. Ouidius de reme. amoris.

Wine given out of time, may be annoyaunce.
A man shall irritate vice, if he prohibit.
When time is not mete unto his vtteraunce.
Therefore, if thou yet by counsel art recuperable
Fle thou from idelnesse, and always Be stable.
Martialis, which for his dissolute writing, is most seldom red of men of
much gravity, has not withstanding many commendable sentences and right wise
counsels, as among diverse, I will reherce one, which is first come to my
remembrance.

If thou wyit eschew byttev adventure Wartialis li. xii. ad Julium.

And aduoyde the gnawyng of a pensiful heart
Set in no one person all holly thy pleasure
The less shalt thou joy, But less shall thou smarte.
I could recite a great nombre of semblable good sentences, out of these and
other wanton poets, which in latin do expres them incomparably, with more
grace and delectation to the reder, than our english tongue may yet comprehend.
Wherefore sens good and wise matter may be pycked out of these poets, it were
no reason for some lyttel matter, that is in their verses, to aba^done therefore
all their warkes, no more than it were to forbear or prohibit a man to come
into a fair gardeyne, lest the redole^t savors of sweet herbs and flowers,
shall meue him to wanton courage, or lest in gadringe good and wholesome herbs,
he may happen to be stunge with a nettle. No wise man enters into a gardeyne,
but he sone espieth good herbs from nettils, and treads the nettils under
his feet, whiles he gadreth good herbs: whereby he takes no damage. Or if he
be stungen, he makes light of it, and shortly forgets it.

Semblably if he do read wanton mattier, mixte with wisdom, he puts the
worst under foot, and sorteth out the best: or if his courage be stered or
provoked, he remembers the lyttel pleasure and great detrimente that should
ensue of it: and withdrawynge his mind to some other study or exercise,
shortly forgets it.

And therefore among the jews though it were prohibyte to children, until they
came to ripe years, to read the books of Genesis, of the iuges, Cantica
Canticorum, and some part of the book of Ezechiel the prophet, For that in
them was contained some matter, which moughte happen to incense the young
mind, wherein were sparks of carnal concupiscence, yet after certain years
of men's aeges, it was lefull for every man to read and dilygently study
those warkes. So al though I approve not the lesson of wanton poets, to be
taught unto al children: yet think I conueniente and necessary, that when
the mind is become constaunte, and courage is assuaged, or that children of
their natural dysposition be shamefaste and continente, none aunciente poet
would be excluded from the lesson of such one, as desires to come to the
perfecty on of wisdom.

But in defendyng of orators and poets, I had almost forgotten where I was.
Ueryly there may no man be an excellent poet, nor orator, unless he have
part of all other doctrine, specially of noble philosophy. And to say the
truth, no man can apprehende the very delectation, that is in the lesson of
noble poets, unless he have read very much, and in diverse autours of diverse
lernynges. Wherefore, as I late said, to the augmentation of understanding,
called in latin Intellectus et men's, is required to be much redynge and
vigilante study in every science, specially of that part of philosophy named
moral, which instructs men in virtue and polytike governance. Also no
noble autour, specially of them that wrate in greek or latin before.xii. C.
years passed, is not for any cause to be omytted. For therein I am of
Quintilians opinion, that there is few or none auncyente warke, that yeldeth
not some fruit or commodity to the diligente reders. And it is a very gross
or obstinate wit, that by redyng much, is not some what amended.

Concerning the election of other autours, to be read, I have (as I trust)
declared sufficiently my conceipte and opinion, in the x. and.xi. chapiters.

Finally, like as a delycate tree, that comes of a kernel, which as soon as
it burgeneth out leaves, if it be plucked up, or it be sufficiently rooted,
and laid in a corner, becomes dry or rotten, and no fruit comes of it: if
it be removed and set in an other air or earth, which is of contrary
qualities where it was before, it either se^blably dies, or bears no fruit,
or else the fruit that comes of it, leseth his verdure and taste, and finally
his estimation. So the pure and excellent lerning, whereof I have spoken,
though it be sown in a child never so tymely, and spryngeth and burgeneth
never so pleasauntly, if before it take a deep rote in the mind of the child,
it be laid a side, either by to much solace, or continual attendaunce in
service, or else is translated to an other study, which is of a more gross or
vnplesaunt quality, before it be confirmed or stablyshed by often redynge or
dilygent exercise, in conclusion it vanishes and comes to nothing. Wherefore
let men reply as they list, in mine opinion, men be wonderfully disceiued now
a days (I dare not say with the persuasion of avarice) that do put their
children at the age of xiiii. or.xv. years, to the study of the laws of the
realm of England. I will show them reasonable causes why, if they will
patiently here me, informed partly by mine own experience.

How the students in the laws of this realm, may take excellent commodity
by the lessons of so^dry doctrines. ca. xiiii.
IT may not be denied, but that al laws be founded on the depest part of
reason, and as I suppose, no one law so much as our own: and the deper men
do inuestigate reason, the more difficile or hard must needs be the study.
Also that reverend study is inuolued in so barbar ouse a la^gage, that it is
not only void of al eloquence, but also being separate from the exercise of
our law only, it serves to no commodity or necessary purpose, no man
understanding it, but they, which have studied the laws. Than children
at.xiiii. or.xv. years old, in which time spryngeth courage, set al in
pleasure, and pleasure is in nothing, that is not facile or elegant, being
brought to the most difficulte and grave learning, which has nothing
illecebrouse or delicate to tickyll their tender wits, and allure them to
study (onles it be lucre, which a gentyl wit littell estemeth) the more part
vainquysshed with tediousenesse, either do abandone the laws, and unawares to
their friends, do give them to gamyng, and other (as I might say) idle
business, now called pastimes, orels if they be in any wise thereto
constrained, they apprehe^dynge a piece thereof, as if they being long in a
dark dungeon, only did se by the light of a candell. Than if after.xx.
or.xxx. years study, they happen to come among wise men, herynge matters
commened of, concerning a publyke weal, or outward affairs between princis,
they no less be astonyed, than if they coming out of a dark house at none
days, were suddenly strike^ in the eyes with a bright son beam. But I
speak not this in reproach of lawyers, for I know diverse of them, which in
consultation will make a right vehemente raison: and so do some other, which
have neither law nor other learning, and if they were fournyshed with
excellent doctrine, their reason should be the more substanciall and certain.

There be some also, which by their fre^des, be coarted to aplye the study of
the law only, and for lack of ple^tuous exhybition be let of their liberte,
wherefore they can not resort unto pastyme. These of all other be most cast
away, for nature repug nyng, they uneath taste any thing that may be profitable,
and also their courage is so mortified (which yet by solace perchance might
be made quick or apt to some other study or laudable exercise) that they
live ever after out of all estimation. Wherefore Tulli says, we should so
endeavor our selfs, that we strive not with the universal nature of man, but
that being conserved let us follow our own propre natures, for though there be
studies of more grauytie and importance, yet ought we to regard the studies,
whereto we be, by our own nature, inclined. And that this sentence is true, we
have daily experience, in this realm specially. For how many men be there,
whose sons in chyldehode are aptly disposed by nature to paynt, kerue, or
grave, to embrowder, or do other like things, wherein is any art commendable
concerning invention, which as soon as they espy it, be there with dyspleased,
and forth with byndeth them apprentyses to taylours, weyuers, towkers, and
some time to cobblers? which has been the inestimable loss of many good
wits, and has caused, that in the said arts, englysshemen be inferyours to
all other people, and be constrained, if we will have any thing well painted,
kerued, or embroudred, to leave our own countray men, and resort unto
strangers: but more of this shall I speak in the next volume. But to resort
unto lawyers.

I think verily, if children were brought up, as I have written, and
continually were retained in the right study of very philosophy, until they
passed the age of.xxi. years, and tha^ set to the laws of this realm (being
ones brought to a more certain and compendious study, and either in english,
latin, or good french, written in a more clean and elegant style) undoubtedly
they should become men of so excellent wisdom, that throughoute all the
world should be founden in no commune weal more noble counsaylours, our laws
not only comprehendynge most excellent reasons, but also being gathered and
compacte (as I might say) of the pure meal or flower, sisted out of the best
laws in all other countries, as some what I do intend to prove evidently in
the next volume, wherein I will render mine office or duty, to that honorable
study, whereby my father was advanced to a judge, and also I my self have
attained no little commodity.

I suppose, there be diverse men will say, that the swetnesse that is contained
in eloquence, and the multitude of doctrines, should utterly withdraw the
minds of young men from the more necessary study of the laws of this realm.
To them will I make a brief answer, but true it shall be, and I trust
sufficient to wise men. In the great multitude of young men, which always will
repair, and the law being ones brought in to a more certain and perfect
langage, will also increase in the reverent study of the law: vndoughtedly
there shall never lack, but some by nature inclyned, diverse by desire of
so^dry doctrines, many for hope of lucre or some other advancement, will
effectually study the laws, ne will be there from withdrawn by any other
lesson, which is more eloquent. Example we have, at this present time, of
diverse excellent learned men both in the laws civil and also in phisike,
which being exactly studied in all parts of eloquence, both in the Greek
tongue and latin, have not withstanding red and perused the great fardelles
and trusses of the most barbarouse autours stuffed with innumerable gloses:
whereby the most necessary doctrines of law and phisyke be mynced into
fragmentes, and in all wise men's opinions, do perceive no less in the said
lerninges, than they, which never knew eloquence, or never tasted other but the
fecis or dragges of the said noble doctrines. And as for the multitude of
sciences can not indamage any student, but if he be meued to study the law by
any of the said motions, by me before touched, he shall rather increse therein
than be hindered, and that shall appear manyfestely to them, that either will
give credence to my report, or else will read the warkes that I will allege,
which if they understand not, to desire some learned man by interpretinge to
cause them perceive it. And first I will begin at orators, who bear the
principal title of eloquence.

It is to be remembered, that in the lernyng The art of retorike in mootinge.
of the laws of this realm, there is at this day an exercise, wherein is a
manner of a shadow or figure of the ancient rhetorike. I mean the pleading
used in court and Chancery called motes. Where first a case is appointed to be
moted by certain young me^, conteinynge some doubtefull controversy, which is
instead of the head of a declamation called thema, the case being known,
they which be appointed to mote, do examyne the case, and inuestygate what they
therein can epsy, which may make a contention, whereof may rise a question to
be argued, and that of Tulli is called constitutio, and of Quintilian status
causae. Also they consider what plees on every part ought to be made, and how
the case may be reasoned. Which is the first part of Rhetorike, named
Invention. Than appoynte they, how many plees may be made for every part,
and in what formalytie they should be set, Which is the second part of
Rhetoryke, called disposition, wherein they do much approach unto Rhetorike.
Than gather they al in to perfect remembrance, in such order as it ought to
be pleaded, which is the part of Rhetorike named memory. But for as much as
the tongue, wherein it is spoken, is barberouse, and the stering of affections of
the mind in this realm was never used: therefore there lacks Eloquution, and
Pronunciatio^, two the pryncipall parts of Rhetorike. Notwithstanding some
lawyers, if they be well retained, will in a mean cause pronounce right
vehemently. More over, there seems to be in the said pledinges, certain
parts of an oration, that is to say, for Narrations, Partitions,
Confirmations, and Confutatio^s, named of some Reprehentions, They have
Declarations, Bars, Replications, and Reioyndres, only they lack pleasant
form of beginning, called in latin Exordium: nor it makes thereof no great
matter, they that have studied rhetorike, shall perceive what I mean. Also in
arguing their cases, in mine opinion, they lack very little of the hole art:
for therein they do diligently observe the rules of Confirmation and
Confutatio^, wherein rests proof and disproufe: having almost all the places,
whereof they shall fetch their reasons, called of orators loci co^munes,
which I omyt to name, fearing to be to long in this matter. And verily I
suppose, if there might ones happen some man, having an excellent wit, to be
brought up in such form, as I have hitherto written, and may also be
exactely or depely learned in the art of an orator, and also in the laws of
this realm, the prince so willing and thereto assistinge, undoubtedly it should
not be impossible for him, to bring the pleadynge and resonynge of the law,
to the ancient form of noble orators: and the laws and exercise thereof,
being in pure latin or doulce french, few men in consultations, should (in
mine opinion) compare with our lawyars, by this means being brought to be
perfect orators, as in whom should than be founden the sharp wits of
logitians, the grave sentences of philosophers, the elegancie of poets, the
memory of ciuilians, the voice and gesture of them that can pronounce comedies:
which is all that Tulli, in the person of the most eloquente man Ci. de
oratore. li. i.
Marcus Antonius, could require to be in an orator.

But now to conclude mine assertion. What let was eloquence to the study of the
law in Quintus Sceuola, which being an excellent autour in the laws civil,
was called of al lawiars most eloquente? Or how much was eloquence mynished by
knowelege of the laws in Crassus, which was called of all eloquent men the
best lawyar? Also Seruus Sulpitius, in his time one of the most noble orators,
next unto Tulli, was not so let by eloquence, but that on the civil laws he
made notable commentes, and many noble warkes by all lawyers approved. Who
redeth the text of Civil, called Pandectes or Digestes, and has any
commendable judgment in the latin tongue, but he will affirm, that Ulpianus,
Sceuola, Caius, and all the other there named, of whose sayings all the said
textes be assembled, were not only studyous of eloquence, but also therein
wonderful exercised: for as much as their style does approach nere to the
antique and pure eloquence, than any other kind of writers, that wrate about
that time?

Se^blably Tulli, in whom it seems, that Eloquence has set her glorious
Throne most ryhcly and preciously adourned for all men to wonder at, but no man
to approach it, was not let from being an incomparable orator, ne was by the
exact knowledge of other sciences withdrawn, from pleadyng infinite causes
before the Senate and iuges, and they being of most wayghtye importance: In
so much as Cornelius Corn. Ta. de orator.
Tacitus, an excellent orator, historien, and lawiar, says, Surely in the
books of Tulli, men may deprehende, that in him lacked not the knowledge of
geometrye, ne musyke, ne grammar, finally of no manner of art that was honest,
he of logike perceived the subtlety, of that part that was moral all the
commodity, and of al things the chief motions and causes. And yet for all
this abundaunce, and as it were a garnerde heaped with all manner sciences: there
failed not in him substaunciall learning in the laws Civil, as it may appear
as well in the books, which he him self ^^^de of laws, as also, and most
specially, in many of his most eloquent orations: which if one well learned in
the laws of this realm, did read and well understand, he should find,
specially in his orations called Actiones again Uerres, many places, where he
should espy by lykelyhode the fountaynes, from whens proceeded diverse grounds
of our common laws. But I will now leave to speak any more thereof at this
time.

Moreover, when young men have red laws, expouned in the orations of Tulli,
and also in histories, of the beginning of laws, and in the warkes of Plato,
Xenophon, and Aristotell, of the dyuersyties of laws and publyke weals, if
nature (as I late said) will dyspose them to that manner study: they shall be
thereto the more incensed, and come unto it the better prepared and furnysshed.
And they whom nature thereto nothing meueth, have not only saved all that time,
which many now a days do consume in idleness, but also have won such a
treasure, whereby they shall all way be able to serve honorably their prince,
and the public weal of their countraye, pryncipally if they confer all
their doctrines to the most noble study of morrall philosophy, which teaches
both virtues manners, and civil policy: whereby at the last we should have in
this realm sufficiency of worshyppefull lawyers, and also a publyke weal
equiualente to the Greeks or Romans.

For what cause at this day there be in this realm few perfect schole
masters. Capitulo. xv.
Lord god how many good and clean wits of children be now adays perished
by ignoraunte schole masters. How little substancial doctrine is apprehended
by the fewenesse of good grammariens? Not with standing I know that there be
some wellerned, which have taught, and also do teache, but god knowethe a few,
and they with small effect, having thereto no comfort: their aptist and most
propre scholars, after they be well instructed in speaking latin, and
understanding some poets, being taken from their schole by their parents,
and either be brought to the court, and made lakaies or pages, or else are
bounden pre^tises, whereby the worship that the master above any reward,
couayteth to have by the praise of his scholar, is utterly drowned. Whereof I
have hard schole masters very well learned, of good right, complain. But yet
(as I said) the fewenesse of good grammariens is a great impediment of
doctrine. And here I would the reders should mark, that I note to be few good
gra^mariens, and not none. I call not them gramariens, which only can teach or
make rules, whereby a child shall only learn to speak congrue latin, or to
make six versis standing in one foot, wherein perchance shall be neither
sentence nor eloquence. But I name him a grammarien by the auctorytie of
Quintilian, that speaking latin Fab. Quintilian. li. i.
elegantly, can expound good autors, expressing the invention and dysposition
of the matter, their style or form of eloquence, explycatinge the figures, as
well of sentences as words, leuynge nothing, person or place named by the
auctour, vndeclared, or hyd from his scholars. Wherefore Quintilian says, It is
not enough for him to have red poets, but all kinds of writing must also be
sought for, not for the histories only, but also for the propretie of words,
which co^munely do receive their authority of noble auctours. More over,
without music, grammar may not be perfect: for as much as therein must be
spoken of metres and harmonies, called rythmi in greek. Neither if he have not
the knowledge of storres, he may understand poets, which in description of
times (I omytte other things) they traict of the risinge and goinge down of
planettes. Also he may not be ignorant in philosophye, for many places that be
almost in every poet, fetched out of the most subtle part of natural
questions. These be well nyghe the words of Quintilian. Than behold how few
grammariens, after this description, be in this realm.

Undoutedly there be in this realm many well learned, which if the name of a
schole master were not so much had in contempt, and also if their labors
with abundante salaries moughte be requited, were right sufficient and able
to induce their herers to excellent learning: so they be not plucked away
grene, and er they be in doctrine sufficiently rooted. But now adays, if to a
bachelar or master of art, study of philosophy waxes tedious, if he have a
spone full of latin, he will show forth a hoggesheed, without any lerninge,
and offer to teach grammar, and expoune noble writers: and to be in the room
of a master, he will for a small salarie, set a false color of learning on
propre wits, which will be washed away with one shoure of rain. For if
the children be absente from schole, by the space of one month, the best
learned of them, will uneath tell whether FATO, whereby Eneas was brought in to
Itali, were other a man, a horse, a ship, or a wild goose: Al though
Uirgilius Aeneid ^ su secu^do.
their master will perchance auaunte him self to be a good philosopher.

Some men peradventure do think, that at the beginning of learning, it
forces not, all though the masters have not so exact doctrine as I have
reherced, but let them take good head, what Quintilian says, It is so much
the better, to be instructed Fab Qui. lib. i.
by them that are best learned, for as much as it is dyfficultie to put out of
the mind, that which is ones settylled, the double bourden being paynefull
to the masters that shall succeed, and verily much more to vnteache than to
teach. Wherefore it is written, that Timothe the noble musician, demanded
always a greatter reward of them, whom other had taught, than of them that
never any thing learned. These be the words of Quintilian or like.

Also the commune experience teaches, that no man will put his son to a
botcher to learn, or he bind him prentyse to a tailour. Or if he will have him
a conning goldsmyth, will bind him first prentise to a tynkar. In these
things poor men be circumspect, and the nobles and gentle men, who would
have their sons by excellent learning come unto honor, for sparyng of cost,
or for lack of dyligente search for a good schole master, wilfully dystroy
their children, causynge them to be taught that learning, which would require
six or seven years to be forgoten, by which time the more part of that age
is spente, wherein is the chief sharpness of wit, called in latin acumen, and
also than approaches the stubborn age, where the child brought up in
pleasure, dysdayneth correction.

Now have I all declared (as I do suppose) the chief impechementes of
excellent learning, of the reformation I need not to speak, sens it is
apparaunt, that by the contraries, men pursuing ernestly with discrete
judgment, and liberality, it should sone be amended.

Of sundry fourmes of exercise necessary for every gentle man. Cap. xvi.
AL though I have hitherto advanced the commendation of learning, specially
in gentle men: Yet it is to be considered, that continual study, without
sum manner of exercise, shortly exhausteth the spirytes vytall, and hyndereth
natural decoction and dygestion, whereby man's body is the sooner corrupted and
brought in to diverse sickenessis, and finally the life is thereby made shorter.
Where contrary wise, by exercise, which is a vehement motion (as Galene prince
of phisytions defines) the health of man is preserved, and his strength
increased: for as much as the me^bres by meuynge and mutual touching, do wax
more hard, and natural heat in all the body is thereby augmented. More over
it makes the spyrytes of a man more strong and valiant, so that by the
hardness of the members, all labors be more tolerable, by natural heat, the
appetite is the more quick: the change of the substance received, is the more
ready, the nourisshing of all parts of the body, is the more sufficient and
sure. By valiant motion of the spirits, all things superfluous be expelled,
and the conduitis of the body cleansed.

Wherefore this part of phisike, is not to be contempned or neglected in the
education of children, and specially from the age of.xiiii. years vppewarde, in
which time strength, with courage increases.

More over, there be diverse manners of exercyses, whereof some, only prepares
and helps dygestyon, some augmenteth also strength and hardynesse of body,
other serve for agilitie and nymblenes, some for celeritie or spedines. There
be also, which ought to be used for necessite only. Al these ought he that is
a tutor to a noble man, to have in remembrance: and as aportunitie serves, to
put them in experience. And specially them, which with health do join
commodity (and as I might say) necessity: considering that be he never so
noble or valyant, some time he is subject to peryle, or (to speak it more
pleasauntely) servant to fortune. Touching such exercises, as many be used
within the house, or in the shadow (as is the old manner of speaking) as
deambulations or moderate walkynges, laboring with poyses made of lead or
other metal, called in latin Alteres, Lyftynge and throwynge the heavy stone or
bar, playing at tenyse, and diverse semblable exercyses, I will for this time
pass over, exhorting them, which do understand latin, and do desire to
know the commodities of sundry exercises, to resort to the book of Galene,
of the governance of health, called in latin De sanitate tuenda, where they
shall be in that matter abundantly satisfied, and find in the reading much
delectation: which book is translated into latin, wonderful eloquently by
doctor Linacre, late most worthy physician, to our most noble soueraygne
lord king Henry the.viii. And I will now only speak of those exercises,
apt to the furniture of a gentle man's personage, adaptynge his body to
hardenesse, strength, and agilitie, and to help therewith him self in peryle,
which may happen in wars or other necessity.

Exercises, whereby should grow both recreation and profit. Cap. xvii.
VUrastlynge is a very good exercise in the beginning of youth, so that it be
with one that is equal in strength, or somewhat under, and that the place be
soft, that in fallinge their bodies be not bruised.

There be diverse manners of wrastlinges, Wrestling. Galenus.
but the best, as well for health of body, as for exercise of strength is, when
laying mutuallye their hands one over a nothers neck, with the other hand
they hold fast each other by the arm, and claspyng their legs together,
they enforce them selfs with strength and agilitie, to throw down each other,
which is also praised by Galene. And undoubtedly it shall be found profitable
in wars, in case that a Capytayne shall be constrained to cope with his
aduersarye hand to hand, having his weapon broken or lost. Also it has
benne seen, that the weaker person, by the sleight of wrastlyng, has
overthrown the stronger, almost or he could fasten on the other any violent
stroke.

Also rennynge is both a good exercise Renninge.
and a laudable solace. It is written of Epaminondas, the valiant captain of
Chebanes (who as well in virtue and prowess, as in lernyng, surmounted al noble
men of his time) that daily he exercised him self in the morning, with
rennynge and leapinge, in the eueninge in wrestling, to the intent that
likewise in armure he moughte the more strongely, embracinge his adversary,
put him in danger. And also that in the chase rennynge and leapinge, he
moughte either overtake his enemy, or being pursued, if extreme need required,
escape him.

Semblably before him did the worthy Achilles, for whiles his ships lay at
rode, he suffered not his people to slomber in idleness, but daily exercised
them and him self in rennynge, wherein he was most excellent, and passed al
other: and therefore Homere through out all his warke, calls him swyfte foot
Achilles.

The great Alexander, being a child, excelled all his companions in rennynge,
wherefore on a time, one demanded of him, if he would run at the great game of
Olympus, whereto out of al parts of Greece, came the most actife and valiant
persons, to assay maistries. Whereunto Alexander answered in this form, I
would very gladly run there, if I were sure to run with kings: for if I
should contend with a private person, having respect to our both astates, our
victories should not be equal.

Needs must rennyng be taken for a laudable exercise, sens one of the most
noble capitaynes of all the Romans, took his name of rennynge, and was called
Papirius Cursor, which is in english, Papirius the Renner. And also the
valiant Marius the Romayne, when he had been seven times Consul, and was of
the age of four score years, exercised him self daily among the young men
of Rome, in such wise, that there resorted people out of far parts, to
behold the strength and agilitie of that old Consul, wherein he compared with
the young and lusty soudiours.

There is an exercise, which is right Swymmynge.
profitable in exstreme danger of wars, but because there seems to be some
peril in the lernyng thereof, and also it has not ben of long time much used,
specially among noble men, perchance some reders will little esteem it, I
mean swymmynge. But not withstanding, if they reuolue the imbecilitie of our
nature, the hasardes and dangers of battle, with the exaumples, which shall
here after be showed, they will (I doubt not) think it as necessary to a
captain or man of arms, as any that I have yet rehearsed.

The Romans, who above all things, had most in estimation martial
prowess, had a large and spaciouse field, without the city of Rome, which
was called Marces field, in latin Campus Martius, wherein the youth of the
city was exercised. This Campus Martius.
field adjoined to the river of Cyber, to the intent that as well men as
children should wash and refreshe them in the water after their labors, as
also learn to swymme, And not men and children only, but also the horses: that
by such usage they should more aptely and boldly pass over greatte ryuers,
and be more able to resyste or cut the waves, and not be aferde of pirries or
great storms. For it has been often times seen, that by the good swymming of
horses, many men have benne saved: and contrary wise, by a timorouse royle,
where the water has uneath come to his bealy, his legs has foltred, whereby
many a good and propre man has perished. What benefit received the hole city
of Rome, by the swymmynge of Oratius Cocles? Oratins Cocles.
which is a noble history, and worthy to be remembered.

After the Romans had expelled Carquine their king, as I have before
remembered, he desired aid of Porsena, king of Chuscanes, a noble and valiant
prince, to recover eftsoon his realm and dignitye: who with a great and
puissaunt host, besieged the city of Rome, and so sodeinely and sharply
assaulted it, that it lacked but little, that he ne had entered into the city
with his host, over the bridge, called Sublitius: where encountered with him
this Oratius with a few Romans. And whiles this noble captain, being
alone, with an incredible strength resysted all the host of Porcena, that
were on the bridge, he commanded the bridge to be broken behind him, where
with all the Chuscanes thereon standing, fell into the greatte river of Ciber,
but Oratius al armed lepte into the water, and swamme to his company. Al be it
that he was stricken with many arowes and darts, and also greuouslye wounded,
not with standing by his noble courage and feate of swymmynge, he saved the
city of Rome from perpetual servitude, which was likely to have ensued by
the return of the proud Carquine.

How much profited the feate in swimmynge Julius Caesar swimmynge.
to the valiant Julius Caesar? who at the battle of Alexandri, on a bridge
being abandoned of his people for the multitude of his enemies, which
oppressed them, when he might no longer sustain the shot of darts and
arowes, he boldly lepte in to the sea, and dyuynge under the water, escaped the
shot, and swamme the space of.CC. pasis to one of his ships, drawing his
cote armure with his teethe after him, that his enemies should not atteyne it,
and also that it moughte somewhat defend him from their arowes: And that more
marvel was, holding in his hand above the water, certain letters, which a
littel before he had received from the Senate. Sertorius


Before him Sertoryus (who of the spanyardes was named the second Anniball for
his prowess) in the battaylle that Scipio faught again the Cimbres, which
muaded France, when by negligence of his people, his enemies prevailed, and
put his host to the warse, he being sore wounded, and his horse being lost,
armed as he was in a gesseron, holding in his hands a tergate, and his
sword, lept into the river of Rone, which is wonderful swyft, and swymmynge
again the streme, came to his company, not without greatte wondering of all
his enemies, which stood and beheld him.

The great king Alexander lamented, that he had not well learned to swim. For
in Indee when he went against the puissaunt king Porus, he was constrained,
in following his enterprise, to conueye his host over a river of wonderful
greatness: than caused he his horse men to gage the water, whereby he first
perceived, that it came to the breasts of the horses, and in the myddle of the
streme, the horsis went in water to the neck, wherewith the fotemen being
aferde, durst not adventure to pass over the river. Alexaunder perceiving
that, with a dolorous manner in this wise lamented, O how most unhappy am I
of all other, that have not or this time learned to swymme? And therewith he
pulled a tergate from one of his soudiours, and casting it in to the water,
standing on it, with his spear conveyed him self with the streme, and
gouernynge the tergate wisely, brought him self unto the other side of the
water. whereof his people being abashed, some assayed to swymme, some holding
fast by the horses, other by spears, and other like weapons, many upon
fardels and trusses, gate over the river: in so much as nothing was perished
save a litell baggage, and of that no great quantity lost.

What utility was showed to be in swymmynge at the first wars, which the
Romans had against the Carthaginensys? It happened a battle to be on the sea
between them, where they of Carthage, being vainquished, would have set up
their sails to have fled, but that perceyuyng diverse young Romans, threw
them selfs in to the sea, and swimming unto the ships, enforced their
ennemies to stryke on land, and there assaulted them so asprely, that the
captain of the Romans, called Luctatius, might easily take them.

Now to behold, what excellent commodity is in the feate of swymmynge, sens
no king, be he never so puissaunte or perfect in the experience of wars,
may assure him self from the necessities, which fortune sows among men
that be mortal, And sens on the health and saulfegarde of a noble captain,
often times depends the weal of a realm, nothing should be kept from his
knowledge, whereby his person may be in every ieoperdie preserved.

Among these exercises, it shall be conuenyente, Defense with waipons.
to learn to handle sundry waypo^s, specially the sword and the bataile axe:
which be for a noble man most convenient.

But the most honorable exercise in mine opynion, and that besemeth the astate
of every Riding and vauntynge of horsis.
noble person, is to ride surely and clean, on a great horse and a roughe,
which undoubtedly not only imports a majesty and dread to inferior
persons, beholding him above the common course of other men, dau^ting a fierce
and cruel beast, but also is no little socour, as well in pursuete of enemies
and confoundyng them, as in escapynge imminente danger, when wisdom thereto
exhorts. Also a strong and hardy horse does some time more damage under his
master, than he with all his weapon: and also sets forward the stroke, and
causes it to light with more vyolence.

Bucephall, the horse of greatte king Alexander, who suffered none on his back
Bucephal.
saulfe only his master, at the battle of Thebes being sore wounded, would
not suffer the king to depart from him to a another horse, but persystynge in
his furyouse courage, wonderfully continued out the battle, with his fete and
tethe beating down and destroyenge many enemies: and many se^blable maruailes
of his strength he showed. Wherefore Alexander, after the horse was slain, made
in remembrance of him a city in the countreye of India, and called it
Bucephal, in perpetual memory of so worthy a horse, which in his life had so
well served him.

What wonderful enterprises did Julius Caesar achieue by the help of his horse?
which not only did excel al other horsis in fierceness and swyste rennyng,
but also was in some parts discrepante in figure from other horses, having his
fore houes like to the fete of a man. And in that figure Plinius writes, that
he saw him kerued before the temple of Uenus.

Other remembrance there is of diverse horses, by whose monstrous power, men
did exploite incredible affairs: but by cause the report of them conteynethe
things impossyble, and is not written by any approved auctour, I will not in
this place reherce them. Saving that it is yet supposed, that the castle of
Arundell in Sussex, was made by one Beauuize, earl of South Arundell.
hamton, for a monument of his horse called Arundell, which in far
countries had saved his master from many peryls.

Now considering the utility in riding great horses, it shall be necessary
(as I have said) that a gentylman do learn to ride a great and fierce horse
whiles he is tender, and the braunes and sinews of his thighs not fully
consolidate.

There is also a right good exercise, which is also expedient to learn, which
is named the vauntynge of a horse: that is to leap on him at every side
without styrope or other help, specially whiles the horse is goinge. And
being therein expert, than armed at all points to assaye the same, the
commodity whereof is so manifest, that I need no further to declare it.

The ancient hyuntynge of Greckes and Romans. Cha. xviii.
BUt now will I proceed to write of exercises, which be not utterly reproved
of noble auctours, if they be used with opportunity and in measure, I mean
hunting, haukynge, and daunsing. In hu^tynge may be an imitation of battle,
if it be such as was used among them of Persia: whereof Xenophon, the noble and
most eloquent philosopher, makes a delectable mention, in his book, called the
doctrine of Cirus: and also makes a another special book, containing the
hole disciplyne of the ancient hunting of the Greeks, and in that form
being used, it is a laudable exercise, of the which I will now some what
write.

Cirus, and other auncyente kings of The hunting of Persians. Xenophon pedia
Cyri. ii. i.
Persia (as Xenophon writes) used this manner in all their hunting. First,
where as it seems, there was in the realm of Persia but one City, which as
I suppose, was called Persepolis, there were the children of the Persians, from
their infancye, unto the aege of seuentene years, brought up in the lerning of
justice and temperance, and also to observe contine^ce in meat and drink: in
so much, that whyther so ever they went, they took with them for their
sustenaunce, but only bread and herbs, called Cressis, in latin Nasturtium:
and for their drink, a dyshe to take water out of the ryuers as they passed.
Also they learned to shote, and to cast the darte or iauelyn. When they came to
the aege of.xvii. years, they were lodged in the palayses, that were there
ordained for the king and his nobles, which was as well for the save guard of
the city, as for the example of te^peraunce, that they daily had at their eyes
given to them by the nobles: which also might be called Peers, by the
signification of the greek word, wherein they were called Omotimi. More over,
they were accustomed to rise always in the first spring of the day, and
pacyentely to sustain always both cold and heat: And the king did se them
exercised in goinge and also in rennynge. And when he intended, in his own
person, to hunte, which he did commenly every month, he took with him the
one half of the company of young me^, that were in the palayses. Than took
every man with him his bow and quiver with arowes, his sword or hache of
steel, a litel tergate, and two darts. The bow and arowes served to pursue
beasts that were swyft: and the darts, to assail them and all other beasts.
And when their courage was chaufed, or that by fiersenesse of the beast they
were in danger, than force constrained them to strike with the sword, or
hache, and to have good eye at the violent assault of the beast, and to
defend them if need were, with their tergates, wherein they accounted to be the
trewest and most certain meditation of wars. And to this hunting the king
did conducte them, and he him self first hunted such beasts as he happened
to encounter. And when he had taken his pleasure, he than with most dilygence
did set other forward, beholdynge who hunted valyauntly, and refourmynge
them, whom he saw negligente or slothful. But er they went forth to this
hunting, they dyned competentely: and during their huntyng they dined no more.
For if by any occasyon their hyntinge continued above one day, they took the
said dinner for their supper: and the next day, if they killed no game, they
hunted until supper time: accountynge those two days but for one. And if they
took any thing, they eat it at their supper with joy and pleasure. If
nothing were killed, they eat only bread and cressis, as I before rehearsed,
and drank thereto water. And if any man will dispreyse this diete, let him
think what pleasure there is in bread, to him that is hungry: and what
dylectation is in drinking water to him that is thursty. Surely this manner of
huntyng may be called a necessary solace and pastyme, for therein is the very
imitation of battle. For not only it does show the courage and strength,
as well of the horse as of him that rydeth, trauersynge over mountains and
valeys, encountrynge and ouerthrowyng great and mighty beasts: but also it
increases in them both agilitie and quickness, also sleyght and policy to
find such passages and straites, where they may prevent or entrap their
enemies. Also by continuance therein, they shall easyly sustain travail in
wars, hunger and thurst, cold and heat. Hitherto be the words of Xenophon,
although I have not set them in like order as he wrate them.

The chief hunting of the valyaunte The hunting of the greeks
Greeks was at the lion, the libarde, the tigre, the wild swyne, and the
bear, and sometime the wolf, and the heart. Theseus, which was companion to
Hercules, atteyned the greatest part of his renoume, for fighting with the
great bore, which the Greeks called Phera, that wasted and consumed the
fields of a great country.

Meleager likewise for sleinge the great bore in Calidonia, which in greatness
and fiercenes, excelled al other bores: and had slain many noble and valiant
persons.

The great Alexander, in times vacant from bataile, delited in that manner
hunting. On a time he faughte alone with a lion, wonderful great and fierce,
being present among other strangers, the ambassador of Lacedemonia. And
after long travail, with incredible might, he ouerthrewe the lion, and slew
him, whereat the said ambassador, wondering maruaylously, said to the king, I
would to god (noble prince) ye should fight with a lion for some great empire.
By which words it seemed, that he nothing approved the valiauntnes of a
prince by fighting with a wild beast, wherein much more was adventured, tha^
might be by the victory gotten.

All be it Pompei, Sertorius, and diverse The hunting of the Romans.
other noble Romans, when they were in Numidia, Libia, and such other
countries, which now be called Barbary and Morisco, in the vacaty on season
from wars, they hunted lions, liberdes, and such other beasts, fierce and
savage, to thente^t thereby to exercise them selfs and their soldiers. But al
mgihty god be thanked, in this realm be no such cruel beastis to be pursued.
Not withstandyng, in the huntyng of read dear and falowe, might be a great
part of semblable exercise, used by noble men, specially in forestis, which
be spaciouse: if they would use but a few nombre of hounds, only to
harborowe or rouse the game, by their yornyng to give knowledge, which way it
flees, the remenaunt of the disporte to be in pursuing with iauelins and other
waipons, in manner of war. And to them, which in this hunting do show
most prowess and actiuitie, a garlande, or some other like token, to be given
in sign of victory, and with a joyful manner to be brought in the presence of
him that is chief in the company, there to receive condygne praise for their
good endeavor.

I dyspraise not the hunting of the fox with rennynge hounds, but it is not
to be compared to the other huntyng in commodity of exercise. Therefore it
would be used in the deep winter, when the other game is unseasonable.

Hunting of the hare with grehoundes, is a right good solace for men that be
studyouse, or them to whom nature has not given personage, or courage apt for
the wars. And also for gentylwomen, which fear neither son nor wind for
appayringe their beauty. And perauenture they shall be there at, less idell,
than they should be at home in their chambres.

Kylling of dear with bows or greyhou^des, serves well for the pot (as is the
common saying) and therefore it must of necessity be some time used. But it
conteynethe therein no commendable solace or exercise, in comparison to the
other form of huntinge, if it be diligently perceived.

As for haukynge, I can find no notable Haukinge.
remembrance, that it was used of ancient time among noble pryncis. I call
auncyente time, before a thousand years passed, sens which time, virtue and
nobleness has rather decayed than increased. Nor I could never know, who
found first that dysporte.

Plinius makes mencio^ in his.viii. book of the hystorye of nature, that in
the parts of Greece, called Thracia, men and hawks, as it were by a
confederacy, took birds to gether in this wise. The men sprange the birds
out of the busihes, and the hawks sorynge over them, beat them down, so
that the men moughte easyly take them. And than did the men depart equally the
pray with the faukons, which being well served, eftsoons and of a custom
repaired to such places, where being a lofte, they perceived men to that
purpose assembled.

By which rehearsal of Plinius, we may coniecte, that from Thratia came this
disporte of haukynge. And I doubt not, but many other as well as I, have seen a
semblable experience of wild hobies, which in some countries., that be
champaine, will sore and lie a lofte, houeringe over larkes and quayles, and
keep them down on the ground, whiles they, which awayte on the pray, do take
them. But in what wise, or where so ever the beginning of haukynge was, surely
it is a right delectable solace, though thereof comes not so much utility
(concerning exercise) as there does of hunting. But I would our faukons
moughte be satisfied with the dyuysion of their pray, as the faukons of Tracia
were, that they nedeed not to devour the hens of this realm, in such
nombre, that unless it be shortly considered, and that faukons be brought to a
more homely dyete, it is right lykely, that within a short space of years, our
familiar pultrie shall be as scarce, as be now partriche and fesaunt. I speak
not this in disprayse of the faukons, but of them which keeps them like
cokneyes. The mean gentyl men and honest householders, which care for the
gentyl enterteinement of their friends, do find in their dyshe, that I say
truth, and noble men shall right shortly epsy it, when they come sodeinly to
their friends house, vnpurueied for lack of long warning.

But now to return to my purpose. Undoubtedly haukynge, measurably used and
for a passetyme, gives to a man good appetite to his supper. And at the least
way withdraws him from other daliaunce or disportes dishonest, and to body
and soul perchance pernicious.

Now I purpose to declare some thing, concerning daunsynge, wherein is merit
of praise and dysprayse, as I shall express it in such form, as I trust the
reder shall find therein a rare and synguler pleasure, with also good learning
in things not yet communely known in our vulgar. Which if it be red of him,
that has good opportunity and quyete silence, I doubt not, but he shall take
thereby such commodity, as he looked not to have founden in that exercise,
which of the more part of sad men is so little esteemed.

That all daunsynge is not to be reproved. Capitulo. xix.
I Am not of that opinion, that all daunsing generally is repugnaunt unto
virtue, all though some persons excellently learned, specially divines, so do
affirm it: which always have in their mouths (when they come into the
pulpette) the saying of the noble doctor, saint Augustine, That better it
were, to delue or to go to ploughe on the sunday, thanne to dance. Which
moughte be spoken of that kind of daunsynge, which was used in the time of
saint Augustine, when every thing with the empire of Rome, declined from their
perfection, and the old manner of dansynge was forgoten, and none remained, but
that which was lascivious, and corrupted the minds of them that daunsed, and
provoked sin, as semblably some do at this day. Also at that time idolatry
was not clearly extinct, but diverse fragmentes thereof remained in every region.
And perchance solemn dau^ses, which were celebrate unto the paynims false
goddis, were yet continued, for asmoch as the pure religion of Christ was not
in all places consolidate, and the pastors and curates did wink at such
recreatio^s, fearing, if they should hastily have remeued it, and induced
suddenly the severity of goddis laws, they should styre the people thereby to
a general sedition, to the imminent danger and subuertion of Christis hole
religion, late sown among them, and not yet sufficiently rooted. But the wise
and discrete doctor saint Augustine, using the art of an orator, wherein he
was right excellent, omytting all rigorous menace or terror, dissuaded them
by the most easiest way, from that manner ceremony, belo^gyng to idolatry,
preferryng before it bodyly occupation, thereby aggrauatynge the offense to god,
that was in that ceremony, sens occupation, which is necessary for man's
sustinaunce, and in due times virtuous, is not withstanding prohibited to be
used on the sondayes. And yet in these words of this noble doctor, is not so
general disprayse to all daunsynge as some men do suppose. And that for two
causes. First in his comparison, he prefers not before daunsynge, or joins
thereto any vycious exercise, but annecteth it with tyllyng and diggynge of the
earth, which be labors incident to man's living, and in them is contained
nothing that is vycyous. Wherefore the preemynence thereof above daunsynge,
qualifyeng the offense, they being done out of due time, that is to say, in
an holy day, concludes not daunsynge to be at all times and in every manner
unlawful or vicious, considering, that in certain cases of exstreme
necessytie, men might both ploughe and delue without doing to god any
offense. Also it shall seem to them, that seriously do examyne the said words,
that therein, Sayncte Augustine does not prohybyte daunsynge so generally, as
it is taken, but only such daunses, which (as I late said) were
superstytious, and contained in them a spyce of ydolatrie, or else did with
unclean motions or countynances irritate the minds of the dauncers to
venereall lusts. Whereby fornication and auoutry were daily increased. Also in
those dau^ces were enterlased dities of wan ton love or rybaudry, with
frequente remembrance of the most vile idolles, Uenus and Baccus, as it were
that the dance were to their honor and memory, which most of all abhorred
from Christis religion, sauering the ancient error or paganism.

I would to god those names were not at this day, used in balades and ditties,
in the courts of pryncys and noble men, where many good wits be corrupted
with semblable fantasies, which in better wise employed, moughte have been
more necessary to the publyke weal, and their princes honor. But now will I
leave this seryouse matter to divines, to persuade or dyssuade herein,
according to their offices. And sens in mine opinion sayncte Augustine, that
blessed clerk, reproves not so generally all daunsynge, but that I may
laufully rehearse some kind thereof, which may be necessary, and also
commendable, taking it for an exercise: I shall now proceed to speak of the
first beginning thereof, and in how great estimation it was had in diverse
regions.

Of the first beginning of daunsinge, and the old estimation thereof. Cap. xx.
THere be sendry opinions of the oryginall beginning of daunsynge. The poets
do feign, that when Saturn, which devoured diverse his children, and semblably
would have done with Jupiter, Bhea the mother of Jupiter, devised, that Curetes
(which were me^ of arms in that country) should daunse in armor, playing
Curetes.
with their swords and sheldes, in such form, as by that new and pleasant
devise they should assuage the melancolye of Saturn, and in the mean time,
Iupyter was conveyed into Phrigia, where Saturn also pursuyng him, Bhea
semblably taught the people there, called Coribantes, to ca^ce in a another
form: where with Saturn Choriba^tes.
was eftsoon demulced and appaised. Which fable has a resemblaunce to the
history of the bible, in the first book of kings, where it is remembered, that
Saul, who^ god chase from a keeper of asses, to be king of jews (who in
stature excelled, and was above all other men by the heed) declinyng from the
laws and precepts of god, was possessed of an iuell spirit, which often
times turmented and vexed him: and other remedy found he none, but that
David, which after him was king, being at that time a propre child, and
playinge swetely on a harp, with his pleasant and perfect harmony, reduced
his mind into his pristinate estate: and during the time that he played, the
spirit cessed to vex him: which I suppose happened not only of the efficacy
of musyke (albeit therein is much power, as well in repressynge as excytinge
natural affectes) but also of the virtue ingenerate in the child Dauyd, that
played, whom god also had p^destinate to be a great king, and a great prophet.
And for the souerayn gifts of grace and of nature, that he was endowed with,
all mighty god said of him, that he had found a man after his heart and
pleasure. But now to return to speak of daunsynge.

Some interpretours of poets do imagine, Proteus.
that Proteus, who is supposed to have turned him self into sundry figures, as
some time to show him self like a serpent, some time like a lion, otherwhyles
like water, an other time like the flame of fire, signifies to be none other,
but a deliver and crafty daunser, which in his daunse could imagyne the
inflexions of the serpent, the soft and delectable flowynge of the water, the
swiftnes and mountynge of the fire, the fierce rage of the lion, the violence
and furye of the lybarde. Which exposition is not to be dispraised, sins it
discordeth not from reason. But one opinyon there is, which I will rehearse,
more for the merye fantasy, that therein is contained, than for any faith or
credit that is to be given thereto.

Over Syracusis (a great and ancient city in Sicile) there reigned a cruel
tyrant Gelo the king of Sicile.
called GELO, which by horrible tyrannies and oppressions, brought him self
into the hatrede of all his people, which he perceiving, lest by mutual
communication, they should conspyre against him any rebellyon, he prohibited
all men under terrible menaces, that no man or woman should speak unto an
another, but instead of words, they should use in their necessary affairs,
countenaunces, tokens, and mouynges, with their fete, hands, and eien, which
for necessity first used, at the last grew to a perfect and delectable
daunsynge. And GELO, not withstanding his folyshe curiosite, at the last was
slain of his people most myserably. But although this history were true, yet
was not daunsynge at this time first begone: for Orpheus and Museus, the most
ancient of poets, and also Homere, which were long before GELO, do make
mention of dau^sing. And in DELVS, which was the most ancient temple of
Apollo, no solemnity was done without daunsynge.

Also in Indie, where the people honoreth the son, they assemble together,
and when the son first appears, joined all in a dance, they salute him,
supposinge that for as much as he mouethe without sensible noise, it pleases
him best to be like wise saluted, that is to say with a pleasante motion and
silence.

The interpretours of Plato do think, that the wonderful and inco^prehensible
order of che celestial bodies, I mean sterres and planettes, and their
motions harmonicall, gave to them, that intentifly, and by the deep search of
reason behold their coursys, in the sundry dyuersities of nombre and time, a
form of imitation of a se^blable motion: which they called daunsynge.
Wherefore the more nere they approached to that temperaunce, and subtyle
modulation, of the said superior bodies, the more perfect and comme^dable is
their daunsynge: which is most like to the truth of any opinion that I
have hitherto founden.

Other fables there be, which I omytte for this present time: And now I will
express, in what estymation daunsyng was had in the aunciente time, and also
sundry fourmes of daunsynge, not all; but such as had in them a semblaunce of
virtue or kunnynge.

When the ark of god (wherein was put Archa federis.
the tables of the commandments, the yerde, wherewith Moises divided the red
see, and did the miracles in the presence of Pharao, king of Egipte: also a
part of manna, wherewith the children of Israel were fed forty years in
desert) was recovered of the Philisties, and brought unto the city of Gaba,
the holy king David, King David daunsing ope^ty.
wearynge on him a linen surplesse, daunsed before the said arc, following him
a great nombre of instrume^tis of music: where at his wife Micol, the daughter
of king Saul, disdayned and scorned him, wherewith (as holy scripture says)
all mighty god was much displeased. And David not cessinge, daunsed ioyousely
through the city, in that manner honourynge that solemn feast, which among
the jews was one of the chief and principal, wherewith god was more pleased,
than with all the other obseruances that then were done unto him at that time.

I will not trouble the reders with the innumerable ceremonies of the gentyles,
which were comprehended in daunsinges, sens they ought to be noumbred among
superstytions. But I will declare, how wise men and valiaunte capitaynes
embraced daunsyng for a soueraygne and profitable exercise.

Licurgus, that gave first laws to the Lacedemones (a people in greece)
ordained that the children there should be taught as diligently to dau^se in
armure, as to fight. And that in time of wars, they should meue them in
bataile again their enemies, in form and manner of daunsynge.

Semblably the old inhabita^tes of Ethiopia, at the ioynyng of their batayles,
and when the trumpettes and other instruments soune, they dau^ce: and instead
of a quiver, they have their darts set about their heads, like to rays or
beams of the son, wherewith they believe that they put their enemies in fear.

Also it was not lefull for any of them, to cast any darte at his enemy but
daunsyng. And not only this rude people esteemed so much daunsynge, but also
the most noble of the greeks, which for their excellency in prowess and
wisdom, were called half goddis, as Achilles, and his son Pirrhus, and
diverse other. Wherefore Homere, among the high benefits that god gives to
man, recites daunsynge. For he says in the first book of Iliados, God
grants to some man prowess martial
To a another daunsinge, with song harmonical.


Suppose ye, that the Romans, which in gravity of manners passed the Greeks,
had not great pleasure in daunsing? Did not Romulus, the first king of Romans,
and builder of the city of Rome, ordeyne certain priests and ministers to the
god Mars. whom he aduaunted to be his father? which prestes, for as much as
certain times they dau^sed about the city with tergates, that they imagined
to fall from heaven, were called in latin Salij, which in to english may be
translated dau^sers: who continued so long time in reverence among the Romans,
that unto the time that they were christened, the noble men and princis children
there, using much diligence and suite, coueyted to be of the college of the
said daunsers

More over, the emperors, that were most noble, delited in daunsyng,
perceiving therein to be a perfect measure, which may be called modulation:
wherein some daunsers of old time so wonderfully excelled, that they would
plainly express in daunsynge, without any words, or dyttie, histories, with
the hole circumstaunce of affairs in them contained: whereof I shall rehearse two
maruailouse experiences.

At Rome, in the time of Nero, there was a philosopher called Demetrius, which
was of that sect, that for as much as they abandoned all shame fastenes in
their words and acts, they were called Cinici in english doggyshe. This
Demetrius often reprouinge daunsynge, would say, that there was nothing
therein of any importance, and that it was none other, but a counterfaytyng
with the feet and hands, of the armonye that was showed before in the
rebecke, shalme, and other instrument, and that the motyons were but vain and
separate from all understanding, and of no purpose or efficacy. Whereof herynge
a famous daunser, and one as it seemed, that was not without good learning, and
had in remembrance many histories, he came to Demetrius, and said unto him,
Sire I humbly desire you, refuse not to do me that honesty with your presence,
in beholding me dance, which ye shall se me do without soune of any
instrument. And than if it shall seem to you worthy disprayse, utterly banyshe
and confound my science. Whereunto Demetrius granted. The young man dau^sed the
aduoutry of Mars and Uenus, and therein expressed how Uulcane, housbande to
Uenus, thereof being aduertysed by the son, laid snares for his wife and
Mars: also how they were wounden and tied in Uulcanes net: more over, how
all the gods came to the spectable: finally how Uenus all ashamed and
blusshynge, fearfully desired her lover Mars to deliver her from that peril,
and the residue contained in the fable: which he did with so subtle and
crafty gesture, with such a plain declaration of every act in the matter
(which of all thing is most dyfficyle) with such a grace and beauty, also
with a wit so wonderful and pleasant, that Demetrius, as it seemed, thereat
reioysyng and delytynge, cried with a loud voice, O man I do not only se, but
also here what thou do: And it seems also to me, that with thy hands thou
spekeste. Which saying was confirmed by all them that were at that time
present.

The same young man song and daunsed on a time before the emperor Nero, when
there was also present a strange king, which understood none other langage
but of his own countreye: yet notwithstanding, the man daunsed so aptely and
plainly, as his custom was, that the strange king, all though he perceived
not what he said, understood every deal of the matter. And when he had
taken his leave of the emperor to depart, the emperor offered to give him
any thing that he thought moughte be to his commodity. Ye may (said the
king) bounteouselye reward me, if ye lend me the young man that daunsed
before your majesty. Nero wondering, and requiring of him, why he so
importunately desired the dau^ser, or what commodity the daunser might be
unto him. Sir, sadie the king, I have diverse confins and neighbors, that be
of sundry langages and manners, wherefore I have often times need of many
interpretours. Wherefore if I had this man with me, and should have any thing
to do with my neighbors, he would so with his facio^ and gesture express
every thing to me, and teache them to do the same, that from hensforth I should
not have need of any interpretour.

Also the ancient philosophers commended daunsynge: in so much, as Socrates,
the wysest of all the greeks in his time, and from whom all the sects of
philosophers, as from a fountain were deriuied, was not ashamed to account
daunsynge among the seriouse disciplines, for the commendable beauty, for the
apt and proportionate meuynge, and for the crafty disposition and facionynge
of the body.

It is to be considered, that in the said anciente time, there were diverse
manners of daunsyng, which varied in the names, like wise as they did in tunes
of the instrumente, as semblably, we have at this day. But those names, some
were general, some were special: the general names were given of the
universal form of daunsynge, whereby was represented the qualyties or
conditions of sundry astates: as the majesty of princis was showed in that
daunse which was named Eumelia, and belo^ged to tragedies: dissolute motions,
and want on countenaunces, in that which was called Cordax, and pertained to
comedies: wherein men of base hauiour only daunsed. Also the form of battle
and fyghting in armure, was expressed in those daunses, which were called
Enopliae. Also there was a kind of daunsynge called Hormus of all the other
most like to that, which is at this time used, wherein daunsed young men and
maidens: the manne expressyng in his motion and countenance strength and
courage, apt for the wars: the maiden moderation and shamefastnes, which
represented a pleasant conjunction of fortitude and temperance.

Instead of these we have now base dau^ses, bargenettes, pauyons, turgions,
and roundes. And as for the specialle names, they were taken as they be now,
either of the names of the first inuentours: or of the measure and noumbre
that they do co^teyne: or of the first words of the ditie, which the song
comprehends, whereof the daunse was made. In every of the said daunses, there
was a co^cinnitie of meuing the foot and body, expressyng some pleasant or
profitable affectes or motions of the mind.

Here a man may behold, what craft was in thauncient time in daunsynge,
which at this day no man can imagine or coniecte. But if men would now apply
the first part of their youth, that is to say from seven years to twenty,
effectually in the scyences liberal, and knowledge of hystoryes, they should
revive the aunciente form as well of daunsynge, as of other exercises.
Whereof they moughte take not only pleasure, but also profit and commodity.

Wherefore in the good order of daunsing a man and a woman daunseth together.
Cap. xxi.
IT is diligently to be noted, that the company of man and woman in daunsynge,
they both observing one nombre and time in their meuynges, was not begone
without a special consyderation, as well for the necessary conjunction of
those two persons, as for the intimation of sundry vtues: which be by them
represented.

And for as much as by the ioynyng of a man and a woman in daunsynge may be
signified matrimonye, I could in declaryng the dignity and commodity of that
sacrament, make intiere volumes, if it were not so co^munely known to all men,
that almost every friar limit our carries it written in his bosom. Wherefore
lest in repeting a thing so frequent and commune, my book should be as
fastidious or fulsome to the reders, as such merchant preachers be now to
their customers, I will reuerentely take my leave of divines. And for my
part, I will endeavor my self, to assemble out of the books of ancient
poets, and philophers, matter as well apt to my purpose, as also new, or at
the least wise infreque^t or seldom hard of them, that have not radde very
many autours in greek and latin.

But now to my purpose. In every dau^se of a most ancient custom, there
dau^seth to gyther a man and a woman, holdyng each other by the hand or the
arm, which betokens concord. Now it behooves the daunsers, and also the
beholders of them, to know al qualities incident to a man, and also all
qualities to a woman likewise appertaynynge.

A man in his natural perfection is fires, A man's qualities.
hardye, strong in opinion, coueytous of glory, desirous of knowledge,
appetiting by generation to bring forth his semblable. The good nature of a
woman is to be myld, timorous, tractable, benign, of sure remembrance, and
shamfast. Diverse other qualites of each of them might be found out, but these
be most apparent, and for this time sufficient.

Wherefore when we behold a man and a woman daunsing to gether, let us suppose
there to be a concord of all the said qualities, being joined together, as I
have set them in order. And the meuynge of the man would be more vehement, of
the woman more delycate, and with less aduansynge of the body, signifienge the
courage and strength that ought to be in a man, and the pleasant sobrenesse that
should be in a woman. And in this wsse Fiersenes, joined with Myldenesse,
makethe Severity: Hardynesse with Timerositie, makes Magnanimity, that is to
say, valiant courage: wilful opinion and Tractabilitie, (which is to be shortly
persuaded and meued) makith Co^stance, a virtue: Couetise of glory, adourned
with benignity, causith honor: Desire of knowledge, with sure remembrance,
procures Sapience: Shamfastnes joined to appetite of generation, makes
Continence: which is a mean between Chastity and inordinate lust. These
qualities, in this wise being knyt together, and signified in the personages of
man and woman dau^singe, do express or set out the figure of very nobility:
which in the higher astate it is contained, the more excellent is the virtue
in estimation.

How daunsing may be an introduction unto the first moral virtue called
prudence. Cap. xxii.
AS I have all ready affirmed, the principal cause of this my little
enterprise, is to declare an induction or mean, how children of gentle
nature or disposition may be trained into the way of virtue with a pleasant
facility: And for as much as it is very expedient, that there be myxte with
study some honest and moderate disport, or at the lest way recreation, to
reco^fort and quicken the vital spirits, lest they long trauaylynge or
being much occupied in contemplation or remembrance of things grave and
serious, moughte happen to be fatigate, or perchance oppressed. And therefore
Tulli, who uneath found ever any time vacaunt from study, permytteth in his
first book of offices, that men may use play and disport: yet not
withstanding in such wise as they do use sleep and other manner of quyete,
when they have sufficiently disposed ernest matters and of weighty
importance.

Now because there is no pass time to be compared to that, wherein may be
founden both recreation and meditation of virtue: I have among all honest
pastymes, wherein is exercise of the body, noted daunsyng to be of an excellent
utility comprehe^ding in it wonderful fygures (which the greeks do call
Idea, of virtues and noble qualities, and specially of the commodious virtue
called prudence, whom Tulli defyneth Ci. offi. i. Prudence.
to be the knowledge of things, which ought to be desired and followed: and also
of them, which ought to be fled from or eschewed. And it is named of Aristotel
the mother of virtues, of other philosophers it is called the capytayne or
maystres of virtues, of some the house wife, for as much as by her diligence
she does inuestigate and prepare places apt and convenient, where other virtues
shall execute their powers or offices. Wherefore as Solomon says, like as in
water be showed the vysages of them that behold Prove. 27.
it, so unto men that be prudent, the secrets of men's hearts be openly
discovered. This virtue being so commodious to man, and as it were the porche
of the noble palayce of man's Reason, whereby all other virtues shall enter, it
seems to me right expedient, that as soon as opportunity may be founden, a
child, or young man, be thereto induced. And because that the study of virtue
is tedyous for the more part to them that do flourysshe in young years, I have
devised, how in the form of dau^sing now late used in this realm among
gentylmen, the hole description of this virtue prudence may be founden out and
well perceived, as well by the daunsers, as by them which standing by, will be
dylygente beholders and markers, having first mine instruction surely graue^ in
the table of their remembrance. wherefore all they that have their courage
stered toward very honor or perfect nobility, let them approach to this
pass time, and either them selfs prepare them to daunse, or else at the least
way behold with watchynge eyes, other that can daunse truly, keeping just
measure and time. But to the understanding of this instruction, they must mark
well the sundry motions and measures, which in true form of daunsinge is to be
specially observed.

The first meuing in every daunse is called honor, which is a reverent
inclination or courtesy, with a long deliberatio^ or pause, and is but one
motion, comprehending the time of three other motions or setting forth of the
foot: By that may be signified, that at the beginning of all our acts, we
should do due honor to god, which is the root of prudence, which honor is
compact of these three things, fear, love, and reverence. And that in the
beginning of al things, we should aduysedly, with some tracte of time,
behold and foresee the success of our enterprise.

By the second motion, which is two in nombre, may be signified celerite and
slownesse: Celeritie, or quiknes and slownes.
which two, all be it they seem to discord in their effects and natural
propreties: therefore they may be well resembled to the braule in daunsynge
(for in our A braule.
english tongue we say men do braule, when between them is altercation in
wordis) yet of them two springs an excellent virtue, whereunto we lack a
name in english. Wherefore I am constrained to usurp a latin word, calling
it Maturitie, which word though it be strange and dark, yet by declaryng the
virtue in a few mo words, the name ones brought in custom, shall be as easy
to understand as other words late comen out of Italy and France, and made
denysens among us.

Maturitie is a mean between two extre Matnritie.
mities, wherein nothing lacks or excedeth, and is in such astate, that it
may neither increase nor minysshe without losinge the denomiation of Maturitie.
The greeks in a proverb do express it proprely in (...)
two words, which I can none otherwise (...)
interpret in englysh, but speed the slowly.

Also of this word Maturitie, sprange (...).
a noble and precious sentence, recyted by Festin^ lent.
Salust in the battle again Catiline, which is in this manner or like,
Co^sulte before thou enterprise any thing, and after thou Priusque in cipias
co^sulto
haste taken counsel, it is expedient to do it maturely.

Maturum in latin may be interpretid ripe Maturum.
or ready: as fruit when it is ripe, it is at the very point to be gathered and
eaten. And every other thing, when it is redye, it is at the instante after to
be occupied. Therefore that word maturitie, is translated to the acts of man,
that when they be done with such moderation, that nothing in the doing may
be seen superfluous or indige^t, we may say, that they be maturely done:
reseruyng the words ripe and ready, to fruit and other thiges separate from
affairs, as we have now in usage. And this do I now remember for the necessary
augmentation of our langage.

In the excellent and most noble emperor Octauius Augustus, in whom reigned
all nobility, nothing is more commended, than that he had frequently in his
mouth this word Matura, do maturelly. As he should have said, do neither to
much ne to little, to soon ne to late, to swyftely nor slowely, but in due
time and measure.

Now I trust I have sufficiently expounded the virtue called Maturitie, which
is the mean or mediocritie between slouthe and celeritie, communely called
spedinesse: and so have I declared, what utility may be taken of a braule in
daunsynge.

The third and fourth branches of prudence. Capitu. xxiii.
THe third motion, called singles, is of two unities separate in pasinge
forward: Singles in dau^sing.
by whom may be sygnifyed providence and industry, which after every thing
maturely achieued, as is before written, makes the first pase forward in
daunsynge. But it shall be expedient to expound, what is the thing called
Prouydence, for as much as it is not known to every man.

Providence is, whereby a man not only Pronide^ce what it is.
foreseeth commodytie and incommoditye, prosperity and adversity, but also
consulteth, and there with endeavors as well to repel anoyaunce, as to
attain and get profit and advantage. And the difference between it and
consideration is, that consideration Consideration what it is.
only consists in pondering and examinyng things, conceived in the mind:
Providence in helping them with counsel and act. wherefore to consyderation
pertayneth excogitation and auysement, to prouydence, prouisyon and execution.
For like as the good husband, when he has sown his ground, sets up
cloughtes or thredes, which some call shailes, some ble^chars, or other like
shows, to fear away birds, which he foreseeth redye to devour and hurt
his corn, also perceiving the improfytable weeds appering, which will anoy
his corn or herbs, forth with wedeth the^ clean out of his ground, and will
not suffer them to grow or increase. Semblably, it is the part of a wise man,
to foresee and provide, that either in such things, as he has acquired by
his study or diligence, or in such affairs as he has in hand, he be not
indomaged or empeched by his adversaries.

In like manner a governor of a publyke weal ought to provide as well by
menaces, as by sharp and terrible punysshementes, that persons yuell and
unprofitable, do not corrupt and devour his good subjects. Finally there is
in prouydence such an admyration and majesty, that not only it is, attributed
to kings and rulers, but also to god creator of the world.

Industry has not ben so long time used Industry.
in the english tongue, as Prouydence: wherefore it is the more strange, and
requires the more plain exposition. It is a quality, procedyng of wit and
experience, by the which a man perceyueth quickly, innenteth freshely, and
counsayleth spedily: wherefore they that be called Industrious, do most craftily
and depely understand in all affairs, what is expedient, and by what means
and ways, they may sonest exployte them. And those things, in whom other men
travail, a person industrious lightly and with facility spedeth, and finds
new ways and means to bring to effect that he desires.

Among diverse other remembered in hystories, such one among the greeks was
Alcibiades, who being in chyldehoode Alcibiades.
most amyable of all other, and of most subtle wit, was instructed by
Socrates. The said Alcibiades, by the sharpenes of his wit, the doctrine of
Socrates, and by his own experience in sundry affairs in the common weal of
the Athenienses, became so industrious, that were it good or yuel that he
enterprised, nothing almost escaped that he acheued not, were the thing never
so difficyle (or as who says) impenitrable: and that many sondrye things, as
well for his country, as also again it, after that, he for his inordinate
pride and lechery, was out of Athenes exyled.

Among the Romans, Caius Julius Ce Iul. Caesar.
sar, which first took upon him the perpetual rule and governance of the
empire, is a noble exaumple of industry, for in his incomparable wars, and
busynes almost incredible, he did not only excogitate most excellent
pollycies and deuyses, to va^quyshe or subdewe his enemies, but also
prosecuted them with such celeritie and effect, that diverse and many times he
was in the camp of his enemies, or at the ga tes of their towns, or
fortresses, when they supposed, that he and his hooste had been two days
journey from thens, leaving to them no time or leisure, to consulte or prepare
again him sufficient resistance.

And over that, this quality, INDVSTRIE, so reigned in him, that he him self
would ministre to his secretaries at one time and instant, the co^tentes of
three sundry epistles or letters. Also it is a thing wonderfulle to remember,
that he being a prince of the most ancient and noble house of the Romans,
and from the time that he came to man's astate, almost continually in wars,
also of glory insatiable, of courage invincible: could in affairs of such
importance and difficulty, or (which is much more to be meruayled at now)
would so exactly write the hystory of his own actis and gestes: that for the
native and inimitable eloquence, in expressing the cou^sailes, devises,
conuentio^s, progressions, enterprises, exploitures, fourmes, and sacions of
imbataylynge, he seems to put all other writers of like matters to silence.

Here is the perfect pattern of industry, which I trust shall suffyce to make
the propre signification thereof, to be understand of the reders. And
consequentely to incense the^ to approach to the true practicing thereof.

So is the sengles declared in these two qualities, Providence and Industry,
which seriousely noted, and often remembered of the daunsers and beholders,
shall acquire to them no little fruit and commodity, if there be in their
minds any good and laudable matter for virtue to warke in.

Of the fifte branch called circumspection, showed in reprinse. Cap. xxiii.
COmmonly next after singles in dau^sing Reprinse in dau^sing.
is a reprinse, which is one mouyng only, putting back the right foot to his
fellow: And that may be well called circu^spection, which sygnyfieth as
much, as beholdynge on every part, what is well and sufficient, what lacks,
how, and from whens it may be provided: Also what has caused profit or
damage in the time passed, what is the astate of the time present, what
advantage or peril may succeed, or is immynent. And because in it is
contained a delyberation, in having regard to that that follows, and is also
of affinytie with prouydence and industry, I make him in the form of a
retreat. In this motion a man may, as it were on a mountain or place of
espiall, behold on every side far of, measurynge and estemyng every thing:
and either pursewe it, if it be commendable, or eschew it, if it be noyful.
This quality (like as prouydence and industre be) is a branch of Prudence,
which some call the pryncesse of virtues: and it is not only expedient, but
also needful to every astate and degree of men, that do continue in the life
called active.

In the Iliados of Homere, the noble Nestor.
duke Nestor, a man of meruaylous eloquence and long experience, as he that
lived three men's lives, as he there auanteth, in the counsel that he gave to
Agamemnon, to reconcile to him Achilles, the most strong and valyant man of
all the greeks, he persuaded Agamemnon specially to be circu^specte,
declarynge, how that the pryuate contention between them, should replenishe the
hooste of the Greeks with much dolor: whereat king Priamus and his children
should laughe, and the resydue of the Troyanes in their minds, should rejoice
and take courage.

Among the Romans Quintus Fabius Fabius.
for this quality is soueraignely extolled among historiens: and for that
cause he is often times called of them Fabius cu^ctator, that is to say, the
tarier or delayer. For in the wars between the Romans and Anniball, he
knowing all costs of the countray, contynuelly kept him and his host on
mountains and high places, within a small distaunce of Hanniballes army: so
that neither he would flee from his enmies, nor yet join with them battle.
By which wonderful policy, he caused Annibal so to travail, that some time
for lack of vittayle, and for werynesse, great multitudes of his host
perished. Also he oftentimes awaited them in dangerous places, unready, and than
skyrmyshed with them, as long as he was sure to have of them advantage: and
after he repaired to the high places adioynyng, vsyng his accustomed manner to
behold the passage of Anniballe. And by this means, this most circumspect
capitayn Fabius, wonderfully infeblyd the powar of the said Anniball, which is
no less esteemed in praise, tha^ the subduing of Cartage by the valyant Scipio.
For if Fabius had not so fatigate Anniball and his host, he had shortly
subverted the cite of Rome, and than could not Scipio have been able to acheue
that enterprise.

What more clear mirror or spectacle can King Henry the seueth.
we desire of circu^spectio^, tha^ king HENRY the SEVENTH, of most noble
memory, father unto our most drad sovereign lord, whose worthy renome, like
the son in the mids of his sphere, shyneth and ever shall shine in men's
remembrance? what incomparable circumspection was in him always founden, that
not withstanding his long absence out of this realm, the disturbance of the
same by sondrye seditions among the Nobility, Civil wars and batayles,
wherein infinite people were slain, beside skirmysshes and slaughters in the
pryuate contentions and factions of diverse gentilmen, the laws laid in water
(as is the proverb) affection and auaryce, subduing justice and equity: Yet
by his most excellent wit, he in few years, not only brought this realm
in good order, and under due obedience, revived the laws, auanced Justice,
refurnyshed his dominyons, and repaired his manours, but also with such
circumspection treated with other princis and realms, of leages, of aliaunce,
and amities, that during the more part of his reign, he was little or nothing
inquieted without war hostility or martial business. And yet all other
princis either feared him, or had him in a fatherly reverence. Which praise
with the honor thereunto dew, as inheritance discendeth by right unto his
most noble son, our most dear souerayn lord that now presently reigns.
For as Tulli says, The best inheritance, that the fathers leave to their
children, excelling al other patrimony, is the glory or praise of virtue and
noble actis: and of such fair inheritance his highness may compare with any
prince that ever reigned, which he daily augmenteth, adding thereto other
so^dry virtues, which I forbear now to rehearse, to the intent I will exclude
all suspicion of flattery, sens I my self in this warke do specially reprove
it. But that which is presently known, and is in experience needs no
monument. And unto so excellent a prince, there shall not lack herafter
condign writers to register his acts, with eloquent style in perpetual
remembrance.

Of the sixte seventh and eight branches of prudence. Cap. xxv.
ADouble in daunsynge is compacte of the nombre of three, whereby may be noted
these three branches of prudence, election, experience, and modesty: by them
the said virtue of prudence is made complete, and is in her perfection.
Election is of an excellent power and authority, and has such a majesty,
that she will not be approached unto of every man. For some there be, to whom
she denies her presence, as children, natural fools, men being frantike, or
subdued with affectes, also they that be subjects to flaterers and proud men.
In these persons reason lacks liberty, which should prepare their entry
unto election. This Election, which Election.
is a part, and as it were a membre of prudence, is best described by
Opportunity, Opportunity.
which is the principal part of counsaylle, and is compacte of these things
following.

The importance of the thing consulted, The faculty and power of him that
co^sulteth, The time when, The form how, The substance wherewith to do it, The
disposition and vsages of the countries, For whom and again whom it ought to
be done. Al these things prepensed and gathered together seriousely, and after
a due examination, every of them justly pondred in the balance of reason.
Immediately comes the authority of election, who takes on her to appoint,
what is to be effectually followed or pursued, reiectinge the refidue. And than
ought experience to be at hand, to whom is committed the actual execution.
Experience or execution
For without her, Election is frustrate, and all invention of man is but a
fantasye. And therefore who aduisedlye beholdethe the astate of man's life, shall
well perceive, that all that ever was spoken or written, was to be executed, and
to that intent was speech specially given to man, wherein he is most
dyscrepante, from brute beasts, in declaringe by them what is good, what
vicious, what is profitable, what improfitable, which by clerenesse of wit
do excel in knowledge, to these that be of a more inferior capacity. And what
utility should be acquyred by such declaration, if it should not be
experienced with diligence?

The philosopher Socrates had not ben Socrates.
named of Appollo the wisest man of al Grecia, if he had not daily practysed
the virtues, which he in his lessons commended.

Julius Cacsar, the first emperor, al Iul. Caesar.
though, there were in him much hid lernyng, in so much as he first found
the order of our kalandre, with the Cikle and bysexte, called the leap year:
Yet is he not so much honored for his learning, as he is for his diligence,
wherewith he exploited or brought to conclusion those counsayles, which as well
by his excellent lerning and wisdom, as by the advice of other expert
counsaylours were before trayted, and (as I might say) ventilate.

Who will not repute it a thing vain and scornefulle, and more like to a may
game, than a matter seriouse or commendable, to behold a personage, which in
speech or writynge expresses nothing but virtuous manners, sage and dyscrete
counsayles and holy aduertisementes: to be resolved in to all vices, following
in his actis no thing that he him self in his words approves and teaches
to other?

Who shall any thing esteem their wisdom, which with great studies find out
remedies and prouisio^s necessary for thingss dysordred or abused, and where
they them selfs may execute it, they leave it untouched, whereby their deuyses,
with the soune that pronounced them, be vanysshed and come to nothing?

Semblably it is to be thought in all other doctrine. Wherefore as it seemed, it
was not without consideration affirmed by Tulli, that the knowledge and
contemplation of Natures operatyons, were lame and in a manner imperfcte, if
there followed none actual experience. Of this shall be more spoken in the later
end of this warke.

Herwith would be conjoined or rather Modesty.
myxte with it, the virtue called Modesty: which by Tulli is defined to be
the know Offi. i.
lege of opportunity of things to be done or spoken, in apoyntinge and
settinge them in time or place to them convenient and propre. Wherefore it
seems, to be much like to that, which men co^munely call Dyscretion.
Discretion.
Al be it discretio in latin signifies Separation: wherein it is more like to
Election. But as it is communely used, it is not only like to Modesty, but it
is the self Modesty. For he that forbereth to speak, all though he can do
it both wisely and eloquentely, because neither in the time nor in the herers,
he finds opportunity, so that no fruit may succeed of his speech, he
therefore is vulgarely called a dyscrete person.

Semblably they name him discrete, that Discrete.
punishes an offendour less than his merits do require, having regard to
the weakness of his person, or to the aptenes of his amendment.

So do they in the virtue called Liberality, Liberalite
where in gyuynge, is had consyderation, as well of the condition, and
necessyte of the person that receives, as of the benefit that comes of the
gift received. In every of these things and their semblable, is Modesty:
which word not being known in the english tongue, ne of all them which
understood latin, except they had red good auctours, they improprely named
this virtue dyscrecion. And now some men do as much abuse the word Modesty
abused.
modesty, as the other did dyscretion. For if a man have a sad countenance at
all times, and yet not being meued with wrath, but pacient, and of most
gentyllnesse, they which would be seen to be learned, will say that the man is
of a great modesty. Where they should rather say, that he were of a great
Mansuetude: which term being Mansuetude.
semblably before this time unknown in our tongue, may be by the sufferaunce
of wise men, now received by custom, whereby the term shall be made famyliare.
That like as the Romans translated the wisdom of Grecia into their city,
we may, if we list, bring the lernynges and wysedomes of them both into
this realm of England, by the translation of their warkes, sens like
enterprise has been taken by french men, Italyons, and Germaynes, to our no
lyttel reproach for our negligence and sloth.

And thus I conclude the last part of daunsynge, which dilygentely beholden,
shall appear to be as well a necessary study, as a noble and virtuous pastime,
used and continued in such form as I hitherto have declared.

Of other exercises, which if they be moderately used, be to every astate of
man expedient. Cap. xxvi.
I Have showed how huntyng and daunsynge may be in the nombre of commendable
exercises, and passetymes, not repugnanute to virtue. And undoubted, it were
much better to be occupied in honest recreation, than to do nothing. For it
is said of a noble autour, In doing nothing, men learn to do yuell. And
Ouidius the poet says,

If thou flee idleness, Cupide has no might,
His how lies broken, his fire has no light. Ovid de remedio amoris.
Idelnes.

It is not only called idleness, wherein the body or mind cesseth from labor,
but specially idleness is an omission of all honest exercise: the other may be
better called a vacation from seryouse business, which was some time embraced
of wise men and virtuous.

It is written to the praise of Xerxes king King Xerxes.
of Persia, that in time vacaunt from the affairs of his realm, he with his
own hands had planted innumerable trees, which long or he died brought
forth abundance of fruit, and for the crafty and dylectable order in the
setting of them, it was to all men, beholdynge the princis industrye,
exceeding maruaylous.

But who abhors not the hystorye of Sardanapalus.
Serdanapalus, king of the same realm? which having in detestation all
princely affairs, and leuyng al company of men, enclosed him self in a
chamber with a great multitude of concubynes: and for that he would seem to be
some time occupied, or else that wanton pleasures and quietness became to him
tedyouse, he was found by one of his lords in a woman's attire spynnynge in a
distafe among persons defamed, which known abroad, was to the people so
odiouse, that finally by them he was burned, with all the place whereto he
fled for his refuge.

And I suppose there is not a more plain Playing at dise.
figure of idelnesse, than play inge at dyse. For besides, that therein is no
manner of exercise of the body or mind, they which play thereat, must seem to
have no portion of wit or kunnynge, if they will be called fair players, or in
some company avoid the stabbe of a dagger, if they be taken with any crasty
conueyaunce. And by cause always wisdom is therein suspected, there is seldom
any playinge at dyse, but thereat is vehement chydyng and braulynge, horrible
oaths, cruel, and some time mortal menacis. I omytte strokes, which now and
than do happen, often times between brethren and most dear friends, if fortune
bring always to one man yuell chances, which makes the play of the other
suspected. O why should that be called a play, which is compacte of malice and
robry? Undoubtedly they that write of the first inventions of things, have
good cause to suppose Lucifer, prince of devils, to be the first inuentour of
dyse playing, and hell the place where it was founde^, although some do write,
that it was first inverted by Attalus. For what better allectiue could Lucyfer
deuyse to allure and bring men pleasantly into damnable servitude, than to
purpose to them in form of a play, his principal The treasory of Lucifer.
treasory, wherein the more part of sin is contained, and all goodness and
virtue confounded?

The first occasion to play, is tediousnes of virtuous occupation: Immediately
succedeth couaytynge of an other man's goods, which they call playinge: thereto
is annexed avarice and strayte keeping, which they call winning: sone after
comes sweryng, in rentinge the members of god, which they name nobleness
(for they will say, he that swereth deep, swereth like a lord) than follows
fury or rage, which they call courage: among them comes inordinate watch,
which they name painfulness: he brings in glotony, and that is good
fellowship: and after comes sleep supersluous, called among them natural rest:
and he some time brings in lechery: which is now named daliance. The name
of this treasory is verily idelnesse: the door whereof is left wide open to
dyse players: if they hap to bring, in their company, lernyng, virtuous
business, liberality, paciencie, charity, temperance, good diete, or
shamefastnes, they must leave them without the gates. For yuell custom, which
is Il custom
the porter, will not suffer them to enter.

Alas what pite is it, that any christen man should by wanton company be
trained, I will no more say into this Treasory, but in to this lothesome
dungeon, where he shall lie fetored in chains of ignorance, and bounden with
the strong chain of obstinacy, hard to be losed but by grace?

The most noble emperor Octauius Augustus, who has among writers in diverse
of his acts an honorable remembrance: only for playinge at dyse, and that
but seldom, susteyneth in hystories a note of reproach.

The Lacedemoniens sent an ambassade Counsaillors disers
to the city of Corinthe, to have with them aliance: but when the ambassadors
found the princis and counsaylours playenge at dyse, they departed without
exploytynge their message, saying, that they would not maculate the honor of
their people with such a reproach, to be said, that they had made aliaunce
with disars.

Also to Demetrius, the king of Parthians sent golden dyse, in the rebuke of
his lytenesse.

Every thing is to be esteemed after his value. But who herynge a man, whom he
The estimation of dysars.
knows not, to be called a dysar, does not anon suppose him to be of light
credence, dyssolute, vain, and remiss? who almoost trusts his brother, whom
he knows a dyse player? yea among them selfs they laughe, when they
perceive or here any doctrine or virtuous word proceed from any of their
companyons, thynkyge that it becomes not his person: much more when he does
any thing with devotion or wisdom.

How many gentle men, how many merchants, have in this damnable
passetyme consumed their substance, as well by their own labors, as by their
parents, with greatte study and peynefull travail in a long time acquyred,
and fynisshed their lyfes in debt and penury? How many goodly and bold
yemenne has it brought unto theft, whereby they have prevented the course of
nature, and dyed by the order of laws myserably? These be the fruits and
reuennues of that dyuylyshe marchaundyse, beside the fynall reward, which is
more terryble, the report whereof I leave to dyuines, such as fear not to
show their lernynges, or fille not their mouths so full with sweet meats, or
benefyces, that their tongues be not let to speak troth: for that is their
duty and office, except I with many other be much dysceyued.

Playinge at cards and tables is some Cards and Tables.
what more tolerable, only for as much as therein wit is more used, and
less trust is in fortune, all be it therein is neither laudable study nor
exercise. But yet men delitynge in virtue, moughte with cards and tables
deuyse games, where in moughte be much solace and also study commodiouse, as
devising a bataile, or contention between virtue and vice, or other like
pleasant and honest invention.

The chesse of al games, wherein is no bo dily exercise, is most to be
commended, for Chess.
therein is right subtle engine, whereby the wit is made more sharp, and
remembrance quickened. And it is the more commendable and also commodious, if
the players have red the moralization of the chesse, and wha^ they play do
think upon it: which books be in englysh. But they be very scarce, because
few men do seek in plays for ver tue or wisdom.

That shotinge in a long bow is principal of all other exercises. Cap. xxvii.
TUlli says in his first book of Officis, We be not to that intent brought
up by nature, that we should seem to be made to play and dysport, but rather
to gravity and studyes of more estymation. Wherefore it is written of Alexander,
emperor of Rome for his gravity called Seuerus, that in his chyldehode, and
before he was taught the letters of greek or latin, he never exercysed any
other play or game, but only one, wherein was a symylitude of Justice: and
therefore it was called in latin Ad Iudices, which is in english to the
iuges. But the form thereof is not expressed by the said auctour, nor none
other that I have yet red. Wherefore I will repair again to the residue of
honest exercise.

And for as much as Galene in his second Exercise for preserving of health.
book of the preservation of health, declares to be in them these qualities
or dyuersyties, that is to say, that sum be done with extendynge of might,
and as it were vyolentely, and that is called valyaunte exercise: Some with
swyfte or hasty motion, other with strength and celerytie, and that may be
called vehemente: The partycular kinds of every of them, he describes, which
were to long here to be rehearsed

But in as much as he also says, that he that is of good astate in his body,
ought to know the power and effect of every exercise: but he nedethe not to
practice any other, but that which is moderate and mean between every
extremytie: I will now brefely declare, in what exercise now in custume among
us, may be most found of that medyocritie, and may be augmented or mynysshed,
at the pleasure of him that does exercise, without thereby appaypayrynge any
part of dilectation or commodity thereof procedynge.

And in mine oppinion none may be compared The commendation of shoting in a
long bow.
with shootynge in the long bow, and that for sondrye vtylytyes that come
thereof, wherein it incomparably excelletly all other exercise. For in drawing
of a bow, easy and congruent to his strength, he that shoots, does
moderately exercise his arms, and the other part of his body: and if his bow
be bygger, he must add to more strength, wherein is no less valiant
exercise than in any other, whereof Galene writes.

In shootynge at buttes, or broad arowe marks, is a mediocritie of exercise of
the lower parts of the body and legs, by goinge a lyttel dystaunce a
mesurable pase. At rouers or pryckes, it is at his pleasure that shoteth, how
fast or softly he lysteth to go: and yet is the praise of the shooter, neither
more ne less, for as far or nyghe the mark is his arowe, when he goes
softly, as when he renneth.

Tenyse, selledome used, and for a little Tenyse.
space, is a good exercise for young men, but it is more violent than shotynge,
by reason that two men do play. Wherefore neither of them is at his own
liberty to measure the exercise. For if the one stryke the balle hard, the
other that intends to receive him, is than constrained to use semblable
vyolence, if he will return the bal from whens it came to him. If it trille
fast on the ground, and he intends to stop, or if it rebounde a greatte
dystaunce from him, and he would eftesones return it, he can not than keep any
measure in swyftnes of mocion.

Some men would say, that in mediocritie, which I have so much praised in
shootynge, why should not bouling, claishe, pynnes, and koytynge, be as much
commended? Ueryly as for two the last, be to be utterly abiected of all noble
men, in like wise foot balle, wherein is nothing but beastely fury, and
extreme violence, whereof proceeds hurt, and consequently rancour and malice
do remayn with them that be wounded. Wherefore it is to be put in per petuall
silence.

In claysse is employed to littel strength, in boulynge often times to much,
whereby the sinews be to much strayned, and the veins to much chafed: whereof
often times is seen to ensue ache, or the decreas of strength or agilitie in
the arms, where, in shoting, if the shoter use the strength of his bow within
his own tiller, he shall never be therewith grieved or made more feeble.

Also in shotyng is a double utility, where in it excellethe all other
exercyses and games incomparably. The one is that it is, and always has been,
the most excellent artillery for wars, whereby this realm of England has been not only best defended from outward hostility, but also in other regions
a few english archers have been seen to prevail against people innumerable.
Also won inpreignable cities and strong holds, and kept them in the mids
of the strength of their enemies. This is the feate, whereby english men have
be^ most dradde and had in estimation with out ward princis, as well enemies
as alies. And the commodity thereof has been approved as far as Jerusalem, as
it shall appear in the lives of Richard the first, and Edward the first,
kings of England, who made several iourneis to recover that holy city of
Jerusalem into the possession of christen men, and achieued them honorably,
the rather by the power of this feate of shootynge.

The premises considered, O what cause Decay of Archers.
of reproach shall the decay of archers be to us now living? Ye what
irrecuperable damage either to us or them, in whose time need of semblable
defense shall happen? which decay, though we already perceive, fear, and
lament, and for the restoryng thereof cesse not to make ordynaunces, good laws
and statutes: yet who effectually puts his hand to contynuall execution of
the same laws and prouysyons? or beholdynge them daily broken, wynketh not at
the offenders? But I shall hereof more speak in an another place, and return
now to the second utility, found in shotynge in the long bow, which is
kylling ofdere, wyld foul, and other game, wherein is both profit and
pleasure above any other artyllery.

And verily I suppose, that before crosbowes and handgunnes were brought into
this realm, by the sleight of our enemies, to thentent to distroy the noble
defense of archery, contynuall use of shotynge in the long bow made the feate
so perfect and exact among english men, that they tha^ as surely and soon
killed such game, which they lysted to have, as they now can do with the
crossebowe or gunne. But this suffyseth, for the declaration of shootyng,
whereby it is sufficientely proved, that it incomparably excellethe all other
exercise, pastyme, or solace.

And hereat I conclude to write of exercise, which apperteyneth as well to
princis and noble men, as to all other by their example: which determyne to
pass forth their lives in virtue and honesty: And hereafter, with the
assistence of god, unto who^ I render this mine account, for the talent that I
have of him received, I purpose to write of the principal, and (as I might
say) the partycular study and affairs of him, that by the prouydence of God,
is called to the most diffycult cure of a publyke weal.

Libri primi finis.
THE SECOND BOOK.
What things he, that is elected or appointed to be a governor of a publyke
weal, ought to premeditate. Cap. I.
IN THE BOOK PRECEdynge I have (as I trust) sufficiently declared, as well
what is to be called a very and right publyke weal, as also, that there
should be thereof one prince and sovereign above all other governors. And I
have also expressed my conceyte and opinion, touching not only the studies, but
also the exercyses concerning the necessary education of noble men and other,
called to the governance of a publyke weal, in such form as by the noble
example of their lives, and the fruit thereof coming, the publyke weal that
shall happen to be under their governance, shall not fail to be accounted
happy, and the authority on them to be employed well and fortunately. Now will
I treat of the preparation of such personages, when Preparation of governors.
they first receive any great dignite charge or governance of the weal publyke.

FIRST SVCHE persons, being now adulte, that is to say, passed their
childehode, as well in manners as in years, if for their vtues and learning, they
hap to be called to receive any dignity, they should first amoue al company
from them, and in a secret oratory or privy chamber, by them self, assemble
all the powers of their wits, to remember these.vii. artycles, which I have
not of mine own heed devised, but gathered as well out of holy scripture, as
out of the warkes of other excellent writers of famous memory, as they shall
soon perceive, which have radde and perused good autours in greek and latin.

First and above all thing, let them consider, that from god only proceeds al
honor, The first consideration of governors.
And that neither noble progeny, succession, nor election be of such force,
that by them any astate or dignity may be so stablyshed, that god being
styred to vengeance, shall not shortly resume it, and perchance translate it
where it shall like him. And for as much as examples greatly do profytte in
the stead of experyence, here shall it be necessary to remember the hystorye of
Saul, whom god him self elected to be the first king of Israel, that where
god commanded him by the mouth of Samuel the prophet, that for as much as the
people Saul and Amalech.
called Amalech, had resisted the children of Israel, when they first departed
from Egypt, he should therefore distroy all the countray, and slay men women and
children, al beastis and cattle, and that he should nothing save or keep there
of. But Saul after that he had vaynquyshed Amalech, and Disobedience.
taken Agag king there of prisoner, he having on him compassion, saved his
life only. Also he preserved the best oxen, catell, and vestures, and all
other thing that was fairest, and of most estimation, and would not consume
it, according as god had commanded him, saying to Samuel, that the people
kept it to the intent, that they would make there of to allmyghty god a
solemn sacrifyce. But Samuel reprouynge him said, Better is Obedience, than
Sacrifyce. with other words that do follow in the history. Finally for that
offense only, almighty god abiected Saul, that he should no more reign over
Israel: and caused Samuel forthewith to enoynte David king, the youngest son
of a poor man of Bethleem, named Isai, which was keeping his fathers sheep.

Sens for ones neglectyng the commandment of god, and that neither natural
pity, nor the intent to do sacrifice, with that which was saved might excuse
the tra^sgressyon of goddis commandment, nor mytigate his grievous
displeasure: how vigilant ought a christen man, being in authority, how
vigilant (I say) industrious and diligent ought he to be in the adminystration
of a publyke weal? dredynge always the words, that be spoken by eternal
sapience to them that be governors The words of Sapience to ^ouernours.
Sapiencie
of publyke weals, All power and virtue is given of the lord, that of all
other is highest, who shall examyne your deeds, and inserche your thoughts.
For when ye were the mynysters of his realm, ye judged not vpryghtely, ne
observed the law of Justice, nor ye walked not according to his pleasure. He
shall shortly and terryblye appiere unto you. For most hard and grievous
judgment, shall be on them, that have rule over other. To the poor man
mercy is granted, but the great men shall suffer great turmentes. He that is
lord of all excepteth no person, ne he shall fear the greatness of any man,
for he made as well the great as the small, and cares for every of them
equally. The stronger or of more might is the person: the stronger pain is
to him immynent. There fore to you governors be these my words, that ye may
learn wisdom and fall not.

This notable sentence is not only to be imprinted in the hearts of governors,
but also to be oftentimes reuolued and called to remembrance.

They shall not think, how much honor The. ^i. consideration.
they receive, but how much care and burdeyn. He they shall not much esteem
their revenues and treasure, considering that it is no buten or pray, but a
laborious office and travail.

Let them think, the greatter dominion The third.
they have, that thereby they sustain the more care and study. And that
therefore they must have the less solace and pastime, and to sensual
pleasures less opportunity.

Also when they behold their garmentis and other ornaments, rych and precious,
The.iiii.
they shall think, what reproach were to them to surmount in that, which be
other men's warkes and not theirs, and to be vanquyshed of a poor subject in
sondrye virtues, whereof they them selves be the artifycers.

They that regard them, of whom they The.v.
have governance, no more than shall appertayn to their own private
commodities, they no better esteem them than other men does their horses and
mules, to whom they employ no less labor and diligence, not to the benefit
of the sely beastis, but to their own necessities and singular advantage.

The most sure foundation of noble renome, The syxte.
is a man to be of such virtues and qualities, as he desires to be openly
published. For it is a faint praise, that is gotten with fear, or by flaterars
given, and the same is but fume, which is supported with silence provoked by
menacis.

They shall also consider, that by their The.vii.
preeminence, they sit as it were on a pyller on the top of a mountayn, where
all the people do behold them, not only in their open affairs, but also in
their secret pastymes, privy dalyaunce, or other improfytable or wanton
conditions, which sone be discovered by the conversation of their most
familyar seruantis, which do always embrace that study, wherein their master
delyteth, according to the saying of Jesus Sirach, As the judge of the people
is, so be his ministers: And such as be the governors of the city, such be
the people. Which sentence is confyrmed by sundry histories. For Nero,
Caligula, Domiciane, Cucius Commodus, Uarius Heliogabalus, monstrous
emperors, nourished about them, rybaudes, and other voluptuouse artifycers.

Maximianus, Dioclesian, Maxencius, and other persecutours of christen men, lac
ked not inuentours of cruel and terryble tourmentes.

Contrary wise, reigning the noble Augustus, Nerua, Traiane, Hadriane, the two
Antonines, and the wonderful emperor Alexander, for his gravity called
Seuerus, the imperial palayce was always replenished with eloquent orators,
delectable poets, wise philosophers, most cunning and expert lawyars,
prudente and valiaunte capitaynes.

Mo semblable examples shall here of be founden, by them which purposely do
read histories, whom of all other I most desire to be princis and governors.

These articles well and substa^cially graven in a noble man's memory, it shall
also be necessary to cause them to be delectably written and set in a table
within his bed chamber, addyng to, the versis of Claudiane the noble poet,
which he wrate to Honorius emperor of Rome, The versis I have translated out
of latin into englshe, not observing the order as they stand, but the
sentence belonging to my purpose.

The table of governors to be hanged in their chambres. Though thy power
stretchith both far and large Claudianus

Through Inde the rich, set at the worldis end,
And Mede with Arabi be both under thy charge
And also Seres, that silk to us does send
If fear the trouble, and small things the offe^de,
Corrupt desire thyn heart has ones embraced
Thou art in bondage, thyn honor is defaced.
Thou shall be demed tha^ worthy for to reign
when of thy self thou winnest the maistry.
Evil custom brings virtue in dysdaine
License superfluous persuades much folly,
In to much pleasure set not felicity,
If lust or anger do thy mind assail
Subdue occasion, and thou shall sone p^uayle.
what thou may do, delight not for to know,
But rather what thing will become the best.
Embrace thou virtue, and keep thy courage low,
And think that always measure is a feast.
Love well thy people, care also for the leest.
And when thou studiest for thy commodity
Make them all parteners of thy felicity.
Be not much meued with synguler appetite
Except it profit unto thy subiectis all
At thyn example the people will delight
Be it vice or virtue with the they rise or fall
No laws avail, men turn as does a balle
For where the ruler in living is not stable
Both law and counsel is turned into a fable.


These verses of Claudiane, full of excellent wisdoms, as I have said, would be
in a table, in such a place as a governor ones in a day may behold them,
specially as they be expressed in latin by the said poet, unto whose
eloquence no translation in english may be equivalent. But yet were it better
to can them by heart, ye and if they were made in the form of a dytie, to be
songen to an instrumente, O what a sweet song would it be in the ears of wise
men? For a mean musician might there of make a right pleasant harmony, where
almost every note should express a counsel virtuous or necessary.

Ye have now hard, what premeditatio^s be expedient before that a man take on
him the gouerna^ce of a publyke weal. These notable premeditations and
remembra^ces should be in his mind, which is in auctorytie often times
renewed. Than shall he proceed further in furnishynge his person, with
honorable manners and qualytyes, where of very nobility is co^pacte, whereby all
other shall be induced to honor, love, and fear him, which things chiefly
do cause perfect obedience.

Now of these manners will I write in such order, as in my conceyt they be (as it
were) naturally disposed and set in a noble man, and soonest in him noted or
espied.

The exposition of majesty. Cap. II.
IN a governor or man, having in the public weal some greatte authority,
the fountain of all excellent manners is majesty, which is the holle
proportion and figure of noble astate, and is proprelye a beauty or
comeliness in his countenance, langage and gesture, apt to his dignite, and
accommodate to time, place, and company, which like as the son does his
beams, so does it cast on the beholders and herers a pleasant and terrible
reverence. In so much as the words or countenances of a noble manne, should
be in the stead of a fyrme and stable law to his inferyours. Yet is not
majesty always in haulte or fyerce countenance, nor in speech outrageous or
arrogante, but in honorable and sobre demeanure, deliberate and grave
pronunciation, words clean and facile, void of rudenes and dishonestie,
without vain or inordinate jangling, with such an excellent temperance, that
he among an infinite nombre of other persons, by his majesty may be espied
for a governor.

Whereof we have a noble example in Homere of Ulisses, that when his ship and
Ulisses.
men were perysshed in the sea, and he vnethe escaped and was cast on land
upon a cooste, where the inhabytauntes were called Pheacas, he being al
naked, saving a mantell sent to him by the kings daughter, without other
apparaylle, or servant, represented such a wonderful majesty in his
countenance and speech, that the king of the country, named Alcinous, in
that extreme calamity, wysshed, that Ulisses would take his daughter Nausicaa,
to wife, with a great part of his tresure. And declarig the honor that he bare
toward him, he made for his sake diverse noble esbatementes and passetymes. The
people also wondering at his majesty, honored him with sondrye presents. And
at their propre charges and expensis, conuayed him into his own realm of
Ithaca, in a ship of wonderful beauty, well ordynaunced and manned for his
defense and saufe conduct. The words of Alcinous, whereby he declares the
majesty, that he noted to be in Ulisses, I have put in english, not so well
as I found them in greek.

Alcinous to Ulisses. when I the consider Ulysses, I perceive
Thou do not dissemble to me in thy speech
As other have done, which craftily can deceive
Untruely reportyng, where they list to preach
Of thiges never done, such falshod they do tech.
But in thy words, there is a right good grace.
And that thy mind is good, it shewith i thy face


The estimatyon of majesty in countenance, shall be declared by two examples
now ensuynge.

To Scipio, being in his manor place, called Linternu^, came diverse great
thieves and pirates, only to the intent to se his person, of whose wonderfulle
prowess and sundry vyctories they hard the renoume. But he not knowing, but
that they came to endomage him, armed him self and such servants as he than
had with him, and dysposed them about the imbatylmentes of his house, to
make defense, which the capytaynes of the thieves perceyuyng, despeched the
multitude from them, and layinge aparte their harneis and weapons, called to
Scipio with a loud voice, saying that they came not as enemies, but wondering
at his virtue and prowess, desired only to see him, which if he vouched
saufe, they would accounte for an heavenly benefyte. That being showed to Scipio
by his servants, he caused the gaates to be set wide open, and the thieves
to be suffered to enter: who kissing the gates and posts with much
reverence, as they had been of a Temple or other place dedicate, humbly
approached to Scipio, which vysaged them in such form, that they as subdued
with a reuerente dread, in beholdynge his majesty, at the last joyfully
kyssing his hand oftentimes, which he benignely offered to them, made humble
reverence, and so departed, laying in the porch semblable offrynges, as they
gave to their gods: And forth with returned to their own habitatio^s,
rejoicing incredibly, that they had seen and touched a prince so noble and
valyant.

It is no little thing to marvel at, the majesty showed in extreme fortune
and mysery. The noble Romayne Marius, when he had been.vii. times Consul, being
vaynguyshed by Scilla, after that he had long hyd him self in marises and
desert places, was finally constrained by famyne to repair to a town called
Minturne, where he trusted to have been succored. But the inhabitants, dreding
the cruelte of Scilla, took Marius, and put him into a dongeon, And after sent
to slay him their commune hangeman: which was borne in Cimbria, a country
sometime distroyed by Marius. The hangman, beholding the honorable port and
majesty, that remained in Marius, not withstanding that he was out of
honorable apparayle, and was in garments torn and fylthy, he thought that in
his vysage appeared the terrible battle, wherein Marius vanquyshed his cou^tray
men: he therefore all trembling, as constrained by fear, did let fall out
of his hand the sword, wherewith he should have slain Marius, and leuing him
untouched, fled out of the place. The cause of his fear reported to the
people, they meued with reverence, afterward studied and devised how they
might deliver Marius from the malice of Scilla.

In Augustus, emperor of Rome, was a native majesty. For as Suetomus writes,
from his eien proceeded rays or beams, which perced the eien of the
beholders. The same emperor spoke seldom openly, but out of a comentarie, that
is to say, that he had before provided and written, to the intent that he would
speak no more ne less than he had purposed.

More over, toward the acquiringe of majesty, three things be required in the
oration of a man having authority, that it be compendious, sententious, and
delectable: having also respect to the time when, the place where, and the
persons to whom it is spoken. For the words perchance apt for a bankette or
time of solace, be not commendable in time of consultation or service of god.
That langage that in the chamber is tolerable, in place of judgment or great
assembly is nothing commendable.

Of apparayle belonging to a noble man being a governor or great
counsaylour. Cap. iii.
APparayle may be well a part of majesty. For as there has been ever a
discrepance of vesture of youth and age, men and womenne, and our lord god
ordained the apparayle of priestis distinct from seculars, as it appears in
holy scripture: also the gentyles had of auncyente time sundry apparayle to
sondrye astates, as to the senate, and dignities called magistrates, And what
enormitie should hit now be thought and a thing to laughe at, to se a judge or
sergea^t at the law in a short coote guarded and pounced after the galyarde
fation, or an apprentyse of the law or pleder, come to the bar with a
myllayne or french bonette on his heed, set full of aglettes? So is there
apparayle comely to every astate and degree, and that which excedeth or
lacks, procures reproach, in a noble man specially. For apparaile simple or
scant reprouethe him of avarice. If it be always exceeding precious and often
times changed, as well in to charge as strange and new facions, it causes
him to be noted dyssolute of manners.

The most noble emperors of Rome, Augustus, Traiane, Hadriane, Antonine,
Seuerus, and Alexander, which were of al other incomparable in honorable
living, used a dyscrete moderation in their apparayle, all though they were
greatte emperors and gentyles. How much more ought than christen men, whose
denomination is founded on humility, and they that be not of the estate of
pryncis, to show a moderation and constaunce in vesture, that they diminysshe
no part of their majesty, either with new fanglenesse, or with over
sumptuous expenses, and yet may this last be suffered, where there is a great
assembly of strangers: for than some time it is expediente, that a noble man,
in his aparayle, do advance him self to be both rich and honorable. But in
this as well as in other parts of majesty, time is to be highly considered.

Semblable deckinge ought to be in the Ha^gynges and plate mete for a noble
man.
house of a noble man, or manne of honor. I mean concerning ornaments of
halle and chambres, in Arise, painted tables, and images couteynynge histories,
wherein is represented some monumente of virtue, most cunnyngely wrought, with
the circumstaunce of the matter briefly declared, whereby other men in
beholdynge, may be instructed, or at the least ways to virtue persuaded. In
like wise his plate and vessayle would be ingraued with histories, fables, or
quycke and wise sentences, comprehendyng good doctrine or counsayles, whereby
one of these commodyties may happen, either that they which do eat or
drink, having those wysedomes ever in syghte, shall happen with the meat to
receive some of them, or by purposing the^ at the table, may sussitate some
dysputation or reasonynge, whereby sum part of time shall be saved, which
else by superfluouse eating and drinking, would be idelly consumed.

What very nobility is, and whereof it took first that denomination. Capitulo.
iiii.
Now it is to be feared, that where majesty approaches to excess, and the
mind is obsessed with inordinate glory, lest pride, of al vices most
horrible, should suddenly enter and take prisoner the heart of a gentyllman
called to authority. Wherefore in as much as that pestilence corrupts all
senses, and makes them incurable by any perswation or doctrine, therefore such
persons, from their adolescency, Adolesce^cye, is the age next to the state of
man. Nobility begun.
ought to be persuaded and taught the true knowledge of very nobylytie, in
form following or like.

First that in the beginning, when private possessions and dignity were given
by the consent of the people, who than had all thing in commune, and
equality in degree and condition, Undoutedly they gave the one and the other
to him, at whose virtue they meruayled, and by whose labor and industry they
received a commune benefyte, as of a commune father, that with equal affection
loved them. And that pro^ptitude or redynesse in employinge that benefyte was
than named in english gentylnesse, as it was in latin BENIGNITAS, and in
other tongues after a semblable signifycation: and the persons were called
gentle men, more for the remembrance of their virtue and benefyte, than for
discrepaunce of astates.

Also it fortuned by the providence of god, that of those good men were
engendered good children, who being brought up in virtue, and perceiving the
cause of the advancement of their progenytours, endeavored them selfs by
imitation of virtue, to be equal to them in hon our and authority: by good
emulation they retained stylle the favor and reverence of people. And for the
goodness that proceeded of such generation, the astate of them was called in
greek EVGENIA, which signifies good kind or lynage: but in a more brief
manner, it was after called nobility, and the persoues noble, which signifies
excellent, and in the analogy or signification it is more ample than gentill,
for it conteyneth as well all that, which is in gentilnesse, as also the honor
or dignity therefore received, which be so annexed the one to the other, that
they can not be separate.

It would be more over declared, that where virtue joined with great
possessions Nobility ancient.
or dygnytie, has long continued in the blood or house of a gentle man, as
it were an inheritance, there nobility is most showed, and these noble men be
most to be honored: for as much as continuance in all thing that is good,
has ever preeminence in praise and comparyson. But yet shall it be necessary,
to advertise those persons, that do think, that nobylitie may in no wise be
but only where men can auaunte them of ancient lignage, an ancient robe, or
great possessions, at this day very noble men do suppose to be much error and
folly. Whereof there is a familiar example, which we bear ever with us: for the
blood in our bodies being in youth warm, pure, and lustye, is the occasion
of beauty, which is every where commended and loved, but in age being
putryfied, it leseth his praise. And the goutes, carbuncles, kankers, lepryes,
and other like sores and sycknesses, which do proceed of blood corrupted, be
to al men detestable. And this persuasion to any gentilman, in whom is apt
dysposition to very nobility, will be sufficient, to withdraw him from such
vice, whereby he may empayre his own estimation, and the good renoume of his
auncetours.

If he have an ancient robe, left by his Aunciente robes.
auncetour, let him consider, that if the first owner were of more virtue than
he is, that succedeth, the robe being worn, mynssheth his praise, to them
which know or have hard of the virtue of him that first owed it. If he that
wears it be vyclouse, it more detecteth how much he is unworthy to wear it,
the remembrance of his noble auncetour making men to abhor the reproach
given by an yuell successor,

If the first owner were not virtuous, it condemns him that wears it of
much folyshenesse, to glory in a thing of so base estimation, which lacking
beauty or gloss, can be none ornament to him that wears it, nor honorable
remembrance to him that first owed it.

But now to confirm by true histories, that according as I late affirmed,
nobilitic Nobility wherein it is.
is not only in dignity, ancient lignage, nor great revenues lands or
possessions, let young gentylmen have often times told to them, and (as it is
vulgarely spoken) laid in their lappes, how Numa Pompilius was taken from
husbandry, which he Numa klg of Romais
exercised, and was made king of Romans by electyon of the people. What caused
it suppose you, but his wisdom and virtue, which in him was very nobility:
and that nobylitie brought him to dygnitie? And if that were not nobylytie,
the Romans were meruaylousely abused, that after the death of Romulus their
king, having among them a hundred senators, whom Romulus did set in
authority, and also the blod royal, and old gentylmen of the Sabynes, who by
the procurement of the wives of the Romans, being their daughters, inhabited
the city of Rome, they would not of sum of them elect a king, rather than
advance a ploughman and stranger to that authority.

Quintius, having but.xxx. acres of land, Quintius Dictator.
and being ploughman thereof, the Senate and people of Rome sent a messager to
show him that they had chosen him to be DICTATOR, which was at that time the
highest dignity among the Romans, and for three months had authority royal.
Quintius herynge the message, let his plough stand, and went into the city,
and prepared his host, agein the Samnites, and vanquished them valiantly. And
that done, he surrendered his office, and being discharged of the dignity,
repaired again to his ploughe, and applied it diligently.

I would demand now, if nobility were only in the dignity, or in his
prowess, which he showed against his ennemies. If it were only in his
dignite, it therewith cessed, and he was (as I might say) estsones unnoble, and
than was his prowess unrewarded, which was the chief and origynall cause of
that dignite: which were incongruent and without reason. If it were in his
prowess, prowess consistynge of valiaunte courage and martial polycie, if
they still remain in the person, he may never be with out nobility, which
is the commendation, and as it were the surname of vtue.

The two Romans, called both Decii, were of the base astate of the people,
and Decii and their a^owe.
not of the great blood of the Romans, yet for the preservation of their
country, they auowed to dye, as it were in a satisfaction for all their
country: and so with valyaunte hearts they perced the host of their
ennemies, and valiauntly fighting dyed there honorably, and by their example
gave such audacitie and courage to the residue of the Romans, that they
employed so their strength against their enemies, that with little more
loss, they opteyned victory.

Ought not these two Romans, which by their death gave occasion of victory,
be called noble? I suppose no man that knows what reason is, will deny it.

More over, we have in this realm coins, which be called nobles, as long as
they be seen to be gold, they be so called: but if they be counterfayted, and
made in brass, coper, or other vile metal, who for the prit only, calls
them nobles? whereby it appears, that the estimation is in the metal, and not
in the prynte or ^ygure.

And in a horse or good greyhounde, we praise that we se in them, and not the
beauty or goodness of their progeny. Which proves, that in estemyng of money
and catell, we be led by wisdom, and in approuynge of man, to whom beasts
and money do serve, we be only induced by custom.

Thus I conclude, that nobylytie is not after the vulgar opynion of men, but
is only the praise and surname of virtue. Which the longer it continues in a
name or lineage, the more is nobility extolled and meruayled at.

Ofaffabilitie, and the utility there of in every astate. Cap. v.
TO that, which I before named gentylnesse, be incident three special
qualities, Affabilite, Placabilitie, and Mercy, of whom I will now seperately
declare the propre significations.

Affability is of a wonderful efficacy or power in procuryng love. And it is
in sundry wise, but most proprely, where a man is facyle or easy to be spoken
unto. It is also where a man speaks courteysely with a sweet speech or
countenance, wherewith the herers (as it were with a delycate odor) be
refreshed, and alured to love him, in whom is this most delectable qualytie.
As contrary wise, men vehementely hate them, that have a proud and haulte
countenance, Hault cou^ tenance.
be they never so high in astate or degree. How often have I hard people say,
when men in great auctoutie have passed by, without making gentyl countenance,
to those which have done to them reverence, This man weneth with a look, to
subdue all the world? Nay nay, men's hearts be free, and will love whom they
list. And thereto all the other do consent in a murmr, as it were bees. Lord
god how they be sore blinded, which do wene, that haulte countenance is
comeliness of nobylitie, where undoubtedly, nothing is thereto, a more
greatter blemyshe: As they have well proved, which by fortunes mutabilite have
changed their astate, when they perceive that the remembrance of their pride,
withdraws all pity, all men reioysynge at the change of their fortune.

Dionise, the proud king of Sicile, after that for his intolerable pride,
was driven by his people out of his realm, the remenbraunce of his haulte and
stately countenance, was to all men so odiouse, that he could be in no
country well enterteyned. In so much as if he had not be releued by learning,
teaching a grammar schole in Italy, he for lack of friends had been
constrained to beg for his living.

Semblably Perses king of Macedonia, and one of the rychest kings that ever
was in Greece, For his execrable pride, was at the last abandoned of all his
alies and confederates, by reason whereof, he was vainquyshed, and taken
prisoner by Paulus Emilius, one of the consules of Rome: and not only he him
self bounden, and led as a captive, in the triumph of the said Paulus, but
also the remembrance of his pride was so odiouse to people, that his own
son, destitute of friends, was by need constrained to work in a smythes
forge, not fyndinge any man that of his hard fortune had any compassion.

The pride of Carquine, the last king of Romans, was more occasion of his
exile, than the rauysshynge of Lucrecia, by his son Aruncius, for the malice
that the people by his pride had long gathered, fyndinge valiant capitaynes,
Brutus, Colatinus, Lucretius, and other nobles of the city, at the last braste
out, and taking occasion of the rauisshement, all though the king were thereto
not party, they utterly expulsed him for ever out of the city. These be the
fruits of pride, and that men do call stately countenance.

When a noble man passes by, showing to men a gentle and familiare visage,
it is a Gentil countenance.
world to behold, how people takes comfort, how the blood in their visage
quickens, how their flesh styreth and hearts leap for gladness: Than they
all speak, as it were in an harmony, the one says, who beholdinge this man's
most gentyl countenance, will not with all his heart love him? A another says, He
is no man but an angel, se how he reioyseth all men that behold him. Finally,
all do grant, that he is worthy all honor that may be given or wyshed him.

But now to resort to that, which most proprely (as I have said) is
affabilite, which is facile or easy to be spoken unto.

Marcus Antoninus, emperor of Rome (as Lampridius writes) enserched, who were
most homely and plain men within the cite, and secretly sent for them into
his chamber, where he diligently enquered of them, what the people coniected of
his living, commaundynge them upon pain of his high indignation, to tell him
truth, and hyde nothing from him. And upon their report, if he hard any
thing worthy never so little dyspreyse, he forthwith amended it. And also by
such means, he corrected them that were about his person, fyndyng them
negligent, dyssemblars, and flatterers.

The noble Trayane, when his nobles and counsaylours noted him to famylyar and
curtaise, and therefore did blame him, He answered, that he would be a like
emperor to other men, as if he were a subject, he would wyshe to have over
him self.

O what damage has ensued to pryncis Liberty in speaking.
and their realms, where liberte of speech has been restrained?

What auayled fortune incomparable to Alexa^ders cruelty in sleinge his
friends.
the great king Alexander, his wonderful puyssaunce and hardynes, or his
synguler doctrine in philosophy, taught him by Aristotle, in delyueryng him
from the death in his young and flourishyng age? where if he had retained the
same affability, that was in him in the beginning of his conquest, and had
not put to silence his counsaylours, which before used to speak to him
frankely, he might have escaped all vyolent death: and by simylitude have
enjoyed the hole monarchy of all the world. For after that he waxed to be
terryble in manners, and prohibited his fre^des, and discrete servants, to use
their accustomed liberty in speech, he fell in to the hateful grudge among
his own people.

But I had almost forgoten Julius Caesar, Julius Caesar example of tyranny
who being not able to sustain the burden of fortune, and enuienge his own
felicity, abandoned his natural disposition, and as it were being dronke with
over much wealth, sought new ways, how to be advanced above the astate of
mortal princis: wherefore litel and little he withdrewe from men his accustomed
gentylnesse, becoming more sturdy in langage, and strange in countenance, than
ever before had been his usage. And to declare more plainly his intent, he
made an edict or decree, that no man should prease to come to him uncalled,
and that they should have good awaite, that they spoke not in such familiar
facio^ to him, as they before had been accustomed: whereby he so did alienate
from him the hearts of his most wise and assured adherentys, that from that
time forward, his life was to them tedious: and abhorrynge him as a monstre or
commune enemy, being knytte in a confederacy, slew him syttyng in the Senate,
of which conspiracy was chief captain Marcus Brutus, whom of al other he
best loved, for his great wisdom and prowess. And it is of some writers
suspected, that he was begoten of Caesar, for as much as Caesar in his youth
loved Seruilia, the mother of Brutus, and as men supposed, used her more
familiarly than honesty required. Thus Caesar by omitting his old
affability, did incense his next fre^des and companions to sle him.

But now take heed what damage ensued Damage ensuing by lack of liberty of
speech.
to him by his decre, wherein he commanded, that no man should be so hardy to
approach or speak to him, One which knew of the conspiracy against him, and
by all lykelihode did participate therein, being meued either with love or
pity, or other wise his conscience remording against the destruction of so
noble a prince, considering that by Cesars decree he was prohybyted to have to
him any familiar access, so that he might not plainly detect the conspiracy,
he thereto vehemently meued, wrote in a byll all the form thereof, with the
means how it might be espied, and se^s he might find none other opportunity,
he delivered the byll to Caesar the same day that his death was prepared, as he
went toward the place, where the Senate was holden. But he being radicate in
pride, and neglecti^g to look on that bil, not esteming the person that
delivered it, which percha^ce was but of a mean hauiour, continued his way to
the Senate, where he inco^tine^t was slain by the said Brutus and many mo of
the Senate for that purpose appointed.

Who beholding the cause of the death of this most noble Caesar, unto whom in
eloquence, doctrine, martial prowess, and ge^tylnesse, no prince may be
compared, and the acceleration or haste to his confusyon, caused by his own
edict or decre, will not commend affability, and extolle liberalite of
speech? whereby only love is in the hearts of people perfectely kendled, all
fear excluded, and consequentely realms, dominions, and all other auctorities
consolydate and perpetually stablished. The sufferance of noble men to be
spoken unto, is not only to them an incomparable sur etie, but also a
confounder of repentance, ennemy to prudence, whereof is engendered this word,
Had I wist, which has benne ever of all wise men reproved.

On a time king Philip, father to the Jugement suspended through liberty of
speech. Plutarchus.
great Alexander, sittyng in judgment, and having before him a matter
against one of his soudiours, being over commen with watch, fell on a
slombre, and suddenly being awaked, immediately would have given a sentence
against the poor soldier. But he with a great voice and outcrie said? King
Philip, I appele. To whom wylt thou appele said the king? To the (said the
soldier) when thou art thoroughly awaked. with which answer the king
suspended his sentence, and more diligently examining the matter, found, the
soldier had wrong: which being sufficiently discussed, he gave judgment for
him, whom before he would have condemned.

Semblably happened by a pore woman, against whom the same king had given
judgment, but she as desperate, with a loud voice, cried, I appele, I appele.
To whom appelest thou said the king? I appeal, said she, from the, now
being drunk, to king Philyp the sobre. At which wordis, though they were
indiscreet and foolish, yet he not being moved to displesure, but gatherynge
to him his wits, examined the matter more seriously: whereby he fyndyng the
pore woman to susteyn wrongs, reuersed his judgment, and according to truth
and justice, gave to her that she demanded. Wherein he is of noble autours
commended, and put for an honorable example of affability.

The noble emperor Antonine, called Antonine philosophus. herodianus
the philosopher, was of such affability, as Herodiane writes, that to every
man that came to him, he gentilly delivered his hand. And would not permit,
that his guard should prohibyte any man to approach him.

The excellent emperor Augustus on a a time, in the presence of many men,
played on cimbales, or an other like instrumente. Augustus*
A poor man standing with other, and beholdynge Suetonius.
the emperor, said with a loud voice to his fellow, See thou not, how this
voluptuous lechour tempereth all the world with his finger? Which words the
emperor so wisely noted, without wrath or displeasure, that ever after,
during his life, he refrayned his hands from semblable lyghtnesse.

The good Antonine, emperor of Rome Antoninus Plus.
coming to supper to a mean gentylma^, beheld in the house certain pyllers
of a delicate stone, called porpheri, asked of the La^ppridius
good man, where he had bought those pillars. Who made to the emperor this
answer, Sir, when ye come into any other man's house, than your own, ever be
you both dome and defe. Which liberal taunte that most gentyl emperor took
in so good pert, that he oftentimes rehearsed that sentence to other, for a wise
and discrete counsel.

By these examples apperith now evidently what good comes of affabylitie or
suffera^ce of speech, what most pernicious danger always ensues to them, that
either do refuse counsel, or prohybyte liberty of speech, sens that in
liberty (as it has been proved) is most perfect suertie, according as it is
remembered by Plutarche, of Theopompus, king of Lacedemone, who being
demanded, how a realm might be best and most surely kept, If (said he)
the prince give to his friends liberty, to speak to him things that be
just, and neglects not the wrongs, that his subject susteyneth.

How noble a virtue placabilitie is. Cap. VI.
PLacabylitie is no little part of Benignity, and is proprely where a man is
by any occasyon meued to be angry, and not withstanding either by his own
reason ingenerate, or by counsaylle persuaded, omytteth to be revenged, and
often times receyuethe the transgressoure ones reconsyled, into more favor:
which undoubtedly is a virtue wonderfulle excellent. For as Tulli says, No
thing is Cice. off. 1.
more to be meruayled at, or that more becomes a man noble and honorable,
thanne mercy and placabilitie. The valewe thereof Ire or wrath.
is best known by the contrary, which is ire, called vulgarely wrath, a
vice most ugly, and farrest from humanity.

For who beholdynge a man in estymation of nobylitie and wisdom, by fury
changed into an horrible figure, his face infarced with rancour, his mouth
foul and imbosed, his eien wide staring, and sparkelynge like fire, not
speaking, but as a wild bulle, roringe and brayinge out words despytefull
and venomous, forgettyng his astate or condytion, forgetting learning, ye
forgetting all reason, will not have such a passion in extreme detestation?
Shall he not wysshe to be in such a man placabilitie? whereby only he should
be eftesoones restored to the form of a man, whereof he is by wrath
despoyled, as it is wondersly well described by Ouide in his craft of love.

Man to thy vysage it is convenient
Beastly fury shortly to aswage. Ouidius de erte ama^di

For peace is beautyfull to man only sent,
wrath to the beastis cruel and savage.
For i^ man the face swells, wha^ wrath is i^ rage
The blood becomes wanne, the eien fiery bright
Like Gorgon the mo^ster, appering in the night.
This Gorgon, that Quide speaks of, is supposed of poets to be a fury or
infernal wrath
monster, whose hears were all in the figure of adders, signifieng the
abundance of myschiefe, that is contained in wrath. Wherewith the great king
Alexander being Alexander in furye.
(as I might say) obsessed, did put to ve^geable death his dear friend
Clitus, his most prudent counsaylour Calisthenes, his most valiant captain
Philotas, with his father Parmenio, and diverse other. whereof he so soore after
repented, that oppressed with heaviness, had slain him self, had he not ben let
by his servants. Wherefore his furye and inordynate wrath, is a foul and
grievous blemishe to his glory, which without that vice, had incomparably
excelled all other princis.

Who abhoreth or hates not the violence The horrible cruelty of Sylla and
Marius.
or rage that was in Scylla and Marius? noble Romans, and in their time in
highest authority within the city, having the governance of the more part of
the world. Scilla, for the malignitie that he had toward Marius, caused the
heads of a thousand and seven hundred of the chief citisens of Rome to be
strike^ of, and brought to him fresh bledinge and quyck, and there on fed his
most cruel cyen, which to eat his mouth naturally abhorred. Marius with no
less rancour inflamed, beside a terrible slaughter, that he made of noble men,
leanyng to Scilla, also caused Caius Caesar (who had been both Consul and Censor,
two of the most honorable dignities in the city of Rome) to be violently
drawn to the sepulture of one Uarius, a simple and seditious person, and
there to be dishonestly slain. With like bestiall fury, he caused the heed of
Marcus Antonius, one of the most eloquente orators of all the Romans, to be
brought unto him, as he sat at dinner, and there took the heed all blody
between his hands, and with a malycious countenance reproched him of his
eloquence, wherewith he had not only defended many an innocent, but also the
hole publyke weal by his wise consultations singularly profyted.

O what calamity happened to that most noble city of Rome, by the
implacabilitie or wrath insaciable, of these two capytaynes, or (as I might
rather say) deuylles? the nobles between them exhauste, the chyualrye almooste
consumed, the laws oppressed, and lacking but little, that the publyke weal
had not ben extinct, and the city utterly desolate.

The indiscreet hastiness of themper or Claudius, caused him to be noted for
foolysshe. For he meued with wrath, caused diverse to be slain, for whom after
he demanded, and would send for to soupper. Not withstanding that he was
right well learned, and in diverse great affairs appeared to be wise. These
disco^modities do happen by implacable wrath, whereof there be examples
innumerable.

Contrariwise, the valiant king Pirrhus Pyrrhus.
herynge that two men at a feast, and in a great assembly and audience, had
openly spoken words, to his reproach, meued with dyspleasure, sent for the
persons: and when they were come, he demanded where they spoke of him any
such words? whereunto one of them answered, If (said he) the wine had not
the sooner failed us, all that which was told to your hyghnes, in comparison
of that which should have been spoken, had been but trifles. The wise prince
with that plain confession was mitigate, and his wrath converted to laughing.

Julius Caesar, after his victory against the Placabilitie.
great Pompei, who had married his daughter, sittyng in open judgment, one
Sergius Galba, one of the nobles of Rome, a friend unto Pompei, said unto him,
I was bounden for thy son in law Pompei in a great sum, when he was consul
the third time, wherefore I am now sewed. What shall I do? Shall I my self pay
it? by which words he moughte seem to reproach Caesar of the selling of
Pompeis goodis, in defraudynge his creditours. But Caesar than having a gentle
heart and a pacient was not meeued with any displeasure toward Galba: but
caused Pompeies dettes to be discharged.

we lack not of this virtue dimesticalle examples, I mean of our own kings
of England, but most specially one, which in mine oppinyon, is to be
compared with any, that ever was written of in any region or country.

The most renomed prince king Henry the fyste, late king of England, during
A good Judge, a good prince a good king
the life of his father, was noted to be fires and of wanton courage: it
happened, that one of his servants, whom he well favored, was for felony by him
committed, arrained at the kings benche: where of the prince being
advertised, and incensed by light persons about him, in furious rage came
hastily to the bar, where his servant stood as a prisoner, and commanded him
to be vngyued and set at liberty. whereat all men were abashed, reserved the
chief Justice, who humbly exhorted the prince, to be co^te^ted, that his
servant might be ordered, according to the aunciente laws of this realm: or
if he would have him saved from the rigor of the laws, that he should
opteyne, if he moughte, of the king his father, his gracious pardon, whereby no
law or justice should be derogate. With which answer the prince nothing
appeased, but rather more inflamed, endeavored him self to take away his
servant. The judge considering the perilous example, and inconvenience that
might thereby ensue, with a valyant spirit and courage, commanded the prince
upon his alegeance, to leave the prisoner, and depart his way, with which
commandment the prince being set all in a fury, all chafed and in a terrible
manner, came up to the place of judgment, me^ thinkyng that he would have slain
the judge, or have done to him some damage: but the judge sittynge still without
moui^g, declaring the majesty of the kings place of judgment, and with an
assured and bold countenance, had to the prince, these words following,

Sir, remember your self, I keep here the place of the king your sovereign
lord and father, to whom ye owe double obedience, wherefore eftesoones in his
name, I charge you desyste of your wylfulnes and unlawful enterprise, and from
hensforth give good example to those, which hereafter shall be your propre
subjects. And now, for your contempt and disobedience, goo you to the
prysone of the kings benche, whereunto I commytte you, and remain ye there
prisoner until the pleasure of the king your father be further known. with
which words being abashed, and also wondering at the meruaylous gravity of
that worshypfulle Sustyce, the noble prince layinge his weapon aparte, doing
reverence, departed, and went to the kings benche, as he was commanded.
whereat his servants disdaynynge, came and showed to the king all the hole
affair. Whereat he awhyles studyenge, after as a man all rauyshed with
gladness, holding his eien and hands up toward heaven, abraided, saying with
a loud voice, O merciful god, how much am I, above all other men, bound to
your infinite goodness, specially for that ye have given me a judge, who fears
not to minister justice, and also a son, who can suffer semblably, and obey
justice?

Now here a man may behold three persons, worthy excellent memory, First a
judge, who being a subject, feared not to execute justice on the eldest son of
his sovereign lord, and by the order of nature his successor. Also a prince,
and son and heir of the king, in the mids of his furye, more considered
his evil example, and the iuges constance in justice, than his own astate or
wylfull appetite. Thirdly, a noble king and wise father, who contrary to the
custom of pare^tes, rejoiced to se his son, and the heir of his crown, to
be for his bysobedyence, by his subject corrected. wherefore I conclude, that
nothing is more honorable, or to be desired in a price or noble man, than
placabilite. As contrary wise, nothing is so detestable or to be feared in
such one, as wrath and cruel malignitie.

That a governor ought to be merciful, and the diversity of mercy and vain
pity. Cap. VII.
MERCY IS and has been ever of such estimation with mankind, that not only
reason persuadeth, but also experience proves, that in whom mercy lacks,
and is not founden, in him all other virtues be drowned, and lose their just
commendation.

The vice called cruelty, which is contrary Cruelty*
to Mercy, is by good reason most odious of all other vices, in as much as
like a poison or contynuall pestylence, it distroyeth the generation of man.
Also likewise as norishyng meats and drinks in a sick body, do lose their
bounty and augmente the malady, semblably diverse vtues in a person cruel and
malicious, be not only obfuscate or hyd, but do minister occasion and
assistence to cruelty.

But now to speak of the inestimable p^ce and value of mercy, Let governors,
which know, that they have received their powar from above, reuolue in their
minds, in what peril they them self be in daily, if in god were not abundance
of mercy, but that as soon as they offend him grievously, he should immediately
stryke them with his most terrible dart of vengeance: All be it uneath any
hour passes, that men deserve not some punyshement.

The most noble emperors, which for their merits resceyued of the gentyls
divine honors, vanquyshed the great hartis of their mortal ennemies, in
showing mercy above men's expectation.

Julius Caesar, which in policy, eloquence, celeritie and prowess, excelled al
other capitaynes, in mercy only, surmounted him self, that is to say,
contrary to his own affectes and determynate purposes, he not only spared,
but also resceyued into tender familyaritie his sworn enmyes. wherefore if the
disdain of his own blood and alyance had not traytorously slain him, he had
reigned long and prosperously.

But among many other exaumples of mercy, whereof the hystoryes of Rome do
Seneca de clementia.
abound, there is one remembered by Seneca, which may be in the stead of a
great noumbre.

It was reported to the noble emperor Octauius Augustus, that Lucius Cinna,
Mercy she wid by Augustus until his enemy.
which was susters son to the great Po^pei, had imagined his death: Also that
Cinna was appointed to execute his feate, whiles the emperor was doing his
sacrifice. This report was made by one of the conspiratours, and therewith
diverse other things agreed: the old hostility between the houses of Po^pei
and Caesar, the wyld and seditious wit of Cinna, with the place and time,
where and when the emperor should be disfurnyshed of servants. No wonder
though the emperors mind were inquiete, being in so perilous a conflict,
considering on the one part, that if he should put to death Cinna, which came
of one of the most noble and ancient houses of Rome, he should ever live in
danger, onelas he should destroy all that noble family, and cause the
memory of them to be utterly exterminate: which might not be brought to
pass, without effusion of the bloudde of persons innumerable, and also peryle
of the subuercion of the empire, late pacified. On the other part, he
considered the imminente danger, that his person was in, wherefore nature
stered him to provide for his suertie: whereto he thought than to be none other
remedy, but the death of his aduersarye. To him being thus perplexed, came his
wife Liuia, the empress, who said unto him, Pleases it you sir to here a
woman's advise. Do you as physicians be wont to do, where their accustomed
remedies preue not, they assaye the contrary. By severity ye have hitherto
nothing profited: prove therefore now, what mercy may aduaile you. Forgive
Cinna, he is taken with the maynure, and may not now indomage you, profit he
may much to the increase of your renoume and perpetual glory. The emperor
reioysed to him self, that Cinna had found such an aduocatrice, and giving
her thanks, caused his counsaylours, which he had sent for, to be
countermaunded, and calling to him Cinna only, commanded the chaumbre to be
avoided, and an other chair to be set for Cinna, and that done, he said in
this manner to him, I desire of the this one thing, that whiles I speak, thou
wylt not let or disturb me: or in the mids of my words make any exclamation.

What time Cinna, I found the in the host of mine ennemies, all though thou
were not by any occasyon made mine enemy, but by succession from thyn
auncetors borne mine enemy, I not only saved the, but also gave unto the all
thyn inheritance: And at this day thou art so prosperous and rich, that they,
which had with me vyctorie, do envy the, that were vanquyshed. Thou
askeddest of me a spiritual promotion, and forth with I gave it the, before
many other, whose parents had served me in wars. And for that I have done
so much for the, thou haste now pourposed to slay me. At that word, when
Cinna cried out, saying, that such madness was far from his mind. Cinna
(said the emperor) thou kepeste not promise, it was couenanted, that thou
should not interrupte me. I say thou preparest to kill me. And thereto the
emperor named his companyons, the place, time, and order of all the
conspiracy, and also to whom the sword was committed. And when he perceived him
astonyed, holding than his peace, not for because that he so promised, but
that his conscience him meued. For what intent dyddeste thou thus, (said
Augustus) because thou would be Emperor? In good faith the publyke weal is
in an evil astare, if nothing lettethe the to raygne, but I oonely. Thou
canste not maintain or defend thine own house. It is not long sens that
thou in a pryuate judgment, were ouercomen of a poor man but laate
infraunchysed. Therefore thou may nothing do lyghtlyer than plede against
the emperor. Say now, do I alone let the of thy purpose? supposist thou that
Paul, Fabius Maximus, the Cosses, and Seruiliis, aunciente houses of Rome, and
such a sort of noble men (not they which have vain and glorious names, but
such as for their merits be adorned with their propre images) will suffer
the? Finally said the emperor (after that he had talked with him by the space
of two hours) I give to the thy life Cinna the second time: first being mine
ennemy, now a traitor and murderer of thy souerain lord, whom thou ought
to love as thy father. How from this day let amity between us two begin,
and let us both contend, whether I with a better heart have given to the thy
life, or that thou can more genrilly recompense my kyndnes.

Sone after Augustus gave to Cinna the dignity of consul undesired, blaming
him, that he durst not ask it, whereby he had him most assured and loyal.
And Cinna afterward dieng, gave to the emperor al his goods and possessions.
And never after was Augustus in danger of any treasone.

O what sufficient praise may be given to this most noble and prudente
emperor, that in a chamber aloone, without men, ordenance, or weapon, and
perchance without harnes, within the space of.ii. hours, with words well
couched, tempered with majesty, not only vainquished and subdued one mortal
enemy, which by a malignitie engendered of a domestical hatred, had
determined to slay him, but by the same feate excluded out of the hole city of
Rome, all dyspleasure and rancour toward him, so that there was not left any
occasion, whereof might proceed any little suspicion of treasonne, which
other wise could not have happened without slaughter of people innumerable.

Also the empress Liuia, may not of A wisewoman.
right be forgoten, which ministered to her lord that noble counsel in such
a perplexity, whereby he saved both him self and his people. Suppose ye that
all the Scnatours of Rome, and counsaylours of the emperor, which were little
fewer than a thousand, could have better aduysed him? This history therefore
is no less to be remembered of women than of princis, taking thereby comfort
to persuade swetely their housebandes to mercy and pacyence, to which
counsel only, they should be admytted and have fre liberty. But I shall
forbere to speak more of Liuia now, for as much as I purpose to make a book
only for ladies, where in her laud shall be more amplye expressed. But to
resort now to mercy.

Suerly nothing more entierly and fastly mercy and gentylnes.
joins the hearts of subjects to their prince or soueraygne, than mercy and
gentilnes. For Seneca says, A te^perate dread represseth high and sturdy
minds: fear frequente and sharp, set forth with extremity, stereth men
to presumption and hardynes, and constrayneth them to experimente all things.
He that hastily punissheth, often times sone repents. And who that over much
corrects, observes none equity. And if ye ask me what mercy is, it is a
temperaunce of the mind of him, that has power to be avenged, and it is
called in latin Clementia, and is always joined with reason. For he that for
every lyttel occasion is meued with compassion, and beholdynge a man punysshed
condygnely for his offense, lamenteth or waylethe, is called pitiouse, which is
a syckenesse of the mind, wherewith at this day the more part of men be
diseased. And yet is the sikenes much wars by adding to one word, calling it
Uayne pity.

Some man perchance will demand of me, what is Uaine pite? To that I will
answer Uayn pity
in a description of daily experience.

Behold what an infynite nombre of english men and women, at this present
time, wander in all places throughout this realm, as beastis brute and savage
abandonyng al occupation, service, and honesty. How many semely personagis, by
outrage in riote, gaminge, and excess of apparaile, be induced to theft and
robry, and sometime to murder, to the inquietatio^ of good men, and finally to
their own destruction?

How consider semblably, what noble statutes, ordinances, and acts of
counsayl, from time to time have been excogitate, and by grave study and mature
consultation, en acted and decreed, as well for due punysshemente of the said
idle persons and vacabundes, as also for the suppression of unlawful games,
and reducynge apparayle to conuenyente moderation and temperance? How many
proclamations there of have be^ dyuulgate, and not obeyed? How many commyssions
directed, and not executed? (Mark well here, that dissobedient subjects, and
negligent governors, do frustrate good laws) A man hering, that his neighbor
is slain or robbed, forth with hates the offendour, and abhors his
enormytie, thinkinge him worthy to be punyshed, according to the laws. Yet
when he beholds the transgressour, a semely personage, also to be his
servant, acqueyntance, or a gentle man borne (I omytte now to speak of any
other corrupty on) he forth with changes his opinion, and prefers the
offenders condition or personage, before the example of justice, condempninge
a good and necessary law, for to excuse an offense pernycious and dampnable,
ye and this is not only done by the vulgar or common people, but much
rather by them, which have authority to them committed concerning the
effectual execution of laws. They behold at their eye the continual
increase of vacabundes, in to infynite nombres, the obstinate resistance of
them that daily do transgress the laws made against games, and apparayle,
which be the straight paths to robry, and semblable mischefe. Yet if any one
comissioner, meued with zele to his country, according to his duty do
execute duly, and freque^tly the law or good ordinance, wherein is any sharp
punisshmente, some of his companyons thereat reboyleth, infamynge him to be a man without charytie, calling him secretly a pyke thank, or ambicious of
glory, and by such manner of obloquie, seek means to bring him in to the
hatered of people. And this may well be called vain pytie, wherein is contained
neither justice nor yet commendable charytie, but rather thereby ensues
negligence, contempt, dissobedyence, and finally all myschiefe and incurable
misery.

If this syckenesse had reigned among the old Romans, suppose ye that the
astate of their publyke weal had six hundred years increased, and two hundred
years continued in one excellent astate and wonderful majesty? Or think ye
that the same Romans might so have ordered many greatte countries, with fewer
mynisters of justice, than be now in one shire of England?

But of that matter, and also of rigor and equalite of punishment. I will
traite more amply in a place more propise for that purpose. And here I conclude
to write any more at this time of mercy.

The pryncipall parts of humanity. Cap. VIII.
THe nature and condition of man, wherein he is less than god almighty, and
excellynge not withstanding al other creatures in earth, is called humanity:
which is a general name to those virtues, in whom seems to be a mutual
concord and love, in the nature of man. And al though there be many of the
said virtues, yet ^e there three pryncipall, by whom humanity is chiefly
compact, Benevolence, Beneficence, and Liberality, which makes up the said
principal virtue called Benignity or gentylnes.

Benevolence, if it do extend to a hole countreye or city, is proprely
called charity, Charity.
and some time zele: and if it concern one person, than is it called
Benevolence. And if it be very fervent and to one singular person, than may it
be named love or amity. Benevolence. Love. Amity.
Of that virtuous disposition proceeds an act, whereby some thing is
complied, which is profitable and good to him that receives it. And that
virtue, if it be in operation, or (as I might say) endeavor, is called than
Beneficence: and the deed (vulgarly named a good turn) may be called a
benefytte. If it be in money, or other thing that has substance, it is than
Liberalite
called Liberality, which is not always a virtue as Beneficence is: for in
well doing (which is the right interpretation of Beneficence) can be no vice
included. But Liberality, Seneca de benef.
though it proceed of a free and gentle heart, willing to do some thing
thankeful, yet may it tra^sgresse the bonds of virtue, either in excessyue
rewards, or expenses, orels employenge treasour, promotion, or other
substance on perersons unworthy, or on things inconvenient, and of small
importance. Al be it some think such manner of erogation not to be worthy the
name of Liberality.

Aristotle defines a liberal man, which A liberal man. Ethic. 2.
does erogate, according to the rate of his substance, and as opportunity
happens. He says also in the same place, that Liberalytie is not in the
multitude or qua^tite of that which is given, but in the habit or facion, of
the gyuer. For he gives according to his ability. Neither Tulli approves
it to be Liberality, wherein is any myxture of avarice or rapine: for it is not
properly Liberality, to exact iniustely, or by violence or craft to take
goods from particular per sons, and distribute them in a multitude: or to take
from many iniustly, and enriche therewith on person or few. For as the same
autour says, the last precept concerning benefytes or rewards is, to take
good head, that he contend not against equity, ne that he uphold none
injury.

Now will I proceed seriously and in a due form to speak more pticulerly of
these three virtues. Not withstanding there is such affinity between
beneficence and liberality, being always a virtue, that they tend to one
conclusion or purpose, that is to say, with a free and glad will to give to a
another that thing, which he before lacked.

Of what excellence benevolence is. Cap. ix.
VUhan I remember, what incomparable goodness has ever proceeded of this virtue
BENEVOLENCE, mercyfulle god what sweet flauour feel I, persynge my spyrytes,
whereof both my soul and body, to my thinking do conceive such recreation,
that it seems me to be in a paradise, or other semblable place of incomparable
delites and pleasures.

First I behold the dygnitie of that virtue, considering that god is thereby
chiefly known and honored, both of angel and man. As contrary wise, the
devil is hated and reproved both of god and man for his malice, which vice is
contrarious and repugnant to Benevolence. Wherefore without Benevolence may be
no god. For god is all goodness, al charity, al love, which holy be
comprehended in the said word Benevolence.

Now let us see, where any other virtue may be equal in dignity with this
virtue Benevolence: or if any virtue remains, where this is excluded? For
what comes of Prudence, where lacks Benevolence? but disceite, rauine,
avarice, and tyrranny. What of Fortitude? but beastely cruelty, oppression,
and effusion of blood. What justice may there be without benevolence? sens the
first or chief portion of justice (as Tulli says) is to indomage no man,
onles thou be wronfully vexed. And what is the cause hereof, but equal and
entier love, which being removed or cessinge, who endeavors not him self to
take from a another al thing that he coueteth, or for every thing that
discontenteth him, would not forthwith be avenged: whereby he confou^deth the
virtue called Temperance, which is the moderatrice as well of al motions of the
mind, called affectes, as of all acts procedynge of man.

Here it sufficiently appears (as I suppose) of what estymatiom benevolence
is. Now will I endeavor me to recreate the spirits of the dylygente reder,
with some delectable hystories, wherein is any noble remembrance of this virtue
Benevolence, that the worthynes thereof may appiere in a more plain
declaration: For in every discipline, exaumple is the best instructour. But
first I will aduertyse the reder, that I will now write of Benevolence only,
which is most universal, wherein is equalytie without syngular affection or
acceptaunce of personages.

And here it is to be noted, that if a governor That Justice never lack
benevolence.
of a publyke weal, judge, or any other ministre of justice, do give sentence
against on e that has transgressed the laws, or punissheth him according to
the quality of his trespass: Benevolence thereby is not any thing peryshed: for
the condempnation or punishment, is either to reduce him that erreth into the
train of virtue, or to preserve a multitude from damage, by putting men in
fcare, that be prone to offend, dreding the sharp correction, that they
behold a another to suffer. And that manner of seuerytie is touched by the
prophet David in the fourth psalm, saying in this wise, Be you angry, and
look that you sin not. And Tulli says, in his first book of Officis: It is
to be wysshed, that Sharpnes of justice.
they, which in the publyke weal have any authority, may be like to the
laws, which in correctynge be lad only by equity, and not by wrath or
dyspleasure

And in that manner, when Chore, Datha^, and Abiro^, moved a sedition against
Moses, he prayed god, that the earth might open and swalowe them, consyderyng
that the fury of the people might not be by aany other menes assuaged, ne they
kept in due rule or obedience.

Helias, the holy prophet of god, did Helias.
his own hands put to death the priests of the Idol Baal, yet cessed he not
with fasting, prayinge, long and tedious pilgrimages, to pacify the
dyspleasure that god took against the people of Israel. But to return to
benevolence.

Moses, be ing highly enterteined with Pharao king of Aegipte, and so much
in his favor, by the means of the kings sister, that (as Josephus says) he
being made captain of a huge army, was sent by Pharao against the
Ethiopians or Mores, where he made such exployture, that he not only achieved
his entreprise, but alsoo had given unto him, for his prowess, the kings
daughter of Ethiopia to be his wife, with great abundance of riches. And also
for his endeavor, prowess, and wisdom, was much esteemed by Pharao and the
nobles of Aegypte, so that he moughte have lived there continually in much
honor and wealth, if he would have preferred his singular aduayle before the
universal weal of his own kindred or family: But he inflamed with feruente
benevolence or zele toward them, to redeem them out of their miserable
bondage, chase rather to be in the dangerous indignation of Pharao, to
commytte his person to the chaungeable myrides of a multitude, and they most
unstable, to pass great and long iourneyes through deserts, replenished
with wild beasts and venomous serpents, to suffer exstreme hunger and
thyrste, lacking often time not only vitayle, but also fresshe water to
drink: tha^ to be in a palayce of Pharao, where he should have been satisfied
with honor, richesse, and ease, and all other things pleasant.

Who that redeth the book of Exodi, shall find the charity of this man
wonderful. For when almighty god, being grievously meued with the children of
Israel, for their ingratitude, for as much as they often times murmured
against him, and uneath moughte be kept by Moses from idolatri, he said to
Moses, That he would destroy them utterly, and make him ruler of a much
greatter and better people. But Moses brenninge in a meruaylous charity
toward them, said unto god, This people good lord have most greuouslye
sinned, yet either forgive them this trespass, or if ye do not, stryke me clean
out of the book that he wrate. And diverse other times he importunatelye cried
to god for the saufe guard of them, notwithstanding that many times they
concluded to have slain him, if he had not been by his wisdom, and specially
by the power of god, preserved.

But peradventure some, which seek for stertynge holes to maynteyne their
vices, will obiecte, saying, that Moses was a holy prophet, and a person
elect by predestination, to deliver the children of Israel out of captivity,
which he could not have done, if he had not ben of such pacyence and
charity. Therefore let us se what examples of semblable benevolence we can
find among the gentyles, in whom was no virtue inspired, but that only which
natural reason induced.

When a furious and wylfull young man, in a sedicio^, had stricken out one of
the eyes Patience.
of king Licurgus, the people would have slain him, and the king would not
suffer them, but had him home to his house, and by such wise means corrected
the young manne, that at the last he brought him to good manners and wisdom.

Also the same Licurge, to thentent that theffect of his benevolence, toward
the common weal of his country might persist and continue, and that his
excellent laws being stablyshed, should never be alterate, he dydlette swear
all his people, that they should change no part of his laws, until he were
returned, saynynge to them, that he would go to Delphos, where Apollo was
chiefly hououred, to consult with that god, what seemed to him to be added to,
or minished of those laws, which also he feyned to have received of the said
Apollo. But finally he went into the Isle of Crete, where he continued and
dyed, commaundynge at his death, that his bones should be cast in to the sea,
least if they were brought to Lacedemonia his countreye, the people should
think them self of their oath and promise dyscharged.

Semblable love Codrus, the last king of Codrus king of Athenes.
Athenes, had to his country. For where the people called Doors (whom some
think to be now Sicilians) would aduenge their old grudges again the
Atheniensis, they demanded of some of their goddis, what Charity.
success should happen, if they made any wars. Unto whom answer was made,
that if they slew not the king of Atheniensis, they should than have the
victory. When they came to the field, strait commandment was given among
them, that above all thing, they should have good awayte of the king of
Athenes, which at that time was Codrus. But he before knowing the answer
made to the Doors, and what commandment was given to the army, did put of
his princely habit or robes, and in apparayle al ragged and rent, carienge on
his neck a bundel of twigs, entered into the host of his enemies, and was
slain in the prease by a soul diour, whom he wounded with a hoke purposely.
But when it was perceived and known to be the corpse of king Codrus, the Doors
al dismayed departed from the field, without proferynge battaylle. And in this
wise the Athenie^sis, by the virtue of their most beneuolent king, who for
the saulfgarde of his country, willyngly dyed, were clearly delivered from
battle.

O noble Codrus, how worthy had you been (if god had been pleased) to have
aboden the reparation of mankind, that in the habit and religion of a
christen prince, ye moughte have showed your wonderful benevolence and courage
for the saulfe guard of christen men, and to the noble exaumple of other
princis?

CVRTIVS, a noble knight of the Curtius.
Romans, had no less love to his cou^treye than Codrus. For soon after
the beginning of the City, there happened to be a great earth quauc, and after
there remained a greatte dell or pytto without botume, which to behold, was
horrible and lothesome, and out of it proceeded such a dampe or air, that
corrupted all the city with pestylence. Wherefore whannej they had counsaylled
with such idols as they than worshypped, answer was made, that the earth
should not close, until there were thrown into it the most precious thing
in the city. which answer received, there was thrown in rich jewels of
gold and precious stone: but all auayled not. At the last Curtius, being a
young and goodly gentle man, considering, that no riches throwhen in,
profyted, finally coniected, that the life of man was above all things most
precious, to the^tent the residue of the people might be saved by his only
death, he armed him self at all points, and sitting on a courser, with his
sword in his hand ready drawn, with a valiant and fyerce courage enforsed his
horse to lepe into the dell or pytte, and forth with it joined to gether and
closed, leuinge only a sign where the pytte was, which long after was called
Curtius lake.

I pass over the two Decius, Marcus Regulus, and many other princis and noble
men, that for the weal of their country died willingly. And now will I speak
of such as in any other form have declared their benevolence.

Xenopho^ the condisciple of Plato, wrate The power of benevolence.
the life of Cirus king of Persya most elegantly, wherein he expresses the
figure of an excellent governor or captain: he shows there, that Cresus
king of Lidia, whom Cyrus had taken prisoner, subdued his countray, and
possessed his treasure, said on a time to Cyrus, when he beheld his
liberality, That such largenes as he used, should bring him in poverty,
where if he lysted, he might accumulate up treasure incomparable. Than Cyrus
demanded of Cresus, what treasure suppose ye should I now have, if during the
time of my reign, I would have gadred and kept money, as ye exhort me to do?
Than Cresus named a great sum. Well said Cyrus, send ye some man, whom ye
best trust, with Histaspa my servant. And thou Histaspa, go about to my
friends, and show them that I lack gold toward a certain busynes, wherefore
I will, they send me as much as they can, and that they put it in writing,
and send it sealed by the servant of Cresus. In the same wise Cyrus wrate in a
letter, and also that they should receive Histaspa as his counsaylour and
friend, and sent it by him. Histaspa, after that he had done the message of
Cyrus, and was returned with the servant of Cres9, who brought letters from
Cyrus friends, he said to Cyrus, O sir, from hensforth look that ye ye take me
for a man of great substance. For I am hyghely rewarded with many great
gifts for bringing your letters. Than Cyrus at the hour appointed, lad with
him king Cresus into his camp, saying to him, now behold here is our
treasure: accounte if ye can, how much money is ready for me, if I have need
of any to occupy. When Cresus beheld, and reckened the innumerable treasure,
which in sundry parts were laid about the pauilyon of Cyrus, he found much
more than he said to Cirus, that he should have in his tresure, if he him self
had gadred and kept it. And when al appeared sufficiently, Cirus tha^ said, How
think you Cresus, have I not tresure? And ye cou^sailed me, that I should gather
and keep money, by occasyon whereof I should be envied and hated of my people.
And more over put my trust to servants hired to have rule thereof. But I do
all otherwise, for in making my friends rich, I take them all for my tresure,
and have them more sure and trusty kepers, both of me and my substance, than I
should do those, whom I must trust only for their wages.

Lord god, what a notable history is this, and worthy to be graven in tables
of gold? consyderyng the virtue and power of benevolence therein expressed. For
the beneuolente mind of a governor, not only byndeth the hearts of the people
unto him, with the chain of love, more stronger than any materyal bonds, but
also gardeth more saufely his person, thanne any toure or garyson.

The eloquent Tulli says in his offycis, Offic. 2.
A lyberall heart is cause of benevolence, although perchance power sometime
lacks. Contrary wise, he says, They that desire to be feared, needs must
they dread them, of whom they be feared.

Also Plini the younger says, He that is In panegyrico.
not enuironned with charity, in vain is he guarded with terror, sens armure
with armure is stered. Which is ratyfyed by the most grave philosopher
Seneke, in his De cleme^tia.
book of mercy, that he wrate to NERO, where he says, He is much deceived,
that thinks a man to be sure, where nothing from him can be saulfe. For with
mutualle assurance, surety is opteyned.

Antoninus Pius, emperor of Rome, so Antoninus Pius.
much tendered benevolence of his people, that when a great nombre had conspired
treason against him, the senate being therewith greuousely meued, endeavored
them to punish the said conspiratours, but the emperor caused the
examination to cesse, saying, It should not need to seek to busily for them
that intended such mischief, lest if they found many, he should know, that
many hated him. Also when the people (for as much as on a time they lacked
corn in their graynardes, would have slain him with stoones) rather than he
would have the sedytious persons to be punysshed, in his own person declared
to them the occasyon of the scarsytie, wherewith they being pacifyed, every
man held him contented.

I had almooste forgotten a notable and King. Philip.
worthy remembrance of king Philyp, father to great king Alexander. It was on
a time to him reported, that one of his capitaynes had menacinge words
towardis him: whereby it seemed he intended sum damage toward his person.
Wherefore his counsel aduysed him, to have good awayte of the said captain,
and that he were put vnderwarde. To whom the king answered, If any part of my
body were sick or else sore, whether should I therefore cut it from the residue,
and cast it from me, or else endeavor my self, that it might be healed? And
than he called for the said capytain, and so entertained him with familia ritie
and bounteous rewards, that ever after he had him more assured and loyal,
than ever he was.

Agesilaus, king of Lacedemonia, to Agesilaus
him that demanded, how a king might most surely govern his realm,
without soldiers or a guard to his person, answered, If he reigned over his
people, as a father does over his children.

The city of Athenes, from whense issued The.xxx. tyra^tes of Athenes.
all excellent doctrine and wisdom, during the time that it was governed by
those persons, unto who^ the people might have a familiar access, and boldly
expou^de their grefes and damages, prospered meruaylously, and duringe a long
season, reigned in honor and weal. Afterward the Lacedemons, by the
mutabilite of fortune, vanquyshed them in battle, and committed the city of
Athenes, to the keeping of xxx. of their own capitaynes, which were for their
pride and avarice called tyrants. But now se how little surety is in great
puissaunce lacking be neuolence.
nombre or strength, where lackith benevolence. These.xxx. tyrants were
contynually enuyronned with sundry garrysons of armed men, which was a
terryble visage, to people that before lived under the obedience of their laws
only. Finally the Athenienses, by fear being put from their accustomed
access to their governors to require justice, and therewith being fatigate as
men oppressed with contynuall injury, took to them a desperate courage, and
in conclusyon expelled out of the city all the said tyra^tes, and reduced it
unto his pristinate governance.

What misery was in the life of Dyonise Dionyse king of Sicile.
the tyrant of Cicile? who knowing, that his people desired his destruction,
for his rauin and cruelty, would not be of any man shaven, but first caused
his own daughters to clyppe his bear de: And afterward also mystrustyng them,
he him self with a bre^nynge cole seared the hears of his beard: and yet
finally was distroyed.

In like wretchedness was one Alexander, prince of a city called Pherea, for
he Alexander Phereus.
having an excellent fair wife, not only excluded al men from her company,
but also as often as he would lie with her, certain persons should go before
him with torches, and he following with his swerd ready drawn, would therewith
enserche the bed, coffers, and all other places of his chaumbre, lest any
manne should be there hid, to the intent to slay him. And that not
withstanding, by the procuremente of his said wife (who at the last fatygate
with his most folyshe ialousy, converted her love into hatred) he was slain
by his own subjects.

NOW DOES IT appear, that this reverend virtue BENEVOLENCE, is of all men,
most specially of governors and men of honor, incomparably before other to
be enbraced. The treasure of a gentylle countenance, sweet aunsweres, aid in
ad uersitie, not with money only, but also with study and dylygent endeavor,
can never be wasted, ne the love of good people thereby acquired, can be from
their hearts in any wise separate. And here I make an end to speak any more
at this time of Benevolence.

Of beneficence and liberality. Cap. x.
ALthough philosophers, in the description of virtues, have divised to set
them as it were in degrees, having respect to the quality and condition of
the person, which is with them adourned, as applieng Magnificence to the
substance and astate of princis, and to private persons Beneficence and
Liberality: yet Aristotel. Ethic. 1.
ben not these in any part defalcate of their co^digne praises. For if virtue
be an election annexid unto our nature, and consists in a Virtue what it is.
mean, which is determined by reason, and that mean is the very mids of two
things vycious, the one in surplusage, the other in lack: than needs must
Beneficence and Liberality be ^apitall virtues, and Magnificence proceeds
from them, approaching to the extreme parts. And may be turned into vice, if he
lack the brydell of reason. But Beneficence can by no means be vicious,
Benefice^ce
and retain still his name. Semblably Liberality (as Aristotle says) is a
mesure, Liberalite
as well in gyuynge as in taking of money and goods. And he is only
lyberall, which distributeth according to his Considerations iu gyuynge.
substance, and where it is expedient. There fore he ought to consider, to whom
he should give, how much, and when. For lyberalitie takes his name of the
substance of the person, from whom it proceeds: for it rests not in the
quantity or qualite of thin ges that be given, but in the natural disposition
of the gyuer.

The great Alexander on a time after he had vanquyshed Darius in battle, one
Alexand.
of his soldiers brought unto him the heed of an ennemy that he had slain,
which the king thankefully, and with sweet countenance received, and taking a
cup of gold filled with good wine, said unto the sowldyour, In old time a
cup of gold was the reward of such virtue, as thou haste showed, which
semblablye thou shall receive. But when the souldior for shamefastnes refused
the cup, Alexander added unto it these words, The custom was to give the
cup empty, but Alexander gives it to the fulle of wine, with good handsell.

Wherewith he expressed his lyberal heart, and as much comforted the soldier,
as if he had given to him a great city.

More over, he that is lyberalle, neglects not his substance or goods, ne
gives Liberal.
it to all men, but uses it so, as he may contynually help therewith other,
and gives when, and where, and on whom it ought to be employed. Therefore it
may be said, that he uses every thing best, that exercyseth virtue, which
is to the thing most appropried. For richesse is of the nombre of things, that
may be either good or yuell, which is in the arbytremente of the gyuer. And
for that cause Lyberalitie and Benefycence be of such affinity, that the one
may never from the other be separate. For the employment of money is not
Lyberalitie, if it be not for a good end or purpose.

The noble emperors Antonine and Alexander Seuerus, gave of the revenues of
Antonyne and liberal Alexander emperors.
the empire inumerable substance, to the reedifieng of cities and common
houses decayed for age, or by earth quaues subvted, wherein they practiced
Liberalite and also Benefice^ce.

But Tyberius, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, and other semblable monsters,
which Prodigalite.
exhausted and consumed infinite treasures in bordell houses, and places, where
abominations were used, also in enryching slaves, concubynes, and baudes, were
not named lyberall, but suffren therefore perpetual reproach of writars, being
called deuourers and wasters of treasure. wherefore in as much as Lyberalitie
holly rests in the gyuynge of money, it sometime colors a vice: But
Beneficence is never taken but in the better part, and (as Tullie says) is
taken out of virtue, where Liberality comes out of the coffer.

Also where a man distributeth his substance to many persons, the less
Liberality shall he use to other: so with bounteousnes, bounty is minyshed.
Only they that be called beneficial, and do use the virtue of Beneficence,
which consists in cou^saylynge, and helping other with any assistence in
time of need, shall always find coadiutours and supportours of their gentle
courage. And douteles, that manner of gen tylnes, that consists in labor,
study, and diligence, is more commendable, and exte^deth further, and also may
more profit persons, than that which rests in rewards and expenses. But to
return to liberality.

What greater folly may be, tha^ that thing Prodigality.
that a man most gladly does, to endeavor him with all study, that it may no
longer be done? wherefore Tulli calls them prodigalle, that in inordynate
feasts and bankettes, vain plays, and huntynges, do spend all their
substance, and in those things, whereof they shall leave but a short or no
remembrance. Wherefore to resort to the counsaylle of Arystotle before
expressed, Lyberalytie, in a noble manne specially, is commended, all though it
somewhat excede the terms of measure. And if it be well and duly employed, it
acquireth perpetualle honor to the gyuer, and much fruit and syngular
commodity thereby increases. For where honest and virtuous personages be
advanced, and well rewarded, it stereth the courages of men, which have any
spark of virtue, to increase therein with all their force and endeavor.
wherefore next to the helping and relieuyng of a communaltie, the great part
of Lyberalitie is to be employed on men of virtue and good qualities, wherein is
required to be a good election and judge meant, that for hope of reward or
favor, under the cloak of virtue, be not hyd the most mortal poison of
flattery.

The true description of amity or frendeshyp. Cap. XI.
I HAVE AL ready treated of Beneuole^ce and Beneficence generally. But for as
much as frendshyp, called in latin AMICITIA, comprehe^deth both those virtues
more specially, and in an higher degree, and is now so infrequente or strauuge
among mortal men, by the tyranny of couetyse or ambition, which have long
reigned, and yet do, that amity may now vnethe be known, or found
throughoute the world, by them that seek for her as dilygently, as a maiden
would seek for a small silver pynne in a great chaumber, strawed with white
rushes. I will therefore borow so much of the gentle reder, though he be nigh
weary of this long matter, barram of eloquence and pleasant sentence, and
declare somewhat by the way, of very and true frendshyp. which perchance
may be an allectiue to good men to seek for their semblable, on whom they may
practice amity. For as Tulli says, Nothing is more to be loved, or to be
joined together, than simylytude Ci. off. i.
of good manners or virtues: wherein be the same or se^blable studies, the same
wylles or desires: in them it happens, that one in an other as much delyteth as
in him self. But now let us enserch what frendshyp or amity is. Ethi. vi.


Aristotle says, Frendeshyp is a virtue, or joins with virtue. which is
affirmed Tulli de amicitia.
by Tulli, saying, Frendeshyppe can not be without virtue, ne but in good men
only. Who be good men, he after declares, to be those persons, which so do
bear them selves, and in such wise do live, that their faith, surety,
equality, and lyberalitie, be sufficiently proved. Ne that there is in them
any couetyse, wylfulnesse, or folehardynes, and that in them is great
stabilitie or constance: them suppose I (as they be taken) to be called good
men, which do follow (as much as men may) nature the chief capytayne or
guide of man's life More over, the same Tulli defyneth frendshyppe in this
manner, saying, It is noone other thing, but a perfect consent of al things
appertaining as well to god as to man, with Benevolence and Charity. And that
he knows nothing given of god, except sapience, to man more commodious.
which definition is excellent and very true. For in god and all thing that
comes of god, nothing is of more greatter estimation, than love, called in
latin AMOR, whereof AMICITIA comes, named in english frendshyppe or amity:
the which taken away from the life of man, no house shall abide standing, no
fyelde shall be in Culture. And that is lightly perceived, if a man do
remember, what comes of dissension and dyscorde, finally he seems to take
the son from the world, that takes frendshyppe from man's life.

Sens frendshyp can not be but in good men, ne may not be without virtue, we
may be assured, that thereof none evil may proceed, or therewith any yuel thing
may participate. Wherefore in as much as it may be but in a few persons
(good men being in a small nombre) And also it is rare and seldom, as all
virtues be communely, I will declare after the opynion of philosophers, and
partly by commune experience, who among good men be of nature most apt to
frendshippe.

Between all men that be good, can not always be amity, but it also requires,
that they be of semblable or much like manners or study, and specially of
manners. For Gra uitie and Affability, be every of them laudable qualities. So
be Severity and Placabilitie. Also Magnificence and Liberalite, be noble
virtues: and yet Frugalitie, which is a sobrenesse or moderation in living,
is, and that for good cause of all wise men extolled. Yet where these virtues
and qualities be seperately in sundry persons assembled, may well be perfect
concord, but frendeshyp is there seldom or never. For that, which the one for
a virtue imbraceth, the other co^temneth, or at the least neglects, wherefore
it seems, that it, wherein the one deliteth, is repugnant to the others
nature: And where is any repugnaunce, may be none amity, sens frendeshyp is an
entier consent of wylles and desires. Therefore it is seldom seen, that
frendeshyp is between these persons, A man sturdy of opinion inflexible, and of
sour countenance and speech, with him that is tractable, and with reason
persuaded, and of sweet countenance and entertaynment. Also between him, which
is eleuate in authority, and a another of a very base astate or degree, ye and
if they be both in an equal dignity, if they be desirous to clyme: as they do
ascend, so frendshyp for the more part decays. For as Tulli says, in his
first book of offices, what thing so ever it be, in the which many can not
excelle, or have therein superiorytie, therein often times is such a
contention, that it is a thing of all other most difficile, to keep among
them good or virtuous company: that is as much to say, as to retain among
them frendshyp and amity. And it is oftentimes seen, that diverse, which before
they came in autorite, were of good and virtuous condicio^s, being in their
prosperity were utterly changed, and dispisyng their old friends, set all
their study and pleasure on their new acquaintance. Wherein men shall perceive
to be a wonderful blyndnes, or (as I might say) a madness, if they note
diligentely all that I shall hereafter write of frendeshyp. But now to resort
to speak of them, in whom frenshyp is most frequente, and they also thereto be
most aptely disposed.

Undoutedly it be specially they, which be wise, and of nature inclyned to
Beneficence, Liberality, and Constance. For by wisdom is marked and
substancially decerned the words, acts, and demeanure of all men, between
whom happens to be any entercours or familiarity, whereby is engendered a
favor or disposition of love. Beneficence, that is to say, mutually putting
to their study and help in necessary affairs, induces love. They that be
lyberall, do withholde or hyde nothing from them, whom they love, whereby love
increseth. And in them that be constant is never mystruste or suspicion, nor
any surmyse or yuelle report can with draw them from their affection. And
hereby frendeshyppe is made perpetual and stable. But if similitude of study
or learning be joined unto the said virtues, friendship much rather happens,
and the mutual enteruewe and conversation is much more pleasant, specially
if the studies have in them any delectable affection or motion. For where they
be to serious, or full of contention, frendeship is oftentimes assaulted,
whereby it is often in peril. Where the study is elegant, and the matter
illecebrous, that is to say sweet to the reder, the course whereof is rather
gentle persuasion and quick reasonynges, than over subtle argument, or
litigious controuersyes: there also it happens, that the students do delight
one in a another, and be without envy or malycyous contention.

Now let us try out, what is that frendshyppe, that we suppose to be in good
men. Ueryly it is a blessed and stable connexyon of sundry wylles, making of
two persons one, in having and suffrynge. And therefore a friend is proprely
named of Philosophers, the other.I. For that in them is but one mind and one
possession: and that, which more is, a man more reioyseth at his friends good
fortune, than at his own.

Horestes and Pilades, being wonderful like in all features, were taken to
geder, and presented unto a tirant, who deedly hated Horestes. But when he
beheld them both, and would have slain Horestes only, he could not decerne
the one from the other: And also Pilades, to deliver his friend, affirmed, that
he was Orestes: on the other part Orestes, to save Pilades, denied, and said,
that he was Orestes (as the truth was) Thus a long time they together
contendynge, the one to dye for the other, at the last so relented the fierce
and cruel heart of the tyraunte, that wondringe at their meruaylous frendshyp,
he suffered them freely to depart, without doing to them any damage.

Pitheas and Damo^, two Pythagoriens, Pithias? Damon.
that is to say, students of Pythagoras learning, being joined together in a
perfect frendshyp: for that one of them was accused to have co^spired against
Dionyse, king of Sicile, they were both taken and brought to the king, who
immedyately gave sentence, that he that was accused, should be put to death.
But he desired the king, that er he died, he might return home, to set his
householde in order, and to dystribute his goods. Whereat the king laughing,
demanded of him skornfully, what pledge he would leave him, to come again. At
the which words, his company on stepte forth and said, that he would
remain there as a pledge for his friend, that in case he came not again, at
the day to him appointed, he wyllngly would lose his head. Which condition the
tyraunte received. The young man that should have died, was suffered to depart
home to his house, where he did set all thing in order, and dysposed his goods
wisely. The day appointed for his return was commen, the time much passed.
Wherefore the king called for him that was pledge. Who came forth meryly,
without semblaunte of dread, offringe to abide the sentence of the tyraunte,
and with out grudginge, to dye for the saving the life of his friend. But as
the offycer of justice had closed his eien with a kerchiefe, and had drawn his
sword, to have stryken of his head, his fellow came renning and crieng, that
the day of his appoyntmente was not yet paste: wherefore he desired the
minister of justice to lose his fellow, and to prepare to do execution on him,
that had given the occasion, whereat the tyraunte being all abashed, commanded
both to be brought in his presence, and when he had enough wo^dred at their
noble hearts, and their constance in very frendshyp, he offering to them great
rewards, desired them to receive him into their company: and so doing* the^
much honor, did set them at liberty.

Undoughtedly that frendshyp, which does depend either on profit or else in
pleasure, if the ability of the person, which might be profitable, do fail
or diminishe, or the disposition of the person, which should be pleasant, do
change or appayre, the feruentnesse of love cesseth, and thanne is there no
frendshyp.

The wonderful history of Titus and Gisippus, and whereby is fully declared the
figure of perfet amity. Ca. XII.
BUt now in the mids of my labor, as it were to pause and take breath, and
also, to recreate the reders, which fatigate with long precepts, desire
varietic of matter, or some new pleasant fable or history, I will reherce a
right goodly example of frendshyp, which example studiousely red, shall
minister to the reders singular pleasure, and also incredible comfort to
practice amity.

There was in the city of Rome a noble senator, named Fuluius, who sent his
son, called Titus, being a child, to the city of Athenes in Greece (which
was the fountain of al manner of doctrine) there to learn good letters: and
caused him to be hosted with a worshypfull man of that city, called Chremes.
This Chremes hapened to have also a son, named Gisippus, who not only was
equal to the said young Titus in years, but also in stature, proporcion of
body, favor, and color of visage, countenance and speech. The two children
were so like, that without much difficulty it could not be decerned of their
propre parents, which was Titus from Gisippus, or Gisippus from Titus. These
two young gentyllmen, as they seemed to be one in form and personage, so
shortly after acquaintance, the same nature wrought in their hearts such a
mutual affection, that their wylles and appetites daily more and more so
co^federated them selves, that it seemed none other, when their names were
declared, but that they had only changed their places, issuing (as I might
say) out of the one body, and entringe into the other. They to gether, and at
one time went to their learning and study, at one time to their meals and
refectyon, they delyted both in one doctrine, and profyted equally therein,
finally they to gether so increased in doctrine, that within a few years, few
within Athenes might be compared unto them. At the last dyed Chremes, which
was not only to his lonne, but also to Titus cause of much sorrow and
heaviness. Gysippus, by the goods of his father was known to be a man of
great substance: wherefore there were offered to him great and rich marriages.
And he than being of ripe years, and of an habile and goodly personage, His
friends, kin, and alies exhorted him busely to take a wife, to the intent he
might increase his lynage and progenye. But the young man, having his heart
all ready wedded to his friend Titus, and his mind fixed to the study of
philosophy, ferynge that marriage should be the occasion to sever him both from
the one and the other, refused of long time to be persuaded, until at the last,
partly by the importunate calling on of his kynnesmenne, partly by the
consent and advise of his dear friend Titus, thereto by other desired, he
assented, to mary such one as should like him. What shall need any words? his
friends found a young gentyl woman, which in equality of years, virtuous
conditions, nobility of blood, beauty, and sufficient richesse, they thought
was for such a young man apt and conueniente. And when they and her fre^des
upon the co^uenantes, of marriage were throughely accorded, they counsayled
Gisippus to repair unto the maiden, and to behold how her person contented
him. And he so doing, found her in every form and condition, according to
his expectation and apperite, whereat he much reioysed, and became of her
amorouse, in so much as many and often times, leaving Titus at his study, he
secretly repaired unto her. Not with standing the fervent love that he had to
his friend Titus, at the last surmounted shamefastnes. Wherefore he dysclosed to
him his secret iourneyes, and what delectacion he took in beholding the
excellent beauty of her, whom he purposed to marye: and how with her good
manners and sweet enterteynemente, she had constrained him to be her lover. And
on a time, he having with him his friend Titus, went to his lady, of whom he
was resceyued most ioyously. But Titus furthewith as he beheld so heavenly a
personage, adourned with beauty inexplicable, in whose visage was most
amiable countenance, myxt with maydenly shamefastenesse, and the rare and
sobre words, and well couched, which issued out of her pretye mouth, Titus
was thereat abashed, and had the heart through perced with the fiery darte of
blind Cupide, of the which wound the anguishe was so excedyng and vehement,
that neither the study of philosophy, neither the remembrance of his dear
friend Gisippus, who so much loved and trusted him, could any thing with
draw him from that unkind appetite, but that of force he must love
inordinately that lady, whom his said friend had determined to mary. Al be it
with incredible pains he kept his thoughts secret, until that he and
Gisippus were returned unto their lodgings. Than the miserable Titus,
withdrawynge him as it were to his study, all turmented and oppressed with
love, threw him self on a bed, and there rebukyng his own most despitefull
unkindness, which by the sodeyne syghte of a maiden, he had conspired against
his most dear friend Gisippus, against all humanity and reason, cursed his
fate or constellation, and wisshed that he had never comen to Athenes. And
therewith he sent out from the botome of his heart deep and cold syghes, in
such plenty, that it lacked but litel that his heart ne was ryuen in pieces. In
dolor and anguishe tossed he him self by a certain space but to no man would
he dyscouer it. But at the last, the pain became so intolerable, that would
he or no, he was enforced to keep his bed, being for lack of sleep and other
natural sustenaunce, brought in such feblenesse, that his legs mougt not
sustain his body. Gisippus, missynge his dear fre^d Titus, was much abashed,
and herynge that he lay sick in his bed, had forthwith his heart perced with
heaviness, and with all speed came to him, where he lay. And beholdynge the
rosiall color, which was wont to be in his visage, turned into salowe, the
resydue pale, his ruddy lyppes wan, and his eyes ledy and holowe, moughte uneath
keep him self from weeping, but to the entente he would not dyscomforte his
friend Titus, dissimuled his heaviness, and with a comfortable countenance
demanded of Titus, what was the cause of his disease, blaming him of
unkindness, that he so long had sustained it, without gyuinge him knowledge,
that he moughte for him have provided some remedy, if any might have begoten,
though it were with the dyspendynge of all his substance. With which words
the mortal syghes renewed in Titus, and the salt tears braste out of his
eyes, in such habundaunce, as it had been a land flode runnyng down of a
mountain after a storm. That beholding Gisyppns, and being also resolved in
to tears, most heartily desired him, and (as I might say) coniured him, for
the feruente and entier love that had been, and yet was between them, that he
would no longer hide from him his gryefe: and that there was nothing to him so
dear or precious (all though it were his own life) that might restore Titus
to health, but that he should gladly, and without grutchynge employe it. with
which words, obtestations, and tears of Gysippus, Titus constrained, al
blusshynge and asshamed, holdinge down his head, brought furthe with great
difficulty his words in this wise.

My dear and most loving friend, with The words of Titus to Gisyppus.
draw your frendely offers, cesse of your courtaisie, refrain your tears and
regretynges, take rather your knyfe and slay me here where I lie, or otherwise
take vengeance on me, most miserable and false traitor unto you, and of all
other most worthy to suffer most shameful death. For where as god of nature,
like as he has given to us similitude in all the parts of our body, so had he
conjoined our wylles, studies and appetites to gether in one, so that between
two men was never like concord and love, as I suppose: And now, not with
standing, only with the look of a woman, those bonds of love be dyssolued,
reason oppressed, friendship is excluded, there avails no wisdom, no
doctrine, no fidelite or trust: ye your trust is the cause that I have
conspired against you this treason. Alas Gysippus, what envious spirit mened
you to bring me with you to her, who^ ye have chosen to be your wife, where I
received this poison? I say Gysyppus, where was than your wysedom, that ye
remembered not the fragilitie of our common nature? what neded you to call me
for a witness of your private delites? why would ye have me see that, which
you your self could not behold without rauysshyng of mind and carnal
appetite? Alas why forgate ye, that our minds and appetites were ever one? and
that also what so ye lyked was ever to me in like degree pleasant. What will
ye more? Gysippus I say, your trust is the cause that I am intrapped. The
rays or beams issuynge from the eyes of her, whom ye have chosen, with the
remembrance of her incomparable virtues, has thrilled throughout the mids
of my heart and in such wise brenneth it, that above althinges I desire to be
out of this wretched and most unkind life, which is not worthy the company
of so noble and loving a friend as ye be. And therewith Titus concluded his
confession, with so profound and bitter a sighe, received with tears, that it
seemed, that all his body should be dyssolued and relented into salt dropes.

But Gysippus, as he were therewith nothing The annswere of Gisippus.
astonyed or dyscontented, with an assured countenannce, and merry regard,
imbrasynge Titus, and kissing him, answered in this wise. Why Titus, is this
your only sickness and grief, that ye so vncur ^esely have so long
counceyled, and with much more unkindness kept from me, than ye have conceived
it? I knowledge my folly, wherewith ye have with good right imbraided me, that in
showing to you her, whom I loved, I remembered not the commune astate of our
nature, ne the agreablenesse or (as I moughte say) the unity of our two
appetites. Suerly that defaulte can be by no reason excused. Wherefore it is
only I, that have offended. For who may by right prove, that ye have
trespased, that by the inevitable stroke of Cupides dart are thus bytterly
wounded? Think ye me such a sole or ignorant person, that I know not the
power of Uenus, where she lysteth to show her importable vyolence? Have not ye
well resysted against such a goddess, that for my sake have stryuen with her
all most to the death? What more loyaltye or truth can I require of you?
Am I of that virtue, that I may resyste against celestial influence,
preordynate by prouydence dyuine? If I so thought, what were my wits? where
were my study so long time spent in noble Philosophy? I confess to you Titus,
I love that maiden as much as any wise man might possible: and took in her
company more delight and pleasure than of all the treasure and lands that my
father left me, which ye know was right abundaunte. But now I perceive,
that the affection of love toward her surmouuteth in you above measure, what
shall I think it of a wanton lust, or sodeyne appetite in you, whom I have
ever known of grave and sad dysposytion, inclyned always to honest doctrine,
fleing al vain dalyaunce and dyshoneste passetyme? Shall I imagine to be in
you any malice or fraud sens from the tender time of our chyldehode, I have
always founden in you, my sweet friend Titus, such a conformytye with all my
manners, appetites, and desires, that never was seen between us any manner of
contention? Nay god forbede, that in the frendshyppe of Gysyppus and Titus,
should happen any suspicion: or that any fantasye should perce my hedde,
whereby that honorable love between us should be the mountenaunce of a cromme,
perysshed. Nay nay Titus, it is (as I have said) the only prouydence of god:
she was by him from the beginning prepared to be your lady and wife. For such
fervent love enters not in to the heart of a wise manne and virtuous, but by a
dyuyne dysposyton: whereat if I should be dyscontented* or grudge, I should
not only be unjust to you, with holding that from you, which is undoubtedly
yours, but also obstinate and repugnant against the determination of god,
which shall never be founden in Gisyppus. Therefore gentle friend Titus,
dysmaye you not at the chance of love, but receive it ioyously with me, that
am with you nothing discontented, but meruaylous glad, sens it is my hap to
find for you such a lady, with whom ye shall live in felicity, and receive
fruit to the honor and comfort of all your lynage. Here I renounce to you
clearly al my title and interest, that I now have or might have in the fair
maiden. Call to you your pristinate courage, wash clean your visage and eien
thus bywepte, and abandone all heaviness, the day appointed for our marriage
approaches: let us co^sulte, how without dyfficultie ye may holy attain your
desires. Take heed, this is mine advise, ye know well, that we two be so like,
that being a part and in one apparayle, few men do know us. Also ye do
remember, that the custom is, that not withstanding any ceremony do one at
the time of the spousayles, the marriage notwithstanding is not confyrmed,
until at night that the husband puts a ring on the finger of his wife,
and vnloseth her girdell. Therefore I my self will be present with my friends,
and perform all the parts of a bride. And ye shall abide in a place secret,
where I shall appoint you, until it be night. And than shall ye quickly
conuaie your self into the maidens chamber: and for the similitude of our
personages, and of our apparayle, ye shall not be espied of the women, which
have with none of us any acquaintance, and shortly get you to bed, and put
your own ring on the maidens finger, and undo her gyrdell of virginity, and
do all other thing, that shall be to your pleasure. Be now of good chere Titus,
and comfort your self with good refections and solace, that this wanne and
pale color, and your chekes meygre and lean, be not the cause of your
discovering. I know well, that ye having your purpose, I shall be in obloquie
and derision of all men, and so hated of all my kynrede, that they shall seek
occasion to expulse me out of this city, thinking me to be a notable reproach
to all my family. But let god therein warke. I force not what pain that I
abide, so that ye my friend Titus may be saulfe, and pleasauntly enjoy your
desires, to the increasynge of your felicity.

WITH these words Titus began to meue, as it were out of a dreme, and
doubting, whether he hard Gisyppus speak, or else saw but a visyon, lay
still as a man abashed. But when he beheld the tears, tryckelynge down by
the face of Gysyppus, he than recomforted him, and thankyng him for his
incomparable kyndnesse, refused the benefyte that he offered, saying, that it
were better, that a hundred such unkind wretches, as he was, should perysshe,
than so noble a man, as was Gysippus, should sustain reproach or damage.
But Gysyppus estesones comforted Titus, and therewith swear and protested, that
with fre and glad will he would that this thing should be in form aforesaid
accomplysshed, and therewith inbraced and swetely kyssed Titus. Who perceiving
the matter sure, and not feyned, as a man not sick, but only awaked out of his
flepe, set him self up in his bed, the quick blood some what resorted unto
his vysage, and after a little good meats and drinks taken, he was shortly
and in a few days restored in to his old facion and figure. To make the tale
short. The day of marriage was commen. Gysyppus accompanied with his alies and
friends, came to the house of the damsel, where they were honorably and
ioyously fested. And between him and the maiden was a sweet entertaynemente,
which to behold, all that were present, took much pleasure and comfort,
praising the beauty, goodlynesse, virtue, and courtesy, which in this couple
were excellent above all other, that they had ever seen. What shall I say
more? the couena^tes were radde and sealed, the dowar appointed, and all other
bargaynes concluded, and the friends of either part took their leave and
depted: the bride, with a few women (as was the custom) brought into her
chamber: tha^ as it was before agreed, Titus conveyed him self, after Gysippus
returned to his house, or perchance to the chamber appointed for Titus,
nothing sorrowful, although that he heartily loved the maiden, but with a glad
heart and countenance, that he had so recovered his friend from death, and so
well brought him to the effect of his desire. Now is Titus in bed with the
maiden, not known of her, nor of any other, but for Gysippus. And first he
sweetly demanded her, if that she loved him, and dayned to take him for her
husband, forsakyng all other. which she al blushing with an eye half
laughing, half mourning (as in point to depart from her maidenheed, but
supposinge it to be Gysippus that asked her) affirmed. And than he eftesones
asks her, if she in ratifieng that promise, would receive his ryng, which he
had there already: whereto she consentyng, puts the ring on her finger, and
vnloseth her gyrdell. what thing else he did, they two only knew of it. Of one
thing I am sure, that night was to Titus more comfortable, than ever was the
lengest day of the year, ye and I suppose a hoole year of days. The morrow is
comen. Gysippus, thinking it expedient, that the troth should be discovered,
assembled all the nobility of the city at his own house, where also by
appoyntemente was Titus, who among them had these words, that do follow.

My friends Athenie^sis, there is at this The oration of Titus to the
Atheniensis.
time showed among you an example, almost incredible, of the divine powar of
honorable love, to the perpetual renome and co^mendatio^ of this noble cite of
Athenes, whereof ye ought to take excellent comfort, and therefore give due
thanks to god, if there remain among you any token of the ancient wisdom of
your most noble progenitors. For what more praise may be given to people,
tha^ benevolence, faithfulness, and constance? without whom all countrayes
and cities be brought unto desolation and ruin, like as by them they be come
prosperous, and in most high felilicitie. What shall I long tarry you in
coniectyng mine intent and meaning? Ye all know, from whens I came unto this
city, that of aue^ture I found in the house of Chre mes his son Gysippus, of
min own age, and in every thing so like to me, that neither his father, nor
any other man could discern of us the one from the other, but by our own
insignement or showing: in so much as there were put about our necks lacis of
sundry colors, to daclare our personages. what mutual agreement and love have been always between us, during the eight years, that we have been together, ye
all be witnesses, that have been beholders and wonderars of our most sweet
conversation and consent of appetites, wherein was never any discord or
variaunce. And as for my part, after the decesse of my father, natwith
standinge that there was descended and happened unto me great possessions, fair
houses, with abundance of riches: also I being called home by the desirous and
importunate let ters of mine alies and friends, which be of the most noble of
all the senators, offered the advancement to the highest dignities in the
public weal, I will not remember the lamentations of my most natural
mother, expressed in her tender letters, all be sprent and blotted with
abu^da^ce ofteares, wherein she accuses me of unkindness, for my long
taryenge, and specially now in her most discomforte. But all this could not
remove me the breadthe of my naylle from my dear friend Gysippus. And but by
force could not I, nor yet may be drawn from his sweet company, but if he
thereto will consent. I choosynge rather to live with him, as his company on
and fellow, ye and as his servant, rather than to be consul of Rome. Thus my
kyndenes has be well acquyted (or as I might say) redoubled, delyueryng me
from the death, ye from the most cruel and peynefull death of all other. I
perceive ye wonder hereat noble Atheniensis, and no marvel. For what person
should be so hardy, to attempt any such thing against me, being a Romayne,
and of the noble blood of the Romans? Or who should be thought so malicious,
to slay me, who (as all ye be my iuges) never trespassed against any person
within this city? Nay nay my fre^des, I have none of you all therein suspected.
I perceive ye desire and harken to know, what he was, that presumed to do so
cruel and great an enterprise. It was love, noble Atheniensis, the same love,
which (as your poets do remember) did wound the more part of all the
goddis, that ye do honor, that constrayaed Jupiter to transfourme him self
in a swanne, a bulle, and diverse other likenesses: the same love that caused
Hercules, the vaynquysher and distroyer of Monsters and Giauntes, to spinne on
a rock, sitting among maidens in a womannes apparayle: the same love that
caused to assemble all the noble pryncis of Asia and Greece in the fields of
Troy: the same love I say, against whose assaults may be found no defense
or resiste^ce, has suddenly and unware stryken me unto the heart, with such
vehemence and might, that I had in short space dyed with most fervent
tourmentes, had not the incomparable friendship of Gysippus helped me. I see,
you would feign know, who she is, that I loved. I will no longer delay you
noble Atheniensis: It is Sophronia, the lady, whom Gysippus had chosen to have
to his wife, and whom he most entierly loved. But when his most gentle
heart perceived, that my love was in a much higher degree than his toward that
lady, and that it proceeded neither of wanto^nes, neither of long conversation,
nor of any other corrupt desire or fantasy, but in an instant, by the only
look, and with such feruence, that i^mediatly I was so cruciate, that I
desired, and in all that I might provoked death to take me. He by his wisdom
so one perceived, (as I doubt not but that ye do) that it was the very
provision of god, that she should be my wife, and not his. whereto he giuynge
place, and more estemyng true friendship, than the love of a woman, where unto he
was induced by his friends, and not by violence of Cupide constrained as I am,
has willyngly granted to me the interest that he had in the damsel. And
it is I Titus, that have verily weded her, I have put the ring on her
finger, I have undo one the gyrdell of shame fastenes. what will ye more, I
have lain with her, and confyrmed the Matrymonye, and made her a wife.

At these words all they that were present, began to murmr, and to cast a
disdainous and grievous look upon Gisippus. Than spoke again Titus.

LEAVE YOUR grudgynges and menasynge countenance, toward Gysyppus, he has
done to you all honor, and no deed of reproach. I tell you, he has
accomplyshed all the parts of a Friend: that Love, which was most certain,
has he continued. He knew, he might find in Greece an other maiden, as fair
and as rich as this that he had chosen, and one perchance, that he might
love better. But such a friend, as I was (having respect to our similitude,
the long approved concord, also mine astate and condytion) he was sure to
find never none. Also the damsel suffers no disper gemente in her blood,
or hynderance in her marriage, but is much rather advanced (no dyspreyse to my
dear friend Gysippus). Also consider noble Atheniensis, that I took her not my
father living, when ye might have suspected, that as well her riches as her
beauty, should have thereto allured me: but soon after my fathers decease,
when I far exceded her in possessions and substance, when the most notable men
of Rome and of Italy, desired mine alia^ce. Ye have therefore all cause to
rejoice and thank Gysippus, and not to be angry, and also to extol his
wonderfulle kyndenesse toward me, whereby he has won me and al my blood
such friends to you and your city, that ye may be assured, to be by us
defended against all the world: which being considered, Gisippus has well
deserved a statue or image of gold, to be set on a pillar, in the mids of
your city, for an honorable monumente, in the remembrance of our incomparable
fre^dshyp, and of the good that thereby may come to your city. But if this
persuasion can not satisfy you, but that ye will imagyne any thing to the
damage of my dear friend Gysippus, after my departing, I make mine auowe unto
god, creator of all thing, that as I shall have knowledge thereof, I shall
forth with resort hither, with the inuyncible power of the Romans, and
revenge him in such wise against his enmies, that al Greece shall speak of it to
their perpetual dishonor, shame, and reproach.

And therewith Titus and Gysippus roose, but the other for fear of Titus
dissembled their malice, making semblaunt, as they had been with all thing
contented.

Sone after Titus, being sent for by the auctorite of the senate and people of
Rome, prepared to depart out of Athenes, And would feign have had Gysippus
to have goone with him, offrynge to deuyde with him all his substance and
fortune. But Gysippus, considering how necessary his counsel should be to
the city of Athenes, would not depart out of his countray, not withstanding
that above all erthly things, he most desired the company of Titus: which
abode also, for the said consideration, Titus approved.

Titus with his lady, is departed toward the city of Rome. Where at their
coming, they were of the mother of Titus, his kynsemen, and of all the senate
and people ioyously received. And there lived Titus with his lady in joy
inexplycable, and had by her many fair children: and for his wisdom and
learning was so hyghely esteemed, that there was no dignity or honorable office
within the City, that he had not with much favor and praise a chyeued and
occupied.

But now let us resort to Gisippus, who immediately upon the departing of
Titus, was so malygned at, as well by his own kynsemen, as by the friends of
the lady, that he, to their semynge shamefully abandoned, lcauynge her to
Titus, that they spared not daily to vex him with all kinds of reproach, that
they could deuyse or imagine: and first they excluded him out of their
counsel, and prohibited from him al honest company. And yet not being
therewith satisfied, finally they adiuged him unworthy to enjoy any
possessions or goods, left to him by his parents, who^ he (as they supposed)
by his vndescrete frendshyppe had so dystayned. Wherefore they dyspoyled him of
all things, and almost naked, expelled him out of the city. Thus is
Gysippus, late welthy, and one of the most noble men of Athenes, for his
kind heart, banysshed his own country for ever, and as a man dysmayed,
wandering hither and thither, finding no man that would socour him. At the
last, remembering in what pleasure his friend Titus lived with his lady, for whom
he suffered these damages, concluded to go to Rome, and declare his infortune to
his said friend Titus. What shall need a long tale? in conclusyon, with much
pain, cold, hunger, and thirst, he is commen to the city of Rome, and
diligently enquiringe for the house of Titus, at the last he came to it: but
beholdinge it so beauteous, large, and pryncely, he was ashamed to approach
nygh to it, being in so simple astate and vnklad, but stands by, that in
case Titus came forth out of his house, he moughte present him self to him.
He being in this thought, Titus holding his lady by the hand, issued out
from his door, and taking their horses to solace them self, beheld Gisyppus:
and beholdynge his vile apparayle, regarded him not, but passed furthe on their
way, wherewith Gysippus was so wounded to the heart, thinking Titus had
contempned his fortune, that oppressed with mortal heaviness, fell in a sown,
but being recovered by some that stood by, thynkyng him to be syeke, forth
with departed, entending not to abide any longer, but as a wild beast to
wander abroad in the world. But for werinesse he was constrained to enter into
an old barn, without the city, where he castinge him self on the bare
gronde, with weeping and dolorous cryenge bewailed his fortune: But most of
all accusynge the ingratitude of Titus, for whom he suffered all that mysery:
the remembrance whereof was so intolerable, that he determined no longer to
live in that anguyshe and dolor. And therewith drew his knyfe, purposyng to
have slain him self. But ever wisdom (which he by the study of Philosophy
had attained) withdrewe him from that desperate act. And in this contention,
between wisdom and will, fatigate with long iournaies and watch, or as god
would have it, he fell into a deed sleep. His knyfe (wherewith he would have
slain him self) falling down by him. In the mean time a commune and notable
rufyan or thief, which had robbed and slain a man, was entered into the
barn, where Gysyppus lay, to the intent to soiorne there all that night.
And seeing Gisippus bewept, and his visage replenysshed with sorrow, and also
the naked knyfe by him, perceived well, that he was a man desperate, and
supprised with heaviness of heart, was werye of his life: which the said
rufyan taking for a good occasion to escape, took the knyfe of Gysyppus, and
putting it in the wound of him that was slain, put it all blody in the hand
of Gysyppus, being fast a sleep, and so departed. Soon after the dedde man
being found, the officers made dyligente search for the murderar: at the
last they entringe into the barn, and fyndinge Gisippus on sleep, with the
blody knife in his hand, awaked him, wherewith he entered again in to his old
sorrows, complaining his yuel fortune. But when the officers laid unto him
the death of the man, and the having of the blody knyfe, he thereat reioysed,
thanking god, that such occasion was happened, whereby he should suffer death by
the laws, and escape the vyolence of his own hands. Wherefore he denied
nothing that was laid to his charge, desyryng the officers to make have that
he might be shortly out of his life. Whereat they meruayled. Anon report
came to the senate, that a man was slain, and that a stranger, and a Greek
borne, was found in such form, as is before mentioned. They forthwith
commanded him to be brought unto their presence, sittynge there at that time
Titus, being than Consul, or in other like dignity. The miserable Gisippus
was brought to the barr^, with bills and staves like a felon, of whom it was
demanded, if he slew the man, that was foundended. he nothing denied, but in
most sorrowful manner cursed his fortune, namynge him self of all other most
miserable. At the last one demanding him, of what country he was, he
confessed to be an Atheniense, and therewith he cast his sorrowful eyes upon
Titus, with much indignation, and braste out into syghes and tears
abundauntly: that beholdynge Titus, and espienge by a lyttel sign in his
visage, which he knew, that it was his dear friend Gisyppus, and anon
consideringe, that he was brought into dyspayre by some my saduenture, rose out
of his place, where he sat, and falling on his knees before the iuges, said,
that he had slain the man, for old malice that he bare toward him, and that
Gysippus, being a stranger, was giltles, and all men might perceive, that the
other was a desperate person. wherefore to abbreuiate his sorrows, he confessed
the act, whereof he was innocent, to the intent that he would finishe his
sorrows with death. Wherefore Titus desired the iuges, to give sentence on him,
according to his merytes. But Gysippus, perceiving his friend Titus (contrary
to his expectation) to offer him self to the death, for his saulfe guard,
more importunately cried to the senate to proceed in their judgment on him,
that was the very offe^dar. Titus denied it, and affirmed with reasons and
arguments, that he was the murderer, and not Gisyppus. Thus they of long
time, with abundaunce of tears conte^ded, which of them should die for the
other, whereat all the Senate and people were wonderly abashed, not knowing
what it meant. The murderer in deed, happened to be in the prease at that time,
who perceiving the meruaylous contention of these two persons, which were
both innocent, and that it proceeded of an inco^ parable friendship, was
vehemently provoked to dyscouer the truth. Wherefore he brake through the
prease, and coming before the senate, spoke in this wise,

Noble fathers, I am such a person, whom ye know have been a common baratour
and thief by a long space of years: ye know also, that Titus is of a noble
blood, and is a proved to be always a man of excellent virtue and wisdom, and
never was malycious. This other stranger seems to be a man full of
simplicity, and that more is, desperate for some grievous sorrow that he has
taken, as it is to you euidente. I say to you fathers, they both be innocente,
I am that person, that slew him, that is founde^ded by the barn, and robbed
him of his money, and when I found in the barn this stranger lyenge on sleep,
having by him a naked knyfe: I, the better to hyde mine offense, did put the
knife into the wound of the ded man, and so al blody laid it again by this
stranger. This was my mischeuous devise to escape your judgment. Where unto
now I remit me holy, rather than this noble man Titus, or this innocent
stranger should unworthily die.

Here at all the Senate and people took comfort, and the noise of rejoicing
hearts filled all the court. And when it was further examined, Gisippus was
dyscouered, the friendship between him and Titus was through out the city
publysshed, extolled, and magnified. Wherefore the Senate consulted of this
matter, and finally at the insta^ce of Titus and the people, dyscharged the
felon. Titus recognysed his negligence, in forgetting Gisippus. And Titus
being advertised of the exile of Gisippus, and the dipiteful cruelty of his
kynrede, was therewith wonderful wrath, and having Gisippus home to his house
(where he was with incredible joy received of the lady, whom sometime he should
have wedded) honorably apparyled him: and there Titus offered to him, to use al
his goods and possessions at his own pleasure and appetite. But Gisippus,
desiring to be again in his propre country, Titus by the consent of the
Senate and people, assembled a great army, and went with Gysyppus unto Athenes:
where he having delivered to him al those, which were causers of banysshynge
and dyspoylynge of his friend Gysyppus, did on them sharp execution: and
restorynge to Gysyppus his lands and substance, stablyshed him in perpetual
quietness, and so returned to Rome.

This exaumple in the affectes of frendshyp, expresses (if I be not deceived)
the description of frendeshyppe, engendered by the symilitude of age and
personage, augmented by the conformity of manners and studies, and confirmed by
the long continuance of company.

It would be remembered, that friendship None evil may be in friendship.
is between good men only, and is engendered of an opinion of virtue. Than may
we reason in this form, A good man is so named, because all that he wylleth
or does, is only good: in good can be none evil, therefore nothing that a good
man wylleth or does, can be evil. Likewise virtue is the affection of a good
man, which neither wills nor does any thing that is evil. And vice is
contrary unto virtue, for in the opinion of virtue, is neither evil nor vice.
And very amytie is virtue. wherefore nothing evil or vycyous may happen in
frendshyp. Therefore in the first election of friends, rests all the
importance, wherefore it would not be without a long beliberation and proof, and
as Aristotle says, in Ethie.
as long time as by them both, being to gether conuersaunt, a hole busshell
of salt might be eten. For oftentimes with fortune (as I late said) is
changed, or at the least minished the feruentnesse of that affection,
according as the sweet Poet Duide affirms, saying in this sentence,

Whiles fortune the favors, friends thou Oui. de Pon.
have plenty.
The time being troublous thou art al alone,
Thou see coluers haunte houses made white and dente.
To the ruynous tower all most comes none,
Of emotes innumerable uneath thou find one
In emty barnes, and where fails substance
Happens no friend, in whom is assurance.
But if any happens in every fortune to be constant in frendshippe, he is to
be made of above all things that may come unto man, and above any other that
be of blood or kynrede, as Tulli says. For from kynrede may be taken
Benevolence, from frendshippe it can never be severed. Wherefore Benevolence
taken from kynrede, yet the name of kynseman remains: take it from frendshyp,
and the name of friendship is utterly peryshed.

But sens this liberte of speech is now How to discernea fre^d from a
flatterer.
usurped by flaterers, where they perceive, that assentation and praises be
abhorred: I am therefore not well assured, how a man now a days shall know or
dyscerne such admonicion from flatery, but by one only means, that is to
say, to remember, that friendship may not be but between good me^. Than
consider, if he that does admonysshe the, be him self voluptuous, ambicious,
covetous, arrogant, or dissolute, refuse not his admonicion, but by the example
of the emperor Antonine, tha^kefully take it: and amend such defaulte, as
thou perceyueste, does give occasion of obloqui in such manner as the reporter
also by thine exaumple may be corrected. But for that admonicion only,
account him not immediately, to be thy friend, until thou have of him a long and
sure experience. For undoubtedly it is wonderful difficile, to find a man very
ambitious or covetous, to be assured in frendshyp. For where fyndest thou him
(says Tulli) that will not prefer honors, great offices, rule, authority,
and richesse before frendshyp? Therefore (says he) it is very hard to find
frendshyp in them, that be occupied in acquiring honor, or about the affairs
of the publyke weal. Which saying is proved true by daily experience. For
dysdayne and contempt be companio^s with ambition, like as envy and hatered be
also her folowers.

The division of Ingratitude, and the dysprayse thereof. Ca. XIII.
THe most damnable vice, and most against justice, in mine opinion, is
INGRATITVDE, commenly called unkindness. All be it, it is in diverse forms,
and of sundry importance, as it is discrybed by Seneca in this form.

He is unkind, which denies to have received any benefit, that in deed he
has received, He is unkind, that dissimuleth, he is unkind, that
recompenseth not: But he is most unkind, that forgets. For the other,
though they render not again kindness, yet they owe it, and there remains
some steps or tokens of deserts, enclosed in an yuel conscience, and at the
last by some occasion may hap to return to yield again thanks, when
either shame thereto provoke them, or sodeyne desire of thing, that is
honest, which is wont to be for that time in stomachs, though they be
corrupted, if a light occasyon do move them. But he that forgets
kindness, may never be kind, sens all the benefit is quite fallen from him:
And where lacks remembrance, there is no hope of any recompense.

In this vice, men be much warse than Kyndenes in bestis.
beasts. For diverse of them will remember a benefytte, long after they
received it. The courser, fierce and courageous, will gladely suf^re his keeper,
that dresseth and fedeth him, to vaunte him easily, and stereth not, but when
he lystethe to provoke him: where if any other should ride him, though he were
a king, he will stere and plonge, and endeavor him self to throw him. Such
kyndenesse has been founden Kidnes in dogs.
in dogs, that they have not only dyed in defending their masters, but also
some, after their masters have died or ben slain, have absteyned from meat,
and for famine have dyed by their masters.

Plini remembers of a dog, which in Epiro (a country in Greece) so assaulted
the murdrer of his master in a great assembly of people, that with barkynge
and bytynge he compelled him at the last, to confess his offense.

The dog also of one Iayson, his master being slain, would never eat
meat, but dyed for hunger.

Many se^blable tokens of kindness Plini reherseth, but principally one of his
own time, worthy to be here remembered.

When execution should be done on one Titus Habinius and his servants, one of
them had a dog, which moughte never be driven from the prison, nor never
would depart from his masters body: and wha^ it was taken from the place of
execution, the dog houled most lamentably, being compased with a great
nombre of people, of whom when one of them had cast meat to the dog, he
brought and laid it to the mouth of his master. And wha^ the corpse was
thrown in to the river of Tiber, the dog swamme after it, and as long as he
moughte, enforced him self to bear and sustain it, the people scateryng
abroad to behold the faythfulnesse of the beast.

Also the Lion, which of all other beasts is accounted most fierce and
cruel, has been founden to have in remembrance a benefit showed unto him.

Aul. Bellius remembers out of the hystory of Appion, how allon, out of whose
foot a young man had ones taken a stubbe, and cleansed the wound, whereby he
waxed hole, after knew the same man, being cast to him to be devoured, and
would not hurt him, but lyckynge the legs and hands of the man, which lay
dysmayde, lokinge for death, took acquaintance of him, and ever after followed
him, being ladde in a small lyam, whereat wondered all they that beheld it.
Which history is wonderful pleasant, but for the length thereof I am
constrained to abrege it.

How much be they repugnaunte, and (as I moughte say ennemies) both to
nature and reason, which being advanced by any good fortune, will contemn
or neglecte such one, whom they have long known, to be to them Beneuolent,
and joined to them in a sincere and assured frendshyppe, approved by infallible
tokens, ratifyed also with sundry kinds of benefycence? I require not such
excellant frendshyppe, as was between Pitheas and Damon, between Horestes and
Pilades, or be twene Gysyppus and Titus, of whom I have before written (for I
fyrmely believe, they shall never happen in payres or couples) nor I seek not
for such as will always prefer the honor or profit of their friend before
their own, ne (which is the least part of frendshyppe) for such one as
desirously will participate with his friend all his good fortune or substance.
But where at this day may be founden such frendshyppe between two, but that
if fortune be Friendship of time.
more Beneuolente to the one, than to the other, the frendeshyppe waxes
tedyous, and he that is advanced, desyrethe to be matched with one having
semblable fortune? And if any damage hapeneth to his old friend, he pytyeth
him, but he soroweth not, and though he seem to be sorrowful, yet he helps
not: and though he would be seen to help him, yet trauaileth he not: And
though he would be seen to travail, yet he suffers not. For (let us lay a
part assystence with money, which is a very small portion of frendeshyp) who
will so much esteem frendshyp, that therefore will enter in to the
dyspleasure, not of his prince, but of them, whom he supposes may mynysshe
his estimation toward his prince, ye and that much less is, will displease
his new acquayntaunce, equal with him in auctorite or fortune, for the
defense, help, or advancement of his ancient and well approved friend? O the
most miscrable astate at this present time of mankind, that for the thing,
which is most propre unto them, the exaumple must be founden among the
savage and syerce beasts.

The election of friends, and the diversity of flaterers. Cap. XIIII.
A Noble man above all thing ought to be very circumspecte, in the election
of such men, as should continually attend upon his person, at times vacant
from busye affairs, whom he may use as his familiars, and saufely commytte to
the^ his secrets. For as Plutarche says, what so ever he be that loves,
doteth, and is blind in that thing, which he does Plutarchus de cognosce^do
amico ab adulatore.
love: except by lernyng he can accustom him self to ensue and set more
price by those things, that be honest and virtuous, than by them that he
sees in experyence, and be familiarly used. And suerly as the worms do bread
most gladly in soft wode and sweet, so the most gentle and noble wits,
inclined to honor, replenished with most honest and curtaise manners, do sonest
admytte flaterars, and be by them abused. And it is no marvel. For like as
the wild corn, being in shape and greatness like to the good, if they be
mengled, with great difficulty will be tried out, but either in a narowe holed
seeue they will still abide with the good corn, orelles, where the holes be
large, they will issue out with the other: so flattery from frendshyppe is
hardely severed, for as much as in every motion and affect of the mind, they
be mutually mengled together. Of this perverse and cursed people be sundry
kinds, Some apparently do flatter, praysynge and extollynge every thing that
is done by their superior, and bearing him on hand, that in him it is of
every man commended, which of truth is of al men abhorred and hated, to the
affyrmaunce whereof they add to oaths, adiurations, and horrible curses,
offryng them selfs to eternal peynes, except their report be true. And if
they perceive any part of their tale mistrusted, tha^ they set forth
sodeynely an heavy and sorrowful countenance, as if they were abiected and
brought into extreme desperation. Other there be, which in a more honest term
may be called Assentatours or folowers, which do awayte diligently, what is
the form of the speech and gesture of their master, and also other his
manners and facion of garments: and to the imytatio^ and resemblaunce thereof
they apply their study, that for the simylitude of manners they may the rather
be accepted in to the more famyliar acquaintance. Like to the servants of
Dionyse, king of Sicile, which al though they were inclined to al unhappiness
and myschiefe, yet after the com mynge of Plato, perceiving, that for his
doctrine and wisdom the king had him in high estimation, they than
counterfayted the countenance and habit of the Philosopher, thereby encreasynge
the kings favor toward them, who than was holy given to study of
Philosophye. But after that Dionyse, by their incitation had expelled Plato
out of Sicile, they abandoned their habit and severity, and estsones
returned to their mischeuous and voluptuous lyuinge.

The great Alexaunder bare his hedde some part on the one side, more than the
other, which diverse of his servants did counterfayte.

Semblably did the scholars of Plato, the most noble Philosopher, which for as
much as their master had a broad breast, and high shulders, and for that
cause was named Plato, which sygnifyeth broad or large, they stuffed their
garments, and made on their shulders great bolsters, to seem to be of like
form as he was. whereby he should conceive some favor toward them, for the
demo^stration of love that they pretended in the ostentation of his person.
Which kind of flatery I suppose Plato could right well laugh at.

But these manner of flaterars may be well found out and perceived by a good
wit, which sometime by him self dyligentely considers his own qualities
and natural appetite. For the company or communication of a person familiar,
which is always pleasant and without sharpnes, inclinyng to inordinate
favor and affection, is always to be suspected.

Also there is in that friend small commodity, which follows a man like his
shadow, meuynge only when he meueth, and abiding where he list to tarry. These
be the mortal enemies of noble wits, and specially in youth, when
communely they be more inclined to glory than grauite. Wherefore that
Liberality, which is on such flaterers employed, is not only perished, but
also spilled and devoured. Wherefore in mine opinion, it were a right necessary
law, that should be made to put such persons openly to tortures, to the
fearful exaumple of other, sens in all pryncys laws (as Plutarche says) not
only he that has slain the kings son and heir, but also he that
counterfayteth his seal, or adulteratethe his coin, with more base metal,
shall be judged to dye as a traitor. In reason how Flateri pernicions to
gentyl nature.
much more peine (if there were any gretter pain thanne death) were he
worthy to suffer, that with false adulation, does corrupt and adulterate the
gentil and virtuous nature of a noble man, which is not only his image, but
the very man him self? For without virtue man is but in the number of beasts.
And also by perverse instruction and flatery, such one sleeth both the soul
and good renome of his master. By whose example and negligence peryssheth also
an infinite number of persons, which damage to a realm neither with treasure
ne with power can be redoubed.

But hard it is, always to exchewe these flaterers, which like to crows, do
pyke out men's eyes er they be ded. And it is to noble men most difficile,
whom all men couayte to please, and to dysplease them it is accounted no
wisdom, perchance lest there should ensue thereby more peril than profytte.

Also Carneades, the Philosopher, was Plutarchus de libe. educandi. A notable
exaumple.
wont to say, that the sons of noble men men learned nothing well but only
to ride. For whiles they learned letters, their masters flattered them,
praysyng every word that they spoke. In wrastlynge their teachers and
companions also flattered them, submyttyng them selfs, and falling down to
their fete: But the horse or courser, not understanding who rydeth him, ne
whether he be a gentle man or yoman, a rich man or a poor, if he sit not
surely, and can skyl of ridynge, the horse casts him quickly. This is the
saying of Carneades.

There be other of this sort, which more Subtle flatterers. Ex Plutarcho de
cogn. amico ab adu latore.
covertly lay their snares to take the hearts of princis and noble men. And
as he, which entendeth to take the fierce and mighty lion, pytcheth his hay
or net in the wood among greatte trees and thorns, where as is the most
haunte of the lion, that being blinded with the thyckenes of the couerte, may
er he be ware, sodeynely tumble into the net: where the hunter seelynge both
his eyes, and byndinge his legs strongly to gether, finally daunteth his
fierceness, and makes him obediente to his ensygnes and tokens. Semblablye
there be some, that by dyssimulation can ostente or show a high gravity,
mixed with a sturdy enterteinment and facion, exilinge them selfs from all
pleasure and recreation, frownyng and gruching at every thing, wherein is any
mirth or solace, all though it be honest, tauntynge and rebukyug immoderately
them, with whom they be not contented, Namyng them selfs therefore plain men,
although they do the semblable, and often times warse in their own howses.
And by a simplicity and rudeness of speaking, with long delyberation used
in the same, pretend the high knowledge of counsel to be in them only: and
in this wise pytchynge their net of adulation, they entrap the noble and
virtuous heart, which only beholds their fained severity and counterfayte
wisdom, and the rather by cause this manner of flatery is most unlike to
that, which is communely used.

Aristotell in his politykes, exorteth governors, Many fre^des necessary for a
governor.
to have their friends for a great number of eyes, ears, hands, and legs,
considering that no one man may see or here all thing, that many men may se
and here: ne can be in all places, or do as many things well, at one time, as
many persons may do. And often times a beholder or loker on, espieth a
defaulte, that the doer forgets or skyppeth over: which caused the emperor
Antonine to e^quire of many, what other men spoke of him, correctinge thereby
his defautes, which he perceived to be justly reproved.

This I trust shall suffice, for the expressing of that incomparable treasure,
called amytie: in the declaration whereof I have aboden the longer, to the
intent to persuade the reders, to enserche therefore vigilantly, and being so
happy to find it, according to the said description, to embrace and honor
it, abhorrynge above all things ingratytude, which pestylence has long time
raygned among us, augmented by detraction, a corrupt and lothly syckenesse,
whereof I will trayte in the last part of this warke, that men of good nature
espienge it, need not (if they list) be therewith deceived.

Finis libri secundi.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Of the noble and most excellent virtue, named Justice. Ca. I.
THE MOST EXCELLENT and incomparable virtue, called JUSTICE, is so necessary
and expedient for the governor of a publyke weal, that without it, none other
virtue may be commendable, ne wit or any manner of doctrine profitable. Tulli
Offic. i. From whe^s the name of a king first proceeded.
says, At the beginning, when the multitude of people were opressed by them
that abounded in possessions and substance, they espienge some one, which
excelled in virtue and strength, repaired to him: who ministringe equity,
when he had defended the poor men from injury, finally retained together and
governed the greatter persons with the less, in an equal and indifferent
order. Wherefore they called that man a king, which is as much to say, as a
ruler. And as Aristotell says, Justice is not only a portion or spice of
virtue, but is entierly the same virtue. And thereof only (says Tulli) men be
called good men, as who says, without Justice, al other qualites and
virtues cannot make a man good.

The ancient Ciuilians say, Justice is a will perpetual and constaunt, which
gives to every man his right. In that it is named constant, it imports
fortitude: in discernyng what is right or wrong, prudence is required: And to
proporcion the sentence or judgment, in an equality, it belongs to
temperance. Al these together conglutinate and effectually executed, makes a
perfect definicion of justice.

Justice, all though it be but one entyer virtue, yet is it described in two
kinds or spyces, the one is named Justice distrybutyue, which is in
dystrybution of honor, money, benefyte, or other thing semblable: the other
is called commutatiue or by Justice co^ mutatif. Diorthotica. Justice correctif.
exchange. And of Aristotel it is named in Greek DIORTHOTICE, which is in
english correctiue. And thatparte of Justice is contained in intremedelynge,
and sometime is voluntary, sometime involuntary intermedlynge. Uoluntary is
byenge or selling, love, suertie, lettynge, and taking, and all other thing,
wherein is mutual consent at the beginnynge: and therefore it is called
voluntary. Intermedlynge involu^tary, sometime is privily done, as stelynge,
auoutry, poysonyng, falsehede, disceyte, secret murdre, false witness, and
perjury. Sometime it is violente, as batry, open murdre, and manslaughter,
robry, open reproach, and other like. Justice dystributiue has regard to the
person, justice commutatiue has no regard to the person, but only
consideringe the inequalite, whereby the one thing excedeth the other,
indeuoureth to bring them both to an equality.

Now will I return again to speak first of Justice distributive, leaving
Justice co^mutatiue to an other volnme. Which I suppose shall succeed this
warke, god giuynge me time and quietness of mind to perform it.

The first part of Justice distributive ca. ii.
IT is not to be doubted, but that the first and principal part of Justice
distributive is, and ever was, to do to god that honor, which is due to his
divine majesty. Whihonour (as I before said in the first book, where I wrate
of the motion called honor in daunsynge) consists in love, fear, and
reverence. For sens all men grant, that justice is to give to every man his
own, much more to render one good deed for a another, most of all to love
god, of whom we have all thing, and without him we were nothing, and being
perysshed, we were eftsoon recovered. How ought we (to whom is given the
very light of true faith) to embrace this part of justice more, or at the
least no less than the gentyles, which wandrynge in the darkness of
ignorance, knew not god as he is, but deuidynge his majesty in to sundry
portions, imagined Idols of diverse fourmes and names, and assigned to them
particular autorites, offices, and dignities. Not withstanding, in the
honoring of those gods, such as they were, they supposed always to be the
chief part of justice.

Romulus, the first king of Romans, The houour that the gentiles bare to
their gods. Plutarchus in vita romuli.
for his fortune and benefytes, which he ascrybed to his gods, made to their
honor great and noble Temples, ordeynyng to them images, sacrifices, and other
ceremonies. And more over (which is much to be meruayled at) he also
prohybyted, that any thing should be red or spoken, reprocheable or blasphemous
to god. And therefore he excluded al fables, made of the aduoutryes and other
enormityes, that the Dionisius halicar. li. i.
Greeks had feigned their gods to have committed, Inducing his people to
speak, and also to coniecte nothing of god, but only that, which was in
nature most excellent, which after was also commanded by Plato in the first
book of his public weal.

Numa Pompilius, the next king after Romulus, and elect by the Senate,
although he were a stranger borne, and dweliynge with his father in a lyttel
town of the Sabynes, considering from what astate he came to that dignity,
being a man of excellent wisdom and lerninge, thought he could never
sufficiently honor his gods for that benefyte, by whose prouydence he
supposed, that he had attained the governance of so noble a people and city.
He therefore not only increased within the city Temples, alters, ceremonies,
priests, and sundry religions, but also, with a wonderful wisdom and
policy, which is to long to be now rehearsed, brought all the people Devotion
cause of tranquillity.
of Rome to such a deuocy on, or (as I moughte say) a supersticion, that where
always before, during the time that Romulus reigned, which was, 37. years,
they ever were continually ocupied in wars and rauine, by the space of,
xliii. years (so long reigned Numa) they gave them self al, as it were to an
obseruaunce of religion, abandonyng wars, and applyeng in such wise their
study to the honoring of their gods, and increasynge their publyke weal,
that other people adioynynge, wondringe at them, and for their devotion having
the city in reverence, as it were a palayce of god, all that seasone never
attempted any wars against them, or with any hostility invaded their
country. Many mo princis and noble men of the Romans could I reherce, who
for victoryes against their enemies, raised Temples, and made solemn and
sumptuouse plays in honor of their gods, rendering (as it were) unto them
their duty, and all ways accuntynge it the first part of Justice. And this
part of justice toward god, in honoring him with convenient ceremonies, is
not to be contempned. Example we have among us that be mortal. For if a man
being made rich, and advanced by his lord or master, will provide to
receive him, a fair and pleasant lodging, hanged with rich Aresse or
tapestrye, and with goodly plate and other things necessary most fresshely
adourned, but after that his master is ones entered, he will never enterteyne
or countenance him, but as a stranger: suppose ye, that the beauty and
garnyshyng of the house shall only content him, but that he will think, that
his servant brought him thither only for vain glory, and as a beholder
and wo^derer at the riches that he him self gave him, which the other
unthankfully does attribute to his own fortune or policy? Much rather is
that servant to be commended, which having a little reward of his
master, will in a small cotage make him hartye chere, with much humble
reverence.

Yet would I not be noted, that I would seem so much to extol reverence by it
self, that churches and other ornaments dedicate to god, should be therefore
contemned. Churches material and ornaments.
For undoubtedly such things be not only commendable, but also expedient for
the augmentation and continuing of reverence. For be it either after the
opinion of Plato, that all this world is the temple of god, or that man is the
same temple, these material churches, where unto repaireth the congregation of
christen people, in the which is the corporal presence of the son of god, and
very god, ought to be like to the said temple, pure, clean, and well
adourned, that is to say, that as the heuyn visible is most pleasauntly
garnished with planettes, and sterres, resplendishynge in the most pure
firmament of asure color, the earth furnished with trees, herbs, and flowers
of diverse colors, facions, and savors, bestis, fowls, and fisshes of sundry
kinds: Semblably the soul of man, of his own kind being incorruptibill,
nete, and clear, the senses and powars wonderful and pleasant, the virtues in
it contained noble and rich, the form excellent and roial, as that, which
was made to the similitude of god. More over, the body of man is of all other
mortal creatures in proporcion and figure most perfect and elegante. What
perverse or froward opinion were it to think, that god, still being the same
god that he ever was, would have his majesty now contempned, or be in less
estimation? but rather more honored for the benefits of his glorious passion,
which may be well perceived, who so peruseth the holy history of the
Eua^gelistes, where he shall find in order, that he desired clennesse and
honor.

First in preparation of his coming, which was by the washing and cleansing
of the body of man by baptism in water, the soul also made clean by penance,
the election of the most pure and clean virgin to be his mother, and she also
of the line of prtncis most noble and virtuous.

It pleased him much, that Mary humbly kneled at his feet, and washed them
with precious balm, and wiped them with her hear.

In his glorious transfiguration, his vysage shone like the son, and his
garments were wonderful white, and more pure (as the Euangelyst says) than
any warkeman could make them.

Also at his coming to Jerusalem, toward his passion, he would than be
received with great routes of people, who laying their garments on the way as
he rode, other casting bows abroad, went before him in form of a triumph.
All this honor would he have before his resurrection, when he was in the
form of humylitye. Than how much honor is due to him now, that all power
is given to him, as well in heuyn as in earth, and being gloryfyed of his
father, sytteth on his right hand, judging all the world.

In redynge the bible men shall find, Ceremonies.
that the infinite number of the sturdye hearted Jews, could never have been
governed by any wisdom, if they had not ben brydeled with ceremonies.

The superstition of the gentiles, preserved often times as well the Greeks as
the Romans from final destruction. But we will lay all those histories a
part, and come to our own experience.

For what purpose was it ordained, that christen kings (all though they by
inheritance succeeded their progenitors kings) should in an open and stately
place be fore al their subjects, receive their crown and other Regalities: but
that by reason of the honorable circumstaunces than used, should be impressed
in the hearts of the beholders perpetual reverence: which (as I before said)
is fountain of obedience, or else moughte the kings be enoynted and receive
their charge in a place secret, with less pain to them, and also their
minysters?

Let it be also considered, that we be men and not angels: wherefore we know
nothing but by outward signifycation. HONOR, whereto reverence perteyneth, is
(as I have said) the reward of virtue, which honor is the estimation of
people, which estimation is not every where perceived, but by some exterior
sign, and that is either by laudable report, or excellency in vesture, or
other thing se^blable. But report is not so common a toke^, as apparaile. For
in old time kings ware crowns of gold, and knights only ware chains.

Also the most noble of the Romans ware sundry garlondes, whereby was
perceived their merit. O creatures most unkind, and bar rain of Justice,
that will deny that thing to their god and creator, which of very duty and
right is given to him by good reason before all pryncis, which in a degree
incomparable be his subjects and vassals, by which opinion they seem to
despoyle him of reverence, which shall cause all obedience to cesse, whereof will
ensue utter confusion, if good christen princis, meued with zeal, do not
shortly provide to extincte utterly all such opinions.

The three noble counsayles of reason, society, and knowledge. Cap. III.
Verily the knowledge of Justice is not Counsaylours of Justice.
so difficile or hard to be attained unto by man, as it is communely supposed,
if he would not wyllyngely abandone the excellency of his propre nature, and
fo lisshely applicate him self to the nature of creatures unreasonable, in the
stead of Reason embrasynge sensuality, and for Societe and Benevolence,
following wylfulnesse and malice, and for knowledge, blind ignorance and
forgetfulness. Undoughtedly reason, society called company, and knowledge
remaining, Justice is at hand, and as she were called for, joins her self
to that company, which by her fellowship is made inseparable, whereby happens
(as I might say) a virtuous and most blessed conspiracy. And in their
short precepts and aduertisementes, man is persuaded to receive and honor
justice. Reason bedyng him, Do the same thing to an other, that thou would
have done to the. Society, without which man's life is unpleasant and full of
anguysshe, says, Love thou thy neighbor, as thou do thy self. And that
sentence or precepte came from heuin, when Society was first ordeimed of god,
and is of such authority, that the only son of god, being demanded of a
doctor of law, which is the great commandment in the law of god,
answered, Thou Matt. 22.
shall love thy lord god with all thy heart, and in all thy soul, and in all
thy mind, that is the first and greatte commandment. The second is like to
the same, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two
commandments do depend all the law and prophets. Behold how our savior
Christ joins Benevolence with the love of god, and not only makes it the
second precepte, but also resembles it unto the first?

Knowledge also, as a perfeyt instructrice knowledge
and mastresse, in a more brief sentence than yet has benne spoken,
declares, by what mean the said precepts of reason and society may be well
understand, and thereby Justice finally executed. The words be these in
latyne, NOSCE TE IPSVM, which that this se^te^ce nosce te ipsu^, know thy
self. induces to the very knowledge of Justice.
is in english, know thy self. This sentence is of old wrytars supposed for
to be first spoken by Chilo, or some other of the seven ancient Greeks, called
in latin SAPIENTES, in english sages or wise men. Other do acco^modate it to
Apollo, whom the paynimes honored for god of wisdom. But to say the
truth, were it Apollo, that spoke it, or Chilo, or any other, suerly it
proceeded of god, as an excellent and wonderful sentence. By this counsel,
man is induced to understand the other two precepts, and also thereby is
acco^plyshed not only the second part, but also the residue of Justice,
which I before have rehearsed. For a man knowing him self, shall know that
which is his own, and perreineth to him self. But what is more his own, than
his soul? Or what thing more apterteyneth to him, than his body? His soul is
un doughtedly and freely his own. And none other person may by any mean
possess it or clayine it. His body so perteyneth unto him, that none other,
without his consent, may vendicate therein any propretie. Of what valor or
price his soul is, the symilitude, whereunto it was made, the immortalytie, and
life everlasting, and the powars and qualities thereof, abundauntly do declare.
And of that same matter and substance that his soul is of, be all other
souls, the equalite in souls and corporal substance.
that now are, and have been, and ever shall be, without syngularytie or
preemynence of nature. In semblable astate is his body, and of no better claye
(as I might frankely say) is a gentyl man made, than a carter, and of
liberty of will, as much is given of god to the poor herdeman, as to the
great and mighty Emperor. Than in knowing the condycyon of his soul and
body, he knows him self, and consequently in the same thing he knowethe
every other man.

If thou be a governor, or haste over other soueraygntie, know thy self.
That knowledge of a gouer nour.
is to say, know that thou art verelye a man, compacte of soul and body,
and in that all other men be equal unto the. Also that every man takes with
the, equal benefit of the spirit of life, nor thou have any more of the dew
of heuyn, or the brightness of the son, than any other person. Thy dignity
or authority, wherein thou only differest from other, is (as it were) but a
weyghty or heavy cloak, freshely gliteryng in the eien of them that be
poreblind, where unto the, it is peynefull, if thou wear him in his right
facion, and as it shall best become the: And from the it may be shortly
taken, of him that did put it on the, if thou use it negligently, or that thou
wear it not commely, and as it apperteyneth. Therefore whiles thou wearest it,
know thy self, know that the name of a sovereign or ruler, without actual
governance, is but a shadow, that governance stands not by words only,
but princypally by act and exaumple, that by example of governors men do rise
or fall in virtue or vice. And as it is said of Aristotell, rulers more
grievously do sin, by example than by their act. And the more they have under
their governance, the greatter accounte have they to render, That in their
own precepts and ordenaunces they be not found negligent. Wherefore there is
a noble aduer tisement of the emperor Alexander, for his gravity called
Seuerus.

On a time, one of his noble me^ exhorted La^pridius
him to do a thing, contrary to a law or edicte, which he him self had
enacted: But he firmly denied it. The other still persistynge, said, The
emperor is not bounden to observe his own laws. Whereunto the said emperor
displeasanntely answering, said in this manner, God forbede, that ever I should
devise any laws, whereby my people should be compelled to do any thing, which I
my self can not tolerate.

Wherefore ye that have any governance, by this most noble princis example
know the bounds of your authority, know also your office and duty, being
your selfs men mortal, among men, and instructours and leaders of men. And
that as obedience is due unto you, so is your study, your labor, your industry
with virtuous exaumple, dew to them that be subject to your autoritye. Ye
shall know al way your self, if for affection or motion ye do speak or do
nothing unworthy the immortality and most precious nature of your soul, and
remembringe that your body is subject to coruption, as al other be, and life
time uncertain. If ye forget not this commune astate, and do also remember,
that in nothing but only in virtue ye are better tha^ an other inferior
person: According to the saying of Agesilaus, king of Lacedemones, who heryng
Agesilaus
the great king of Persia praised, asked how much that greatte king was
more than he in justice. And Socrates, being demanded, Socrates.
if the king of Persia seemed to him happy, I can not tell (said he) of what
estimation he is in virtue and lerning. Consider also, that authority being
well and diligently used, is but a token of superiority, but in very deed it is
a burden and loss of liberty.

And what governor in this wise knows him self, he shall also by the same
rule know all other men, and shall needs love them, for whom he takes
labors, and for saketh liberty.

In semblable manner, the inferior person Knowledge of subjects
or subject aught to consider, that all be it (as I have spoken) he in the
substance of soul and body, is equal with his superyor. yet for as much as
the powers and qualities of the soul and body, with the disposition of reason,
be not in every man equal, therefore god ordained a diversity or precminence
in degrees to be among men, for the necessary derection and preservation of
the^ in conformity of living. Whereof nature ministers to us examples
abundauntly, as in bees (whereof I have before spoken in the first book)
cranes, red dear, wolfes, and diverse other fowls and bestes, which herdeth or
flocketh, among whom is a governor or leader, toward whom all the other have
a vigilante eye, awaytyng his signs or tokens, and according thereto reparinge
the^ self most dylygently. If we think, that this natural instinction of
creatures unreasonable is necessary and also commendable, how far out of
reason shall we judge the^ to be, that would exterminate all superiority,
extincte all governance and laws, and under the color of holy scriptuxe,
which they do violently wraste to their purpose, endeavor them selfs, to
bring the life of mau into a confusion inevitable, and to be in much warse
astate, than the before named beasts. Sens without governance and laws, the
persons most strong in body, should by violence constraigne them that be of
less strength and weaker, to labor as bondemen or slaves for their
sustynaunce and other necessaryes, the strong men being without labor or
care. Than were all The neces site that is in governance.
our equalytie dasshed, and finally as beasts savage, one shall desire to slay
a another. I omytte contynuall manslaughters, rauishementes, aduoutryes, and
euormyties horrible to reherce, which (governance lacking) must needs of
necessity ensue: except these evangelical persons could persuade god, or
compelle him to change men in to angels, making them all of one dysposition,
and confirmyng them al in one form of charity. And as concerning al men in
a generaltie, this fentence, Know thy self, which of all other is most
compendious, being made but of three words, every word being but one syllable,
induces men sufficiently to the knowledge of justice.

Of fraud and dysceyte, which be against Justice. Cap. IIII.
TUlli says, that the foundation of perpetual Ci. offi. 1. The exce lency of
Justice
praise and renome, is Justice, without the which nothing may be
commendable. Which sentence is verified by experience. For be a man never so
valyaunte, so wise, so lyberal or plentuous, so famylyare or courtayse, if he
be seen to exercise injustice or wrong, it is often remembered: But the other
virtues be seldom rekened, without an exception, which is in this manner. As
in praysyng a man for some good qualytie, where he lacks Justice, men will
communely say, He is an honorable man, a bounteous manne, a wise man, a
valiant man, sauinge that he is an oppressor, an extortioner, or is
deceytefull, or of his promise unsure. But if he be just, with the other
virtues, than is it said, he is good and worshypfull, or he is a good man, and
an honorable, good and gentyl, or good and hardy. so that Justice only,
bears the name of good, and like a captain or leader precedeth all virtues
in every commendation.

But where as the said Tulli says, that injury, which is contrary to
Justice, is Injury by two means done.
done by two means, that is to say, either by violence or by fraud, fraud
seems to be proprely of the fox, violence or force of the lion, the one and
the other be far from the nature of man, but fraud is worthy most to be hated.
That manner of injury, which is done with fraud and dysceyte, is at this
Fraud and deceyte.
present time so communely practysed, that if it be but a little, it is called
polycie, and if it be much, and with a visage of grauite. it is than named and
accounted wisdom. And of those wise men speaks Tulli, saying, Of all
injustice, none is more capital tha^ of those persons, that wha^ they disceiue
a man most, do it, as they would seem to be good men. And Plato faith, It is
extreme Plato de repub. li.
injustice, one to seem rightous, which in deed is unjust, Of those two manner
of frauds will I severally speak. But first will I declare the most mischiuous
importance of this kind of injury in a generalte. Like as the physicians call
those diseases most pryllous, against whom is fou^den no preservative, and ones
entered, be seldom or never recovered: Se^blably those injuries be most to be
feared, against the which can be made no resistance, and being taken, with
great difficoultie or never they can be redressed.

Injury apparante and with power infor ced, either may be with like power
resisted, or with wisdom eschued, or with entreatie refrained. But where it
is by crafty enginne imagined, subtylly prepared, covertly dyssembled, and
dysceitefully practysed, suerly no man may by strength withstand it, or by
wisdom eskape it, or by any other manner of mean resist or a void it.
Wherefore of all iniuryes, that which is done by fraud, is most horrible,
and detestable, not in the opynion of man only, but also in the syghte and
judgment of god. For unto him nothing may be acceptable, where in lacks
veryte, called communely truth, he him self being all veryte: and al thing
containing untruth, is to him contraryons and adverse. And the dyuell is
called a liar, and the father of leasinges. where fore all thing, which in
vysage or apparaunce pretends to be any other thanne verelye it is, may be
named a leasing, the execution whereof is fraud, which is in effect but
untruth, enemy to truth, and consequentely enemy to god. For fraud is
(as experyence teachethe us) an yuell dysceyte, craftly imagined and devised,
which under a color of truth and simplycitie, indomageth him that nothing
mystrusteth. And because it is evil, it can by no means be lefull. Wherefore
it is repugnaunt unto justice.

The Neapolitanes, and Nolanes the frande of an arbitrour.
(people in Italy) contended to gether for the limits and bounds of their
lands and fyeldes, And for the dyscussyng of that co^trouersye, either of them
sent their ambassadors to the senate and people of Rome (in whom at that time
was thought to be the most excellent knowledge and execution of justice)
desirynge of them an indifferent Arbitour, and such as was substancyally
learned in the laws Civil, to determine the variance, that was between the two
cities: compromyttynge them selfs in the name of all their country, to abide
and perform all such sentence and awarde, as should be by him given. The
Senate appointed for that purpose one named Quintus Fabius Labeo, whom they
accounted to be a man of great wisdom and lerning. Fabius, after that he was
come to the place, which was in controversy, he seperatinge the one people
from the other, communed with them both a part, exhortyng the one and the
other, that they would not do or desire any thing with a couetyfe mind, but
in treading out of their bounds, rather go short thereof than over. They,
doing according to his exhortatyon, left between both companies a great
quantite of ground, which at this day we call batable. That perceiving
Fabius, assygned to every of them the bounds that they the^ selfs had
appointed. And all that land, which was left in the mids, he adiuged to
the Senate and people of Rome. That manner of dealing (says Tulli) is to
disceyue, and not to give judgment. And verelye every good man will think,
that this lack of justice in Fabius, being a noble man and well learned, was a
greatte reproach to his honor.

It was a notable rebuke unto the Israhelites, Fraud in confederacies.
that when they besyeged the Gabaonites (a people of Chanani) they in
co^clusyon received them in to a perpetual leage. But after the Gabaonites
had yielded them, the jews perceiving they were restrained by their oath to
slay them, or cruelly entreat them, made of the Gabaonytes, being their
confederates, their skullions and drudges, wherewith al mighty god was no thing
contented. For the leage or truce, wherein friendship and liberty was intended
(which caused the Gabaonites to be yolden) was not duly observed, which was
clearly against Justice.

Trewely in every couenaunte, bargain, or promise aught to be a symplicitie,
that is to say, one plain understanding or meaning Simplicity in conenaunt
promise.
between the parts: And that symplicitie is properly justice. And where any
man of a covetous or malicious mind will digress purposely from that
symplicite, taking advantage of a sentence or word, which might be
ambiguous or doubtful, or in some thing either superfluous or lackyng in the
bargain or promise, where he certaynely knows the troth to be other wise:
this in mine opinion is damnable fraud, being as plain against Justice, as
if it were enforced by violence.

Finally, all dysceyte and dyssimulation, in the opinion of them which exactely
honor justice, is nerre to dysprayse than commendation, all though thereof
moughte ensue some thing good. For in virtue may be nothing fucate or
counterfayte: But therein is only the image of verity, called Symplicitie.
Wherefore Tulli, being of the opinion of Antipater the Philosopher, says, To
concele any thing, which thou know, to the entente that for thine own
profitte thou would a another, who shall take any damage or benefyte thereby,
should not know it, is not the act of a person plain or simple, or of a man
honest, just, or good: but rather of a person crafty, ungentle, subtylle,
deceytefull, malicious, and wyly.

And after he says, Reason requires, that nothing be done by treason,
nothing by dyssimulation, nothing by disceyte. which he excellently (as he
does all thing) afterward in a brief conclusyon proves, saying, Nature is
the fountain, whereof the law springs, and it is according to nature, no
man to do that, whereby he should take (as it were) a pray of a another man's
ignorance.

Of this matter Tulli writes many propre exaumples and quycke solutions. But
now here I make an end to write any more at this time of fraud, which by no
means may be joined to the virtue, named justice.

That Justice ought to be between enemies. Cap. V.
SVCHE IS THE excellencye of this virtue Justice, that the practyse thereof has
not only opteyned digne commendatyon of such persons, between whom has
benne mortal hostylytie, but also often times, has extyncte the same
hostylytie. And the fyerce hearts of mutual enemies has benne thereby rather
subdued, thanne by armure or strength of people. As it shall appear be
examples ensuynge.

When the valyaunte king Pyrrus warred most asprely against the Romans,
Treason hated of enemies.
one Timochares, whose son was yoma^ for the mouth with the king, promised
to Fabricius, than being consul, to sle king Pyrrus: which thing being to
the senate reported, by their ambassade warned the king, to be ware of such
manner of treason, saying, The Romans maynteyned their wars with arms, and
not with poison. And yet not withstanding, they dyscouered not the name of
Timochares, so that they embraced equytie as well in that they slew not their
enemy by treason, as also that they betrayed not him, which purposed them
kyndnes.

In so much was Justice of old time esteemed, that without it none act was
allowed, were it never so noble or profitable.

What time Xerxes, king of Persya, Honestye preferred before commodity.
with his army was expulsed out of Greece, all the nauye of Lacedemonia lay at
rode in an haven, called Gytheum, within the do minion of the Atheniensis.
Themistocles, one of the princis of Athenes, a much noble captain, said
unto the people, that he had aduysed him self of an excellent counsel,
where unto if fortune inclyned, nothing might more augment the power of the
Atheniensis. But it aught not to be diuulgate or publyshed. He therefore desired
to have one appointed unto him, to whom he might secretly discover the
enterprise. Where upon there was assigned to him one Aristides, who for his
virtue was surnamed ryghtwise. Themistocles declared to him, that his purpose
was to put fire in the nauye of the Lacedemones, which lay at Gytheum, to
thentent that it being brenned, the dominion and hole power over the sea,
should be only in the Atheniensis. This deuyse herd and perceived, Aristides
coming before the people, said, The counsel of Themistocles was very
profitable, but the enterprise was dishonest and against justice. The people
herynge that the act was not honest or just, cried with one voice, Nor yet
expediente. And furthwith they commanded Themystocles, to cesse his enterprise.
Whereby this noble people declared, that in every act, special regard, and
above all thing, consideration ought to be had of Justice and Honestitie.

Of faith or fidelity, called in latin Fides, which is the foundation of
Justice. Capi. VI.
THat which in latin is called FIDES, is a part of justice, and may diuersely
be interpreted: and yet finally tends to one purpose in effect. Some time it
may be called faith, some time credence, other wyles trust. Also in a french
term it is named loyalty. And to the imitation of latin, it is often called
Fydelytie. All which words, if they be intierly, and (as I moughte say)
exactelye understood, shall appear to a studious reder, to signyfye one
virtue or quality, all though they seem to have some diversity. As belcuinge
the precepts and promise of god, it is called faith. In contractes between
manne and man, it is communely called credence. Between persons of equal
astate or condytion, it is named trust. Fro the subject or servant to his
soueraygne or master, it is proprely named fidelite, and in a french term
loyalty.

Wherefore to him, that shall either speak or write, the place is diligently to
be observed, where the propre signyfication of the word may be best expressed.
Considering (as Plato says) that the name of every thing is none other, but
the virtue or effect Plato in Cratylo.
of the same thing, conceived first in the mind, and than by the voice
expressed, and finally in letters signified.

But now to speak, in what estymation Faith neglected.
this virtue was of old time among gentiles, which now (alas to the
lamentable reproach, and perpetual infamy of this present time) is so neglected
throughout christendom, that neither regard of religion or honor, solemn
oaths or terrible cursis, can cause it to be observed. And that I am much a
shamed to write, but that I must needs now remember it: Neither seals of
arms, sign manuels, subscryption, nor other specyalties, ye uneath a multitude
of witnesses be now sufficient, to the observing of promyses. O what public
weal should we hope to have there, where lacks fidelity? which as Tulli
says, is the foundation of Justice. What marvel is it, though there be in all
places contention infinite, and that good laws be turned into Sophemes and
insolubles, sens every where fidelity is constrained to come in trial and
credence (as I might say) is become a vagabounde?

To Iosue, which succeeded Moses in the governance and leadyng of the jews,
almighty god gave in commandment to sle as many as he should happen to take
of the people, called Cananees. There happened to Of what authority fidelity is.
be nyghe to Jerusalem a countreye, called Gabaon, and in deed the people there
of were Cananees, who herynge of the precepte given to Iosue, as men (as it
seemed) of Cananees preserved by Iosue.
great wisdom, seute an ambassade to Iosue, which approached their country,
saiinge, They were far dystaunte from the Cananees, and desired to be in
perpetual leage with him and his people. And to dissemble the length of their
iournay, as their country had been far thens, they had on them old worn
garments, and torn shone. Iosue supposinge all to be true that they spoke,
concluded peace with them, and confirmed the leage, and with a solemn oath
ratified both the one and the other. Afterward it was dyscouered, that they
were Cananees, which if Iosue had known before the leage made, he had not
spared any of them. But when he reuolued in his mind, the solemn oath that he
had made, and the honor, which consisted in his promise: he presumed, that
faith being observed vnperysshed, should please all mighty god above al
things, which was than proved. For it appears not, that god ever did so much
as in any wise imbrayed him for brekynge of his commandment.

By this exaumple appears, in what estimation and reverence, leages and
truces, made by princis, ought to be had, to the breach whereof none excuse
is sufficyente. But let us leave princis affairs to their cou^saylours. And
I will now write of the parts of Fidelity, which be more frequent and
accustomed to be spoken of. And first Trust and fidelity.
of Loyalty and trust, and last of Credence, which principally rests in
promise.

In the most renoumed wars, btewene The loialty of Saguntines.
the Romans and Anniball, duke of Carthaginensis, a noble city of Spain,
called Saguntum, which was in amytie and leage with the Romans, was by the
said Titus Liuius. Ualerius max.
Anniball strongely besieged, in so much as they were restrained from vytayle
and all other sustenaunce. Of the which necessite, by their pryuie messages
they assertayned the Romans. But they being busyed, about the preparatyons
for the defense of Italy, and also of the city, against the intolerable
power of Anniball, having also late, two of their most valiaunte capitaynes,
Publius Scipio, and Lucius Scipio, with a great hooste of Romans, slain by
Anniball in Spain, deferred to send any spedy socours to the Saguntines. But
not with standing that Anniball desired to have with them amity, offering them
peace, with their city and goods at liberty: Considering that they were
brought into extreme necessite, lacking vitayle, and dispayaing to have
socours from the Romans, All the inhabitauntes, confortynge and exhortyng
each other to dye, rather than to violate the leage and amity that they of
long time had continued with the Romans, by one hole assent, after they had
made sundry great piles of wodde and other matter to brenne, they laid in it
al their goods and substance, And last of al, conueyeng them selfs into the
said piles or bonefires, with their wives and children, set al on fire, and
there were brenned, er Annibal could enter the city.

Semblable loyalty was in the inhabytantes of Petilia the same time, who being
like wise besieged by Anniball, sent for socoures to Rome: But for the great
loss, that a little erste the Romans had sustained at the battle of Cannas,
they could in no wise deliver them. Wherefore they dyscharged them of their
promise, and licensed them to do that thing, which might be most for their
saufegarde. By which answer they seemed to be discharged, and lefully moughte
have entered in to the favor of Anniball: yet not withstanding, this noble
people, preseruinge loyalte before life, putting out of their city their
women, and all that were of years unable for the wars that they might more
fra^kely sustain famyne, obstynately defended their walls, that in the
defense they all perysshed. So that when Annibal was entered, he found, that he
took not the city, but rather the sepulcher of the loyal city Petilia.

O noble fidelity, which is so much the more to be wondered at, that it was
not only in one or a few persons, but in thuosandes of men: and they not
being of the blood or aliaunce of the Romans, but strangers, dwelling in
far contreys from them, being only of gentle nature and virtuous courage,
inclined to love honor, and to be constant in their assurance.

Now will I write from hensforthe of particular persons, which have showed
examples of loialte, which I pray god may so cleue to the minds of the reders,
that they may be alwaie ready to put the semblable in experience.

How much ought all they, in whom is The commendatio^ of loialtie.
any portion of gentle courage, endeavor them selfs, to be always trusty
and loyal to their soueraygne, who puts them in trust, or has been to them
beneficial, as well reason exhorts, as also sondrye examples of noble
personages, which as co^pendiously as I can, I will now bring to the reders
remembrance.

What time Saul, for his grievous offenses Faythfulnes in subjects.
was abandoned of all mighty god, (whom of a very poor man's son, god
ausunced to the kyngedome of Israel) and that David being his servant, and as
poor a man's son as he, was elected by god to reign in Israel, and
enointed king by the prophet Samuel, Saul being therefore in a rage, having
indjgnation at David pur sued him with a great host, to have slain him: who
(as long as he might) fled, and forbear Saul as his sovereign lord. On a
time, David was so enclosed by the army of Saul, that he might by no wais
escape, but was feign to hyde him and his men, in a great cave, which was wide
and deep in the earth. During the time that he was in the cave, Saul, not
knowinge thereof, entered in to the cave, to do his natural easement: which the
people of David perceyuinge, exhorted him, to slay Saul, having such
opportunity, saying, God had brought his ennemy into his hands, and that Saul
being slain, the war were all at an end, considering that the people lo
ued better David thanne Saul. But David, refusing their counsel, said, He
would not lay violent hands on his soueraygne lord, being a king enoynted
of god: but softely approached to Saul, and cut of a peace of the nether part
of his mantell. And after that Saul was departed out of the cave toward his
camp, David called after him, saying, Whom pursuest thou noble prince? with
other words rehearsed in the bible, in the first book of kings: and than
showed to him the part of his mantell. Whereat Saul being abashed, recognized
his unkindness, calling David his dear son and trusty friend, recommendynge
to him his children and progenye, sens by the will of god he was elected to
succeed him in the kyngedome of Israel. And so departed Saul from David.

Yet not withstanding, afterward he pursued him in Gaddy. And in a night,
when Saul and his army were at rest, and that David by an espiall, knew they
were all fast on sleep, took with him a certain of the most assured and
valiaunte personages of his host, and in most secret wise came to the
pauilion of king Saul, where he found him slepynge, having by him his spear
and a cup with water. Wherefore one of the company of David said, that he with
the spear of Saul, would stryke him through, and slay him. Nay said David,
our lord forbede, that I suffer my soueraign lord to be slain. For he is
enoynted of god. And therewith he took the spear, with the cup of water. And
when he was a good dystaunce from the host of Saul, he cried with a loud
voice to Abuer, which was thanne marshall of the army of Saul, who answered
and said, what art thou that thus dyseasest the king, which is now at his
rest? To whom David said, Abner, thou and thy company are worthy death, that
have so neglygentely watched your prince. Where is his spear, and the cup of
water, that stood at his beds head? Suerlye ye be but deed men, when he
shall know it. And there with he showed the spear and cup with water.
Which Saul perceiving, and hearing the voice of David, cried unto him,
saying, Is not this the voice of my dear son David? I vncurteysely do
pursue him, and he notwithstanding does to me good for evil. with other
words, which to abbreuiate the matter, I pass over.

This noble history, and other semblable, Mistories i ha^gingis
either wroughgt in Aresse, or conningly painted, will much better beseme the
houses of noble men, than the Concubines, and voluptuous pleasures of the same
Da, uid, and Salamon his son, which be more frequentely expressed in the
hangynges of houses and counterpoyntes, than the virtue and holiness of the
one, or the wise experimentes of the other. But now will I pass over to
hystoryes, which be more strange, and therefore I suppose more plesaunte to
the reder.

Xerxes being king of Persia, the great cite of Babylon rebelled against him,
which loving ser uaunte.
was of such strength, that the king was not of power to subdue it: that
perceyning a gentilman, one of the counsel of king Xerxes, named Zopirus, a
man of notable wisdom, vnwyttynge to any pesonne, did cut of his own ears
and nose, and pryuely departed toward Babylon: And being known by them of
the city, was demanded, who had so dyffigured him. Unto whom he answered,
with apparaunt tokens of heaviness, that for as much as he had given to
Xerxes Counsel and advise, to be reconsyled unto their City, he being meued
with ire and dyspleasure toward him, in most cruel wise, caused him to be
so shamefully mutulate. Adding there unto reprochefull words against
Xerxes. The Babylonians beholdinge his miserable astate, and the tokens, which
(as it seemed to them) approved his words to be true, much pitied him: And as
well for the great wisdom, that they knew to be in him, as for the
occasion, which they supposed should incense him to be shortly avenged, made
him their chief capytayne, and committed holy to him the governance and
defense of their city: which happened in every thing according to his
expectacion. Where upon he shortly gave notice to the king of all his
affairs and exploitures. And finally so endeavored him self, by his
wisdom, that he accorded the king and the city, without any loss or damage
to either of them, wherefore on a time the said king Xerxes, cuttynge an odly
great pomegarnate, and beholdynge it fair and full of kernels, said in the
presence of all his counsel, He had lever have such one friend, as Zopirus
was, thanne as many Babylons, as there were kernels in the pomegarnate. And
also that he rather would, that Zopirus were restored again to his nose, and
his ears, than to have a hundred such cities as Babylon was, which by the
report of writers was incomparably the greatteste and fairest city of all the
world.

The Parthiens, in a ciuyle dyscorde among them selfs, drove Arthabanus their
king out of his realm, and elected among them one Cinnamus, to be their
king. Iazate king of Adiabenes, unto whom Cinnamus
Arthabanus was fled, sent an ambassade unto the Parthiens, exhortyng them to
receive again Arthabanus: but they made answer, that sens the departing of
Arthabanus, they had by a hole assent chosen Cinnamus, unto whom they had done
their fealty, and were sworn his subjects, which oath they might not
laufully break. There of herynge Cinnamus, who at that time was king over
them, wrate unto Arthabanus and Iasate, that they should come, and that he would
render the realm of Parthia unto Arthabanus. And wha^ they were come, Cinnamus
met with them, adourned in the robes of a king, and as he approached
Arthabanus, a lightyng down of his horse, said in this wise, Sir, when the
people had expelled you out of your realm, and would have translated it unto a
another, at their instaunce and desire I took it. But when I perceived their
rancour aswaged, and that with good will they would have you again, which are
their natural souerayge lord, and that nothing let, but only that they
would nothing do contrary to my pleasure, with good will, and for no dread or
other occasion, as ye may perceive, do here re^dre your realm eftsoon unto
you, and therewith taking the diadem of from his own head, did set it
immediately upon the head of Arthabanus.

The fidelity of Ferdynando (king of A faithful Tutor,
Aragone) is not to be forgotten, whom his brother Henry, king of Castill,
decessing, made governor of his son, being an infant. This Fernando with
such justice ruled and ordered the realm, that in a parliament, holden at
Castille, it was trayted by the hole consent of the nobles and people, that the
name or title of the kyngedome of Spaygne should be given unto him. Which
honor he fayning to receive thankefully, did put upon him a large and wide
robe, wherein he secretly bare the young prince his neuewe, and so came to the
place, where for the said purpose the nobles and people were assembled,
demanding of every man his sentence. Who with one voice gave unto him the
kyngedome of Spain. With that he took out of his robe the little baby his
neuewe, and setting him on his shulder, said all aloude unto them, Loye
Castilians, behold here is your king. And than he confirmynge the hearts of
the people toward his neuewe, finally delivered to him his realm in peace,
and in all things abundaunt. This is the fidelite that appertains to a noble
and gentle heart.

In what hatered and perpetual reproach ought they to be, that corrupted with
pestilencial avarice or ambicion, do betraie their masters, or any other that
trusts them? O what monstrous persons have we red and herd of, which for
the inordinate and deuelyshe appetite to reign, have most tyrannously slain
the children, not only of their soueraygne lords, but also of their own
natural brethren, committed unto their governance? of whom purposely I leave
at this time to write, because the most cursed remembrance of them shall not
consume the time, that the well disposed reder moughte occupy in examples of
virtue.

This one thing I would were remembered, Ue^geance for treason.
that by the just providence of god, disloyalte or treason, seldom escapes
great vengeance: Albe it that it be pretended for a necessary purpose.

Example we have of Brutus and Cassyus, two noble Romans, and men of excel
lent virtues, which pretendinge an horarable zeal to the lybertye and commune
weal of their City, slew Julius Caesar, who trusted them most of al other,
for that he usurped to have the parpetuall dominion of the Impire, supposing
thereby to have brought the senate and people to their pristinate liberty. But
it did not so succeed to their purpose. But by the death of so noble a prince
happened confusyon and civil batayles: And both Brutus and Cassius, after long
wars, vainquished by Octa uian, neuewe and heir unto Caesar, at the last
falling in to extreme desperatyon, slew them selfs. A worthy and
conuenyente vengeance, for the murder of so noble and valyaunte a prince. Many
other like examples do remain, as well in writing as in late remembrance,
which I pass over for this time.

Of promise and covenant. cap. VII.
Concerning that part of fydelytie, which concernethe the keeping of
promise, or couenantes, experience declares how lyttel it is now had in
regard, to the notable rebuke of al us, which do profess Christ's religion.
Consideringe that the Turks and Sarazens have us therefore in contempt and
derision, they having fidelite of promise above all thing in reverence. But
no marvel that a bare promise holds not, where an oath upon the
Evangelists, solempnely and openly taken, is but little esteemed. Lord god, how
frequente and famyliar a thing with every astate and degree throughout
Christendom, is this reverent oath on the Gospelles of Christ? How it has been hitherto kept, it is so well known and had in daily experyence, that I
shall not need to make of the neglecting thereof any more declaration. Only I
will show, how the Gentiles, lacking true religion, had solemn oaths in
great honor, and how terrible a thing it was among them, to break their
oaths or vows. In so much as they supposed, that there was no power,
victory, or profit, which might be equal to the virtue of an oath.

Among the Egiptians, they which were Periurye punished.
perjured, had their heddes stryken of, as well for that they violated the
honor due unto god, as also that thereby faith and trust among people might
be decayed.

The Scithes swear only by the chair or throne of their king, which oath if
they brake, they therefore suffered death.

The ancient Romans (as Tulli writes) the form of an oath among
auncyente romans.
swear in this manner, He that should swear, held in his hand a stone, and
said in this wise, The City, with the gods thereof being saulfe, so Jupiter
cast me out of it, if I deceive wittingly, as I cast from me this stone. And
this oath was so straytely observed, that it is not remembered, that ever any
man brake it.

Plutarche writes, that the first Temple The gretteste oath.
that Numa Pompilius, the second king of Romans, made in the city of Rome,
was the temple of faith. And also he declared, that the greatest oath, that
might be, was faith: which now a days is uneath taken for any oath, but
most communely Oaths vsyd.
is used in moekage, or in such things as men forse not, though they be not
believed.

In daily communication the matter sauoureth not, except it be as it were
seasoned with horrible oaths, As by the holy blood of Christ, his wounds,
which for our redemption he paynefully suffered, his glorious heart, as it were
numbles chopped in peaces. Children (which abhors me to remember) do play
with the arms and bones of Christ, as they were chery stones. The soul of
god, which is incomprehensible, and not to be named of any creature without a
wonderful reverence and dread, is not only the oath of great gentilmen, but
also so vndyscretely abused, that they make it (as I might say) their gonnes,
wherewith they thunder out thretenynges and terryble menacys, when they be in
their fury, though it be at the damnable play of dyse. The mass, in which
houourable ceremony is left unto us, the memorial of Christis glorious passion,
with his corporal presence in form of bread, the invocation of the three
dyuine persons in one deity, with all the hole company of blessed spyrytes
and souls elect, is made by custom so simple an oath, that it is now all
most neglected and little regarded of the nobilirie, and is only used among
husband men and artificers: onelas some taylour or harbor, as well in his
oaths as in the excess of his apparayle, will counterfayte and be like a
gentilman.

In judicial causes, be they of never so light importance, they that be no
parties but strangers, I mean witnesses and iurates, which shall proceed in
the trial, do make no less oath, but openly do renounce the help of god and
his saints, and the benefit of his passion, if they say not true, as fer
forth as they know. How yuel that is observed, where the one party in degree
fer excedeth the other, or where hope of reward or affection takes place, no
man is ignoraunte, sens it is every year more commune than haruist. Alas what
hope shall we have of any public weal, where such a pe stilence reigns? Does
not Salomo^ say, A man much sweryng, shall be filled with iniquity, and the
plage shall not depart from his house? O merciful god, how many men be in
this realm, which be horrible swerers, and commune iurates perjured? Than
how much iniquite is there? and how many plages are to be feared, where as be
so many houses of swerers? Suerly I am in more dread of the terryble vengeance
of god, than in hope of amendeme^t of the publyke weal. And so in mine opinion
ought all other to be, which believe, that god knows all thing that is done
here in earth: and as he him self is al goodness, so loves he all thing that
is good, which is virtue, and hates the contrary, which is vice. Also all
thing that pleases him, he preserves, and that thing that he hates, he at
the last destroys, but what virtue may be without veryte, called truth, the
declaration where of is faith or fidelity? For as Tulli says, Faith is a
constaunce and truth of things spoken or couenaunted. And in a another place
he says, Nothing keeps so to gether a publyke weal, as does faith. Than
follows it well, that with our faith a publyke weal may not continue. And
Aristotle says, By the same craft or means, that a publyke weal is first
co^stituted, by the same craft or means is it preserved. Than sens faith is
the foundation of Justice, which is the chief constitutour and maker of a
publyke weal, and by the before mentioned authority, conseruatour of the same,
I may well conclude, that faith is both the original, and (as it were)
principal constitutour and conseruatour of the publyke weal.

It is also no little reproach unto a man, Promise.
which estemeth honesty, to be lyte in making promise: or when he has
promised, to break or neglecte it. Wherefore nothing ought to be promised,
which should be in any wise contrary to justice.

On a time, one remembered king Agesilaus Plutarchin apophthegma.
of his promise. By god, said he, that is truth, if it stand with justice:
if not, I than spoke, but I promised not.

But now at this present time, we may make the exclamation, that Seneca does,
saying, O the foul and dyshonest confession Seneca de benefi. iii.
of the fraud or mischief of mankind now a days, seals be more set by
than souls. Alas what reproach is it to christen men, and reioysynge to Turks
and Sarazens, that nothing is so exactely observed among them, as faith,
consistinge in laufull promise and couenaunte: And among christen me^, it is
so neglected, that it is more often times broken than kept? And not only
sealinge (which Seneca disdained, that it should be more set by then souls)
is uneath sufficient, but also it is now come in to such a general contempt,
that all the learned men in the laws of this realm, which be also men of great
wisdom, can not with all their study, devise so sufficient an instrument,
to bind a man to his promise or covenant, But that there shall be some thing
therein espied, to bring it in argument, if it be denied. And in case that
both the parties be equal in estymation or credence, or else he that
denies, superyour to the other, and no witnesses deposes on knowledge of the
thing in demand, the promise or couenaunte is utterly frustrate, which is
one of the pryncypall decays of the publyke weal, as I shall traite thereof
more largely here after. And here at this time I leave to speak any more of the
parts of that most royal and necessary virtue, called Justice.

Of the noble virtue fortitude, and of the two extreme vices, Audacite, and
Timerositie. Ca. VIII.
IT IS TO be noted, that to him, that is Gouerna^ce double.
a governor of a publyke weal, belongs a double governance, that is to say,
an interior or inward governance, and an exterior or outward governance.
The first is of his affectes and passions, which do inhabyte within his
soul, and be subjects to reason. The second is of his children, his
servants, and other subjects to his authority. To the one and the other is
required the virtue moral called fortitude, which as much as it is a virtue,
is a Mediocritie or mean between two extremities, the one in surplusage, the
other in lack. The surplusage is called Audacitie, the lack Timorositie or
fear. I name Audacitie
that AVDACITIE, which is an excessife and inordinate trust, to escape al
dangers, and causes a man to do such acts, as are not to be ieoperded.
TIMOROSITIE is Timorosytie.
as well when a man fears such things, as be not to be feared, as also when
he fears things to be feared, more thanne needs. For some things are
necessary and good to be feared, and not to fear them is but rebuke. Infamye
and reproach, be of al honest men to be dradde. And not to fear things that
be terrible, against which no power or wit of man can resyste, is fool
hardynesse, and worthy no praise, as earth quakes, rages of greatte and sudden
floddes, which do bear down before them mountains and greatte towns. Also
the horrible furye of sudden fire, devouring all thing that it apprehends.
Yet a man that is valyaunte, called in latin A valyan man.
Fortis, shall not in such terryble adventures be resolved into waylinges or
desperation. But where force constrayneth him to abide, and neither power or
wisdom assayed, may suffice to escape, but will he or no, he must needs
perysshe, there does he patiently sustain death, which is the end of al
euyls. And like as an excellent Physician cures most dangerous dyseases and
dedely wounds, so does a man that is valiaunte, auaunce him self as
inuyncible in things that do seem most terrible, not unadvisedly, and as it
were in a bestely rage, but of a gentyl courage, and with premeditation, either
by victory, or by death winnynge honor and perpetual memory, the just
reward of their virtue.

Of this manner of valiaunce was Horatius Cocles, an ancient Romayne, of whose
example I have all ready written in the first book, where I commended the feate
of swymmynge.

Pirrhus, whom Anniball esteemed to be King Pirrhus the hardye.
the second of the most valiant capitaynes, assaultyng a strong fortress
in Sicile called Erice, first of all other scaled the walls, where he behaved
him so valiantly, that such as resisted some he slew, and other by his
majesty and fierce countenance he did dyscomfit. And finally before any of
his army, entered the walls, and there alone sustained the hole bronte of his
enemies, until his people, which were with out, at the last missing him,
stered partly with shame, that they had so lost him, partly with his
courageous example, took good heart, and enforced them selfs in such wise,
that they clymed the walls, and came to the succor of Pirrhus, and so by his
prowess wanne the garrison.

What valyant heart was in the Romayn Mutius Sceuola, which when Porcena,
king of Ethruscanes, had by great power constrained the Romans, to keep them
within their city, took on him the habyte of a beggar, and with a sword
privily hid under his garment, went to the enemies Camp, where he being
taken for a beggar, was nothing mystrusted: and when he had espied the kings
pauillio^, he drew him thither, where he found diverse noble men sitting. But
for as much as he certainly knew not, which of them was the king, at the
last perceiving one to be in more rich apparayle than any of the other, and
supposinge him to be Porcena, he or any man espied him, stepte to the said
lord, and with his sword gave him such a stroke, that he imediatly died. And
Sceuola being taken (for he could not escape such a multitude) boldly
confessed, that his hand erred, and that his intent was to have slain king
Porcena. Wherewith the king (as reason was) all chauffed, commanded a great
fire forthewith to be made, wherein Sceuola should have been brenned, but he
nothing abashed, said to the king, Think not Porcena, that by my death
only, thou may escape the hands of the Romans, for there be in the city
three hundred young men, such as I am, that be prepared to slay the by oone
means or other, and to thaccomplysshemente thereof, be also determined to
suffer all tourmentes, whereof thou shalt have of me an experyence in thy
syghte: and incontynently went to the fire, which was made for to brenne him,
and with a glad countenance, did put his hand into the flame, and there
held it without chaungynge of any countenance, until his said hand was
brenned unto ashes. In like wise he would have put his other hand into the
fire, if he had not been withdrawn by Porcena, who wonderynge at the valiant
courage of Sceuola, lycenced him to return unto the city. But when he
considered, that by the words of Sceuola, so greatte a nombre of young men of
semblable prowess, were confederate to his destruction, so that or all they
could be apprehended, his life should be always in ieoperdye, he dyspayrynge of
winning the city of Rome, raised his siege, and departed.

In what acts fortitude is, and considerations thereto belongyng. Ca. ix.
BUt all though I have now rehearsed sundry examples, to the commendation of
Fortitude, concerning acts martial, yet by the way I would have it remembered,
that the praise is proprely to be referred unto the virtue, that is to say, to
enterprise things dreadful, either for the public weal, or for winnyng of
perpetual honor, orels for eschewynge reproach or dishonor. Whereunto be
annexed these considerations, what importance the enterprise is, and wherefore
it is done, with the time and opportunity when it ought to be done. For (as
Tulli says) to enter in battle, and to fight vnauysedly, is a thing wild,
and a manner of beasts: but thou shall fight valyantly, when time requires and
also necessity. And always death is to be preferred before Servitude, or any
dishonestie. And therefore the acts of Annibal, against the Saguntynes, which
never did him displeasure, is not accounted for any prowess. Neither
Cataline, which for his singular co^modite, and a few other, making detestable
wars against his own country, entendyng to have brenned the noble city of
Rome, and to have distroyed all the good men, is not numbered among valyant
men, all though he faught manly and with great courage, until he was slain.

What auayled the boldness of Uarro and Flamimus, noble capitayns of Romans,
which despisynge the prowess and craft of Anniball, and contemning the sobre
counsel of Fabius, having only trust in their own hardynesse, lost two noble
armies, whereby the power of the Romans was nyghe utterly peryshed. Wherefore
eftsoon I say, who may be called a valiant man.
that a valiant man is he, that does tolerate or suffer that, which is
needful, and in such wise as is needful, and for that which is needful,
and also when it is nedeful. And he that lacks any of this, may be called
hardy, but not valyant.

More over, all though they, which be hardy, or persons desperate, have a
similytude, and seem to be valiant, yet be they not valiant, no more than
kings in may games and enterludes be kings. For they that be hardy, er they
come to the peril, seem to be fierce and egre, and in beginning their
enterprise wonderful hasty, but when they feel the thing more hard and grievous
tha^ they esteemed, their courage decaieth more and more, and as men abashed and
unprepared, their hearts utterly do fail, and in conclusyon they appear more
faynte, than they that be cowardes.

Also in Desperatio^ can not be fortitude: for that being a moral virtue, is
ever voluntary. Desperation is a thing as it were constrained, ne has any
manner consyderatyon, where fortitude expendeth every thing and act
diligently, and does also moderate it with reason.

Here now appears (as I suppose) that neither they, which employe their force
without just cause or necessite, ne they, which without forecaste, or (as I
might say) circumspection, will take in hand an hard enterprise: ne they,
which heedlong will fall into dangers, from whens there is no hope to escape:
nor yet men desperate, which dye wyllyngly without any motion of honor or
zeal toward the public weal, be in the nombre of valyant persons, but of a
refuse company, and rather to be rekned with bestes savage, than among men,
which do participate with reason. For as Curtius Q. curstus
says, It appertains to men, that be valiant, rather to despise death,
thanne to hate life.

A Man is called in latin VIR, whereof says Tulli, VERTVE is named. And the
most propre virtue longing to a man, is FORTITVDE, whereof be two excellent
propreties, that is to say, the contempt of death, and of grief. But what
very fortitude is, he more plainly declares afterward, in a more larger
circu^scription, saying, Things humain ought to be litell este med, death not
regarded, labors and griefs to be thought tolerable. When this is ratified
by judgment and a constant opinyon, than that is valyant and stable fortitude.
But there unto I would should be added, which opinion and judgment proceeds
of a reason, and not repugnant to Justice. And than it shall accord with this
saying of Aristotle, A valyant man susteineth, and Aristotle.
does that, which belongs to fortitude, for cause of honesty. And a
little before he says, A man that is valyant, as well suffers, as does
that, which agrees with his worship, and as reason commands. So no
violence or sturdy mind, lacking reason and honesty, is any part of
fortitude. Unto this noble virtue be attendant, or as it were continual
adherentes, diverse virtues, which do ensewe, and be of right great estimation.

Of peynefulnesse, the first companion of Fortitude. Cap. x.
IN them, which be either governors or capytaynes, or in other office, where
unto appertains greatte cure or dispatchynge of sundry great affairs,
peynfulnesse, named in latyne TOLLERANTIA, is wonderful commendable. For thereby
things be in such wise exployted, that utility proceeds thereof, and seldom
repentance. For as much as thereof comes an excellent fruit, called
opportunity, which is ever ripe, and never in other astate. For lack of this
virtue, much wysedom, and many a valiant enterprise, have peryshed and
turned to none effect. For if things sharply invented, prudently discussed,
and valyauntly enterprysed, be not dylygentely followed, and without cessynge
applied and poursewed, as it were in a momente all thing is subverted: and the
peynes before taken with the time therein spente, is utterly frustrate.

The peinfulnes of Quintus Fabius (be inge dictator or principal captain of
the Romans) in leadynge his army by mountains, and other hard passages, so
disapoynted Anniball of the hope of vyctorie, wherein he so much gloried, that
at the last he trained and drew Anniball and his host into a fyelde, enclosed
about with mountains, and deep ryuers, where Fabius had so enuironned him,
by the fortifieng of two mountayns with his people, that they were in ie oper
dye, either to be famyshed, for lack of vitayle, or else in fleinge, to be
slain by the Romans, if the crafty and polytyke wit of Anniball had not
delivered them. Which for the notable invention, I will borowe so much time of
the reder, to renew the remembrance thereof in our English tongue.

Anniball, perceyuinge the danger that he and his army were in, commanded in
The polycye of Annibal to escape from the Romans.
the deep of the night, when nothing was sterynge, to be brought before him,
about two thousand great oxen and bulls, which a lyttel before his men had
taken in foragynge, and caused fagottes made of dry sticks to be fastened unto
their horns, and set on fire. The beasts, troubled with the flame of fire,
ra^ne as they were wood up toward the mountains, where as lay the host of
the Romans. Anniball with his hoole army following in array.

The Romans, which kept the mountains being soore afraid of this new and
terryble sight, forsook their places. And Fabius dredynge the deceytefull wit
of Annibal, kept the army within the tre^ch, and so Anniball with his host
escaped with out damage. But Fabius, being payneful in pursuinge Anniball from
place to place, awaytynge to have him at advantage, at the last did so
fatigate him and his host, that thereby in conclusion his power mynished, and
also the strength of the Carthaginenses, of whom he was general capytayne. In
so much as they were at the last constrained to countermande him by sundry
messangers, willing him to abandon the wars in Italy, and to return to the
defense of his own city. Which by the opinion of most excellent writers
should never have happened, if Fabius would have left any part of his purpose,
either for the tediousness of the pain and travail, or sor the intolerable
rebukesg, yuen unto him by Minutius, who imbrayded him with cowardyse.

Among the virtues, which abounded in Julius Caesar, none was accounted more
excellent, than that in his counsayles, affairs, and exploitures, he omitted
no time, ne forsook any peine. Wherefore most sonest of any man, he achieued and
brought to good pass, all thing that he enterprised.

Suppose ye that the same Anniballe, of whom we late spoke, could have won
from the Romans, all Spain, and have perced the mountains, called Alps,
making a way for his army, where before was never any passage, and also have
gotten all Italye unto Rome gates, if he had not been a man peynefull and of
labor incomparable?

Julius Caesar, after he had the intier governance and dominion of the empire
of Peynefulnes in heringe controversies.
Rome, never omitted labor and diligence as well in commune causes as private,
concerning the defense and assistence of innoce^tes. Also he laborously and
studiously discussed controversies, which almost daily, he hard in his own
person.

Traiane, and both Antonines emperors of Rome, and for their virtue worthy to
be emperors of all the world, as well in exterior affairs, as in the
affairs of the city, were ever so continually occupied, that uneath they
found any lyttel time, to have any recreation or solace.

Alexander also, for his incomparable gravity, The pain of a perfect governor
called Seuerus, being but of the age of.xviii. years, when he first was made
emperor, finding the noble city of Rome, than maystresse of the world,
throughely corrupted with most abhomynable vices, by the most shameful
example and living of that detestable monster, Uarius Heliogabalus next
emperor before him, a great part of the senate and nobility, being resolved
into semblable vices, the chiualry dispersed, martial prowes abandoned, and
well nyghe the majesty imperial dissolved and brought in contempt, was so
inflamed with the zele of the pristinate honor of the Romans, that he utterly
laid apart al pleasures and quietness, and holly gave his wit and body to study
and trauayles intolerable, and chosing out of all parts of the world, men of
greattest wisdom and experience, and consultyng with them, never ceased, until
he had reduced, as well the Romans as all other cities and provinces, unto
them subject, to their old moderation and temperance.

Many other examples could I rehearse to the commendation of peinfulnes: but
these shall suffice at this present time, to prove that a governor must needs
be peinefull in his own person, if he desire to have those thin ges prosper,
that are under his governance.

Of the noble and fair virtue named Patience. Cap. XI.
PATIENCE is a noble virtue, apperteinyng as well to inward gouerna^ce, as to
exterior governance: and is the vanquyshour of injuries, the sure defense
against al affectes and passions of the soul, retayning always glad semblant
in adversity and dolor.

Saint Ambrose says in his book of offices, Ambrossius Off. ^.
Better is he, that contemns injury, than he that soroweth. For he that
contem neth it, as he nothing felt, passes not on it: But he that is
sorowfulle, is therewith tourmented, as though he felt it.

Which was well proved by Zeno Eleates, a noble philosopher, who being a man of
excellent wisdom and eloquence, came to a city, called Agrigentum, where
reigned Phalaris, the most cruel tyrant of all the world, who kept and used
his own people in most miserable seruytude. And first he thought by his
wisdom and eloquence, to have so persuaded the tyrant to temperaunce, that he
should abandon his cruel and auaricious appetite: but custom of vice more
prevailed in him than profitable counfayle. Wherefore Zeno, having pity at the
wretched astate of the people, excited diverse noble men, to deliver the city
of that seruyle condytion. This counsel was not so secretly given, but that
notice thereof came to the tyrant, who causyng all the people to be assembled in
the market place, caused Zeno there to be cruciate with sundry turmentes,
alwais demandyng of him, who did participate with him of his said counsel:
but for no peynes would he confess any person, but induced the tyrant to have
in mystrust his next friends and familyar servants. And reproving the people
for their cowardyse and dread, he at the last so inflamed the^ unto liberty,
that suddenly with a great vyolence they fell on the tyrant, and pressed him
with stoones. The old Zeno, in all his exquisite turme^tes never made any
lamentable cry, or desire to be relyued.

But for this form of Pacyence, this only example suffyseth at this time,
sens there be so frequent examples of martyrs, which for true religion
sustained patiently not only equalle tourmentes with Zeno, but also far
exceeding. But now will I write of that Patience, that pertayneth unto
interior governance, whereby the natural passions of man be subdued, and the
malice of fortune sustained. For they which be in autorite, and be occupied
about great affairs, their lives be not only replenished with labors and
grievous displesures, but also they be subjects to sundry chances.

The mean to obtain Patience, is by Patience how hit may be opteyned.
two things principally, A dyrecte and upright conscience, and true and
constant opinion in the estimation of goodness: which seldom comes only of
nature, except it be wonderful excellent, but by the diligent study of very
philosophy. (not that which is sophisticate, and consists in sophismes)
nature is thereto prepared and helped. This Opinion good or ill
opinion is of such power, that ones cleuing fast to the mind, it draws a man
as it were by violence to good or evil. Therefore Tulli says, Like as wha^ the
blod is corrupted, and either fleume or colere, black or read, Tusc. g. 3.
is superhabu^da^t, than in the body be inge^dred sores and diseases: so the
vexation of evil opinions, and their repugnancie, dispoyleth the mind of all
health, and troubles it with griefs. Contrariwise afterward Tulli describes
good OPINION, and calls it the beauty of the soul, saying in this wise, As
of bodily members, there is an apt figure, with a manner plesantnesse of color,
and that is called beauty: so in the soul, the equality and constance of
opinions, and judge mentes ensuyng virtue, with a stable and sted fast purpose,
or conteynyng the self same effect, that is in virtue, is named Beauty.
Which sentences depely inuestigate, and well perceived, by them that be about
prin cis and governors, they may consider, how ware and circumspecte they
ought to be in the inducynge them to opinions.

Of patience in susteynyng wrongs and rebukes. Cap. XII.
Unto him that is valyant of courage, it is a great pain and diffycultie to
sustain injury, and not to be forth with revenged: and yet oftentimes there
is accounted more valiantness, in the sufferance, than in an hasty reue^gyng.
As it was in Antoninus the emperor, called the philosopher, against whom
rebelled one Cassius, and usurped the imperial maiestic in Syria, and in the
cast partis. Yet at the last the same Cassus being slain by the capitaynes of
Antonine next adjoining, he there of vnwittinge, was therewith soore grieved. And
therefore taking to him the children of Cassius, entreated them honorably,
whereby he acquired ever after, the incomparable and most assured love of his
subjects.

As much dishonor and hatred his son Co^modus wanne by his impacience,
wherein he so exceded, that for as much as he found not his bayne hette to
his pleasure, he caused the keeper thereof to be throwe^ in to the hot brennyng
fornais. What thing might be more odible, thanne that most dyuellyshe
impacience?

Julius Caesar, when Catullus the poet wrate against him contumelious or
reprocheable versis, not only forgave him, but to make him his friend, caused
him oftentimes to soupe with him.

The noble emperor Augustus, when it was showed him, that many me^ in the cite
had of him vnsittynge words, thought it a sufficient answer, that in a fre
city me^ must have their tu^ges needs at liberte. Nor never was with any
person, that spoke evil of him, in word or countenance wors discon tented.
Some men will not praise this manner of patience, but account it for
folishenes: Remedy against impacience.
but if they behold on the other side, what incommoditie comes of
impacie^ce, how a man is therewith abstract fro reason, and turned into a
monstrous figure, and do co^ferre all, that with the stable countenance and
pleasant regard of him that is p acie^t, and with the commodity that does
ensue thereof, they shall affirm, that that simplicity is an excellent
wisdom.

More over, the best way to be aduenged, is so to contemn injury and rebuke,
and live with such honesty, that the doer shall at the last be thereof
ashamed, or at the least, lose the fruit of his malice, that is to say,
shall not rejoice and have glory of thy hyndrance or damage.

Of pacyence in repulse or hynderance of promotion. Ca. XIII.
TO a man, having a gentyl courage, likewise as nothing is so pleasant, or
equally rejoices him, as reward or preferremente sodaynelye given, or above
his merit: so nothing may be to him more dyspleasaunt or payneful, than to
be neglected in his pain taking, and the reward and honor, that he looks
fore, and for his merits is worthy to have, to be given to one of less
virtue, and perchance of no virtue or laudable quality.

Plato in his Epistoll to Dion king of Scicile says, It is good right, that
they, which be good men, and do the semblable, obtain honor, which they be
worthy to have.

Undoughtedly in a prince or noble man, Commodities which do happen by the
advancement of good men.
may be nothing more excellent, ye nothing more necessary, than to advance
men after the estimation of their goodness, and that for two special
commodities, that come thereof. First that thereby they provoke many men to
apprehend virtue. Also to them, which be good, and all ready advanced, they
give such courage, that they endeavor them selfs with all their power, to
increase that opinion of goodness, where by they were brought to that
advancement, which needs must be to the honor and benefyte of those, by whom
they were sopromoted. Contrary wise, where meu from their infancye have
ensued virtue, worn the florysshynge time of youth in paynefull study,
abandoning al lusts and other thing, which at that time is pleasant,
trusting thereby to profytte the publyke weal, and to obtain honor: when
either their virtue and travail is little regarded, or the preferment, which
they looked for, is given to other not equal in merit, it not only perceth
their heart with moehe anguysshe, and oppresses the^ with dyscomforte, but
also mortyfyeth the courages of many other, which be aptely disposed to study
virtue, and hoped thereby to have the propre reward thereof, which is
commendation and honor, which being given to men, lacking virtue and
wisdom, shall be occasion for them to do yuell, as Democritus says. For who
douteth, but that authority in a good man does publyshe his virtue, which
before lay hid. In an yuell man it ministers boldness and license to do yuel,
which by dread was before covered.

Surely this Repulse, or (as they vulgarly speak) putting back from
promotion, is no little pain or dyscomforte, but it may be withstand, or at
the least remedied with Patience, which may be in this wise induced.

First, considering that the world was Patience how hit may be induced.
never so constant, that at all times before, good men were justly rewarded,
and none but they only promoted.

Cato, called Uticensis, at whose wisdom all the world wo^dred, and whose
gravity, as well the senate and people of Rome, as other kings and pryncis,
reuerensed, lokynge to be one of the Consules, was openly rejected, wherewith
his friends and kynsemen took no little discomforte. But Cato him self, so
little regarded that repulse, that where always he went very homely, he the
next day following, decked and trymmed him self more freshclye than he was
wont: and when he had showed him self so to the people, at after none he
walked with one of his friends in the markette place, bare legged, and in
sengle apparayle, as he was accustomed.

Scipio called Nasica, who by the hoole senate was iuged the best man in the
city, and of an auncyente house, was like wise put back, fro being Consule.

Lelius like wise, which was openly called the wise man, was semblably refused.
And diverse other, of whom hystories do make mention, were abiecte, when they
had well deserved honors, and their inferyors in merits promoted.

Also a man's confeyence shall well comfort him, when he has so lived, that
where he is known, men do judge him worthy preferment. And than may he say to
them, which marvel, why he is not advanced, as Cato say de to a person,
that told to him, that men wondered, why among A Wise sentence of Cato.
so many noble men's images, as were set up in the city, Catos image was not
espied. By god said Cato, I had lever that men wondered why I have none image
set up, than why men should set up mine image. So if men marvel, why a
man is not advanced, knowing him a good man, than judge they him to be worthy
promotion, which judgment proceeds of favor: and than though he lack
promotio^, yet has he perfect glory, which every noble heart desires. For
Tulli says, The perfect and most pryncipall glory, consysteth in those three
things, If the multitude love us: if they put confydence in us: if also, as
it were meruaylynge at us, they think us worthy to have honor given unto us.

With this glory and clennesse of conscience, shall a wise man content him, and
be induced to Patience, and not be grieved with his fortune, but to follow
Democritus, in laughing at the blind iugementes of men, in bestowynge
promotions.

I omytte at this time, to write any more of this virtue Patience, sens to the
instytution of a governor, this seems to be sufficient, to the residue he
shall be better persuaded by the warkes of Plutarche, Seneca, and Pontane, where
they write of Patience, which warkes he may read at his leasour.

Of Magnanimity, which may be named valiant courage. Cap. XIIII.
MAGNANIMITY is a virtue much commendable, and also expedient to be in a
governor, and is as I have say de, a companion of fortitude, And may be in
this wise defyned, that it is an excellency of mind, concerning things of
great importance or estimation, doing althynge, that is virtuous, for the
achieuing of honor.

But now I remember me, this word Magnanimity, being yet strange, as late
borrowed out of the latin, shall not content all men, and specially them, whom
nothing contenteth out of their accustom Mumpsimus: I will adventure to put for
Magnanimity, a word more familiar, calling it Courage,
good COURAGE, which having respect to the said definition, shall not seem
much inconuenyente. But now concerning a more larger description of the said
virtue, Aristotle says, That man seems to be of noble courage, that is
worthy, and also iugeth him self worthy to have things that be great. He
says also afterward, Noble courage is an ornamente of virtues, for it makes
them the more ample, and without them she her self may not be.

But I will for a little time leave this noble Philosopher Arystotelle, and
reuerentely interpret a place in the offices of Tulli, where he most
eloquentely and plainly sets out this virtue saying, Always a valyaunte
and noble courage is discerned by two things specially, whereof one is in
dyspysynge things outewarde, when a man is persuaded, neither to marvel at
any thing, neither to wysshe or desire any thing, but that which is honest.
More over, that a man should not bow for any fortune or trouble of mind. A
another thing is, when thou art of that mind or courage, as I before said,
that thou thanne practyse those things, not only which be great, and most
profitable, but also that be very dyfficile and full of labor and peril, as
well concerning man's life, as many other things thereto perteynynge.

And afterward the same Tulli says, To esteem lyttel those things, which
unto the more part of men seems excellent, and also with reason firm and
stable to co^tempne them, is sign of a noble and valiant courage. Also to
tolerate those things, which do seem bitter or grievous (whereof there be
many in the life of man, and in fortune) in such wise as thou depart not from
the astate of nature, neither from the worship perteyninge unto a wise man,
betokens a good courage, and also much constaunce.

By this it seems, that MAGNANIMITY, or good courage, is as it were the
garmente of Virtue, where with she is set out (as I moughte say) to the
vttermooste. I mean not, that thereby virtue is amended or made more beauteous,
which of her self is perfect: but like wise as a lady of excellent
beautye, though she be all ways sayre, yet a rich and a fresshe garmente
declares her astate, and causes her the more to be looked on, and thereby her
natural beautye to be the better perceived. Semblably does Magnanimity,
joined with any virtue, set it wonderfullye furthe to be beholden, and (as I
might say) meruayled at, as it shall appear aboundauntly in the examples
ensuynge.

Agesylaus, king of Lacedemonia, in the beginning of his youth, perceiving
all Greece to be in great fear, for the fame that was sprade of the Persians,
coming with an infinyte army: with a noble courage profred, not only to
defend his own country, but also with a small host to pass the sees into
Asia, and from thens either to bring victory of the Persians, or else a sure
and honorable peace. With whose courage, the Lacedemones hyghely recomforted,
delivered unto him.x. thousand soldiers, with the which host he went into
Asia, and there vainquisshed the Persians, and returned joyfully into his
cou^treye, with his people all saulfe, to his perpetual renoume, and also the
honor and suertie of all Greece.

Antigonus, king of Macedonia, being on the sea, one of his capytaynes aduysed
him to depart, saying, The nauye of his enemy was much greatter in noumbre
than his: where unto with a noble courage he answered, And for how many
ships accounte you our person? wherewith his people took such comfort,
that they boldly did set furthe, and vaynquisshed their enemies.

Such noble courage was in great king Alexander, that in his wars against
Darius, he was seen of al his people fighting in the prease of his enemies
bare heeded.

I will not be so vncurtaise, to leave unremembered in this place, the notable
magnanimity of a king of England, which I happened to read late in an old
cronycle.

Edgar, who in the time that the Saxons had this realm in subjection, had
subdewed all the other kings Saxons, and made them his trybutaries. On a time
he had them all with him at dinner, and after it was showed him, that Aynande,
king of Scotts, had said, that he wondered how it should happen, that he
and other kings, that were talle and greatte personages, would suffer them
selfs to be subduaed by so little a body as Edgare was. Edgare dissembled and
answered nothing, but faynynge to go on huntyng, took with him the Scottyshe
king in his company, and purposely withdrewe him from them that were with him:
And causynge by a secret servant, two swerdes to be conueyde into a place in
the foreste, by him appointed. As soon as be came thither, he took the oone
sword, and delivered the other to Kinande, bidding him to prove his strength,
and to assaye, whither his deeds would ratify his words. Whereat the
Scottysshe king being abashed, beholdynge the noble courage of Edgar, with an
horrible fear confessed his error, desiring pardon, which he with most
humble submission, at the last optayned.

That noble king Edgare, declarynge by his Magnanimity, that for his virtue
and not by chance, he was elected to reygne over so noble a region.

Plato for his divine wisdom and eloquence, named the god of Philosophers,
was sent for by Dionyse king of Sicile, to the intent, as it seemed, that he
would be of him instructed, concerning the polytike governance of his realm.
But when he had been with him a certain space, and would not flatter with the
king, and uphold his tyranny, the king became weary of him, in so much that
if it had not ben at therequest of Architas, price of Tare^t, he would have
put him to death. Wherefore partly at the desire of that prince, partly for
fear of the Athenienses, he lycenced Plato to depart without damage: but at
his departing, he said unto him, as it were in despite, O how euylle will
thou speak of me Plato, when thou come among thy companyons and scolers?
Than Plato with a noble courage answered, God defend, there should be in my
scole so much vacant time from the study of wisdom, that there might be
any place left, ones to remember the.

Now will I make an end of this virtue, and proceed further to write of some
vices, which commonly do follow magnanimite, and with great difficulty may be
eschewed.

Of Obstinacy, a familiar vice, folowinge Magnanimity. Cap. XV.
THE PRINCE OF Orators, Marcus Cullius, in his first book of officis, says,
In height and greatness of courage, is most soonest engendered Obstinacye, and
inordinate desire of Soueraignetie. OBSTINACY is an affection immovable,
fyxed to will, abandoning reason, which is engendered of Pride, that is to
say, when a man estemeth so much him self above any other, that he reputeth
his own wit only, to be in perfection, and contemns al other council.
Undoutedly this is an horrible and peryllous vice, and very familiar with
them, which be of most noble corages. By it many a valiant captain and
noble prince, have not only fallen them selfs, but also brought al their
countries in danger, and oftentimes to subuercion and ruin.

The wise king Solomon says, Among proud men be all way contentions: And
they that do all things with counsel, be governed by wisdom. I need not to
rehearse examples out of old writers, what damage has ensued of Obstinacy,
consyderyng that every history is full thereof, and we still have it in daily
experience. But of one thing am I sure, where Obstinacy rules, and reason
lacks place, there counsel avails not: And where council has not
authority and franches, there may nothing be perfect. Solomon says, Where be
many Prouer. xi.
counsayles, there the people is in surety. Now will I declare the resydue of
Tullies sentence, concerning inordynate desire of soueraignetie, which is
proprelye called Ambition.

Of an other vice following magnanimity, called Ambition. Cap. XVI.
IT was not without a high and prudente consideration, that certain laws were
made by the Romans, which were named the laws of Ambition, whereby men were
restrained in the city to obtayn offices and dignities in the Publyke well,
either by gyuynge rewards, or by other synyster labor or means: And they,
which by that law were condemned, were put to death without any favor.
Uerily it was a noble law, and for all places necessary, consyderinge what
inconvenience happens by this vain and superfiuous appetite, witnesses among
the Romans, Sylla, Marius, Carbo, Linna, Po^pei, and Caesar, by whose ambicion
mo Romans were slain, than in acquyrynge the empire of all the world. Sylla
condemned, and caused to be slain, four score thousand Romans, beside many
mo that were slain in the battayles, between him and the both Marius.

Also Pompei, and Julius Caesar, the one suffrynge no piere, the other no
superior, by their ambycion caused to be slain between them, people
innumerable, and subverted the best and most noble publyke weal of the
world, and finally having lyttel time of rejoicing their unlawful desire,
Pompeie shamefully fleinge, had his heed stricken of, by the commandment of Pro
lomee, king of Egypt, unto whom as unto his friend he fled for succor.
Caesar the vanquyssher, was murdered in the Senate with daggers, by them, whom
he most specially favored.

I could occupy a great volume with histories of them, which coveting to
mount into excellent dignities, did thereby bring in to extreme perils, both
them selves and their countries. For as Tacitus says, wonderful elegantly,
With them, which desire soueraygnetie, there is no mean place between the
top and the step down. To the which words agreynge Tullie says, High
auctorities should not much Ci. off. 1.
be desired, or rather not to be taken at sometime, and oftentimes to be left
and forsaken. So did Sylla, whom I late spoke of. And Dioclesyan Emperor of
Rome, who after he had governed the empire Sextus Aurelius.
XXV. yeree honorably (if he had not ben polluted with the blod of
innumerable Christen men) wyllyngely abandoned the crown and dignity
imperial, and lived.ix. years on his private possessions. And on a time being
desired of Herculius and Galerius, unto whom he had resigned the empire, to
take efteso ones on him the governance, abhorringe it as a pestilence, answered
in this wise, I would ye did see the herbs, that I have with mine own hands
sown and set at Salona, surely ye would not than in this wise advise me.

Also Octauius Augustus, which in felicity passed all emperors, devised often
times with his friends, to have resygned his authority. And if at that time
the Senate had been as well furnished with noble and wife personages, as it was
before the Civil wars, between Caesar and Pompeie, it is to be thought, that
he would surely have restored the public weal to his pristinate glory. But
now let us see, what is the cause, that Ambytion is so pernicious to a
publyke weal.

In mine opinion it is for two causes prin Ambition why it is il
cipally. First for as much as they, which be of that courage and appetite,
when they be in authority, suppose al thing to be lefull that lyketh them. And
also by reason of their preeminence, would so be separate from other, that no
man should co^trolle them, or warn them of their enormyties, and finally would
do what they list without contradiction. Whereof do ensewe diverse injuries and
subuertion of justice.

And this, which I have now said, Tulli affirms to be true, saying, Uerily
it is a great difficulty, where thou would be above all men, to observe
equity. Which is the thing most appropried to justice. And shortly after he
says, The more higher of courage that a man is, and desirous of glory, the
sooner is he meued to do things against right. Seeing it was so, in the time of
Tulli, when almost every man, that was in authority, had de excellent lernyng
(the Romans bryngyng up their children in study of moral philosophye (what
shall we suppose in our time, when few men in authority do care for lernyng?
Why should we think to be more justice now used in authority, than was in the
time of Tulli? Is there not now private affection, particular favor,
displeasure and hatrede, as was at that time? I would the reders hereof, should
be iuges, examinyng these my wordis with daily experience.

The second cause, that conde^neth Ambicion, Conetyse.
is couetyse of treasure, therewith to mainteyn their ostentation and vaynglory,
which ambicious persons, do call their honor, whereby they be procured to
find unjust means by their authority, to provide for such substance,
wherewith they may be not only satisfied (they being insaciable) but
according to their own appetite fully suffysed. Wherefore the philosophers,
called Stoici, used this sentence, great indigence or lack comes not of
poverty, but of great plenty, for he that has much, shall need much.

But certes such ambycious persons, may well consider, that the magnificence
and pomp, which they couete, is not so much wondered at, as avarice and
collection of money is universally hated. Wherefore Darius, Plutarchus in apoth.
king of Persia, and father to Xerxes, wha^ he had commanded a subsidy to be
leuyed of his subjects, demanded the chief men of the countries, whether
they found themself grieved. They answering, that they were in a merely good
case, he commanded the one half to be eftesones restored, lest he of any
avarice should be suspected. By the which act he stabysshed his dignity, and
made it more perfect.

More over, Tulli says, To take any Ci. off. iii.
thing from an other man, and one man to increase his commodity with an other
man's detryment, is more repugnaunt to nature, than death, than poverty,
pain, or other thing that might happen, either to the body or other goods
worldly.

The true definicion of abstinence and Contynence. Cap. XVI.
ABSTINENCE and continency be also companions of fortitude, and be noble and
excellent virtues, and I can not tell, wheter there be any to be preferred
before them, specially in men having authority, they being the brydles of two
capital vices, that is to say, Avarice and Lechery. Which vices being
refrayned by a noble man, that lives at liberty and without controlement,
procures unto him, beside the favor of god, immortal glory. And that cite
or realm, whereof the governors with these vices be lyttel or nothing
acquainted, do abide long in prosperytie. For as Ualerius Maximus says,
where so ever this fervent pestilence of mankind has entry, Injury reygneth,
reproach or infamy is spradde and deuoureth the name of nobylitie. The
propretyes of these two virtues, be in this manner.

Abstinence is, whereby a man refraineth from any thing, which he may lefully
take, for a better purpose. CONTINENCE, is a virtue which keeps the
pleasant appetite of man under the yoke of reason. Aristotell, making them
both but one, describes them under the name of contine^ce, Ethi. vii.
saying, He that is continent, for as much as he knows, that coueitous
desires be yuell, does abandone them, reason perswadynge him. For this time I
take abstynence, for the refusing of money, possessions, or other thing
semblable. Continence, the only forbearyng the unlawful company of women.

Martius Coreolanus, a noble young Absteynig from rewards, Coreolanus
man, which lyneally descended from Ancus, sometime king of Romans, when he
had done many valyaunte acts, and achyeued sondrye enterpryses, was according
to his merits commended in the army by Postumius, than being consul, and by
their universal assente, was rewarded with all such honors, as than
apperteyned to a good warryour: Also with one hundred acres of arable land,
the election of ten prisoners, ten horsis apparayled for the wars, one
hundred of Oxen, and as much silver as he moughte bear. But of all this would
he take no thing, but one only prisoner, which was of his acquayntaunce, and
one courser, which al ways after he used in battle.

Marcus Curious, the very rule and pattern Curious,
of Fortitude and moderate living, wha^ the people, called Samnites, which had
wars with the Romans, found him syttyng in his house by the fire upon a
homely form, catyng his meat in a dyshe oftre, they bringing to him a great
some of gold by the consent of the people, and wondering at his poverty, with
courtaise langage, desired him to take that they had brought him, he thereat
smylyng, said thus unto the^, Ye ministers of a vain and superfluous message,
show you to the Samnites, that Curious had lever have domynyon over them that
be rich, than he him self to have richesse. And as for this gold, which ye
accounte precious, take it again with you, and remember, that ye can neither
vaynquishe me in battle, nor corrupt me with money

Quintus Tubero, surnamed Catelius, what time he was Consul, the people in
Tubero.
Greece, called Aetoli, sent to him by their ambassadonrs, a great quantity
of silver vessel, curiously wrought and graven. But when they came to him, they
found on his table vessel only of earth. And when he saw them, he exhorted
them, that they should not suppose, that his contentation in poverty, should
be with their presents relyued. And with that saying, commanded them to
depart.

To Epaminondas, the Thebane, being Epamino^das.
in his time, as well in virtue as prowess, the most noble man of all Greece,
Arthaxerses, king of Persya, to make him his friend, sent one of his
servants to Thebes, with a greatte quantity of treasoure, which servant
knowing his manners, darste not offer it unto him when he came, but speaking
to a young man, which was famyliar with Epamino^das, gave unto him a great
reward, to meue Epaminondas to receive the kings present. Who uneath herynge
the first words of the young man, commanded the kings servant to be
brought unto him, unto whom he had these words.

Friend, show to the king, that he needs not to offer me money: for if he
have any thing to do with the Thebanes for a good purpose, he may have their
assistence with out any reward: if the purpose be naught, he can not with all
the treasoure of the world hope to obtain it

Which words were spoken with such a gravity, that the said servant,
being a ferde, desired Epamynondas, that he might be saulfly conuayed out of
the cite: which he granted with good will, least if the money were taken
away, he might of the receyuynge thereof, have been suspected. More over, he
caused the Thebane, which was his friend and companyon, to restore to the
messager the money that he had received.

Semblable abstinence was there in Pho Phocion.
cion, a noble counsaylour of Athenes, unto whom the ambassadoure of the
greatte king Alexaunder, brought from their master a hundred Talentes of
gold, which were of english money.xii. thousand pound. But before that he
herd them speak any thing, He demanded of them, why to him only the king
sent so bounteous a reward. And they answered, for as much as king
Alexander iuged him only to be a good man and a just. Than suffer ye me (say de
Phocion) to be and to seem the same man, that your king does judge me, and carry
your gold again to him.

To the same Phocion, the ambassador of Antypater (who succeeded the greatte
king Alexander in Macedonia) offered to give a great some of money: which
Phocion despysynge, said in this wise, Sens Antipater is not greatter than
Alexander, nor his cause better, I do nothing perceive, why I should take any
thing of him. And when the Orator would have had Phocions son, to have
taken the money, Phocion answered, If his son would be like unto him, he
should have no need, neither of that money, nor of none other. If he would be
unlike unto him, and of dysso lute manners, neither Antipaters gystes, nor none
others, were they never so great, should be sufficient.

By these examples it does appear, how good men did always flee from rewards,
all though they might have been lefully taken, which in them was neither
folyshenes nor yet rusticitie, but of a prudent consideracion. For as much as
both by wisdom and experyence they knew, that he which takes a reward
before any thing done, is no longer at lybertye, but of a free man is made
bond, because he has taken erneste for his true endeavor. Also by the
taking, he is become an yuel man, though before he were good, For if he
receive it for an yuel purpose, he is than a wretch and detestable: If the
matter were good, than is he not ryghtwyse in selling a good deed, which he
ought to do thankfully, and with out reward.

And I doubt not who so ever is contented with this present astate, and
supposes felycitie to be in a mean, and al excess to be peryllous, will
allow these sentences, and think them worthy to be had in remembrance,
specially of them that be governors. For that realm, or City, where men in
auctorytie have their hands open for money, and their howses for presents, is
ever in the way to de subverted* Wherefore Caius Pontyus, prince of Samnytes,
was wont to say, I would god, that fortune had reserved me unto the time and
that I had be than borne, when the Romans should begin to take gifts, I
should thanne not suffer them any longer to rule.

Paulus Emilius, when he had vaynquished Paulus Aemilius.
king Perses, and subdued al Macedonia, brought into the commune treasory of
Rome an infinite treasure, that the substance of that one prince dyscharged
all the Romans to pay ever after any tax of subsidy. And yet for all that
goods Emilius brought nothing into his own house but only perpetual renoume.

Scipio, when he had gotten and destroyed Scipio Affrican.
the greatte City of Chartage, was not therefore the rycher one halfepeny.

By this appears, that honor rests not in richesse, all though some
perchance will say, that their revenues be small, and that they must take
such rewards as be lefull, only to maynteyne their honor: but let them take heed to the saying of Tulli, Nothing is more to be abhorred, than Avarice,
specially in princis, and in them which Ci. off. ii.
do govern publyke weals.

The examples of continence, given by noble men. Capl. XVII.
Now will I speak of CONTINENCS, which is specially in refraynynge or
forbearynge the act of carnal pleasure, whereunto a man is fervently meued, or
is at liberty to have it. Which undoubtedly is a thing not only diffycyle,
but also wonderful in a man noble or of great autoritye* but in such one as
it hapeneth to be, needs must be reputed much virtue and wisdom, and to be
supposed, that his mind is invincible, considering that nothing so sharply
assaileth a man's mind, as does carnalle affection, called (by the folowers
thereof) love. wherefore Plato says, that the soul of man, which by love is
possessed, dies in his own body, and lives in an other.

The great king Alexander, after his first Alexander
victory against king Darius, having all ways in his hooste, the wife of the
same Darius, which incomparably excelled all other women in beaultie, would
never, after he had ones seen her, have her come in his presence. Al be it that
he caused her astate still to be maintained, and with as much honor as ever it
was: and to them, which wondering at the ladies beauty, meruayled, why
Alexander did not desire to have with her company, he answered, saying, It
should be to him a reproach, to be any wise subdued by the wife of him, who^ he
had vanquyshed.

Antfochus, the noble king of Asia, in Antiochus
the city of Ephesum, beheld a virgin (being a Mynchen in the temple of
Diana) of excellent beauty, and perceyuyng him self to be rauyshed in the
love of the maiden, hastily and immediately departed out of the city, lest
love should constrayn him to violate the virgin: wisely consydering that it
was best, to absteyne from doing battle with that enmy, which uneath might be
vanquished, but by flight only.

The valiant Pompei, when he had Pompeius
vanquyshed the king Mithridates, and had taken diverse of his concubynes,
which in beauty excelled, would have no carnal knowledge with any of them: but
when he knew, that they were of noble lignage, sent them undefiled to their
parents and kynnesfolke.

Semblably did Scipio, when he wanne Scipio.
Carthage. For among diverse womenne, which were there taken: one most
faireste of other, was brought unto him, to do with her his pleasure. But after
that she had discovered to him, that she was affyanced to a gentylle man,
called Indibilis, he caused him to be sent for, and when he beheld the
lame^tation and signs of love between them, he not only deliuerid her to
Indibilis, with her ransom, which her friends had paid for her
redemption: but also added thereto an honorable portion of his own treasure. By
the which contynence and lyberalitie, he wan the hearts of Indibilis and all
his blood, whereby he the sooner optayned and wanne all the country.

Of this virtue be exa^plesinnumerable, as well of gentiles as of christen men:
But these for this time, shall suffyse, saving for the strangeness of it, I
will rehearse a notable history, which is remembered by the most excellent
doctor saint Hierome.

Ualerian being emperor of Rome, and A wonder full continence in and
Christian martyr.
persecutyng the church, In Egypt was a christen man presented unto him, whom
he beholdynge to be young and lusty, thinking therefore to remove him from the
faith, rather by veneryall mocions, than by sharpness of tourmentes, caused
him to be laid in a bed within a fair gardayne, having about him all
flowers of sweet odor and most delectable savors and perfumes. And than
caused a fair ten der young woman to be laid by him al naked, who ceased not
swetely and louyngly to embrace and kiss him, showing to him all pleasant
devises, to the intent to provoke him to fornication. There lacked little, that
the young man was not va^quisshed, and that the flesh yielded not to the service
of Uenus. That perceiving the young man, which was ar mid with grace, and seeing
none other refuge, with his teth did gnawe of his own tu^ge, wherewith he
suffered such incredible pein, that therewith the brennyng of voluptuous
appetite was utterly extincte.

In this notable act, I wot not which is to be commended, either his
invincible courage, in resisting so much against nature, or his wisdom, in
subduing the less peyn with the more: and bytyng of that, whereby he might be
constrained to blasphem god, or renounce his religion. Sure I am, that he
therefore received immortalle life, and perpetual glory.

And this I suppose suffiseth, to persuade me^ of good nature, to embrace
Contine^ce. I mean not to live ever chaste: but to honor matrimony, and to
have good awayt, that they let not the sparks of concupiscence grow in great
flames, wherewith the wits shall be dried up, and all noble virtues devoured.

Of constance or stabilitie. Ca. XVIII.
IN BVYLDYNGE of a fortress, or other honorable mancion, it ought to be well
considered, that the cement or mortar, wherewith the stones be laid, be fyrme
and well byndynge. For if it be brokle, and will mouldre away with every shower
of rayn, the buyldyuge may not contynewe, but the stones, not surely couched
and mortred, fall away one after an other, and finally the holle house is
defaced and falls in ruin. Semblably, that man, which in chyldehode is
brought up in sundry virtues, if either by nature, or else by custom, he be not
induced, to be always constant and stable, so that he meue not for any
affection grefe or displeasure, all his virtues will shortly decay, and in the
estimation of men be but as a shadow and so one forgotten. For though he have
all the gifts of nature and fortune, and also is adorned with doctrine and
virtue, which he in his chyldhod has acquired with much travail, watch,
and study, and add not to Constaunce, when he comes to the time of
experience, which experience is as it were the warke of the crafts of man,
being meued with any private affection, or fear of adversity, or exterior
damage, will omytte any part of his lernyng or virtue, the estymation of his
person immediately cesseth among perfect warkemen, that is to say, wise
men, and finally being wauerynge or unstable, what thing in him may be
commended?

And in one thing me seems that Constance Constance equal to Justice.
has equail praise with justice: that is to say, that he that is him self
unjust, loves that person, that deals justly with him, and contrary wise,
hates that person that deals iniustly, or does him wrong. In likewise he,
which is inconstant, extolleth him, whom he fyndeth constaunt, and desyrethe
to have him his friend: on the other part, heis angrye with him, whom he
prouethe inconstaunt and wauerynge, and accounts him a beast, and unworthy
company of men: and awayteth diligently to trust him with nothing.

We note in chylderne inconstancy, and likewise in women, the one for
sklendernes of wit, the other as a natural sickness. Therefore men use in
rebuking a man of inconstance, to call him a chyldyshe or womanly person. All
be it some women now adays be founden more constant than me^, and specially in
love toward their husbands, or else might there happen to be some wrong
inheritours.

Constance is as propre unto a man as is reason: And is of such estymation,
that according as it was spoken of a wise man, It were better to have a
constant ennemy, tha^ an inconstant friend. Whereof I my self had sufficient
experience.

But now to declare some experience of Constance, whereby the reders may be the
more thereto provoked, I will rehearse some examples thereof, out of old
histories, as I shall happen to remember them.

After that Sylla had vanquished Marius, ^ceuols.
and distroyed the part of his adversaries, he, with a great number of persons
all armed, enuironned the senate, intending to compel them by violence to
condemn Marius for a traitor. Which request none darste geynesaye, Sceuola
only except, who being thereof demanded would give no sentence. But when
Sylla did cast therefore on him a cruel countenance, he with a constant vysage,
and noble courage, said to him, Sylla, although thou facest and thret nest me
with thy multitude of soldiers, with whom thou haste thus besieged this
court, ye and although thou do menace me with death never so much, yet
shalt thou never bring to pass, that for shedinge a little old blood, I
shall judge Marius a traitor, by whom this city and all Italye have been
preserved.

The constance, that great king Alexander had, in trustyng his friend against
falls Alexa^ders confidence
report, saved his life: where of all men despaired. for after that noble
battle, wherein he had vanquyshed Darius, and taken his treasure, as he passed
through Cilicia, being fore chaufed with feruente heat, and the length of his
journey, he came by the river, called Cydnus, and beholding it clear and
pleasant, and thinking to assuage therein the heates that he suffered, went
thereinto naked, and drank thereof: But immediately, by the excedyng cold,
which was in that water, his finewes shranke, and his joints became unwieldy,
and as they were deed, and all his host being disco^forted he was conveyed to
a city thereby, called Tarsum. Whereupon the physicians assemblyd to deuyse
the best remedy. All were determined, to give him one medycyne, and that it
should be mynistred by one Philyppe, chief physicyon with Alexander. In the
mean time Parmemo, one of the greattest capytaynes about Alexander, ad
uertysed him by his letters, that he should beware of the treason of the said
Philip saying, he was corrupted with a greatte sum of money by Darius.
Wherewith he being nothing esbaied, held in his hands the letter, and
receyuyng the medycyne, that Philippe gave him, at oone time delivered the
letter open to Philyp, and drank also the medycine, declarynge thereby the
consta^ce that was in his frendshyppe. Which trust, not only caused nature
the better to wark with the medicine, but also bound so the heart of the
Physician toward him, that he ever after studied more diligently for the help
and pre seruation of the noble prince, that did so much trust him.

The Constance of Cato Uticensis was Cato.
always immovable, in so much that at sundry times, when he in the Senate
egrely defended the public weal, with vehement and long orations, against
the attemptates of ambicious persons, he was by them rebuked, and committed to
prison, But he therefore not cessynge, but going toward prison, detected to
the people as he went, the unlawful purposes and enterpryses of them, by whom
he was punyshed, with the peril that was imminente to the publyke weal,
which he did with such courage and eloquence, that as well the Senate as the
people drew so about him, that his adversaries were feign for fear to
dyscharge him.

Who can sufficiently commend this noble man Cato, when he redeth in the
warkes of Plutarche of his excellent courage and virtue? How much worthyer
had he ben, to have had Homere the trumpe of his fame immortal, than Achilles?
who for a little wenche contended with Agamemnon only: where Cato for the
conservation of the weal publyke contended, and also resysted against Julius
Caesar and the great Pompey, and not only against their menaces, but also
against their desires, and offres of alyaunce. Whereof I would gladly have
made a remembrance in this warke, if the volume thereby, should not to much
have increased and becomen unhandsome.

Undoughtedly constaunce is an honorable virtue, as inconstance is reprocheful
and odious. Wherefore that man, which is mutable for every occasyon, must needs
often repent him, and in much repentance is not only much folly, but also
great detrymente: which every wise man will eschew, if he can. Wherefore to
governors no thing is more propre, than to be in their living stable and
constant.

The true signification of Temperaunce, a moral virtue. Cap. XIX.
THIS BLESSED company of virtues, in this wise assembled, follows TEMPERANCE,
as a sad and dyscrete matrone and reverent gouernesse, awaytynge dylygentely,
that in any wise voluptie or concupiscence have no preemynence in the soul of
man.

Aristotelle defyneth this virtue, to be a Arist. ethi.
mediocritie in the plesures of the body, spe cially in taste and touching.
Therefore he that is temperate, flees pleasures voluptuous, and with the
absence of them is not discontented, and from the presence of the^, he
wyllyngely absteyneth. But in mine oppynyon Plotinus, the wonderful
philosopher, makes an excellent definition of te^peraunce, saying, that the
propretie or office thereof is, to couaite nothing, which may be repented,
also not to excede the bounds of mediocritie, and to keep desire under the
yocke of reason.

He that practices this virtue, is called Te^perate inco^tine^ce.
a temperate man, and he that does contrary thereto, is named intemperate:
between whom and a person incontinent, Aristotell makes this diuersytie, that
he is intemperate, which by his own election is ladde, supposing the
pleasure that is present or (as I moughte say) invre, should always be
followed. But the person incontinent supposes not so, and yet he not
withstanding does follow it. The same auctour also makes a diversity,
between him that is temperate, and him that is contynente, saying, The
continente man is such one, that nothing will do for bodily pleasure, which
shall stand against reason. The same is he, which is temperate, saving that
the other has corrupt desires, which this man lacks.

Also the temperate man delyteth in nothing, contrary to reason. But he that
is contynent delyteth: yet will he not be lad against reason. Finally to
declare it in few words, we may well call him a Temperate man, that desires
the thing which he ought to desire, and as he ought to desire, and when he
ought to desire. Not withsta^dyng there be diverse other virtues, which do seem
to be as it were companions with temperaunce. Of whom (for the exchuing of
tediousnes) I will speak now only of two, moderation, and so brenesse, which
no man (I suppose) doubts to be of such efficacy, that without them no man
may attain unto wisdom: and by them wisdom is sonest espied.

Of Moderation a spyce of temperaunce. Capi. XX.
MODERATION in the lymyttes and bounds, which honesty has appointed in
speaking and doing: like as in rennynge, passing the gole, is accounted but
rasshenesse, so rennynge half way is reproved for slownesse. In like wise,
words and acts be the paces, wherein the wit of man makes his course, and
moderation is instead of the gole, which if he pass over, he is noted either
of presumpti on, or of fool hardynesse, if he come short of the purpose, he is
contempned as dulle and unapt to affairs of great importance. This virtue
shall best be perceived by rehersyng of examples showed by noble men, which is
in effect but daily experience.

Fabius Maximus, being five times Consul, perceyuyng his father, his grau^d
father, and great graundefather, and diverse other his auncetours, to have
had often times that most honorable dignytie, when his son by the
universal consent of the people should be also made consul, ernestely entreated
the people, to spare his son, and to give to the house of Fabius, as it were
a vacatio^ time from that honor: Not for any mystruste that he had in his
sons virtue and honesty, but that his moderation was such, that he would
not that excellent dignity should always continue in one family.

Scipio Affricanus the elder, when the senate and people had purposed, that
according to his merytes he should have certain statues or imagis set in all
courts and places of assembly, Also they would have set his image in
triumpha^t apparayle within the capitole, and have granted to him to have been
consul and Dictator during his life, not withstandyng he would not suffer, that
any of them should be decreed, either by the act of the senate, or by the
peoples sufferage. wherein he showed him self, to be as valiant in refusing
of honors, as he was in his acts, wherein he had them well deserved.

There is also moderation in tolleration of fortune of every sort, which of
Tulli Tolleration of fortune good and badde.
is called equabilitie. which is, when there seems to be always one visage and
countenance, neither changed nor for prosperytie nor for adversity.

Metellus, called Numidicus, in a commune sedicion being banished from Rome,
and abiding in Asia, as he happened to sit with noble men of that country, in
beholdynge a great play, there were letters delivered him, wherein he was
assertayned, that by the hole consent of the senate and people, his return
into his country was granted. Not withstanding, that he was of that tidinges
exceeding ioiful, yet he remeued not, until the plays were ended, nor any man
sitting by him, might perceive in his countenance any token of gladness.

When the great king Antiochus, which long time had in his dominion al Asia,
which is accounted to be the third part of the world, was at the last
vanquished by Lucius Scipio, and had lost the more part of his empire, and was
assigned but to a small portion, used his fortune so moderately, that he gave
great thanks to the Romans, that being delivered of so great burdo^ and charge,
he more casely might govern a little dominion.

Alexander being elect and made emperor of Rome at.xvi. years of his age so
excelled al other in virtue, that the senate and people would have him called,
the greatte Alexander, and father of the country, which of al names was
highest, he with a wonderful gravity refused it, saying, It behooved, that
those names were obtained by merits and ripeness of years.

The same prince also would not suffer his empress to use in her apparayle any
richer stones than other ladies, and if any were given her, he either caused
them to be sold, or else gave them unto Temples, affyrming that the examples of
pomp and inordinate expensys, should not proceed of the Emperors wife.

And when for the honor, that he did to the Senate and laws, his wife and
his mother rebuked him, saying, he should bring the imperial majesty into
to low astate, he answered, It should be the surer, and continue the longer.

There is also a Moderation to be used against Moderation of wrath.
wrath or appetite of vengeance.

Hadriane the Emperor, while he was but a pryuate person, bare toward a
capytayne grievous dyspleasure, who afterward herynge, that he was made
emperor, was in great fear, least Hadrian would be aduenged. But when he
came to the Emperors presence, he nothing did or said to him, but only these
words, Thou have well escaped. By which words he well declared his
moderation, and also that who so ever puts on the habyte of a comune person
or governor, it shall not beseme him to revenge private dyspleasures

Architas, when he had been a long space out of his country, and at his
return found his possessions and goods dystroyed and wasted, said to his
balyfe, I would surely punysshe the, if I should not be angry.

Much like did Plato. For when his servant had offended him grievously, he
desired Speusyppns his friend to punish him, least (said he) if I beat him,
I should hap to be angry. Wherein Plato deserved more praise than Arthitas, in
as much as he observed patience, and yet did not suffer the offense of his
servant to be unpunished. For most often times the omittyng of correction
redoubleth a trespace.

Semblable moderation and wisdom Aulus Gellius remembrethe to be in Plutarche
Aulus Gell.
the philosopher, which was master to Trayane the emperor. It happened that
the bondeman of Plutarch had committed sum grievous offense: wherefore his
master wylled, that he should be sharply punysshed: and commaundynge him to
be stryded naked, caused an other of his servants in his prnesence to beat
him. But the slave, who as it semid was learned, while he was in beatyng cried
out on Plutarche, and in manner of reproach said unto him, How agrees this
with thy doctrine, that preachest so much of patience, and in all thy lessons
reprouest wrath: and now contrary to thine own teaching, thou art all
inflamed with wrath, and clean from the patience, which thou so much praysest?
Unto whom Plutarche, without any change of countenance, answered in this
form, Thou embraydest me causeles with wrath and impacience, I pray the,
what perceiuest thou in me, that I am angry or out of patience? I suppose
(except I be much deceived) thou see me not stare with mine eyes, or my
mouth imbosed, or the color of my face changed, or any other deformity in
my person or gesture, or that my words be swyfte, or my voice louder than
modesty requires, or that I am unstable in my gesture or motion, which be
the signs and euydent tokens of wrath and impacience. Wherefore said he to the
correctour, sens he can not prove, that I am yet angry, in the mean time,
while he and I do dispute of this matter, and until he utterly do cesse of his
presumption and obstinacy, look that thou still beat him.

Uerily in mine opinion Plutarch herin declared his excellent wisdom and
gravity, as well in his exaumple of patience, as also in subduyng the
stubborn courage of an obstinate servant. Which hystory shall be expedient
for governors to have in remembrance, that when according to the laws, they
do punysshe offenders, they them selfs be not chaufed or meued with wrath.
But (as Tulli says) be like to the laws, which be provoked to punyshe not
Off. 1.
by wrath or displeasure, but only by equity. And immediately the same auctour
gives an other noble precepte, concerning moderation in punishment, saying, In
correctynge, wrath is principally to be forboden, for he that punyssheth while
he is angry, shall never keep that mean, which is between to much and to
little.

Of sobriety in diete. Cap. XXI.
VErily I nothing doubt, but that the more part of the reders of this wark
will take in good part all that is before written, considering the benefyte,
and also the ornament, that those virtues, of whom I have spoken, of good
reason and congruence must be to them, in whom they shall be planted and do
contynewe. But I know well, that this chapter, which now ensues, shall uneath
be thankfully resceiued of a few reders, ne shall be accounted worcester thy to be
radde of any honorable person, considering that the mattier therein contained
is so repugnant and adverse, to that pernicious custom, wherein of long time
men have esteemed to be the more part of honor, in so much as I very well
know, that some shall accounte great presumption in this mine attemptate, in
writing against that, which has been so long used. But sens I have taken
upon me to write of a publyke weal, which takes his beginning at the
example of them that be governors, I will not let, for the disprayse given by
them, which be abused, with all study and dyligence to discriue the ancient
temperaunce, and moderation in diet, called SOBRIETY, or in a more general
term FRVGALITIE, The act whereof is at this day as infrequente or out of use
Frugalite.
among all sorts of men, as the terms be strange unto them, which have not
been well instructed in latin.

The noble emperor Augustus, who in all the resydue of his life, was for his
moderation and te^perance excelle^tly commended, suffered no little reproach, for
as much as he in a secret souper or banquet, having with him six noble men his
friends, and six noble women, and namyng him self at that time Apollo, and
the other men and women the names of other goddis and goddessis, fared
sumptuously and delycately, the city of Rome at that time being vexyd with
scarcity of grain: he therefore was rent with curses and rebukes of the
people: in so much as he was openly called Apollo the turmentour, saying also
that he with his goddis had devoured their corn, with which liberty of speech
being more persuaded than disconte^ted, fro than forth he used such a
frugalitie or moderation of diete, that he was contented to be seruid at one
meal with three disshes, or six at the most: which also were of a moderate
price, and yet therein he used such sobrenes, that either he him self would not
sytte, until they which dyned with him, had eaten a good space: or else if he
satte when they did, he would arise a great space, or any of them had left
eating. And for what purpose, suppose ye, did this emperor in this wise, in
whom was never spot of avarice or vile courage? Certes for two causes. First,
knowing the inconueniencis, that always do happen by ingurgitations and
excessive fedynges: Also that like as to him was committed the sovereign
governance of all the world, so would he be to al men the general example of
living.

Now what damages do happen among men by immoderate eating and drinking, we
be every day taught by experience: but to bring them (as it were to men's eien)
I will set them out evidently.

First, of sacietie or fullness be inge^drid paynfull diseases and sicknesses,
as squynces, distillatio^s, called reumes or poses, hemorroydes, Galenus de
sa^tuend lib. v.
great bledynges, crampes, duskenesse of sight, the tisike, and the stiche,
with many other that come not now to my remembrance. Of to much drinking
proceeds dropsies, wherewith the body, and often times the vysage, is swollen
and defaced, beastly fury, wherewith the minds be perished, and of all other
most odious, swyne dronkennes, wherewith both the body and soul is deformed,
and the figure of man is as it were by inchauntement transfourmed into an ugly
and lothesome image. Wherefore the Lacedemones sometime purposely caused their
rusticall servants to be made very dronk, and so to be brought in at their
commune dyners, to the intent that young men, beholdynge the deformity and
hastye fury of them, that were dronkardes, should live the more sobrely, and
should eschew drunkenness, as a thing foul and abhomynable.

Also pittacus (one of the seven sages of Greece) did constitute a law, that
they, which being drunk did offend, should sustain double punyshement:
that men should the more dily gently forbear to be drunk.

It is right euydente to every wise man, who at any time has hau^ted affairs,
where what profit is in so briete, and what discommodite happens by the con
trary.
unto was required conte^plation or seryous study, that to a man, having due
concoction and digestion, as is expediente, shall in the morning fasting, or
with a little! refection, not only have his inuencion quycker, his judgment
perfecter, his tongue redyar, but also his reason fresher, his ear more atten
tife, his remembrance more sure, and generally al his powers and wittis more
effectual, and in better astate, than after he has cate^ abundantly. And I
suppose for this cause, the ancient courts of record in this realm, have
ever benne used to be kept only before none. And surely the consideration is
wonderful excellent, and to be (as I might say) superstytiously observed:
the reasons why, be so apparent, that they need not here to be rehearsed.

Pythagoras was never seen to eat any fyshe or flesh, but only herbs and
fruits. Semblably did many other, who exactely followed his doctrine. Wherefore
it was sup posed, that they the rather excelled all other, in fyndyng out the
secrets and hid knowleges of nature, which to other were impenctrable.

Plato, or rather Socrates, Plato indictynge, in his second book of the
publyke weal, wylleth, that the people of his city, which he would
constitute, should be noryshed with barley bread and cakes of wheat, and that
the residue of their diete should be salt, olyues, chese and lykes, and more
over wortes, that the fields do bring forth, for their potage: but he adds
to, as hit were to make the dinner more delycate, figs, beans, myrtylberies,
and beche mast, which they should roste on the coals, and drynk to it water
moderately. So (says he) they liuig restfully and in health unto extreme age,
shall leave the same manner of living unto their successors.

I know well, some reders, for this diete appointed by Socrates, will scorn
him, accountynge him for a fool, who not only by the answer of Apollo, but
also by the consent of all excellent writers, that followed him, and the
universal renoume of all people, was approved to be the wyseste man of all
Grecia.

Certes I have known men of worship in this realm, which, during their yo
uth drank for the more part water.

But here men shall not note me, that I write this, as who says, that noble
men in this realm, should live after Socrates diete, wherein having respect
to this time and region, they might perchance find occasion to reprove me.
Surely like as the excess of fare is to be justly reproved, so in a noble man
much pinchyng and nygard ship of meat and drink is to be discommended.
Nigardeshyppe.


I can not co^me^de Aelius Pertinax, who being emperor of Rome, would have his
gestes served with a plant of lettuse, divided in two parts: and except some
thing were sent him, he would appoynte nine pound weight of flesh unto three
messes, and if any dyshe happened to be brought to him, he caused it to be set
up until the next day.

I am ashamed to remember, that he would send to his friends: two morsels of
meat, a piece of podynge, or the carkaisse of a capon. This was but myserye and
wretched nygardshyp in a man of such honor.

In like manner, who will not have in extreme betestation, the insatiable
gloto^ny of Uitelli', Fabius Gurges, Apicius, and diverse other, to which
carmorantes, neither land, water, ne air, might be sufficient?

Neither the curiosity and wanto appetite of Heliogabalus, emperor of Rome,
is of any wise man allowed, who being at Rome, or far from the sea, would eat
only see fyshe: And when he soiourned nighe to the sea, he would touch no
fysshe, but which was taken out af the river of Cyber, or other places of
equal or of more distaunce. Also he would have dishes of meat made of Camelles
heels, the combs of cocks, newely cut, the tungues of pecockes and
nyghtyngales, partriches eggs, and other things hard for to come by: whereto
be no english names founden (as I suppose) apt to the true signification.

More over, all though I dyspraysed nigardshyp and vicious scarcity, yet in
these no^bre of dyshes, which I have commended, I desire not, to have therein
meats for any occasion to much sumptuous. For in one or two dyshes may be
employed as much money as in twenty, percha^ce as good or better in eating.
Whereof there remains a noble example of Cleopatra, daughter to Ptholomee,
late king of Aegipt, whom Caesar in his life held for his Concubyne. The same
lady Antony (with whom Octauian divided the empire) loved also perramours,
abandoning his wife, which was suster to Octauian. And the wars between him
and Octauian cessynge by a littell space, he (during that time) lived in most
prodigal riotte, and thynkyng all thing in the sea, the land, and the air
to be made for satisfienge his glotony, devoured al flesh and fish that
moughte be any where founden. Cleopatra, disdayninge to be vainquished in any
excess by a Romayne, laid a wager with Antony, that she her self would
receive in to her body at one sup per, the value of fyfty thousand pounds,
which to Antony was thought in a manner to be impossible. The wager was put in
to the hands of Numatius Plancus, a noble Romayne. The next day Cleopatra
prepared for Antony a right su^ptuous super, but thereat Antony nothing
meruailed, knowig the value thereof by his accustomed fare, than the queen
smiling, called for a goblet, where into she did power a quantity of very
tarte vinegar, and taking a perle, which hinge at one of her ears, quickly
did let it fall into the vinegre, wherein being shortly dyssolued (as is the
nature of the perle) she immedyately drank it. And all though she had
vainquisshed Antony, according to her wager, the perle without any dought,
being of the value of.l. M. li. yet had she likewise dronken an other perle
of like value, which was hanging at her other ear, had not Numatius Plancus,
as an indifferent judge, forthewith given judgment, that Antony was all ready
vainquisshed.

I have rehearsed this history, written by Macrobius satu. li. 9. Plin. li. 19.
ca. 35.
Macrobius, and also Plini, to the intent, that the vanite in sumptuous
feastyng should be the better expressed.

Androcides (a man of excellent wisdom) Plinius li. xiiii. natural. hist.
cap. 5.
wrate unto the great king Alexander an epistell, desiryng him to refrain his
intemperaunce, wherein he said, Noble prince, when thou wylt drink wine,
remember than, that thou drynkeste the blood of the earth. Sygnyfienge thereby
(as I suppose) the might and power of wine, and also warning Alexander, of
the thirste or appetite of blood, which would ensue by his intemperate
drinking. For Plini (that writes this history) says immedyately, If
Alexander had obeyed the precepts of Androcides, he had never slain his
friends in his dronkennes. for undoubtedly it may be said with good right,
that there is nothing to the strength of man's body more profitable than wine,
ne to voluptuouse appetites more pernicious, if me sure lacks.

Also it is very truly and proprely written of propretius the poet, in this
sentence following or like,

By wine beauty fades, and age is defaced wine makes forgote^, that late was
embraced.

More over, Salomo^ in his book named Ecclesiastes, calls that country
happy, where of the governors do eat in their time. And what shall we
suppose is their time, but only that, which nature and the universal consent
of all people has ordained? And of what space is that time? But only that,
which suffiseth to the abundaunte sustentation and not oppression of nature, ne
lets any part of their necessary affairs about the publyke weal.

Of Sapience, and the definition thereof. Capi. XXII.
AL be it that some men, which have hitherto radde this book, will subpose,
that those virtues, whereof I have treated, be sufficient to make a governor
virtuous and excellent: yet netheles for as much as the effect of mine
enterprise in this warke is, to express, as far furthe as god shall instruct
my poor wit, what things do belong to the making of a perfeytte publyke
weal, which well nygh may no more be without an excellent governor, than the
universal course of nature may stand or be permanent without on chief
dysposer and meuer, which is over all supereminent in power, understanding,
and goodness. Wherefore because in governance be included Dysposition and Order,
which can not be without sovereign knowelege, procedynge of wisdom, in a more
elegant word called SAPIENCE, Therefore I will now declare, as much as my
little with does comprehend of that part of Sapience, that of necessity must
be in every governor, of a just or perfeytte publyke weal.

The noble philosopher, and most excellent Ci. tusc. q. lib. iiii.
orator CICERO, says in this wise, SAPIENCE is the science of things dyuine
and humayne, which considers the cause of every thing, by reason whereof,
that, which is dyuine, she follows, that, which is humayne, she estemeth
far under the goodness of fortune.

This definition agrees well with the gift of sapience, that god gave to
Salomo^, king of Israel, who asked only wisdom, to govern there with his
realm. But god, which is the fountain of sapience, graciously ponderynge the
young princes petition, which proceeded of an apt inclination to virtue, with
his own most bounteous liberality, which he purposed to employe on him, for
the entiere love that he had to his father: he therefore infused in him ple^tie
of all wisdom and conning, in things as well natural as supernatural: as
it appears by the warkes of the same king Solomon, wherein be well nyghe as
many wysedomes, as there be sentences. And in mine opynion, one thing is
specially to be noted.

King David, father to Solomon, was a man of a rare and meruaylous strength,
in so much, as he him self reports in the book of kings, being a child,
and carienge to his brethren their dinner, where they kept their cattle,
slew first a great bear, and after a lion, which fyerce and hungry assaulted
him, all though he were unarmed: and whether he had any weapon or no, it is
uncertain, sens he makes thereof no mencio^. Also of what prowes he was in
arms, and how valiant and good a captain in battle, it may sufficiently
appear to them that will read his noble acts and achieuaunces in the books
before remembered. wherein no good catholyke man will any thing doubt, though
they be maruaylous. Yet not withstanding al his strength and puyssaunce was
not of such effect, that in the long time of his reign, which was by the
space of.xl. years, he could have any time vacant from wars. But all way
had either continual battle with the Philisties, or else was molested with
his own children, and such as ought to have been his friends. Contrary wise,
his son Solomon, of whom there is no notable mention made, that he showed
any commendable feate, concerning martial prowess, sauinge the furniture of
his garrisons with innumerable men of war, horses, and chariotes, which
proves not him to be valiaunte and strong, but only prudente: after a
little bykerynge with the Philisties, in the beginning of his raygne,
continued in peace without any notable battle, or molestation of any person:
wherefore he is named in scripture, REX PACIFICVS, which is in english, The
peasyble king. And only by sapience so governed his realm, that though it
were but a little realm in quantity, yet it excelled incomparably all other
in honor and riches. In so much as silver was at that time in the city of
Jerusalem, as stones in the street. Wherefore it is to be noted, that Sapience
in the governance of a publyke weal, is of more efficacy, than strength and
puyssaunce.

The authority of Sapience is well declared by Solomon in his proverbs,
saying. By me kings do raygne, and makers of laws dyscerne things that be
just. By me princes do govern, and men having power and authority, do
determine Justice. I love all them that love me, and who that watches to have
me, shall find me. With me is both riches and honor, stately possessions and
Justice. Better is the fruyre, that comes of me, than gold and stones that
be precious.

The same king says in his book, called Ecclesiastice: A king without
sapience shall lose his people, and cities shall be inhabited by the wit of
them that be prudent. which sentence was verifyed by the son and successor
of the same king Solomon, called Roboaz, to whom the said book was written,
who neglectinge the wise and virtuous doctrine of his father, comtempned the
sage counsel of auncyente men, and embraced the light persuasions of young
men and flatterers, whereby he lost his honor, and brought his realm in
perpetual deuisyon.

The empire of Rome (whose beginning, prosperytie, and desolation seems to be
a mirror and example to al other realms and countries) declares to them that
exactely behold it, of what force and value Sapie^ce is to be esteemed, being
begone with shepardes, fleinge the wrath and displeasure of their masters.

Romulus, duringe the time of his reign Diodorus Scicuius libr. 1.
(which was.xxxvii. years) nothing did enterprise, without the auctorite and
consent of the fathers, whom he him self chase to be Senators. And finally,
as long as the senate continued in the city of Rome, and retained their
authority, which they received of Romulus, and was increased by Tullus
Hostilius, the third king, they wonderfully prosperid and also augmentid
their empire over the more part of the world. But sone after the emperor
Constantine had abandoned the city, and translated the Senate from thens to
Constantynople, and that finally the name and authority of the Senate, was by
little and litel exhauste, by the negligence and folly of ignorant emperors, not
only that most noble cite, heed and princess of the world, and fou^tayne of
all virtue and honor, fell into most lamentable ruin, but also the majesty
of the empire decayed utterly, so that uneath a little shadow thereof now
remains, which who so beholds and conferreth it with Rome, when it
flourished, according as it is left in remembrauce by noble writers, he shall
uneath keep reares out of his eyes, beholding it now as a rotten shepecote in
comparyson of that city noble and triumphaunt. O poor and miserable city,
what sundry tourme^tes, excisions, subuertions, depopulations, and other evil
adventures has happened unto the, sens thou were byrefte of that noble court of
Sapience? whose authority if it had always co^ tinued, being also confyrmed in
the faith and true religion of Christ, god being with the pleased, thou
could never have been thus desolate unto the fynall consummation and end of
the world.

I dout not, but it is well known to every Catholyke man, that has the
lyberall use of reason, that all manner of understanding and knowledge, where of
proceeds perfect operation, do take their origynalle of that high sapience,
which is the operatrice of all things. And therefore Salomo^ or Phi lo, or who
so made the book callid Sapie^tia, made his prayer to god in this wise,

Give to me, good lord, Sapience, that sytteth by thy throne. And in the later
end of the prayer he says, Send her from the sete of thy holiness, that she
may be with me, and labor with me, and that I may know what may be accepted
with the.

Orpheus (one of the eldeste poctes of Musis what they do signify.
Greece) affirms in his hymns, that the Musis were gote^ between Jupiter and
Memory. which saying well understand, and exactly tried, shall appear
manifestly to agree with the saying of the wise manne, contained in the said
prayer late rehearsed.

Eustathius, the exposytour of Homere, says, Musa is the knowledge of the
soul, and is a thing divine, as the soul is.

But finally, as by old autors a man may aggregate a definition, that which is
callid in greek and latyne Musa, is that part of the soul, that induces and
moves a man to search for knowledge, in the which motion is a secret and
inexplicable delectation. All be it, because knowledge is in sundry wise
distributed, and the nombre of nine among old authors was always rehearsed,
where they spoke of a multitude, as it shall appear to them that read Homer and
Uir gil, Therefore there were divised to be nine mu ses, which also for the
resemblance of their disposition, were feigned by the poctes to be nine virgins,
that first invented all liberal sciences: but the other opynion approchith more
nere unto the troth, and agrees better unto my purpose.

More over, Jupiter was always taken of the poets and philosophers for the
supreme god, which was the gyuer of life, and creator of all things, as
appears in all their warkes, wherefore sometime they call him omnipote^t,
sometime the fader of goddis and of men, so that under that name they knowleged
to be a very god, though they honored him not as one only god, as they ought
to have done.

But now Orpheus saying, that the Muses proceeded of Jupiter and memory, may
be in this wise interpreted, That god almighty infuded Sapience into the Memory
of man: for to the acquirynge of science belongs understanding and memory,
which as a treasory, has power to retain, and also to erogate and dystribute,
when opportunity happens. And for the excellency of this thing, some noted to
be in man's soul a dyuine substance. As Pythagoras, or sum of his scolers,
writing his sentence, says in this wise, speaking to man,

Now in thy self have thou good confidence
Sens mortal men be of the kind divine
In whose nature a reverent excellence
Appears clear, which all thing does defyne.
Which sentence of Pythagoras, is not rejected neither of Plato, which
approached next unto the catholyke writers, nor of divines, which interpret
holy scripture, taking the soul for the image and similitude of god.

More over, Plato affirms, that there Science from whens hit proceeds. plato
in Time us.
is set in the soul of man, coming in to the world, certain spices, or as
it were seeds of things, and rules of arts or sciences. Wherefore Socrates, in
the book of science, resembles him self to a midwife, saying, plato in
Theage.
In teaching young men, he did put into them no science, but rather brought
for the that, which all ready was in them, like as the mydwyfe brought not in
the child, but being conceived, did help to bring it forth. And like as in
hounds is a power or disposition to hunt, In horses and greyhoundes an
aptitude to run swyftly, so in the sowles of men is ingenerate a leme of
science, which with the mixture of a terrestryall substance is obfuscate, or
made dark. But where there is a perfect master prepared in time, the bryghtnes
of the science appears polyte and clear, like as the power and aptitude of the
beasts before rehearsed, appeared not to the uttermost, except it be by
Exercise provoked, and that slouthe and dullness, being plucked from them by
Industry, be induced unto the contynualle act: which as Plato affyrmethe, is
proved also in the master and the dysciple.

Semblablye the foresay de Socrates, in Platos book of sapie^ce, says to one
Theages, Never man learned of me any thing, all though by my company, he became
wyser, I only exhorting, and the good spirit inspirynge.

Which wonderful sentence, as me seems, may well accord with our catholic
faith, and be received into the commentaryes of the most perfect dyuines.
For as well that sentence, as al other before rehearsed, do comprobate with
holy Scripture, that god is the fountain of Sapience, like as he is the
sovereign beginning of all generation.

Also it was wonderfully well expressed, of whom Sapie^ce is engendered, by a
poet Sapience from whens
named Affranius, whose verses were set over the porche of the Temple, where
the Senate of Rome most commonly assembled. Which verses were in this manner,

Vsus me genuit, matter peperit Memoria. Sophiam me Graii vocant, vos
Sopientiam. Which in English may be in this wise translated. Memory hight my
mother, my fader Experye^ce
Greeks call me Sophi, you name me Sapie^ce.


By use or experience, in these versis expressed, the poet intended, as well
those acts, which we our self daily do practice, as also them, which being
done by other in time passed, for the fruit or utility, which thereof
succeeded, were allowed and also proved to be necessary. And the cause, why the
poet conioyneth Experience and Memory together (as it were in a lefulle
matrimonye, Experience by getting, and Memory always producynge that
incomparable fruit, called Sapience) is, for that Memory in her operation
proprelye succedeth Experience, for that, which is presently do one, we
perceive, that which is to come, we coniecte or dyuyne: but that, which is
passed, only we have in our memory. For as Aristotel declares wonder
Aristoteles de memoria et reminisce^tis lib. ii.
fully in an example, In the princypall sense of Man there is conceived an
image or figure of a thing, which by the same sense is perceived, as long as
it is retained intiere or hole, and (as I might say) consolydate, pure,
manyfeste, or plain, and without blemmysshe, in such wise, that in every
part of it, the mind is stered or occupyedde, and also by the same mind, hit
may be throughely perceived and known, not as an image in it self but as
representynge an another thing.

This is proprelye Memory. But if the hoole image or figure be not retained in
the mind, but part thereof only remains, part is put out, either by the
length of time, or by some other myshappe or injury, so that it can neither
bring the mind eftsoon unto it, nor it can be called again of the mind, as
often as by that portion, which still remains, and has aboden always intiere
and clean, the residewe that was thereto knytte and adjoined, and late seemed
for the time deed or bireft from the mind, is revived and (as it were)
returned home agein, it is than had for redeemed or restored, and is proprely
called REMEM BRAVNCE.

This is the exposition of the noble Philosopher, which I have written,
principally to thentent to ornate our langage, with using words in their
propre signification. Whereof, what commodity may ensue, all wise men will (I
doubt not) consider.

what is the true signification of understanding. Cap. XXIII.
FOr as much as in the beginning of the first book of this warke, I
endeavored my self to prove, that by the order of man's creation, preeminence
in degree should be among men, according as they do excel in the pure
influe^ce of understanding, which can not be denied to be the pryncipall
part of the soul: some reder perchance, meued with dysdayne, will for that
one assertion, immediately reject this warke, saying, that I am of a corrupt or
folyshe oppinion, supposing that I do intend by the said words, that no man
should govern or be in authority, but only he which surmounteth all other
in doctrine, which in his hastye malice he demeth, that I only do mean, where
I speak of understanding.

I suppose all men do know, that man is made of body and soul, and that the
soul in preeminence excels the body, as much as the master or owner
excels the house, or the artificer excels his instruments, or the king
his subjects. And therefore Saluste in the conspiracy of Cathalyne says, We
use specially the rule of the soul, and service of the body: the one we
participate with goddis, the other with beasts. And Tulli says, Man's soul,
Ci. tus^. ^. lib. 1.
being decerpt or taken of the portion of divinity called MEN'S, may be
compared with none other thing (if a man moughte lefully speak it) but with
god him self.

Also the noble dyuine CHRISOSTOMVS, Chrisostode reparatione lapsi.
says, The body was made for the soul, and not the soul for the body. How
it is to be further known, that the soul is of three parts: the one, wherein
is the power or efficacy of growing, which is also in herbs and trees, as
well as in man, and that part is called vegetatyfe. An other part, wherein man
does participate with all other things living, which is called sensytife, by
reason that there of the sensis do proceed, which be dystributed into diverse
isntrumental parts of the body, as sight into the eien, heryng to the ears,
smelling to the nose, tastynge to the might, felyng to every part of the
body, wherein is blood, without the which undoubtedly may be no feeling. The
third part of the soul is named the part intellectual or of understanding,
which is of all the other most noble, as whereby man is most like unto god and
is preferred before al other creatures. For where other beasts by their senses
do feel, what thing do profytte them, and what does annoy them: only man
understands, whereof the said contrary dispositions do come, and by what
means they do either help or annoy: also he perceyueth the causes of the same
thing, and knows how to resyst, where and whan'nede does require: and with
reason and craft how to give remedy: and also with labor and industry, to
provide that thing, which is wholesome or profitable. This most pure part of
the soul, and (as Aristotelle Arist. li. 1. de anima.
says) divine, impassyble, and incorruptibic, is named in latin INTELLECTVS,
whereunto I can find no propre english, but Understanding. For intelligence,
which comes of Intelligentia, is the perceiving of that, which is first
conceived by understanding, called Intellectus. Also intelligence is now used
for an elegant word where there is mutual treaties or appointmentes, either by
letters or message, specially concerning wars, or like other great affairs
between princis or noble me^. wherefore I will use this word vnderstanidng, for
Intellectus, until sum other more propre english word may be founden and
brought in custom. But to perceive more plainly, what thing it is, that I
call understanding, It is the principal part of the soul, which is occupied
about the beginning or original causes of things that may fall in to man's
knowledge: and his office is, before that any thing is attempted, to think,
considre, and prepence, and after often tossynge it up and down in the mind,
to exercise that power: the propretie whereof is to epsy, seek for, enserche,
and find out: which virtue is referred to wit, which is as it were the
instrument of understanding.

Moreover after the things be inverted, coniected, perceived, and by long
time and often considered, and that the mind dysposeth her self to execution
or actual operation: thanne the virtue, named PRVDENCE, first purteth her self
forwards, and tha^ appears her industry and labor, for as much as she
teaches, warns, exhorts, orders, and profits, like to a wise
captain, that sets his host in arraye. And therefore it is to be remembered,
that the office or duty of understanding, precedeth the interprise of acts,
and is in the beginning of things. I call that beginning, wherein before any
matter taken an hand, the mind and thought is occupied, and that a man
sercheth and douteth, whether it be to be entreprised, and by what way, and in
what time it is to be executed. Who by this little introduction knowing, what
understanding does signify, will not suppose, that he, which therein does
excel, is not with honor to be advanced? Than it follows not by this
argument, that for as much as he that excellethe other in understanding,
should be preferred in honor, therefore no man should be preferred to honor,
but only they that excel other in learning. No man having natural reason,
though he never read logyke, wyliudge this to be a good argument,
considering that understanding, called in latin Intellectus and Men's, is by
it self sufficient, and is not of any necessite annexed to doctrine, but
doctrine proceeds of understanding. But if doctrine be always attendynge upon
understanding, as the daughter upon the mother, undoubtedly than understanding
must be the more perfect, and of a more efficacy, being increased by the
inventions and experiences of many other declared by doctrine, no one man
without inspyration having knowledge of all thing. I call DOCTRINE Arist. ethi.
li. 5. posterioru^. i. politice. li. 1.
dyscipline intellectife, or lerning, which is either in writing or by
report of things before known, which procedith from one man to an other.
That which I have said, is in this wise confyrmed by Solomon, saying, A man
that is wise, by heryng Prouer. ^.
shall become wyser, And he that has understanding, shall be a governor.
Seneca says, We instruct our children in liberal sciences, not because those
scyences may give any virtue, but because they prepare the mind, and make it
apt to receive virtue. Which being considered, no man will deny, but that
they be necessary, to eeuery man, that coueyteth very nobylitie. which, as I
have often times said, is in the having and use of virtue. And verily in whom
doctrine has been founden, ioynid with virtue, there virtue has seemed excel
lent, and as I might say triumphant.

Scipio, common of the most noble house of the Romans, in high learning and
knowledge of the nature of things wonder full studyous, having all way with
him the most excellent Philosophers and poets that were in his time, was an
example and myrrour of martial prowess, contynence, devotion, liberality,
and of all other virtues.

Cato, called vticensis, named the chief pilar of the public weal of the
Romans, was so much inflamed in the desire of lernyng, that (as Suetonius
writes) he could not te^pre him self in redinge greek books whiles the Senate
was sitting.

How much it profited to the noble Augustus, which until the death of his
uncle Julius Caesar, dylygentely applied his study in Athenes, it well appeared
after that the Civil wars were all finisshed: when he refourmynge the hole
astate of the publyke weal, stablyshed the Senate, and taking unto him ten
honorable personages, daily in his own person consulted with them of
matters, to be reported twyse in a monethe to the Senate, in such wise aydynge
and helping forth that most noble court with his incomparable study and
dylygence.

The emperor Titus, son to Uaspasian, for his learning and virtue was named
the delycate of the world.

Marcus Antoninus, the e^perour, was in every kind of lerning so excellent,
that he was therefore openly named the philosopher, not in reproach (as men do
now a days in despite call them philosophers and poets, whom they perceive
studyous in sundry good disciplines) but to the augme^ tatio^ of his honor.
For being of his own nature aptly inclined to embrace virtue, he adding to
abundance of lerning, became thereby a wonderful and perfect prince, being
neither of study withdrawn from affairs of the publyke weal, nor by any
busynes utterly plucked from philosophy, and other noble doctrines. By the
which mutual conjunction and just temperaunce of those two studyes, he
attained to such a form in all his governance, that he was named and taken
for father of the senate, of the people, and vnynersally of all the hole empire.

Moreover, his deeds and words were of all men had in so high estimation and
reverence, that both the Senate and peo ple took of him laws and rules of
their living. And in his governance and propre lyuinge, as well at home in his
house, as in his civil business, he was to him self the only law and
example. And as he was above other highest in authority, so by the universal
oppinion of al men he was iuged to be of all other men than lyuinge the best
and also the wyseste.

Of Experience which have preceded our time, with a defense of Histories. Ca.
XXIIII.
EXPERIENCE, whereof comes wise dome, is in two manner of wise: The one is
acts committed or done by other men, whereof profytte or damage succedynge, we
may (in knowing or beholdinge it) be thereby instructed to apprehe^de Titus
Liuius in proemio. li. 1.
the thing, which to the publyke weal, or to our own persons, may be
commodious: and to exchue that thing, which either in the beginning, or in
the conclusyon appears noisome and vycyous. The knowledge of this Experience is
called Example, and is expressed by hystory, which of Tulli is called the life
of memory. And so Hystoryes wherefore they be co^ mendable.
it agrees well with the versis of Affranius, by melate declared. And therefore
to such persons, as do contempne ancient histories, reputing them among
leasynges and fa^tasies (these be their words of reproach) it may be said,
that they frustrate Experience: which (as the said Tulli says) is the light
of virtue, which they would be seen so much to favor, all though they do
seldom embrace it. And that shall they perceive many festely, if they will a
little while lay a part their accustomed obstinacy, and suffer to be
distilled into their ears two or three dropes of the sweet oil of remembrance.

Let them reuolue in their minds generally, that there is no doctrine, be it
either divine or humayne, that is not either all expressed in history, or at
the least mixte with history. But to thentente that there shall be left none
ignorance, whereby they might be detained in their error, I will now declare
unto them what it is, that is called an hystorye, and what it comprehends.

First it is to be noted, that it is a greek name, and comes of a word or
verb in Mist or yewhat it si gnifieth.
Greek Historeo, which does signify, to know, to se, to enserche, to
enquere, to here, to learn, to tell, or expound unto other. And than must
history, which comes thereof, be wonderful profitable, which leaves
nothing hyd from man's knoledge, that unto him may be either pleasant or
necessary. For it not only reports the gestes or acts of pryncis or
capitaynes, their counsaylles and attemptates, entreprises, affairs, manners in
living good and bad, descryptions of regions and cities with their
inhabitants: but also hit brings to our knowledge, the fourmes of sundry
publyke weals, with their augme^tations and decays, and occasyon thereof. More
over precepts, exhortations, counsayles, and good perswasyons, comprehended in
quick sentences and eloquente orations. Finally so large is the compase of
that, which is named history, that it comprehends all thing that is
necessary to be put in memory. In so much, as Arystotelle, where he
declares the parts of man's body, with their descryption and offices, and
also the sundry forms and disposytions of all beasts, fowls, and fishes,
with their generation, names his book an historye. Semblably Theophrast his
scholar, a noble philosopher, descryuynge all herbs and trees, whereof he
might have the true knowledge, intytleth his book, The hystorye of plants.
And finally Plini the elder, calls his most excellent and wonderful warke,
the historye of nature: in the which book he nothing omytteth, that in the
bosom of Nature is contained, and may be by man's wit comprehended, and is
worthy to be had in remenbraunce. Which auctorities of these three noble
and excellent learned men, approves the sygnification of HISTORY, to agree well
with the exposition of the verb Historeo, whereof it comes.

Now let us se what book of holy scripture, I mean the old testament and
the new, may be said, to have no part of history. The five books of Moises,
the book of Iuges, the four books of kings, Job, Hester, Iudeth, Ruth,
Thobias, And also the history of Machaebes (which from the other is
separate) I suppose no man will deny, but that they be all historical: or
(as I might say) intier histories. Also Esdras, Nemias, Ezechiell, and Daniel,
all though they were prophets: yet be their warkes compacte in form of
narrations, which by orators be called enunciatyue, and only perteyneth to
hystories, wherein is expressed a thing done, and persons named. All the
other prophets, though they speak of the time future or to come, which is
out of the description of an history, yet either in rebukinge the sins and
enormities passed, or bewayling the destruction of their country, or
captivity of the people, and such like calamity or miserable astate, also in
meuynge or perswadynge the people, they do recite some circumstaunce of a
narration.

But now be we commen to the new testament, and principally the books of the
Evangelists, vulgarely called the gospelles, which be one contexte of an
history: do not they conteyne the temporal life of our savior Christ, king
of kings, and lord of the world, until his glorious assention? And what
thing lacks therein, that does perteine to a perfect history? There lacks
not in things, order and dysposition, in the contexte or narration, verytye,
in the sentences grauytye, vtylytie in the counsaylles, in the perswasyons
doctrine, in exposytions or declaratio^s facylitie. The books of acts of
apostelles, what thing is it else but a plain history? The epistles of
sayncte Paul, saint Peter, saint John^, sayncte James, and Judas, the
apostles, do conteyne counsayles and aduertisementes in the form of orations,
recytynge diverse places, as well out of the old testament, as out of the
gospels, as it were an abbreuiate, called of the greeks and latins Epitoma.
This is well known to be true, of them that have had any leisure to read holy
scripture: who remembering them selfs by this my little induction, will leave to
neglecte historye, or contemn it with so generalle a dysprayse as they have
benne ac customed.

But yet some will impugn them with a more particular objection, saying, The
histories of the Greeks and Romans be nothing but lies, and faynynge of
poets: some such persons there be, between who^ and good auctours have ever
ben perpetual hostility. First how do they know, that all the hystoryes of
Greeks and Romans be leasynges, sens they find not, that any scripture
autentyke, made about that time that those histories were written, do reprove
or contemn them? But the most catholic and renoumed doctors of Christis
religion, in the corroboratio^ of their arguments and sentences, do allege the
same histories, and vouche (as I might say) to their aid the authority of the
writars. And yet some of those Rabines (in goddis name) which in comparison of
the said noble doctors, be as who says petites, and uneath lettred: will
presume, with their own sely wits, to dysproue that, which both by
auncientie of time, and consent of blessed and noble doctors, is allowed, and
by their warkes honored.

If they will coniect histories to be lies, because they some time make report
of things seen, and acts done, which do seem to the reders incredyble: by
the same reason may they not only condemn all holy scripture, which
conteyneth things more wonderful, thanne any hystorian writes, but also
exclude credulity utterly from the company of man? For how many things be
daily seen, which being reported unto him that never law them, should seem
impossible?

And if they will allege, that al thing contained in holy scripture, is approbat
by the hole consent of all the clergy of Chrystendome, at diverse general
counsayles assembled: Certes the same counsels never disproued or rejected
the histories of greeks or Romans, but the most catholic and excellent
learned men of those congregations, embraced their examples, and sowing them in
their warkes, made of them to the church of Christ, a necessary ornament.
Admytte, that some histories be interlaced with leasynges: why should we
therefore neglecte them? sens the affairs there reported, nothing concerns
us, we being thereof no parteners, ne thereby only, may receive any damage. But
if by redyng the sage counsel of Nestor, the subtylle persuasions of Ulisses,
the compendious gravity of Menelaus, the imperyall majesty of Agamemnon, the
prowess of Achilles, and valiant courage of Hector, we may apprehende any
thing, whereby our wits may be amended, and our personages be more apt to
serve our publyke weal and our prince: what forces it us, though Homere write
leasynges?

I suppose no man thinks, that Esope wrate gospels: yet who doubts, but
that in his fables, the fox, the hare, and the wolf, though they never spoke,
do teach many good wysedomes? which being well considered, men (if they have
not auowed to repugne against reason) shall confess with Quintilian, that
few, and uneath one may be found of ancient writars, which shall not bring
to the redars some thing commodious: And specially they that do write matters
historical, the lesson whereof is as it were the myrrour of man's life,
expressinge actually, and (as it were at the eyes) the beauty of virtue, and
the deformytie and lothelynes of vice. Wherefore Lactantius Lacta^tius lib. 3.
says, Thou must needs peryshe, if thou know not, what is to thy life
profitable, that thou may seek for it: and what is dangerous, that thou
may flee and escheue it. Which I dare affirm may come sonest to pass by
the redyng of histories, and reteinynge them in continual remembrance.

The Experience or practyse necessary in the person of a governor of a publyke
weal. Cap. xxv.
THe other experience, which is in our propre persons, and is of some men
called practice, is no small moment or efficacy in the acquiringe of Sapience:
in so much that it seems, that no operation or affair may be perfect, nor
no science or art complete, except experience be there unto added, whereby
knowledge is ratyfied, and (as I might say) consolidate.

It is written, that the great king Alexander, on a time being (as it happened)
unoccupied, came to the shop of Apelles, the excellent paynter, and standing
by him, whiles he painted, raisoned with him of lines, adumbrations,
proportions, and other like things perteining to imagery, which the paynter a
little whiles sufferyng, at the last said to the king, with countenance all
smiling, See thou noble prince, how the boy, that gryndeth my colors,
does laughe the to scorn? which words the king took in good part, and
held him therewith justly corrected, consideringe by his own office in
martial affairs, that he than had in hand, how great a portion of knowledge
fails, where lacks experience. And therein governors shall not disdain to
be resembled unto physicians, considering their offices in curing and
preserving, be most like of any other.

That part of Phisycke, called Rational, whereby is declared the faculties or
powers of the body, the causes, accidents, and tokens of syckenesses, can not
always be sure, without some experience in the temperature or distemperature of
the regions, in the disposition of the pacyente, in diete, concoction,
quietness, exercise, and sleep. And Galene, prince of phisitio^s, exhorts
them, to know exactely the accustomed diete of their patientes, which can not
happen without much resort into their companies, seryousely notynge their
usage in dyete. Semblably the vnyuersalle state of a countray or city, may be
well likened to the body of man. Wherefore the governors, in the stead of
physicians, attendynge on their cure, ought to know the causes of the decay
of their public weal, which is the health of their country or city, and
than with expedition to proceed to the most spedy and sure remedy. But certes
the very cause of decay, ne the true mean to cure it, may never be
sufficientely known of governors, except they themselves will personally
resort and pervse all parts of the countries, under their governance, and
inserche diligentely, as well what be the customs and manners of people good
and badde, as also the commodities and discommodities: how the one may be
preserved, the other suppressed, or at the least ways amended.

ALSO among them that have ministration or execucyon of Justice (which I may
lyken unto the members) to taste and feel, how every of them do practice their
offices, that is to say, whether they do it febly or vnprofytably, and whether
it happen by negligence, discourage, corruption, or affection.

BUT NOW may the reder with good reason demand of me, by what manner
experience, the govnors may come to the true knowledge hereof. That shall I now
declare.

First the governors them selfs, adorned withvertue, being in such wise an
example of living to their inferiors, and making the people judges of them and
their domestical servants and adherentes, should sundry times duringe their
governance, either purposely, or by way of solace, repair into diverse parts
of their jurisdiction or province, and making their abode, shall partly the^
selfs attentifely here, what is commonly or privately spoken, concerning the
astate of the country or persons, partly shall cause their servants or
friends, of whose honesty and truth they have good assurance, to resort,
in disportynge them selves in diverse towns and vyllages, and as they happen to
be in company with the inhabytauntes, priuyly and with some manner of
circumstance, enquire, what men of hauour dwell nygh unto them, what is the
form of their living, of what estimation they be in justice, liberality,
diligence in executyng the laws, and other semblable virtues. Contrary wise,
whether they be oppressors, covetous men, mayntenors of offenders, remiss or
negligent, if they be officers. And what the examyners do here the greater
nombre of people report, that they intierly and truly denounce it to the said
governor: by the which intymation, and their own prudent endeavor, they
shall have infallible knowledge, who among the inhabytauntes be men toward the
public weal best disposed. Them shall they call for, and most courtaisely
entertayne, and (as it were) louyngely embrace, with thanks for their good will
and endeavor toward the public weal, commending them openly for their virtue
and diligence: offryng to them their assiste^ce in their semblable doings, and
also their furtherance toward the due recompense of their trauayles.

On the contrary part, when they se any of them, who among their inferiors,
observe not Justice, and like wise officers, which be remiss or favorable to
common offenders and brekers of laws, and negligent in the execution of their
auctorities, to them shall they give condign reprehentions, manifesting their
defautes in omyttynge their duties, and in gyuyngeuyl example to their
co^panyons, also boldness to transgress and to contemn the laws. Declaryng
also, that they mynystring such occasion, deser ue not only a sharp rebuke,
but also right grievous punishment.

And if he, that thus admonyssheth, be a sovereign governor or prince, and
shortly hereupon does ratifye his words, by expellynge sum of them, which
I now rehearsed, from their offices, or otherwise sharply correctynge them,
and contrary wise aduaunsynge higher some good man, and whom he has proved to
be diligent in the execution of Justice, undoubtedly he shall inflame the
appetite and zele of good mynysters, and also suscytate or raise the courage of
all men, inclyned to virtue, so, that there shall never lack men apt and
propyie to be set in authority. Where the merits of men be hid and
unknown to the soueravgne governor, and the neglygent ministers or inferior
governors have not only equalle thank or reward, but perchance much more
than they, which be diligent, or would be, if they might have assistence,
there undoubtedly is grievous discourage, and peril of conscience: for as much
as they omytte oftentimes their duties and offices, reputyng it great folly and
madness, to acquyre by the executynge of Justice, not only an opinyon of
tyranny among the people, and consequently hatred, but also malignitie among
his equalles and superiors, with a note of ambition.

This reuolued and considered by a circumspecte governor, lord GOD, how
shortly, and with how little diffycultie, shall he dispose the publycke
weal, that is grieved, to receive medycyne, whereby hit should be soon healed
and reduced to his perfection.

Of Detraction, and the image thereof made by the peynter Appelles. Cap. XXVI.
THERE IS MUCH conuersaunt among men in authority a vice very ugly and
monstrous, who under the pleasant habyte of frendshyp and good counsel, with
a breathe pestilenciall infecteth the wits of them that nothing mystrusteth.
This monster is called in english DETRACTION, in latin Calumnia, whose
propretie I will now declare.

If a man, be determined to equity, having the eyes and ears of his mind,
set only on the troth, and the public weal of his countreye, will have no
regard to any request or desire, but proceeds directely in the
admynistration of justice, either he, which by Justice is offended, or some
his fautours, abbettours, or adhere^tes, if he him self, or any of them be in
service or famyliaritie with him that is in authority, as soon as by any
occasyon, mention happens to be made of him, who has executed Justice
exactely, forthwith they imagine some vice or defaut, be it never so little,
whereby they may mynysshe his credence, and craftily omittyng to speak any
thing of his rygour in Justice, will note and touch sum thing of his
manners, wherein shall either seem to be lyghtnes, or lack of gravity, or to
much sowernes or lack of Ciuilytie: or that he is not beneuolent to him in
authority, or that he is not sufficient to receive any dygnitie, or to
dispatche matters of weighty importance or that he is superfluous in words, or
else to scarce. Also if he live temperately, and delyteth much in study, they
embrayd him with nygardshyp, or in derislon, call him a clerk or a poet,
unmeet for any other purpose. And this do they couertely and with a more
gravity, than any other thing that they enterprise.

This evil report, called Detraction, The image of detraction.
was wonderfully well expressed in figures, by the most noble peynter APELLES.
After he was dyscharged of the crime, whereof he was falsely accused to
Ptholomee, king of Egypt, having for his ame^des of the said king. xii. M.
pounds sterlynge, and his accuser to his bondsman perpetually, the table,
wherein detraction was expressed, he peynted in this form.

At the right hand was made syttyng a man, having long cares, putting forth
his hand to DETRACTION, who far of came toward him. About this man stood
two womenne, that is to say, Ignorance, and Suspicion. On the other side came
Detraction, a woman above measure well trymmed, all chaufed and angrye, having
her aspecte or look like to the fire, in showing a manner of rage or furye. In
her left hand, she held a brennynge torche or bronde, and with her other
hand she drew by the hear of his heed, a young man, who held up his hands
toward heaven, calling god and the saynctes for witness: with her came a man
pale, and evil favored, beholdynge the young man intentifely, like unto one
that had been with long sickness consumed, whom ye might lyghtely coniecte, to
be envy. Also there followed two other women, that trymmed and apparayled
Detraction, the one was Treason, the other Fraud. After folowid a woman, in a
mournyng weed, black and ragged, and she was called Repentance, who
tournynge her back, weepynge and soore ashamed, beheld Ueritie, who than
approached.

In this wise Apelles described Detraction, by whom he him self was in
peril. Which in mine opynion is a right necessary matter to be in tables or
hangynges, set in every man's house, that is in auctorytie, considering what
damage and loss, has ensued, and may hereafter ensue, by this horrible
pestilence, false Detraction, to the avoiding, whereof Luciane, who writes of
this picture, gives a notable counsel, saying,

A wise man, when he douteth of the honesty and virtue of the person accused,
should keep close his ears, and not open them hastily to them, which be with
this sickness infected, and put reason for a dyligent porter and watch,
which ought to examyne and let in the reports that be good, and exclude
and prohibit them that be contrary. For it is a thing to laughe at, and very
unsitting, to ordeyne for thy house a keeper or porter: and to leave thine
ears and mind to all men wide open. Wherefore, when any person comes to
us, to tell us any report or complaint: First it shall behoue us thoroughly and
euenly to considre the thing, not having respect to the ears of him that
reports, or to his form of living, or wisdom in speaking. For the more
vehement the reporter is in perswadynge, the more dylygente and exact trial
and examynation ought to be used. Therefore trust is not to be given to an
other man's judgment, much less to the malice of an accuser. But every man
shall reteyne to him self the power, to enserche out the truth, and leauyng
the envy or dyspleasure to the detractour, shall ponder or way the matter
indifferentely, that every thing, in such wise being curiously inserched and
proved, he may at his pleasure either love or hate him, whom he has so
substauncially tried. For in good faith, to give place to detraction at the
beginning, is a thing chyldisshe and base, and to be esteemed among the most
great inconveniences and myschiefes. These be well nyghe the words of Luciane:
whether the counsel be good, I remytte it to the wise reders. Of one thing I
am sure, that by Detraction, as well many good wits have been drowned, as also
virtue and peynefull study unrewarded, and many zelatours or favorers of the
publyke weal, have been dyscouraged.

Of Consultation and counsaylle, and in what form they ought to be used in a
publyke weal. Capi. XXVII.
THe griefs or diseases, which of Aristotelle, be called the decays of the
publyke weal, being inuestigate, examyned, and tried by the experience before
expressed, tha^ comes the time and opportunity of consultation: whereby, as I
said, is provided the remedies most necessary for the healynge of the said
grefes, or reparation of decays.

This thing, that is called CONSVLTATION, Consultation.
is the general denomination of the act, wherein men do deuyse to gether, and
reason, what is to be done. Counsel Counsel.
is the sentence or advise particulerly given by every man for that purpose
assembled. Consultation has respect to the time future or to come, that is to
say, the end or purpose there of is adressed to some act or affair, to be
practiced after the Consultation. And yet be not all other times excluded, but
first the state of things present, ought to be examined, the power,
assiste^ce, and substance to be esteemed, semblably thin ges passed, with much
and long delyberation, to be reuolued and tossed in the mind, and to be
conferred with them that be present, and being exactely wayed, the one
against the other, than to inuestygate or enquire exquisitely, the form and
reason of the affair, and in that study to be holly resolved so effectually,
that they, which be counsaylours, may bear with them out of the counsaylle
house, as it were on their shulders, not only what is to be followed and
exployted, but also by what means or ways it shall be pursued, and how the
affair may be honorable, also what is expedyent, and of necessity, and how
much is needful, and what space and length of time, and finally how the
enterprise, being achieued and brought to effect, may be kept and retained.
For often times, after exploitures, happens occasions, either by assaults, or
other encombrances of ennemies, or of to much trust in fortunes assurance,
or by dyssobedyence or presumption of some persons, whom the thing touches,
that this last part of Consultation is omytted, or more rather neglected:
where much study, travail, and cost have utterly perished, not only to the
great detriment of infinite persons, but also to the subuertion of most noble
publyke weals.

More over, it is to be diligently noted, Counsel proved by three thi^gis
that every counsel is to be approved by three things principally, that it be
ryghtwyse, that it be good, and that it stand with honesty. That which is
rightwise, is brought in by reason. For nothing is right, that is not ordered
by reason. Goodness comes of virtue, of virtue and reason proceeds honesty.
wherefore counsel, being compacte of these three, may be named a perfect
Capytayne, a trustye companyon, a plain and unfeigned friend. Therefore in
commendation thereof TITVSLIVIVS Titus Liuius. li. xv.
says, Many things be impeched or let by nature, which by counsel be
shortly achiued. And verily the power of Counsel is wonderful, having
authority as well over peace as martial enterprise. And therefore with good
reason Tulli affirms in his book of offices, arms without the doors be of
little inportaunce, if counsel be not at home. And he says sone after, In
things most prosperous, the counsel of friends must be used. Which is
ratified by the auctour of the noble warke, named Ecclesiasticus, saying, My
son, with Ecclesiast. xxxii.
out counsel see thou do nothing, and than after thy deed thou shall never
repent the. The same auctour gives three noble precepts concerning this
matter, which of every wise man ought to be had in continual memory.

Of fools take thou no counsel, for Eclesiasticus. viii.
they can love nothing, but that pleasethe them selfs. Discover not thy
counsel before a stranger: for thou know not what thereof may happen. Unto
every man dysclose not thy heart, lest parauenture he will give to the a feyned
thank, and after report rebukefully of the.

Foles (as I suppose) be they, which be more ladde with affection than reason.
And whom he calls strangers, be those, of whose fidelity and wisdom he
is not assured: and in the general name of every man, may be signified the
lack of election of counsaylours, which would be with a vigilaunt search, and
(as I might say) of all other most scrupulus.

What in Consultation is to be chiefly considered. Cap. XXVIII
THe end of al doctrine and study, is good Counsel, whereunto, Counsel.
as unto the principal point, which Geometriciens do call the Center (which
by some autours be imagined in the form of a cerkle) all doctrynes do send
their effects like unto equal lignes, as it shall appear to them that will
read the books of the noble Plato, where he shall find, that the wise
Socrates, in every inuestigation, which is in form of a consultation, uses
his persuasions and demonstrations by the certain rules and examples of sundry
sciences, proving thereby that the conclusion, and as (I moughte say) the
perfection of them, is in good counsel, wherein virtue may be founden, being
(as it were) his propre mantion or palayce, where her power only apperethe,
concerning governance, either of one person only, and than it is called
moral, or of a multitude, which for a dyuersytie may be called polityke.
Sens counsel is of such an efficacy, and in things concerning man has
such a preemynence, It is therefore expedyente, that consultation (wherein
counsel is expressed) be very seriouse, substanciall, and profitable. Which
to bring to effect, requires two things principally to be considered.

First, that in every thing, concerning Considerations of Counsel
a publyke weal, no good counsaylour be omytted or passed over, but that his
reason therein, be hard to an end. I call him a good counsaylour, which (as
Caesar says) in the coniuration of Cataline, whiles he Counsaylours. Sal. bell.
Cataline. Counsaylours man
consulteth in doubtful matters, is void of all hate, frendshyppe,
displeasure, or pity. How necessary to a public weal it shall be, to have
in any wise, men's oppinions declared, it is manifest to them, that do remember,
that in many heads be diverse manners of wits, some inclined to sharpenes and
rigor, many to pity and compassyon, diverse to ate^perance and mean between
both extremities, some have respect to tranquillity only, other, more to
welthe and commodity, diverse to much reuoume and estimation in honor. There
be, that will speak all their mind sodeynely, and perchance right well.
Diverse require to have respect and study, wherein is much more suertie, many
will speak warely, for fear of displesure, some more bolder in virtue, will
not spare, to show their minds plainly, diverse will assent to that reasons,
wherewith they suppose, that he, which is chief in authority, will be best
pleased. These vndoughtedly be the dinersyties of wits. And more over, where
there is a greatte noumbre of counsaylours, they all being hard, needs must
the counsel be the more perfect. For sometime perchance one of them, which
in doctrine, wyrte, or experience is in least estimation, may hap to express
some sentence more auailable to the purpose, wherein they consult, than any that
before came to the others remembrances. No one man is of such perfection, that
he can have in an instant remembrance of all thing. Which I suppose was
considered by Romulus, the first king of Romans, Dionis. Malicarnasseus.
in the first constitution of their publyke weal. For having of his own
people but three thousand footmen, and three hundrede horsemen, he chase of the
eldeste and wiseste of them all, one hundrede counsaylours. But to the more
assertyon of diverse men's sentences, I will declare a notable experience, which
I late happened to read.

Belinger Baldasine, a man of great wit, synguler lernyng, and excellent
wisdom (Who was one of the counsaylours to Ferdinando, king of Arogon) when
any thing doubtful, or weyghty matter was consulted of, where he was present,
afterward when he had souped at home in his house, he would call before him
all his servants: and merely purposynge to them some feyned question or fable,
wherein was craftily hyd, the matter, which remained doubtful, would merely
demand of every man his particular oppinion, and gyuinge good ear to their
judgments, would confer toget her every man's sentence, and with good
delyberation pondering their value, he at the last perceived, which was the
truest and most apt to his purpose: and being in this wise fournyshed,
translatynge iapes and things fained to matter serious and true, he among the
kings cou^saylours, in gyuinge good and substancial advise, had always
preeminence. How much commodytie than suppose ye moughte be taken of the
sentences of many wise and expert cou^ Homerus. Iliad. pr^.
saylours? And like as Calchas, as Homere writes, knew by divination things
present, things to come, and them that were passed, so cou^saylours garnished
with learning, and also experience, shall thereby considre the places, times,
and personages examing the state of the matter, than practiced, and expendyng
the power, assystence, and substance, also reuoluyng long and often times in
their minds, things that be passed, and conferring them to the matters that
be than in experyence, studiously do seek out the reason and manner, how that,
which is by the^ approved, may be brought to effect. And such men's reasons
would be thoroughly herd, and at length, for the wyser that a man is, in
tarienge, his wisdom increases, his reason is more lively, and quycke
sentence abounds. And to the more part of men, when they be chaufed in
reasonynge, arguments, solutions, exaumples, symilitudes, and experymentes do
resort, and (as it were) flow unto their remembrances.

The second consyderation to be had in consultation. Cap. xxix.
THe second consyderation is, that the General things be fore particular.
general and universal astate of the public weal, would be preferred in
co^sultation, before any particular commodity: and the profit or damage,
which may happen within our own countrays, would be more considred, than that,
which may happen from other regions: which to believe. common reason and
experience leads us. For who commends those gardiners, that will put all
their diligence in trymmyng or keeping delicately one knotte or bed of
herbs, suffrynge all the remenaunt of their gardeine to be subverted with a
great nombre of molles, and to attend at no time for the taking and
destroyenge of them, until the herbs, wherein they have employed all their
labors be also turned up and peryshed, and the molles increased in so
infinite nombres, that no industry or labor, may suffice to consume them:
whereby the labor is frustrate, and all the gardeyne made unprofitable, and
also unpleasant. In this similitude to the gardeyn may be resembled the public
weal, to the gardiners, the governors and counsaylours, to the knottes or
beds, sundry degrees of personages, to the molles, vices, and sundry
enormities, Wherefore the consultation is but of a small effect, wherein the
universal astate of the publyke well does not occupy the more part of the
time, and in that generaltie every particular astate, be not diligently
ordered. For as Tulli says, They that consulte for part of the people, and
Ci. Ooffia, li. i.
neglecte the residue, they bring into the city or country a thing most
pernicious, that is to say, sedition and discord. Whereof it happens, that some
will seem to favor the multitude, other be inclyned to leene to the best
sort, few do study for all universally. Which has benne the cause, that
not only Athenes (which Tulli does name) but also the City and empire of
Rome, with diverse other cities and realms, have decayed and ben finally
brought in extreme desolation.

Also Plato, in his book of Fortitude, Plato in ^achete.
says in the person of Socrates, When so ever a man seeks a thing, for
cause of an other thing, the consultation ought to be always of that thing,
for whose cause the other thing is sought for, and not of that, which is
sought for because of the other thing. And surely, wise men do consider, that
damage often times happens, by abusinge the due form of consultation: men
like evil Physicians, sekyng for medicines, er they perfectly know the
sicknesses: and as yuel merchants do utter first the wares and commodities
of strangers, whiles strangers be robbing of their own cofers.

Therefore these things, that I have rehearsed, concerning consultation, ought
to be of all men in authority substancially pondered, and most vigilantly
observed, if they intend to be to their publyke weal profitable: for the
which purpose only, they be called to be governors.

And thus I conclude, to write any more of consultation, which is the last
part of moral Sapience, and the beginning of Sapience politic.

Now all ye reders, that desire to have your children to be governors, or in
any other authority in the public weal of your country, if ye bring them
up, and instruct them in such form, as in this book is declared, they shall
than seem to all men, worthy to be in authority, honor, and nobleness. And all that is under their governance shall prospere and come to perfection, and as a
precious stone in a rich ouche, they shall be beholden and wondered at, and
after the death of their body, their souls for their endeavor, shall be
incomprehensibly rewarded of the gyuer of wisdom, to who^ only be given
eternal glory.

Amen.
FINIS.
Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio.

Anno. 1537. mense lulij


