THE LAMENTATION OF The lost Sheep.

By G. E.



LONDON, Printed by W. Iaggard dwelling in Barbycan. 1605.

Ibi res humanae nunqua^ prospere succedunt, vbi negliguntur Diuinae. Si
Christum discis, Nihil est si caetera nescis: si Christu^ nescis Nihil est, si
caetera discis. TO THE RIGHT worshipful sir Francis Castillion Knight, a
Gentleman Pentioner unto his Majesty.
THE mighty Emperor Aurelius being demanded what should become of a
certain stranger, that audatiouslie entered his Pauilion, he answered with
words deserving immortal memory:

If he come in love let him live, if otherwise, let him bear the price of his
presumption. Wherefore though imboldned by a general report of your respective
favors to men any ways well quallited, I have unacquainted, boldly presumed
to present this little Book unto your worships good acceptance: yet my meaning
pretending a love and dutious well wishing, And the Subject prefering no idle
or unprofitable substance, J hope, you will (with Aurelius) kindly regard the
one, and favorably censure of the other: for herein J do but imytate the
prescriptions of all former writers, who from time to time have as well
selected strangers, as those of their acquaintance to patronize their endeavors,
being known to be lovers of learning and virtue. I have (in the like)
heretofore pleased many, and my trust is, J shall not now (in this) displease
you, in which hope, J tender my labors to your good liking, And leave your
worship to the happy fruition of all your goldly, and hopeful expectations.
Ever resting

At your commandment in all humble duty. G. Ellis.

T riumphant Fame, like to our Saviors star,
O nly to point where complet virtues are,
T owers aloft unto the Azured sky,
H ere in this Clime with greatest Majesty,
E uer beholding, as she soars aloft,
R ight virtue plast in Castillions thought,
I, there is the Knight, still honored may he be,
G rast by our King, loved in his Cuntry,
H olinesse it self like lightnings flame,
T race still his steps unto immortal fame,
W orthlesse is this poor modren Muse of mine,
O ne note to sing, whose descant keeps no time,
R ich is my will, but poor my power is,
S ing then sweet Angels and you Saints of bliss,
H elpe me to end, what I have here begun,
I I, help by inuocating may be won,
P our down the vigor of your living praise,
F om sable thoughts my humble Spirit to raise
V nto the crystal sky with diamond pure,
L et me there write his Name for to endure,
L ike bright Astreas golden helm to shine,
S uch is his worth, nay, he is more divine,
I n the worlds last age there shall still remain,
R ecords on him of everlasting Fame,
F air fortune grant thou ever be his guide,
R euerently kneeling by his worthy side,
A nd worship thou his virtuous conversation,
N o Man whereof can give dew estimation,
C ome Clio come, bring forth thy golden pen,
I f praise immortal thou can give to men,
S ee, see, Mecoenas in this Knight suruiues,
C ome all you Muses that sweet verse contriues,
A nd spend the vigor of eternal spirits,
S weetly emblasing Castillions merrits,
T hat when pale death of course shall claim his due,
I n spite of death his days may still renew,
L et not desert, and virtue shining fair,
L iue in oblivion, base and deep despair,
I f you will but write what all the world importunes,
O r sing sweet Lays of him, and his good fortunes,
N o Saint of bliss or Angel bright but will
K eepe consort true unto your Poem still,
N ay Jove himself for all such Knights as he,
I n heavens fair quire assures them place to be,
G o worthless lines fall prostrate at his feet,
H umbly entreat a pardon for thee meet,
T hat he vouchsafe of thee and thy Lost Sheep.
The lost Sheep.
1
Above the Clouds, where spangled troops of stars
Adorn the precious bosom of the sky,
where heavenly peace abandons breaking iars,
from whence sweet comfort comes in misery:
And all the Consort that is tun'de on high.
Send forth their delicate melodious sound,
That make those crystal vaults with joy rebound
2
Within the bright Jmperiall Orb of rest,
Where souls of Saints on golden Altars set,
And in the Lambs sweet breath are only blessed,
where thousand graces, Millions more beget;
Where days bright shine suffers no sun to set.
There MERCY is inthron'de in blessed chair,
Most gorgeous in attire, most heavenly fair.
3
About her head the swift-wing'd CHERVBINS
Houer their silver pinions in her eyes,
And the sweet Spheres with glorions SERAPHINS,
Upon her shining brow with bliss arise,
And those bright beams that deck the crystal skies:
No stormy cloud can veil her beauteous face,
Because there burns the holy LAMP of grace.
4
TRVTH richly clothed in milk-white ornament,
Stands at the right hand of this happy Saint,
From whom the words of righteousness are sent,
Whose worth, no wit: whose will, no pen can paint:
But as the daughter to the highest power
She sits defended in a strong-built Tower.
5
Oh thou, that art both MERCY and TRVTHS-self,
On whom all grace and goodness does attend,
Thou that do feed thy servants with such wealth,
As may them from the Tyrants jaws defend,
(So they but on thy sacred state depend)
With thy dear MFRCIE save me, save thy son,
Who melts with grief for what he has misdone.
6
And may my soul (oh maker) speak with zeal,
I stand in danger of a deadly wound,
Unless thy MERCY me in time do heal,
The Dragon spues forth poison on the ground.
Preserve me (Lord) thy saving health reveal:
So tongue, so pen, so heart, shall for the same,
Speak, write, sing, laud and praise unto thy name.
7
That Name, which MOSES on his for-head bare,
J in my heart will worship and adore:
That Name, which JEWS to name did sildom dare,
May J presume for mercy to implore?
That Name, which Solomon upon his breast
Jn his Divine PENTACVLVM, did wear;
That Name Jle love, Jle reverence, and fear.
8
That Name, which Aron wore upon his head,
Fixed to his holy Myter, made of gold;
That Name, which ANGELS laud, and Furies dread,
Whose praise, no tongue can worthily unfold:
that Name, which kills the quick, and quicks the dead;
That Name, which flesh is too vnpure to name,
My sinful soul with sacred zeal inflame.
9
By that sweet Name, which Name we invoke,
When sable sadness does oppress the heart:
For whose dear sake, our still-declining state
Finds comfort in the midst of sorrows smart,
I pray in my lament thou act a part.
Restore me, that in sinful ways am tossed,
And (SHEPHERD) save thy sheep that is almost lost.
10
O JESUS at whose sacred birth a Star,
Was the true figure of eternal life:
Thou art all peace, by thee surceaseth war:
Thy births beginning ended mortal strife,
Thou did bring glad some hearts in stead of iarres.
O let thy MERCY guide my wandering soul,
And with thy grace, my graceless ways control.
11
Oh light of heaven thou wast extinkt on earth,
Yet to our souls celestial life do give,
Thy death our life, thy rising our new birth,
Thou with thy heavenly blessings do relieve:
Thou three days dead, did make us ever live.
Thou at whose death obscured was the earth and sky
Reduce me to the right, that run awry.
12
Fountain of grace, from whom does only run,
Water of life, to save our souls from death,
Oh savior of the world, pure VIRGINS Son,
That in red earth infused first vital breath,
Joining thy godhead with humanity:
Oh thou whose name was called EMANVELL,
My sin-staind soul from danger save of hell.
13
Oh woman's seed that did from God proceed,
By prophets said to break the serpents head,
Thou, that in grace and virtue do exceed,
Content to die that thou might quicken dead,
Thou, that ore death the victory did get:
And that did raise the dead men from the Tomb,
Oh help thy servant, raise thy falling Son.
14
Ancient of days, and yet still young in years,
Oh Godon earth: oh man, yet most divine,
Poor in this world, the chief of heavenly peers,
Whose glory in the infernal pit did shine,
Oh thou whose praise both SAINTS and ANGELS sing,
Stay my sin-following steps from deaths dread hands,
That threats as many sorrows as are sands.
15
Oh God of times, and yet in time a man,
Before all times, thy time of being was,
And yet in time, thy human birth began,
Least we should fade untimely like the grass,
Thou that have said, thy word shall never pass:
And thou that do al times begin and end,
Vouchsafe thy comfort to my sad-soule send.
16
I come in clouds of grief, with pensive soul,
Sending forth vapors, of black discontent:
To fill the concaue cirkle of the Pole,
And with my tears bedeaw each continent,
For straying from the fold of sweet content.
Thou art all MERCY, from thy MERCIES throne,
Make me in number, one amongst thine own.
17
I bring a heart wherein all woes are closed,
Mingled with tears, distild from weeping eyes,
And not so much as hope for me reposed,
Is left behind, but quite from me it flies,
Unless thy favor please to temporize:
For which I beg, for which I wail and moan,
That thou redeem me that am almost gone.
18
Like NIOBE, that till death ever mourned,
For her dear childrens loss, whom PHEBVS slew,
And to a senseless stone at last was turned,
That in her life did most extremely rue,
And with one grief another did pursue:
So will I turn my joys to bitter gall,
And sighs to tears (so thou be pleased withal)
19
Thou deepest searcher of each secret thought,
Infuse in me thy all affecting grace;
So shall my works to good effects be brought,
While I peruse my ugly sins a space,
Which (I confess) in me has taken deep place,
Whose staining filth so spotted has my soul,
As naught will wash, but tears of inward dole.
20
But woe it is to see fond worldlings use,
Who most delight in things that unjust be,
And (without fear) work virtues foul abuse,
Scorning souls rest and all true piety,
Following (with hot pursuit) iniquity,
As if they made account never to part
From this frail life, this pilgrimage of smart.
21
Such was the nature of our foolish kind,
When practiced sin has taken deep-set root,
The way to penance due is hard to find,
REPENTANCE, held a thing of little boot,
Such is the foul corruption of man's mind,
That contrite tears, souls health, and Angels joy,
Men now account, a mere fantastic toye.
22
Ill working USE, deuourer of all grace,
The fretting moth, that wastes souls chief bliss,
The sly close thief, that lurkes in every place,
Filching by peece-meale, till the whole be his,
Teaching corrupted minds to do amiss;
How many are deceived by this bait,
T'account their sins as trifles of no weight?
19
Oh cursed CUSTOM, causing myschiefe still,
Too long thy craft my senses has misse-led,
Too long I have bin thrall unto thy will,
Too long I have bin Luld in pleasures bed,
Too long my soul on bitter sweets has fed;
That surfeiting with thy hell-poysoned cates,
I now repent fair virtues former hate.
20
And humbly come with sorrow-rented heart,
With blubered eyes, and hands vpreard to heaven,
To play a poor lamenting LOST SHEEP part,
That would weep streams of blood to be forgiven.
So that heavens joys may not from me be-reauen.
But (oh) I fear, mine eyes are draind so dry
That though I would, enough I cannot cry.
25
If any eye therefore can spare a tear,
To fill the well-springs that must wet my cheeks,
Oh let that eye to this sad feast draw near,
Refuse me not my humble soul be-seekes,
With weeping mones help me to fill the air:
For all the tears mine eyes have ever wept,
Were now too little had they all bin kept.
26
I see my sins arraigned before my face,
I see their number pass the motes in sun:
I see that my continuance in this place
Cannot be long: for since my life begun,
All I have said, all that I have misdone,
I see the IVDGE before my face has laid,
At whose stern looks, all creatures are afraid.
27
If he be just my soul condemned is,
And just he is. What then may be expected?
But banishment from everlasting bliss,
To live like curssed CAIN, base, vile, abiected,
And from the flock of Gods dear fold rejected?
He in his rage his brothers blood did spill:
I (more unkind) mine own souls life do kill.
28
Oh could mine eyes send trickling tears amain,
Never to cease till my eternal night,
Til this eie-flood thy mercies might obtain,
Whom my defaults has banished from thy sight,
(Sending forth sighs of true repenting sprite)
Then could I bless my happy time of crying:
But (ah) too soon my barren springs are dying.
29
Thrice happy sinner was that blessed Saint,
Who though he fell with puff of woman's blast,
Went forth and wept with many a bitter plaint,
And by his tears, obtained grace at the last:
For in his weeping tears he did not faint.
I, having lost my self of mine accord,
Have fallen ten thousand times from my deer Lord.
30
Yet cannot strain one true repentant tear,
To gain the bliss from which my soul is banished:
My flinty heart such sorrowing does forbear,
And from my sense all true remorse is vanished,
So have my follies led me without fear,
That heart and sense are cloyd with dregs of sin,
And there is no place for grace to enter in.
31
No place (dear Lord) unless thy goodness please
To pity him that worst deserves of any,
And in thy tender mercy grant him ease,
As thou tofore has mercy showed to many,
With th'oile of grace curing their foul disease:
Yet none of those do equal me in sin,
How may I hope thy MERCY then to win?
32
The traitor JVDAS, heire-borne to Perdition,
Who for a trifle did his Lord betray,
In equal doom deserves more remission,
Then my defaults can challenge any way,
That thus have lost my self and run astray:
He sold him once: that once for gain was done,
I often times; yet less then nothing won.
33
The bloudy-minded JEWS, in fury mad,
Until on thee (dear Lord) their rage was fed,
In their fell anger more compassion had,
And less in self destruction surfetted
Then I, for whom thy harmless blood was shed:
Their hellish spite within a day was past,
My sinful fit does all my life time last.
34
For every stripe from them my Lord did take,
A thousand deadly sins I have committed,
And every sin as deep a wound did make,
As did the cords wherewith my CHRIST was whipped
For straying from him, now my soul is nipped.
Oh hateful caytife, PARRICIDE most vile,
Thus with my sin his pure blood to defile.
35
Oh sin, first parent of man's euer-woe,
The distance long, that seuers hell and he auen,
Senses confounder, Souls chief overthrow,
Grafted by Men, not by the Grafter given,
against true bliss, a secret-working foe:
Consuming CANKER, wasting souls chief tresure,
Only to gain a little trifling pleasure.
36
Happy were Man, if sin had never bin;
Thrice happy now, if sin he would forsake,
But happier far, if for his wicked sin
He would repent, and hearty sorrow make,
And for his comfort, true CONTRITION take:
Leaving this dross, and filthy delectation,
To gain in heaven, a lasting habitation.
37
There is the place wherein all sorrows die,
Where joy exceeds all joys that ever were;
Where ANGELS make continual harmony,
The mind set free from care, distrust, and fear:
Where vertu's crowned with eternal glory.
There all receive like joyful Contentation,
Happied by that most heavenly contemplation.
38
Now do I see the change we make for sin:
In stead of Heaven, Hell is become our lot;
For blessed Saints, we damned fiendes do win;
For rest and freedom, lasting bondage got.
Such payment, and such Intrest is sins shot.
For joy, content, eternal love, and peace;
Grief, despair, hate, and iars that never cease.
39
The worm of CONTIENCE still attends on me,
Telling each hour, each instant I shall die,
And that my sins cannot be parted from me,
But where I am, thither they likewise fly,
Working my souls heartbreaking misery,
Urging this still, that death I have deserved,
Because I fled from him I should have served.
40
What greater sin can touch a humane heart?
What hellish FVRIE can be worse tormented?
What sinner lives, that feels not a part
Of that sharp plague, unless he have repented,
And with remorsefull tears sins scourge prevented?
And yet I find REPENTANCE is but vain,
Without full purpose not to sin again.
41
And is it not then follies contagious error,
To covet that, which brings with it contempt,
And make us live in fear, distrust and terror
Hating at last the thing we did attempt,
Pursuing still our courses with black horror:
For never sin did yet so pleasing taste,
But lustful flesh did loath it, when it was past.
42
Witness my woeful soul, which well can tell,
In highest top of sins most fresh delight
Although my frailty suffered me to dwell,
Yet being past, I loathed it with despite,
And then (methought) it seemed a second hell:
Yet like the SWINE, I see mine own desire,
That being clean, do covet still the mire.
43
So greedy is man's beastly appetite,
To follow after dunghill pleasures still,
And feed on carrion, like the ravening Kite,
Not caring what his hungery maw does fill,
So he may please his fond affecting will:
He works still, a self-conceit effect,
Without constraint, controulement, or respect.
44
Oh, why should man, that bears the stamp of heaven,
So much abase heavens holy will and pleasure?
Or why was sense and reason to him given,
That in his sin cannot contain a measure?
But still neglect his souls celestial treasure:
He knows he must account for every sin,
And yet commits sins that countlesse bin.
45
This to peruse (dear God) does kill my soul,
But that thy MERCY quickneth it again;
Oh hear me (Lord) in bitterness of dole,
That of my sins do prostrate here complain,
And for the same pour forth my tears amain.
And at thy feet with MARIE knock for grace,
Though wanting MARY'S tears to wet my face.
46
She happy sinner saw her life misse-led,
At sight whereof, her inward heart did bleed:
To witness with her, outward tears were shed,
Oh blessed SAINT, and oh most blessed deed:
(For on the tears of sinners ANGELS feed)
But wretched I, that see more sins then she,
Nor grieve within, nor yet weep outwardly.
47
When she had lost thy presence but one day,
The want was such, her heart could not sustain,
But to thy TOMB, alone she took her way,
And there with mournful sighs she did complain,
And down her face tears trickled like the rain:
Nor from her sense once stirred or moved was she,
Until again she got a sight of thee.
48
But I have lost thy presence all my days,
And still I am slack to seek thee as I should,
My wtetched soul in wicked sin so stays,
I am unmeet to seek thee, though J would,
J have so strayed from thee in by-waies:
Yet if I could with tears thy coming tend,
I know, I should (as she) find thee my friend.
49
Tears are the key, that open the way to bliss,
The holy water, quenching heavens quick fire:
Th'atonement true twixt God and our amiss,
The ANGELS drink, the blessed SAINTS desire:
(Happy is he that sings in this sweet quier)
The joy of thee (OH CHRIST) the balm of smart,
The spring of life, ease to a grieved heart.
50
The second king of ISRAEL by succession,
When with VRIAHS wife he had offended,
Jn bitter tears bewailde his great transgression,
And by his tears found grace and so repented,
For at the same almighty God relented.
He night and day in weeping did remain,
I, night nor day, to shed one tear take pain.
51
And yet my sins in greatness and in number,
Far his exceed. How comes it then to pass,
That my REPRNTANCE should so far be under,
And graces force (dear God) is as it was?
Why is CONTRITION now so far asunder?
Truth is; that I, although I have more need,
Do not as he, so truly weep indeed.
52
Oh, wherefore is my steely heart so hard?
Why am J made of metal unrelenting?
why is all ghostly comfort from me bard?
Or to what end do J refer repenting?
Why am J not of after-claps afeard?
Can lustful flesh, or flattring world persuade me,
That I can escape the power of him that made me?
53
No, no, the secret searcher of all hearts,
Both sees and knows the deeds that I have done,
And for each deed will pay me home with smart,
No show can shadow what I have misdone;
No place can serve his will decreed to shun:
I should deceive my self, to think that he
For sin would punish others, and not me.
54
Our firstborn Sire, first breeder of man's thrall,
For one bare sin, was of perfection reft,
and all mankind was banished by his fall
From PARADISE, and unto sorrow left,
and former comfort was from him bereft.
Jf he for one, and all for him feel pain,
Then for so many, What shall I sustain?
55
The ANGELS, made to attend on God in glory:
Were thrust from heaven, and, only for one sin,
That but in thought (for so records the story)
For which they still in lasting darkness bin,
And cannot suns bright shining comfort win.
If these once glorious thus tormented be,
J poor LOST SHEEP, what will become of me.
56
What will become of me, that not in thought,
In thought alone, but in each word and deed,
A thousand, thousand, deadly sins have wrought,
and still do work, whereat my heart does bleed;
Being by sin out of the right way led?
Which makes me thus bewail, lament, and grieve,
For grief, and sorrow, must my cares relieve.
57
Now do I curse the time, J ever went
In sins black path, that leads to damnation:
Now do J hate the hours I have misspent
In idle vice, neglecting souls SALVATION,
Now do I grieve I lost that was but lent.
And to redeem the time J have misse-worne,
I wish this hour I were again newborn.
58
But vain it is, as says the wisest man,
To call again the day that once is past.
Oh! let me see what best is for me than,
To gain thy favor whilst my life does last,
(For worldlings favors are but as a blast)
That in the next, J may but worthy be,
Even in the meanest place to wait on thee.
59
J do as did the prodigal son sometimes,
Upon my knees with hearty true CONTRITION
And weeping eyes confess my former crime,
Not hiding any wilful sins transgression,
But humbly beg, upon my low submission,
That thou will not of former faults detect me,
But like a loving father now respect me.
60
And thus will J in sorrow spend my breath,
And spot my face with neuer-dying tears,
Till aged wrinckles MESSENGERS of death,
Have purchased mercy, and removed fears,
And brought true hope in stead of false despaires.
And then the world within my looks shall read
The pittious wrack unbridled sin has bred.
61
Oh that I were removed to some close cave,
Where all alone, retired from delight,
I might my sighs and tears untroubled have,
And never come in wretched worldlings sight,
In whose ill deeds misfortune works despite.
Whose ill bewitching company still brings,
deep provocation, whence great DANGER springs.
62
Jll COMPANY, the cause of many woes,
The sugered bait, that hides poisoned hook,
The rock unseen, that ship-wrackt souls ore-throwes
The weeping CROCODILE, that kills with look,
The Siren, that can never virtue brook;
The readiest step to ruin and decay,
Graces confounder, and hels nearest way.
63
How many souls do perish by thy guile?
How many men do without fear frequent
Thy deadly haunts? where they in pleasure smile,
Taking no care such danger to prevent,
Nor sorrowing for their youthful time misspent:
But live like BELIALS, senseless and vnta'md,
Not looking for their faults they shall be blamed.
64
Alas, alas, too wretched do we live,
That carelessly do work our own confusion,
And to our wills such liberty do give:
Aye me It is the devils mere illusions,
Who spares not to practice lewd conclusions;
To flatter us with such SENCE-pleasing trains,
That he thereby may take us in his chains.
65
This well foresaw good men of ancient time,
Which made them shun th'occasions of foul sin,
Knowing it was the nurse of every crime,
And SIREN-like would train fond worldlings in;
And never cease until their souls they win.
Aluring them with show of musickes sound,
Until on sins deep gulf their souls were drowned.
66
But better it is believe me in my trial,
To shun such hell hounds Factors of the devil,
And give them leave to grudge at your denial,
Then to partake with such in sin and evil,
Treading the open way that leads to hell:
For, if that God in justice then should stay us
From hell and horror who (alas) could stay us.
67
Good God: the just (as he himself has spoken)
Should scarce be saved, oh terror unremovable!
What should they that never had a token,
Or sign of grace (souls comfort most behouable,
Bringing to good minds Joys unspeakable)
But graceless lived, and al good works did hate,
What hope of them that live in such a state?
68
Oh who will give me tears, that J may wail
Both nights and days, the dangers J have past?
My soul, my soul it is much sor thy avail,
That thou art gotten from these straits at last,
And have recovered that was almost lost.
Oh joy, but in thy joy mix tears withal,
That I have time to say, Lord, hear me call.
69
I seek not to conceal my deeds misdone,
That I have sinned against heaven, J do confess
And am unworthy to be called thy son,
Unless thy mercy make my sin seem less:
Though crime be great, Oh let CONTRITION
Procure a pitti-yeelding swift relief,
That for sins past suffer a hearts true grief.
70
Now do I see, and sighing grieve to see,
That what we here possess is but a blast,
Nothing's found sure in this mortallity,
But virtues ship-wracke, and true honors waste,
Desert is still by harsh repulse disgrast?
Minds meaning well do taste of misery,
When hearts corrupted are advanced on hie.
71
From bad to worfe still grows this wicked world,
Wherefore I think that PLATOES wondrous year,
(When as the Orbs of heaven shall be reuolu'd,
To their first course) approaches very near;
The bands of th'element shall be dissolved.
And till those days of consumation come,
Cares shall make mute, and sorrows make me dumb.
72
VANITY is the mask wherein fond youth
Does march and wander to his own annoy;
Folly attends as PAGE: but care and wrath
Are the rewards of soule-seducing joy.
This lesson has experience taught for truth,
That after wits are bit with many cares,
And had I wist, is wrapped in sorrows snares.
73
From the green pastures, mounts, and meades,
And from the cristall current of heavens ioies;
The woolfe has cast me, and foul error leads
My soone-seduced steps to such annoies,
That where I feed, my staruing food destroies;
Seek me dear SHEPHERD, else J shall be lost,
From blessed vales, to thorns and thistles tossed.
74
Oh seek me (Christ) as once thy mercy sought
Downe-falling DAVID from thy mountain laws:
oh seek thine own, thine own whom thou have bought,
And keep me from the Draggons open jaws;
Where sin betraies for every slender cause.
For from the treasure of thy sacred side,
Thou paid'st the ransom of accursed pride.
75
With shame-sick ADAM have I hid my head,
Vnparadiz'd, from my ANGELL-like state,
And from the presence of thy father fled,
My soul sepultur'd in my bodies hate.
My heap of sins has bard that blessed gate
Was opened wide, by that deep sluice was made
Within that wound, where mercies balm was laid.
76
Paine-pearced Shepherd, master of that fold,
Old ISRAEL brought into thy spacious field,
For which thy felfe, thy glorious self has sold,
Making a dearth such store of MANNA yield,
With which the parcht and desert plains were filled;
That where thy lambs from sweet repast were driven,
They banquet with celestial food from heaven.
77
Thou drankest freting vinegar with gall,
To make their bitter waters hunny-sweet,
That spungy moisture, that in deadly thrall,
For thy pale lips the sons of men thought meet:
From such a holy SHEPHERD who would fleet?
None but my self who having lost my mark,
Wander alone in shames despised dark.
78
Behold my feet entangled in the briars,
And envious brambles tear my fleece away:
To loose them (Lord) my gasping soul desires,
Least to the Ravens J become a pray:
Such fruit they reap that run so far astraie.
Then on thy SHOVLDERS take me to thy fold,
The sheep who^ thou have bought, and satan sold.
79
Five tallents did thou pay, whereon was framed
The seal of death, impressed with crimson blood;
Two in thy hands, two in thy feet remainde,
One in thy side. Those bought that heavenly food,
That feeds the soul with his eternal good.
Oh bring me then sweet CHRIST, where J may feed
On that, for which I sigh, and thou did bleed.
80
So shall J bid adue to deep dispaires,
And welcome hearts delight and souls content;
So shall J put away distrust and fears,
And sing thy praises, till my days be spent,
With joyful himnes, after a sad lament:
That this may be thy servant suite does make,
thy LOST SHEEP begs, even for thine own names sake.
The Conclusion.
No far-fetcht story have I now brought home,
Nor taught to speak more language then his mothers
No long dark POEM is from darkness come,
To light: It Is ill to filch from others.
J do lament my wandering deeds misdone,
From whence alone proceeds my hate-bred sorrow,
which pensive Muse from pining soul does borrow.
I sing not I, of wanton-Loue-sick lays,
Or tickling toies, to feed fantastic ears:
My MUSE respects no glozing tatling praise,
A guilty conscience this sad passion bears:
My straying from my Lord has brought these tears
My sinne-sick soul, with sorrow al besprent,
Lamenting thus a wretched life misspent.
Finis
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.

