THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE QVEENES MAJESTY, TO THE Lord Mayor of
London, and his brethren: containing a most gracious acceptance of the great
joy which her Subjects took upon the apprehension of diverse persons, detected
of a most wicked conspiracy, read openly in a great assembly of the Commons
in the Guildhall of that City, the 22. day of August. 1586. Before the reading
whereof, master James Dalton, one of the Counselors of that City, in the
absence of the Recorder, made this speech hereafter following.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1586



BY THE QVEENE.

To our right trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of our City of London,
and his brethren the Aldermen of the same.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. Being given to understand
how greatly our good and most loving Subjects of that City did rejoice at the
apprehe^sio^ of certain deuilish and wicked minded subjects of ours, that
through the great and singular goodness of God have been detected, to have most
wickedly and unnaturally conspired, not only the taking away of our own life,
but also to have stirred up (as much as in them lay) a general rebellion
throughout our whole Realm: we could not but by our own letters witness
unto you the great and singular contentment we received upon the knowledge
thereof, assuring you, that we did not so much rejoice at the escape of the
intended attempt against our own person, as to see the great joy our most
loving Subjects took at the apprehension of the contriuers thereof, which, to
make their love more apparent, they have (as we are to our great comfort
informed) omitted no outward show, that by any external act might witness
to the world the inward love and duetifull affection they be are toward us.
And as we have as great cause with all thankfulness to acknowledge Gods great
goodness toward us, through the infinite blessings he lays upon us, as many
as ever Prince had, yea rather, as ever Creature had: yet do we not for any
worldly blessing received from his divine Majesty, so greatly acknowledge the
same, as in that it has pleased him to incline the hearts of our Subjects
even from the first beginning of our reign, to carry as great love toward
us, as ever Subjects carried toward Prince, which ought to move us (as it does
in very deed) to seek with all care, and by all good means that appertain
to a Christian Prince, the conservation of so loving and duetifully affected
Subjects: assuring you that we desire no longer to live, then while we may in
the whole course of our government carry our self in such sort, as may not
only nourish and continue their love and good will toward us, but also
increase the same. We think meet, that these our letters should be
communicated in some general assembly to our most loving Subjects the
Commoners of that City. Yeuen under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor, the
18. day of August 1586. in the 28. year of our reign.

RIght worshipful, my good countrymen and Citizens of this most noble City of
London. Since the late brute and report of a most wicked and traitorous
conspiracy, not only to take away the life of our most gracious Sovereign,
(whom God grant long to live and reign over us) but also to stir up a
general rebellion throughout the whole Realm: the great and universal joy of
you all of this City, upon the apprehension of diverse of that most wicked
conspiracy alate declared and testified, by many outward acts and shows, has
wrought in the Queens most excellent Majesty such a gracious contentme^t,
that it has moved her Highness, by her letters signed with her own hand, to
signify unto my L. Mayor of this City and his brethren, her most Noble and
Princely acceptance thereof, and that in such sort, as thereby may appear,
that her Highness has not more, no not so much rejoiced at the most happy
escape of the wicked mischief intended against her own person, as at the joy
which her loving Subjects, and namely you of this City of London took at the
apprehension of the practisers of that intended Treason.

By occasion whereof, her Highness brought to a thankful Remembrance, and
acknowledging of Gods infinite blessings bestowed on her, comparable with any
Prince or creature in the world, no worldly thing more or like accompteth of,
then of the hearty love of her loving and faithful subjects many ways and
many times before now, but especially by this our great joy in this sort, at
this time, and upon this occasion showed.

And that her exceeding great love and acceptance of our Rejoicing may the
more appear unto you, it has pleased her Highness in the same letters to
declare, that she desires not longer to live among us, then she shall
maintain, continue, nourish and increase the love and good will of her
Subjects toward her. And this her Highness has willed to be made known unto
you all, with this, that she will not fail with all care, and by all good
means that appertain to a Christian prince, to seek the co^seruation of you
all so loving and duetifully affected Subjects.

This her Majesty's pleasure in part now declared, and more to be made known
to you by her own letters, which you shall hear readde, my Lord Mayor and his
brethren have required me to declare unto you all, that they do heartily
rejoice and thank God for the happy day of the good acceptance of this your
great joy, and my L. himself has willed me to give you all hearty thanks in
his name, for that in the time of his service your duetifull behauiours have
gotten to the City so Noble and worthy a Testimony of duty and loyalty,
of so Noble and worthy a Queen.

Now forasmuch as Gods blessings wonderfully abound, and one joy comes upon
another, let us not be unthankful to God, but acknowledge his goodness, and
attribute the same (as in deed we ought) to the sincere Religion of Almighty
God, most godly established by the Queens most excellent Majesty, which has
taught us to know God aright, our duty to our Sovereign, and to love our
country, and has made us duetifull and obedient Subjects, rejoicing at all
good things happening to her Majesty, her Realm, or to any in her Noble
service, the true effects of a true and good Religion: Whereas the contemners
thereof, and immoderate affectors of the Romish religion and superstitions,
being void of the true knowledge of God, have declyned from God, their
allegiance to their Prince, their love to their Country, and have becomme
Inuenters of mischiefs, bruters and spreaders abroad of false and seditious
rumors, such as joy at no good thing, but contrariwise rejoice at every evil
success, the badges and marks of their profession, who have before this, in
this Realm and in other her Highness dominions, stirred up rebellion, foreign
invasion, and many times practiced the very death and destruction of the Queen
her self, the Ruin and subversion of the whole Realm, the proper effects of
their Romish religion.

We have beheld all these things, and seen in our days the Ruin and
mischiefs invented against others, fall upon the Inuenters themselves: and
have known the wicked and violent hands of diverse of them, deuilishly to kill
and murder themselves, when most traitorously they would, and most happily
they could not, slay the Lords anointed.

As we have known all these things, so God be thanked, that by a better
Religion, having been better taught, we have been no partakers of their wicked
devises, but have put to our helping hands as occasion has served, and ever
ready to overthrow the auctors and deuisers thereof.

And I have no doubt, but we of this Noble City, who hitherto have been
always ready duetifully and faithfully to serve her Majesty upon all
occasions, (her Highness now so graciously accepting only of our rejoicing at
the apprehension of her enemies, eue^ the least part of the duty of a good
Subject to so good a Queen) will be ready every one with all that we can
make, and with the uttermost adventure of all our lives, speedily to be
revenged upon all such as shall villainously and traitorously attempt or put in
ure any mischief to her Noble person, and in the mean time will have a better
eye and ear to all suspicious and miscontented persons, to their sayings and
doings, to their false bruites and reports, to the places and corners of their
haunt and resort, to their harborers, companions, ayders and mainteiners.

God uphold and continue his Religion among us, and increase our zeal therein,
which has made us so loving and loyal, and so beloved and acceptable
Subjects to so worthy a Prince, and root out that wicked and Romish religion,
that has made so many disloyal and traitorous Subjects: to whom is both
odious and irksome, the long life and prosperous Reign of our most noble
Queen Elizabeth. God confound all such traitors, and preserve her Highness
long to live and reign over us.


