THE CLOSET of Counsels, containing The advice of diverse wise Philosophers,
touching sundry moral matters, in Poesies, Pre ceptes, Proverbs, and
Parrables, translated, and collected out of diverse aucthors, into English
Uerse: by Edmond Eluiden Gent.

Whereunto is anexed a pithy and pleasant description of the abuses: and
vanities of the world. 1569.

Imprynted at London in Fleetstreat, at the sign of Saint John Euangeliste, by
Thomas Colvvell*

To his Neuew william Busher, Edmond Eluiden wishes wealth, health, peace, and
prosperity.
BEing diversely moved and motioned to further my dilygence and travel as some
acquittall for your curtesyes, and yet dispayring of my power (gentle Neuewe) I
have finyshed this endeavor, which has seemed to me a meet gift and requisite
reward, though not in sufficient ability: yet considering your disposition,
able enough to satisfy your expectation. And for because I pon dered the
oblivion of mortal memory and ungratefulness of nature in such things as
notwithstanding be to his proper commodity, I have renewed herein, and have
set before your eyes such necessary precepts of living and rules of wise
experience as you have read and perused before time: to the end that by more
perusing you may print the same in your heart, that it also may bear fruits
in your life, and waying well you may perceive that no knowledge is so requisite
or needful as moral philosophy, which not only disseuereth the nature of
man from beastly brutish kind, and bewtifies and adornes the sense and ratefies
the life: but also teaches and instructs to avoid inconvenience and
mischefe, and leads the soul to the favor of God. Wherefore finding this
most meet for you and easyest for me to attain, I have been bold to offer you
this same, as a token of my well wishing: Supposing me not needful for to
crave your patience, because I am assured of your gentleness.

Your friend and kinsman Edmond Eluiden.

To the Reader.
How requisite and necessary instructions be, both in divine things and
matters moral, I refer it to thy judgment (gentle reader) the which want or
rather ye neclige^ce used of all estates in the slack imitatinge of the
abundance of good lessons and counsels both privately and openly publyshed in
this our country, has caused me to use this my simple pain and endeavor to set
before thy sight most needful lessons, iustructions, and counsels, of the wise
philosophers, which be no less profitable then necessary to such as would
willingly learn, and by learning prosecure the honest acts and decent
endeavors which pertain to verteous living: and be cause I know that there has
been in more ample and larger wise by more learned men instructions and lessons
here to fore set forth, I crave thy curtesy to respect of my well meaning
rather then of my ability, the which I find unapt in all things to the which
my good will exte^deth, and notwithstanding though by right I must acknowledge
my work barbarous, rude and unpolished, yet I dare presume to say that it is
necessary: not for the want or lack of good instructions the which I know to
be ple^teously dispersed, but for the obliuious weakness of mortal nature and
memo ry, the which is so feeble that it can not have too much renewance of his
duties, but rather requires to be continually put in remembrance of the same,
and this is the cause which has imboldeued me to translate these worthy say
ings of ye wise into verse, whereby thou might be the sooner moved to peruse
them, as also the more effectually and redely to print the^ in thy thought,
wherein I crave thy gentle patience, and if ought be amiss it shall be reformed.

Farewell. E. E.

The Closet of counsels.
Of forecaste.
AL inconvenience that may grow, Pontanus.
or harms that may ensue:
Ofdyuers happs, the good forecaste of wisdom may eschew.
Of Labor.
No man is strong, but he whose force, can labor well subdue:
And he is weak whose heart is faint Marcus aureli.
his travel to pursue:
And in such labor rest appears, most plesaunte for to be:
For rest is medsyne to the soars, which labors have we see.
Of Rest.
Each thing by nature has a time Ovid.
for to receive his rest,
And nature each thing void thereof does seem for to deteste?
Of Towns or Realms.
It is the welthe of every Town, of Province, Realm, or place: Zenophon.

That virtue rather more abound then people, in such case.
Of the Common welthe:
The common welthe should rather be preferred unto fame,
Then the material cyttye buylte for to enlarge his name Alex se ue^us.

For each man's life more precious is and virtue of more price
Then either stone or timber work or any such deuyce
Of The honor of a reamle.
The perfect honor of a realm or beautye of a town. Iesussy rach.

Consysts not in the building but, by virtue reapes renown.
Of Praise and disprasye.
The wicked praise can not aduaunse nor infamye defame
The good, for nether does desarue Cicero.
the having of the same.
Of Suffisanse.
Unto the rich more rycher is suffysanse then more welthe
Or substanse for it does pretend, Plato.
aboundanse of his health,
As fickell fortune may give cause to the to ^ke thy foo.
So may thy enemy rejoice whilste thou art wrapped in woo.
Of offenses.
When little faults escape vnspyde prevented not in time: Aristot:

Of them does spryng huge hurt at last and cause of greater crime.
Of Beloved things.
With daynger much and peril great that thing is kept with pain, Seneca.

Which many men desyer to have or crave for to retain.
Of a custom.
It is as dyfficulte a thing a custom or a use,
To break, as nature for to chaynge Aristot:
or alter by abuse.
Of Corrupt rulers.
A poison and corruption it is to subjects most, Iesussy rach.

To have a ruler which corrupt corruptlye rules the roste.
Of Honor.
The man great honor does dezarue whom fortune does abate.
Without desarte suppressinge down his floryshynge estate,
And he of shame demaundes a part Marcus aureli.
whom fate has set a lofte,
Without just cause, yclad in sylke or set on pyllowe soft.
Of Practyse.
Those things which use has overcome or practyse, pleasant seem,
To such as use the same although Plat^.
them paynefull other deem.
Of Frendshippe.
Of all things, earthly globe contains the newest is the best
Except of friends, the which accept Seneca.
the neweste for the least.
Of Disdain.
As the devouring fire consumes the fyerbrande with rage
Disdain does fre^dshipp waste, and love, Hermes.
by fumynge does assuage.
Of Measure.
That man most valyant is whose state does not provoke his heart
To joy, or sorrow over much, Seneca.
but use an equal part.
The runner runnynge ouermuche Plato.
shall werynes attain
And by his swiftnes purchase harm, while he does gape for gain.
Of an old Lecherer.
A Lecherous lover being old Marcus aure^
is like a youthful swyne,
Which has a white head, and his tail of green, exceedinge fine.
Of Benefytes.
The man that fyndeth benefyts Plato.
in fetters lyethe bound
Till he repaye his dettes, and than he ryseth from the ground:
Yet is it custom to receive with mirth, as does appear Marcus aure.

But to forg^ with evil will, and with repentaunt cheer.
Of Pride.
As lyberalytye causes friends and hatred does remove,
So pride alureth many foes, Socrate*
But clean exyleth love.
Of Wrath.
Of feeblenes of courage and of scarsytie of wytt,
Does wrath proceed an vglye vice Hermes.
a fylthie and vnfytt.
Of lust.
He many myschyfes does obaye that does obaye his lust, Hermes

For none more wauryng be then such or Dangerous to trust.
Of Repentaunse.
Repentaunse pardon craves as dew to him and his by right,
And pardon is a pacient thing Plato.
For gyuing all dispyte.
Of Gentleness.
The sweet effect of gentleness does purchase mere goodwill Alex se uerus.

And fervent love his quallytyes such proffittes do dystyll.
Of courage.
It is a sign of courage great and of a mighty blood, Ovid.

Lyttyll to care for mighty things regarding well the good.
Of the law.
Nature the fruictfull fountain is from whense good law does spring.
And that is natural for man Cicero.
to fly each fruictles thing.
Of worldlyenes.
As by continual labor strength of body does decay,
Whereby the body perishes and nature wears away Ovid.

Even so the mind of man oppreste with pensyfe worldly cares,
Does leese his love and lust to god which heavenly welthe appares.
Of solitarines.
A sollitarye man does seem a god or else a beast, Claudia

As one that knows much or else as one that knows least.
Of patience.
A pacient man or sober man shall nere repent in heart, Marcus aure.

Nor do the deeds, which by his haste shall turn unto his smarte.
Of weomen.
There are in weomans eyes two tears the one of great dysecite, Pitthago ras.

The other of grief, and both do lay a wylye subtle beyte.
Of the Tongue.
A fools tongue is his counsels keye for nothing it can hyde,
But wisdom keeps the wise manes Socrates
tongue not suffryng it to slide.
Of Measure.
In all things measure is most meet excess does hurt to much. Claudia

Or else at least does profytt naught his qualytyes are such.
Of Bryberye.
Both faith and treuth and frendshipp fayles and manners be defylde, Zenoph:

Where brybrye used is, and there all justice is exylde.
Of a Flatterer.
As a Kamelion colloures has of every sort, save white:
Even so a Sycophant has skyll Hermes
of every point save right.
Of Sudayne chances.
Though sudden haps or chances fallen provoke new thoughts in haste Hermes

Yet by such chance proceds a cause in time of lesser waste.
Of The contented state? etc.
Some men are rich which nothing Sallamon^
have And some again are pore
Which have great riches thus the least have most, and most, least store
Of Many words.
Where pensyfe care or trouble is there many dreams remain: Iesussy rach.

So where as words abound, thou may descerne a foolyshe brain.
Of Youth.
More needful manners be to youth, then skill in musykes art Aristotel

Which beatifie there face through there behauyours of the heart.
Of Ly^e.
To live long take no thought, but care how that thou may live well:
Aristot:

Buy not the life of death, but live as thou thy life should sell.
Of Truth.
The man that uses faythfulnes and truth in every thing Socrates.

Has greater servants then a prince or subjects then a King.
Of The pryuye enemy.
An open aduersarye is more better then the foo,
That friendly semes who pincheth har^ B^etius.
and says it is not so.
Of wisdom.
A wise man's heart, in his right side is lappt, the fools the lestte, Sall^s
(...)*

The one of reason is indewed the other clean berefte.
Of sorrow.
As syknes is the prison of the body so is greyfe,
And sorrow prison to the soul Hermes:
through voydnes of relyefe.
Of understanding.
When as in doubtful things a man does doubt and certain is:
Of certain things his sense seems A^istip.
not to understand amys.
Shamfastenes.
From youth it does become each man great shamefastnes to have,
In filthy things, but bold to be Hermes.
in each thing right does crave.
Of Ignoranse.
The ignorante which errs in that the which he does not know, Plato.

Demands that pardon would be quick but rashness to be slow.
Of a fool
Like as the rain or sappye dew cannot inriche the seed,
Which planted is upon the stones whereof it stands in need Plato.

No more may teaching ought prevail or study to the fool.
Or any ingine that informs the scyll of wysdomes scoole.
Of friends.
As fire can not be separate from heat, nor heat from fire: Seneca.

So are the hearts of faithful friends which live in one desire.
Of Wrath.
A stone is heavy and the sand is wayghtye by his kind, Sal^

But yet a fools wrath by his wayght does burden more the mind,
Of wrath.
Humylytye patiense and fair speech Do mollyfye the rage,
Of anger wrath or heauynes Hermes.
And sorrows do assuage.
Of Evil men's praise.
The payntyng praise of wicked men does rather yield defame Hermes:

To him, that praised is, then good aduaunsynges of his name.
Of Gentleness.
It is a point of gentleness the gentle to suppose Hermes:

Rather the best of every thing, then woorste, for to disclose.
Of Man's course.
AS after night, the cheerful light of morning does appear,
And then the rays of Tytan cause the skies for to be clear
And after Tytan does approach by course a filthy cloud,
And then fair wether which departes Marcus aureli.
and cuttes the pytchye shrowde,
And after that huge Thunder clapps, with lyghtnynges cource the ayere
And after this proceeds again the wether clear and fair,
So after infancye by kind does chyldhode hye him fast,
Then manly youth, then crooked age, then ouglye death, at last:
And after death another life, renewes him self from pain
Thus state does stand, and state does fall, and state does rise again.
Of Women and children.
A woman's counsel has but weak a chyldes imperfect shyftes, Seneca.

The one for slendernes of wytt the other, natures gifts.
Of Lechery^.
The young man living lecherouslye when as his youth is paste Anaxagoras.

And age salutes him, most does crouch to foul deformed waste.
Of a good Captain.
Alustye captain which should lead an army, ought retain
These four things or else his forte is frustrate and in vain: Cicero.

First perfect knowledge of the wars then valyantnes of heart:
Then with aucthorytye good luck to ratyfye his part:
Of seeking and fynding.
A better thing it is to seek Demosibe nes.
and seeking not to find,
Then for to get the thing whereof no proffitt is resynde.
Of experiense.
Experiense is a chastismente which knows to esche we
The danger of an old mishape, Iesussy rach.
or perryll of an new.
Of a wicked man.
When as a wicked man is dead and lapped in the ground, Marcus: aurels.

Then does least hurt from him proceed and myschyfe least abound.
Of good works.
Exterior deeds or works be void Alexse ^erus.
vnsauorye and disgraste,
Except that from the heart they have, there sause, and take their taste.
Of f^me
A good report more precious is Sal^on.
to him that does it houlde.
Then riches, favor likewise semes more valerous then goulde,
Of victory.
There is no greatter victory by knowledge or by scyll: Dioge.

Then man for to subde we him self and overcome his will.
Of liberty.
No state possesses perfectte joy which lybertye does want: Dioge.

For nothing can be void of woes wheare lybertye is scante.
Of truth
Truth is the daughter of time which truth by right immortal seems, Auluss
gelius.

Because when time has covered long her state and each man deems
That time has broake the wings of truth and that she can not fly, Marcus
aure^

Yet truth at last with mighty forse her wisdom does discrye.
Of the soul.
As to the soul the body is a norisher of needs Plutareh

So is the soul an instrumente, to god and thense proseedes:
Of Love.
Of love, there is two several kinds the one of natural love Cicero.

The other heavenly which surmounts the former far above.
Of Lyberalytie.
The lyberall man neglects not his goods, but does maintain Hermes.

His geuynge so, as he may keep: to give his store again.
Of Fear.
Fear is a virtue which dependes on love, and louelye use: Alex: se ue^us.

And when as fear is void of love then fear is in abuse.
Of Uyce.
The man is cursed whom power divine has formed to be wise Marcus: aureli.

And he inferyor to a man does make him self by vice.
Of Wytt.
He wyslye sees his proper wytt although it be the best Protege.

Which does suppose it for the woorste the weakest add the least.
Of a Fool.
The man that sekeeth felowshipp Pitthago
or counsel of his fooes:
Does seek the redye means to heap A boundanse of his wooes.
Of love.
Nothing so hark or secret is But love can it espy,
Nothing so dangerous but love Seneca.
will sone attempt to try.
Of death.
Praise no man's life before his death for death discouers then: Socrates

The man his life, and all that he before his death did mean.
Of three pyttyfull things
Three things are to be pytyed much the fourth can not be borne:
A good man sobiect to a shrewe has mighty cause to morn,
A wise man thrall unto a fool Hermes
a lyberall to a wretch
Have likewise cause by shryking cries there careful throtes to stretch:
But when a fool is set a lofte and plased in the seat.
Where as a wise man should bear rule* this open wrong is great.
Of good deeds.
The wight which knows how to do well retaynes suffitiente scyll, Pla^o.

And he has power enough that can refrain from doing ill.
Of friendship.
The distansye of plase can not d^sseuer the effect Isocrates

Of frendshipe, but may slake his heat and proof thereof neglecte.
Of a godly scare.
The vertueus man does so^er fear two prosperous days of welthe Marcus aure.

Then for two hundred days take care of want or lack of health.
Of fools:
Amongst the foolyshe rout of fools, that fool exceedes the rest:
Which does pretend to know the most Pithago
and yet does know the least.
Of Godly works,
In life the many years of man should not esteemed be,
Except his years with many woorks Marcus aure.
of Godlynes agree.
Of Lust and Lecherye.
NO sin does sooner man invade then lecherye or lust,
And nothing sooner works his wooes or lays him in the duste:
For it reprooueth Goulden fame and makes all things waste,
And that which long the fathers pain has reapte it spendes in haste.
And makes faynte the force of man and takes his strength away,
And does deforme the flower of youth long time before his day:
And favor does dysfygure clean and beawtye does de^ace
And health endeavors to appare Aristos:
and shortens vytall race:
And all diseases does it bring, and damps and ^lles the wit,
And grasses abeastelie mind in man, a filthy and vnfytt,
And plungeth him, and sosseth him in puddle and in mire,
And broylethe syngeth and consumes his heart in scorchyng fire.
Of prayer.
A precious virtue prayer is Pitthago ras.
which stronglye can prevail,
Against temptations and the harms which do our lives assail.
Of bringinge up.
It is not possible for hime to virtue to attain, (...).

Whose youth has not iustructed ben in virtue to take pain.
Of disobedience.
The cheifest ruen of a realm or fountain of decay, Ponta: nus.

Is disobedience to the things which ought to bear a swaye.
Of gen^illnes.
Like as dysdainefull pride does tears the twiste of virtues knot
And iustise does confound, and realms and public weals does rot
And treadethe honor under fo^te and clean suppresseth down,
The happy gain of good roporte and proffet of renown.
So gentilnes and meekenes does beneuolense provoke,
And sweet affection styrreth up Alex^ seen.
and slayes by dedlye stroke:
The rage of hatred and disdain but kyndels whot desire
To love, and each man's heart by force of favor settes on fire.
Of the noble man.
The noble man does well dezerue of honor to have part, Marcus aure.

The which adioyneth virtue, to his high and noble heart.
Of lies.
To boaste or lie it is a vice which makes the soul of man, Socrate:

Soar sick, and nothing else but shame and reason, cure it, can.
Of pouertye.
Theare is no fault in myserye in poverty or need, Isocrat.

But such as judge the same thearof theye faultye are in deed.
Of mysfortunes.
Of all mysfortunes that may chaynce or chances that may fall,
To have been fortunate it is Socrates
the greatste myschaunce of all.
Of Pleasures.
Possessions great and substance move virtue to be suspecte,
Because theye be the nurses to Alex: seue.
delyghtes of wanton sect.
Of couetousenes.
The fouleste vice that may be found and ouglyest to behold,
Is aueryse, which selles the souls Pitthago ras.
of men, for gain of goulde.
Of the pleasures of the soul
The pleasures of the soul whear in The soul does most delight Aristot.

Is for to know his god him self and heavenly things a right.
Of prosperytie.
The more thy fate aduanseth thee the more should thou, abase Cicero.

Thy self, and least suppose of such thy state, or happy case.
Of idleness.
Idleness is, the syncke of sin which gapes and still receaues,
Each st ynkynge puddle in his mouth that vice to him bequeaues:
And when bryin full it can not then Alexse (...).
sustain to carrye more,
It brasteth out his poisoned air the which it held before.
Of measure.
Spend not to much, nor be to near Pitthago ras.
so shall thou measure have
And neither want to live, nor to thy substance be a slave.
Of the soul.
A vysage that deformed is does seem af^lthye sight: Pit^ags

But much more is a soul def^lde, which has in vice del^ght.
Of dissension.
Like as a spotte, in time should be removed from his place
And cleanlye wyped out least h^e the garment more disgrace: (...).

So should dissension at the first be seassed in the pryme,
Before it grow to further hate through length or traste of time.
Of wrath
If that thou can not rule thy will or brydell wrathful ire, Hermes.

Keep close the same for that shall quench the flamynges of such fire.
Of Law.
An evil law and a fools love is like a cloud: in scye Seneca.

Which now appears, but straight dispersed and seen by no man's eye.
Of science.
A man may science get by pain and knowledge by his shyftes, Aristit.

But wisdom and discression be of God the seldom gifts.
Of the learned.
The ignorant man had need have mirth and musyke in his feasts, Socrates

But of the learned man his voice, can better cheer his geastes.
Of conceyte.
The man has least of sense, and is for each deuyce vnfytt, Iesussy rach.

That best supposes of him self, and trusts to his wytt.
Of faith.
From perfect faith proceeds fear from fear proceeds hate Iesussy rach.

Of ill, from hate of ill, proceeds good hope in adverse state,
And the^ through hope, the faithful mind is locked in a chair
Of health: and happynes but shutt from doubting or despair.
Of unprofitable living.
That man most viciouslye does live and hatred ought to chase Iuuenal.

Who lives only for him self and for his proper case.
Of the ^onge.
As by the tongue the treasures of the heart are so dysclosd
That thearby frendshypp is begonn and thearto trust deposd,
And earthlye substance is increaste and life is brought to stay,
And eke the body well preserud Legmon.
and kept from his decay,
So likewise purchases the same much hatred and dyspyght:
Great mischyfes: and in every thing the loss of his delyght.
Of perfect patience.
The man is perfect patient who when furye does assaye Socr^es

His heart, can bridle his affectes and appetytes delay.
Of gifts.
Give to the wise, and he will thank, the fool willl ask the more: Socrates

Use therefore wisdom in thy gifts so shalt thou purchase store.
Of sorrow.
The redyest means to ease a grye^s is idleness to fly, Marcus aurel^.

And use some exersyse for this dame sorrow does deny.
Of a Judge.
Hatred, love, and avarice Be causes diverse times
That Judges slackly punish vice Aris^t
and stiffly maintain crimes.
Of a Fool.
When as a Fool, of riches has Aris^ot
or substance any store,
His Riches make him more a fool then ^re he was before.
Of Nature.
Each thing save nature, may be changde Solon.
each thing eschew^e save death,
And it is natural for man to leese his vytall breath.
Of godly works.
The man that uses dilygence and care good works to sow, Socrates:

With joy shall reap the fruictfulnes, that of such works do grow.
Of a wysemans heart.
The hearts of wise men be the fortes or castles which witheholde Pithago^

The secreates, least the tic^le tongue their counsels should unfold.
Of an unjust man.
It is a noisome labor and a travel spent in vain
A fond endeavor of no good and eke a frui^tles pain: Marcus (...)

To give the rule of justice to the man that is unjust,
Who rather in the lytleste things dezerueth most mystruste.
Of houore.
To loftye honor whearin is to much of statelye pride, Pl^tarch

Is like a thing which stands on hye and suddaynlye does slide.
Of Knowledge.
A man which does presume to be Aris ip
a man, and has no skyll
Is like a stone which neither sap Mar^us (...).
nor lyckor does dystyll.
The depycture of a wrathful man.
If man do mark the foolish rage of wrath, and ponder well,
How man dysfigurde is thereby: into a monster fell
With foul infarsed rankrous face with mouth imboste and swollen,
And staryng eyes and stampping feet Cicere.
and lyppes as black as colne,
And flautring tongue and chattring teth and brayinge roarynge voyse,
And poisned spitful words and works of such unseemly noise
His heart would loath this ouglye vice and utterly detest.
The same to see the form of man converted in a beast.
Of the heart.
The heavy heart and sorrowful Marcu^ aure:
does live by sobbes and tears,
And lafes at death, because his syghte does ryd him from his fears.
Of revenge.
The redyest way to seek revenge is it for to despise Marcus aureli.

And wrong contemn this rightlye do and then thou shalt be wise.
Of the wit.
Like as there is no tree, except it good attendaunse have,
That will be fertyll or resygne such fruictes as we do cra^e. Plu^arch

No more our wytt will proffit us or yield us any wealth,
Except we first imploye or pain for to deuyse his health.
Of prosperity and adversity.
In time of troubell constantnes and patiense should the guide
In time of wealth thy lowlynes Marcus aureil.
should brydell thee from pride.
Of the begininge.
Consider the begyninge, so the end shall surer be.
For one mischaunce another draws Aristot:
and both will hyndre thee.
Of a scolding woman.
Who so the woman can refrain that s^owes her poisoned mind Salamon*

By spiteful words does he^ld fast oil and does re^arne the wind.
Of a fools honor.
Like as the snow in summer is or rain, in harvest prime
A fruictles thing and most vnfytt for such a pleasant time: Jesus sy r^ch.

So likewise honor for unwise or woorshypp for a fool,
Does seem an instrument unapt a fond and fruictles tool.
Of the knowledge of our selves.
If thou desyreste to know thy self Seneca.
peruse thy self, and way
Thy self: but credicte not the things that other by thee say.
How to praise.
If thou would praise a man because he sprynges of noble blood,
^we well, if that his parents eke deserve a praise as good:
If for his riches think that fate and fortune tickle is,
If for his strength suppose disease may make it fare amiss,
If for his swiftness bear in mind, that age can it deface,
If for his beutie know the same (...)
will vanish in a space.
But if for virtue, wit, or shyll, or else for wisdoms store:
^low forth thy tro^pe of fame with force, for they will flourish more.
And neither heritage does yield nor Fortune alter may,
Nor age deface, nor time deforme, nor any chance decay.
Of Idleness.
None lust more fearsly does assault, or lechery torments,
Then those whom Idleness inhauntes, Plato.
and slouthfulnes frequentes.
Of Drunkenness.
As when good wine does spurge by kind there will amounte and rise
The nether parts thereof, and that Plato.
within the bottom lies.
So be the secrets of the heart by dronkennes disclosd,
And all such counseles as thereto Plutarch
we are faythfullye reposd.
Of nature.
If after nature thou will live thou never shalt be poor,
If after thine opinion then Seneca.
thou never shall have stoare.
Of inordinate desire.
There is no grief in want or need but where there is desyer,
Inordinate, of having that August. ce^sarus.
the fansye does requier.
Of the kings court.
The court or pallayce of the prince or dwellinges of the king,
Is as a fountain to his realm from whence if cleannes spring
Unto his peoplle do proceed Alexse ^erus.
the fruictes of honest life,
But if uncleanness then does rain each filthy vyse as ryfe.
Of counsayll.
Demand no counsel of the man that seems to dyspyce.
Thy state, but hide it from thy fooe so shall thy heart be wise
Nor take, of woman her advice in matters that she would
Nor counsel, touching wars of him which therein is not boulde, Jesus sy rach.

Nor of a byer how that thou thy wares to him should sell,
Nor of an ^uyous man how thou, with other men should deal,
Nor of the slothful how thy state thou may in welthe maintain.
Nor of the idle how to get a profit or a gain:
But of the virtuous take advice and he shall tell thee ^este,
The thing that needful is for thee and meet to thy request.
Of the prodygall and niggarde.
The great consumption of the man which spendes his goods in vain,
Does heap him sorrow, shame, and need and much deserved pain, Protege.

And he that niggardlye does spare his goods to ruste and rotte,
Does purchase wittnes how the same he has retaynde and got.
Of a Woman.
Like as a block though it be decte with pearl and precious goulde,
If it no comlye shape or form or feature fine do houlde,
Is not to be regarded, so, Plato.
a woman or a wife
Though she be beautiful, and have no manners in her life,
Is not to be esteemed more then is a brutishe swine,
Whom neither goulde nor other cost can make sufficient fine.
Of a good life.
Suppose not of thy self to much by foolyshe proud consaite,
Nor crave to seem a greater man then thou doeste way by wayght,
Nor be not cruel but despise such churlyshnes, and use
Meek gentleness, nor flatter not, Sene^a.
nor seem not to abbuse
The frendshipp offered unto thee, but render like a gain:
And then be slow to wrath, but swift to cure thy neighbors pain,
And thou shall live in happy state in worshipp and at ease,
And if thou fail, aredie help shall soon thy care appease.
Of our creation.
As from the mighty God our first beginning did proceed:
That likewise they to him return Aristot:
it seems, a seemelye need.
Of Fear.
The man that only worshipps God for fear of a mischaunce:
Is like the man that for like fear Plutare
does tyrants fame advance.
Of Credence.
Give neither to much credence to a tale is toulde to thee
Nor to much scorn, for these the guise Isocrates
of fools and mad men be.
How to make the wit apt.
Ne wit, ne courage, strength, ne force, can floryshe in his kind,
If eyter slothe or foul excess by use oppress the mind,
For strength of body is resolved the wits consume and waste,
And be disperste to fruitles end* Alexse ^rus.
and lose their sauorye taste
But by good order of the life and practyse in the same
Both wit and courage prosper well and get immorrall fame.
Of Love.
OF love five several sorts the^ be, and one deserves praise,
And three be wicked, and the fourth to natures will obayes. Pitthago ras.

The first is mutual love, which love to each man does abound,
Provoked be the fear of God, or else by frendshipp found.
The other love is natural which love him self extendes,
Unto his kindred or his stock or other such his friends,
An other love there is which loves Pithago
an other man, for that
That louelye use might purchase him aduaunsement to his state:
And so some love for lukers sake, by flattrye to attain:
When as they need, some redye help or else some pryuate gain,
And last, therbee which dote in love, by louinge that which thaye,
In time do find a fruictles love that works their own decay.
Of lybertye.
Of every earthly thing that most his liberty does crave* Alex^ seue.

Man's fansye lyketh best of all his lybertye to have.
Of friends.
If friends their frendshypp well have bought and fredshipp well have sold,
Their cares, theyrioyes, and eke their pains Aristot^
in common they d^ hold.
Of vice.
No man can virtue get except, he first do clean ^yle Hermes.

His vices, which pollute his parts and do his soul def^le.
Of faith.
The faith of faithful men not vsd, Socrate^
or practysd makes it faint:
And diverse great displeasures reapes and moves it to complaynte.
Of Honor not dezerued.
As withred flowers do shed there leaves so shall the honored wight Cicero.

Which does dezerue no honor, vade and purchase him dispight.
Of Counsel.
Though few in counsel may suffyse, yet take the good advise
Of many, for the more there is the better does arise,
Preventing of the harms that may by ouersyghte insewe:
For one will show the oulde misehapp Marcus aureli.
another tell the new,
Another what the damage is another what the gain,
Another, remedy disclose for every pryuie pain.
Of men's Laws.
The laws which men do make may well to cobwebbes be comparde, Marcus aure.

Through which great flies be soon escapt but little fast insnarde.
Of a Judge.
Whom good deliberation and perfect proof have found
To be deuoyde of each suspecte, Alex^ seue.
and of a judgment sound:
Such men should be assignde to rule and justice to dispose,
Whose hearts the tract of time should prove true dealings to disclose.
Of a quarreler.
As coals or wood provoke heat and makes a flaminge fire, Solomon

So does a man that has delyght in brawling, stir up ire.
Of a Prince.
Like as a Prince should gracious be, and bountiful of will Philip Rex.

Unto the good, so sharp* severe and rough unto the ill.
Of the soul.
The night is tedious unto man, but much more is the spright Socrates

Of man, if it be destitute or void of heavenly light.
Of the World.
The man that byndes himself unto this world, must whole bequeaue
And yield him self, to these.iii things which needs he must receive:
First unto need, for never he Archi la^
suffisaunce shall attain,
Then unto loss, and hassardes great and last to endless pain.
Of the souls sycknes.
Even as the soul does far surpas the body, so likewise
The griefs thearof more greater are, Dioge.
then body can deuyse.
Of delyberation.
The wiseman with ^iser ession does his deeds for fear of waste, Salamon

The fool with follye does attempt his works in harishe haste.
Of a Prince.
The Princes life is as a mark which each man shootethe at,
Or as a glass wherein the realm may see his proper state: Marcus aureli.

For whereunto the king inclynde does use his busye pain
Unto the same his subjects most adicted do remain.
Of frendshipp.
The wight that from the life of man Cicero.
would frendshipp take a way,
Should seem to take the sun from yerth or else the light from day.
Of Hope.
The hope of things, is bondage great despair is free of all: Tha^es.

The one at ease is sure to stand The other fears to fall.
Of mercy
Compassion ought for to be shown to such as live in grief, Alex se (...).

And poverty, and need, and such as want of such relief.
Of the lyberall man.
The lyberall man does not receive the right of this his name,
By valewe of the things he gives nor purchases his fame:
But by the frendelye gentleness Aristor.
aboundynge in his heart,
Which moves him by loving zeal his substance to imparte.
Of Love.
In loving him that hatethe us Plato.
we can not take delyght,
Let each man therefore live for love, that he deserve no spite.
Of good counsel.
Where as good counsel is not, there the people do decay: Sal^mon.

But if advise do rule, there state does stand in perfect stay.
Of Obedience.
That public wealth does surely stand and is in prosperous plight,
Where as the Prince obedience has and reverence a right: Justin.

For rightful duty done to him does move him for to show
His favor likewise unto them and so does concord grow.
Of Honest life.
It is a thing unnatural Cicero.
that men by others spoil
should live, and thereby heap his goods and use no further toil.
Of Rich men.
The painful travel rich men use to have their goods encreast, Jesus sy
ra^h.

Consumes their bones, and wears their flesh and makes them want their rest.
Of the happy man.
Of all which happy men have been. Jesus sy rach.
that man deserves the name
Of happy, who has lived, to get by death, parpetuall fame.
Of Uertew.
Pure Virtue is a fortress strong, that never can be won:
A pleasant river, that, by forse can never be undone:
A ^ea, that never moves his waves: a Fire that does defend
His heat, which never quenched is a treasure has no end: Marcus aure:

An Army never vanquished: a burden very light:
A Spy, that never taken is a token pointyng right.
A parfecte pathwaye never fayles: a Sirrope which does cure
And heals straight: a hye renoune that ever does endure.
Of a Good man.
The man which does an honest deed, is better then his act:
So likewise he which woorketh ill Socrates
is worser then the fact.
Of the ill.
If needs thou wylt, imploye thy self to wickedness and ill: Socrates:

Where God is absent there be bold to work thy wicked will.
Of the ignorante.
The man vnscylfull, is of trust and creditt very light:
But learned men by learninges scyll Salamon.
in each thing have foresyght.
Who knows.
The man that understands not that which he by right should know,
Amongst the feloship of men a brutishe beast does grow: Pitthag^

And he that knows no more then sarues to satisfy his neade,
Among brute beasts is as a man and sarues no further stead,
But he y^ knows all should be known and each thing understands
Amongste men is a God, and lives unbound from errors bands.
Of a dead fool.
The wise man lives because he knoes the things by learned scill,
That he endeavors or attemptes or guydeth by his will
But the unlearned fool is dead Plato.
because he knows not that
Which he deuiseth or assaults, and proves he knows not what.
Of the slothful.
The slothful man ingenders sleep and breeds his proper pain:
And does disease his bodies health Salamon.
and honger does sustain.
Of an ignorant man.
An ignorant man may be discried by want of reasons sayll,
Because he knows not how to rule him self or guide his will,
And eke by lack of wit because he knows not to refrain Plato.

His lust, but folowes vice unawares and runs in hedlonge pain,
And last, by bondage that he is suppressed in woman's yoke,
The which his mind to every filthe and follye does provoke.
Of perfect good.
A man can not be perfect good If he despise his fo: Plato.

What is he then, if to his friend, he offer to do so.
Of wise men.
Like as to men, which Olephantes enstructe or seek to tame,
Do wear no colors white, lest that they should displease the same:
Or as the kepers of wild bulls do warely refuse
To give them sight of colors light. Plutarch
lest they should them misuse:
So likewise, wise men ought to shun and good men to eschew
All things whereof mishap or harm may follow or ensewe.
Of Youth.
As wax is pliaunte to receive the printe of every seal: Mermes:

So Youth, each doctrine taught to him is ready to reveal.
Of the Covetous man.
The Covetous man, a Dropsye has: for still the greater store
He does possosse of want and need Pitthago
he ever has the more.
Of Flaterye.
As worms do seek the softest wood and there increase their nest: Plus.

So Flatery sonest does deceive the gentliest and the best.
Of Lust.
Dishonor, shame, and evil end dependes on filthye lust, Aristot.

And it defaseth fame, and soon consume him to the dust.
Of Diligence.
The man that uses diligence in ought he does pretend. Arist^.

His deeds or works with quietness shall bring to perfect end.
Of Richesse.
These Richesse ought to be dispisde whom wast does spend in vain, Pithago*

Or Auarise does heap, whereof doothe spryng no good or gain.
Of Fortune.
The brickle form of Fortuns wheel, So tickle is and vain,
That now it hoysteth up alofte and now reuokes again,
And after flattreth by her guyse Marcus ^re:
and shows a short delyght,
Whear^ye, in time her subtle wyle does work a greater spyght.
Of children.
The diposition of the child, or manners of the same: Philip Rex.

Is either to the fathers praise or to the fathers blame.
Of men which live in sorrow.
There be six sorts of wretched men which ever live in wooes,
And drous^e care, and by no means may be deuoyd of those.
The first is he whose memory Philip Rex.
can not forgett his pain
Or trouble, but records his grief which moves him to complain:
Another is the enuyous man, whose heart does melt by spyghte
And care, to see his fooe aduaunste or live in happy plighte,
Another he who dwells in place wheare as he can not thryue,
And sees another prosper well whom fate does not deprive:
Another is the hautye man suppressed by decay:
Another he which can not get his wisshe by any way,
And last, the man which does enhaunte the fellowship of wise,
And can not yet obtain such skyll. as feign he would devise.
Of the souls vexacion.
The greatest grief or dolours which the body does sustain Socrates

Can not be likened to the souls most least surmised pain.
Of a Pikethanke.
He that in presence unto thee an other will defame
when thou art absent, of thy self will do the very same. Hermes:

For none mistrust does more deserve or doubtfulnesse then they
which can the will of every man accordingly obey.
Of Travel.
The travels labors or the pains necessity requiers, Marcus aurels.

Should be sustaind with courage good and steadfast whot desires.
Of the Wit.
The greateste vice that does abuse the wit of man is this, Jesus sy rach.

By others faynynge of him self to judge or think amiss.
Of Uaynglorie.
Even as the famyshed for want of sustenaunce or food
Is sometime forste to eat his flesh Plutare
and drink his proper blood:
So the vayneglorious man for lack of others good report,
Is feign to praise him self to them, in seekinge their resort.
Of purchasing love.
If thou desire unto thye self good favor to attain,
Or steadfast love of faithful frend^ then do thye busy pain: Proper c^ne.

For to forbear his testie wrath, but when the same is paste,
Then easylie reprove his fault and he shall yield at las^e.
Of Wrath.
Wrath makes a man an ouglie beast, but dronkennes does more:
Deforme the visage of the soul Plato.
which nothing can restore.
Of the gyuer.
The man that has sufficient power to give a fruictfull gift
Unto his friend, and does it not, pretendes a subtle shifte:
And he that promisethe to give Marcus aure.
and seekethe a delay,
Him for a weak suspicious friend by right suppose we may.
Of the spiteful man.
As green wood lies and smolthers long before it takes the fire,
But once through kindled hotter is, then wood which is more drier:
So is the man whose heart can not Plato.
be moved straight to wrath
When he is vexte, more hot then he who hasty nature has.
Of the wit.
Ercepte the field be tilde with care, it lies void of gain:
And so the wit vnexersisde Plato.
no profit does attain.
Of the Tongue.
It is a most vnseemlye thing vnpleasannte and unfit,
when as the slippery tongue of man Socrates
does run, before his wit.
Of Equal Friendship.
It Is seldom seen that friendship does endure in full effect.
where as the same unequal seems, in any one respect:
As with the sturdye stoburne man the easy gentle heart, Plato.

Can not continue but by time, their frendshipp will depart:
Nor he whom Fortune has aduaunst or set in hye estate:
with him whose case decaid by chance, is overthrown by fate:
Nor he which seeks to ascend with him whose greedy mind
is likewise bent to clime a lofte Plato.
his honor for to find.
But where as Fortune equal is and natures works alyke,
And stomakes luker do dispyse there steadfast love does stick.
Of an unlearned Rich man.
The rich man void of learnings skill, is like a patched peese:
Or as a sheep which on his skine Dioge.
does wear a Goulden fleese.
Of Alms.
If thou extend thy will and welth^ to satisfy the poor:
Then God the rather will dispose Socrates
and give to thee the more
Of Slothe.
The slothful man is made of clay^ or durte the which polutes Jesus sy rach.

The toucher of the same, and sloth the state of man confutes.
Of the World.
This world is like a burninge fire whereof if thou do take
A little, it will warm thee well Pitthago
and coldness will aslake:
But if to much thou gripe the force thereof thie self will burn,
And thus the more thereof thou fakeste the less it serves thye turn.
Of the knowledge of this world.
IF to thy self, thou purchase would the needful perfect skill,
Both of thy self, and of this world, imploye thye paynefull will
With busy care for to suppose and diligence to way,
Three singul^r especial things whereon thie state does stay:
The first which rightly does require the chiefest room or place:
Thy soul it is because the same pretends in this same case,
The figure which immortal is of portrature divine:
Created by the mighty God, who did the same assign.
The next and second to the same thy body, which the grave
Or closet is of that thy soul: which body semes to have.
The execution of the advice the soul by heavenly grace:
Does move and stir the body to, when vice it does deface.
And last as servant to the rest this world supplies the need
Of every thing the body lackes, and is the least in deed.
Let therefore thus accordingly Socrat^
the eyesight of thy mind
Respect^ the virtues of these three, as thou thereof shall find.
And first account thy soul the best and therefore most bequeaue,
Thy diligence unto the same which ought it to receive.
And then unto thy body next, according to degree:
And last and least unto the world for so it ought to be.
Of Justice.
The man that uses Justice shall both got him love and fear: Seneca.

But where as Justice is abused each vice abounds there.
Of punishment of the wicked.
As cuttynge of the vine does cause the same to florishe more,
So sharpnes used to evil men Plato.
does make the lesser store.
Of Patience.
The virtue of patience is not got by force, nor strength refraines
But by the goodness and the grace Plato.
the soul of man contaynes.
Of a Prince.
That Prince the most unhappiest is which happy thynkes his state, Marcus
aureli.

Because his cofers be inrichte or he aduaynste by fate.
Of a Princes office.
Like as the son is equal to the rich man and the poor,
And shines as well on barren ground, Soerates
as on the firtile store:
So ought a prince to have regard unto the thing he hears,
And not unto the persons, but use equallye his ears.
Of swearynge.
The man that many oaths frequentes Iesussy.
shall live in cursed days:
And plagues shall never leave his house and shame shall be his praise.
Of the civil law.
The full effect of Civil law, if it be good and true: Cicero.

Is to live well and hurt no man, and give each one his due.
Of the wit.
A quiet wit and skillful sense, does ponder what is paste: Alex: seue.

And what is now, and what to cum, and so auoydethe waste.
Of Judgment.
It is more better for a man, to judge amongste his foes Alex: se

Then friends: for he shall therbie make a friend of one of those.
Of Justice.
Justice, is not only part or piece of virtues praise,
But is the sum of virtues wealth, Aristot.
and head of virtues stays.
Of an unquiet wise.
As to the feet of aged men it is a tedious pain,
(...) And makes hearty all his fooes but makes his people faint,
And thereby honor fled, with shame be does him self acquaynt.
Of the Soul.
Like as the eye without his sight is blind and nothing sees, Plato.

Even so the soul deuoyde of grace, is blind and naught discries.
Of perseueraunce in counsel.
Like as a sick man which demaund^ good council for his welthe,
Of the Phisission, and denies the medsyne for his health:
Even so the man whom doctrine good instructed has, to learn Seneca.

If he persevere not therein no knowledge can deserne.
Of Foolishnes.
It is the nature of a fool with scorn for to deride, Cicero.

The little faults of other men and leave his own vnspyde
Of youth.
After the course of winter time Plutarch
the spring does follow fast:
But after age shall never youth^ return, but death at last.
Of a rare thing.
Of all things rare upon the earth or seldom on the ground: Marcus* ^ure.

A rich man, good, most rarest is and hardeste to be found.
Of a good Judge.
The judge which wins more good will then monye, winnethe well: Marcus
aureli.

But he that winnethe monye, more then love, does weakelye deal.
Who may not be just.
The man that dredethe pain or death or fears for exile, Cicero.

May not be just nor void of vice, nor wantynge subtle guyle.
Of the wit without knowledge.
Even as a barren tree deuoyd of fruicte or fertile gain, Socrates.

So is a wit that has no skill, or else, a senceles brain.
Of Contempt.
No man contempt can suffer, for (...)
none thinks him self so vyl^
As for to be despysd, or had in scornful hates exile.
Of man's property.
The nature of a man is most that thing for to require: Thales.

The which occasion does forbid to grant to his desire.
Of Credyte.
As after life once lost, that life retourneth not again: Alex* seue.

So credyte once abused, is lost but byndrance does remain.
Ofselfeloue.
Selfeloue an ougly vice, desames the high and lofty state:
And blyndeth many by the toys conceived of flattring fate. Cicero.

For many fools by glosing guyle upholding fancies will:
Be far deceived, and themselves with swelling pride do fill.
Of a Princes duty.
The greater power and force a Prince attayneth by his fate: Marcus ^ure:

The greater virtue should he use to be wtify his state.
Of people or subjects.
As wind unto the fire is in causing it to flame: Pitthago

So be the people to the prince in raising up his name.
Of the World.
This world is as a priuye path wherein do thistles lie: Seneca.

And therefore men should take good bed^ how they do pass thereby.
Of Rulers.
The man that would a ruler be must labor first to learn
A subjects duty: then to guide he better shall discern. Alex: se

For he that is a subject proud or covetous of heart:
Shall never tempratelye fulfill a rulers busy part.
Of counsel taking.
There can not be in mortal man Plato.
a matter more divine
Then good advice: for to demand in ought he does assign.
Of God.
Y Fthou wouldste rightlye know to please the mighty god of heaven,
Of all things needful most thereto be these, insuinge seven:
The first that man do never leave his God for other men,
Least likewise God when he shall need forsake his case as clean:
The second, that it more auayles to trust unto the might
Of the immortal God, then all Marcus aure:
the power of mortal fight:
The third that we emploie our cares least we provoke the ire
Of God, whose anger ragethe more then does the broylinge fire.
The fourth that God does not forget a man for all his crimes,
Except, that man do first forget his God, a thousand times.
The fyfthe, that god does punish more the good men then the ill,
Because his mercy may pursue the teachinge of his will.
The sixte that if in time of wars we would our wealth increase:
We duly serve and seek to please our God in time of peace.
The seventh, that god to no man sends or realm his plague or threat:
Except that man or realm have first committed vices great. Marcus aure.

For as God is of mercy full whose pity we may trust:
So is he sharp, severe and rough and yet a God most just.
Of worldly honor.
He worldly honor does contemn the which is perfect wise: Plato.

And he which riches does embrace must wisdom needs dispyse.
Of Law.
The happy realm which has good law has such a propp and stay: Socrates

That thereby all things flourish fast but nothing can decay.
Wisdom is a wholesome tree which springs from the heart: Plato.

And in the tongue does bear his fruits and gives each man part.
Of a wise man.
By these three chief and proper points thou may a wise man know:
By making him a faithful friend which was his utter foe. Isocrates

By making learned such as rude and ignorant have been:
And last by good reforming those which wallow in their sin.
Of study.
Like as the earth sustaynes the root of any herb or tree:
But yet the Sun by wholesome heats does cause there blossoms be.
So study bredes the sappy dew Protege.
of knowledge and of skill:
And love and favor moves the same his virtues to distill.
Of man.
We have a soul and body which be diversely enclynde: Catelin.

The one participate with God, the other brutish kind.
Of Riches.
The rich man's substance does provoke his heart to every vice:
By moving him to pleasures fond Aristot
whereof great harms arise.
Of childehode.
Nothing does stick more fast in mind or planted is so deep:
As that which in his tender youth Fabius.
a man has sought to keep.
Of words.
The disposition of the mind may best be understood: Dioge.

By the procedings of the mouth as they be naught or good.
Of good deeds.
So do thy deeds as thou would have the same for to be known: Euripi des.

Yet keep them close a while, and then at large let them be showen.
Of Concord.
No peace ne concord may endure amongst such foolish men:
As know not reverence for to give, to whom, wherefore nor when.
For where as all men be alyke, there is continual strife: Justin.

And thereby hatred and decay, and ruin reign as rife.
Of vice.
As we are set in great delites Marcus aureli.
and worldly pleasant fame
By vice, so likewise mischiefs more we purchase by the same.
Of vain glory.
As he that gives unwillingly but little seems to have: Marcus aure.

So he that prayseth slenderly seems praise again to crave.
Of Virtue.
Eachman by travail will provoke and put himself to pain:
To get the treasure of this world and wealth of earthly gain. Dioge.

But much more requisite it is that man should use his care:
To seek for virtue which no time can alter nor apare.
Of virtuous deeds.
It Is better much, for virtuous deeds to take rebuke and shame: Hermes

Then by deceit of vicious works to get renown and fame.
Of fair words.
In trouble poverty or need Marcus aureli.
sweet words do profit small:
Except that also sweet good works be mingled therwithall.
Of an Envious man.
The serpents spew their venim out and poison, to intent
To damage other men therewith, and therefore is it spente. Seneca.

But the malicious man does more him self with filth infecte
Then any else, and therefore most his own wealth does detecte.
Of Liberality.
There be two fountains which approve Valeri us maxi
the liberal man's good savor:
The one is judgment sound or sure the other honest favor.
Of the most evil thing.
As nothing better then good men in all the world remaynes: Proteg.

So nothing worse then evil men or wicked it contaynes.
Of Conditions.
Like as in each Pomegranate is Plato.
some rotten seed or grain:
So some condition that is ill in each man does remain.
Of gifts.
If thou would give, and would therein avoid suspicious fame:
Thou must with measure use thy gifts and wisely weigh the same. Solon.

For if too little they be, then report will say in have:
Thou art a niggarde, if too great it judges thee to waste.
Of Faith.
Nothing a commonwealth preserues and nothing profit stayth: Cicero^

So much in perfect proof of wealth as does the virtuous faith.
Of truth.
Truth is the messenger of God which each man ought to take: Plato.

Both for the nature of her self and for her masters sake.
Of good behavior.
If thou intendst to do the things is good, or to thy need:
With diligence and pain provide therein for to proceed.
But if thou do determine ought that does incline to ill: Zenocra tes.

Then be as swifte for to suppress the same and conquer will.
Of Love.
As Ivy always some what finds whereto himself should cleave:
So love has always servant good Plato.
which love do never leave.
Of sober demeanor.
It is most requisite for man to show a sober face:
And manners in the sight of youths that they may learn his grace.
And in the sight of ancient men Plato.
to use himself likewise:
That he may know and learn of them the things that they devise.
Of Flatery.
It is ^ point of slatery in presence for to praise. Seneca.

A man, and great vnsemelines for to revoke his phrayse.
Of wrath.
The man may best from wrath or ire his raging heart refrain:
Which thinks how God beholdes him Soerates
well and does his pride disdain.
Of Wine.
Like as with water Malt is made to have a savor sweet:
So wine with measure to make glad Hermes:
the senses is most meet.
Of the tongue.
The tongue of man well vsd is good, the most commodious thing
That man may have, whereby procedes the favor of the king. Legmon.

But if abusd the same, more ill, more pestilent and vile,
And poyseuous is then any harm that works the wealths exyle.
Of speech.
It is great wisdom for a man in speech to be advised: Socrat.

Least after many words dispersed his sayings be dispysed.
Of a Liar.
It Is meet the foolish fellowship of liars to eschew:
But needful more we credit not Hermes
the same nor them ensue.
Of a fools secret.
Even as a clear and perfect glass Aristot.
can hide nothing apeares
Before the same: so fools can keep no secret close of theirs.
Of pleasures.
Temperance is an utter foe to lust and lusts despite: Aristot.

And lust is wayghting servant to each pleasure and delight.
Of the Flatterer.
Even as the shadow follows still a man in every place: Plutarch

So does a Sicophant the like with his dissembling face.
Of Fortune.
The property of Fortune is so cruel fierce and fell:
That she will punish them who most do seem to serve her well.
And she beguyleth every man, Marcus aure:
but none beg^leth her:
And she will promise much and yet the time will still defer.
Her song is weeping, and her tears is laughter both to dead:
And them alive and both alike she serves in their need.
And spurneth them that present be the absent threatening sore:
A wise man shonnes her, but a fool will care for her the more.
Of the covetous man.
Like as a dog deuoureth all is given to him in have:
And greedely does gape for more Aristot.
and eats it up as fast.
So likewise does the covetous when he by chance does get
A pray: abound thereby, the more in greedines as great.
Of diligence.
Nothing does sooner purchase store or sets the heart at ease: Aristot:

In quiet state then diligence which travel does apease.
Of happiness.
He is not happy that aboundes in riches or in store: Seneca.

But he which well does use the same that man is happy more.
Of sure living.
The little goods or poverty Isocrates
that is with suerty kept:
Is better much then riches which with dread and fear be rept.
Of the knowledge of our selves.
It is a point of folly great that thou should rightly show: Marcus aure:

Of other men and of their faults, and not thy self to know.
Of wise men's fore knowledge.
A fool may well perceive the things the which concluded be: Cicero.

But wise men of the things to come as plainly judge and see.
Of deffe and blind men.
Such men as deffe or blind are borne more pure and perfect have Mar: au:

Their inward powers, because their sense of pleasures least do crave.
Of vnsaciate desire
It Is very rare and seldom seen Alexseue.
where honor does increase:
Or riches do abound or flow that avarice there can sease.
Of laysure.
The tract of time or laysure does engender perfect skill: Aristot:

And prudence and experience both of the wit and will.
Of aduisement.
The man does seldom fall or slip which fears for to fall: Marcus aure.

Because in every step, he takes aduisement there withal.
Of vain men.
Uayne men be known by vttrance of their words, which likewise vain Thales.

Do vainly show the vain delights their foolish hearts retain.
Whereto man is made.
By natures craft we are not taught as though that we were made Cicero.

To solace, but to gravity if it be wisely wayde.
Of forecast.
Like as a stroke well spyed, may be received with better ease: Aristot:

So he that does forecast his harms his troubles may appease.
Of our life and death.
Mankind from whence we take our breath so wicked is and ill:
And eke the world wherein we live so full of rainging will:
And last the glyding serpent which impoysned Fortune hight:
Does with her feet and nails and teeth, so kick and scratch and bite. Mar:
au:

That nothing is more amorous or plesaunt to the heart:
Of wise men, then to die in God and from this world depart.
Of Correction.
Correction done with gentleness does easily persuade:
But with extreamenes moves ill will, Seneca.
the stomach to invade.
Of a King.
A king should be of courage good, and of a courteous heart:
And free, and with great pain devise to execute his part.
And should refrayn himself from wrath Plutarch
and bridell him from ire:
But should with measure use it, where occasion does require.
And if it chances that his force or fortune do decay:
Yet should his courage still increase and not to wear away.
Of shame.
It is a shame for any man to honor to attain: Anacar:

By birth, and not desarue the same by good and virtuous pain.
Of secrets.
The man is wise which can refrain and keep his secrets close:
But he a fool who does his trust Seneca*
to every man depose.
Of Counsel.
For diverse services a man may make a meet reward:
But for good counsel given to him Mar: au:
the same is very hard.
Of the Law.
The prince that makes his realm to be a subject to his law:
Does reign in peace because he makes his people live in awe. Justinian

But he that does reject his laws from out his realm, does cast
Himself from out his seat therewith and all things bringes to waste.
Of all Injuries.
By two perverse and wrongful ways all injuries be wrought:
Whether they be retaynde by force or else by wrong are sought.
The one is by witholding that Pithago:
which is another right:
The other by extorting ought which is an open spite.
If thou the truth of any thing would very feign descry: Socrates.

Give little credit to thine ear but trust unto thine eye.
Of the wrathful.
The man that is a slave to wrath or bondeman to his ire:
Has neither power to rule his wit Socrates.
nor bridle his desire,
Of early risinge.
To rise from sluggish sleep betimes and long there from to stay: Plato.

Maintaynes the health of man, the wit and senses from decay.
Of Wisdom.
Wisdom is the perfect skill of matters be divine: Aristot:

As also knowledge of the things that nature does assign
Of honest living.
That man of honor does desarue and worship most his part:
And lives most aright in earth and best imployes his heart.
Which has a conscience vncorrupt and fears God aright: Mar: au:

And is a freende unto his freende, and bears his foe no spite.
And temperate is of words and works not covetous of fame:
And in his person restfull is such man deserves no blame.
Of a whore.
A fair whore sweet poison is Chilon.
which by her privy watch:
The simplenes of foolish men Mar: au:
with subtle guile does catch.
Of Obedience.
The wicked man obayes for dread the good for perfect love: Aristot

Whose true obedience firmly stands and never does remove.
Of trouble.
Even as the mariner by course exspectes for storm and wind
After calm weather, so likewise the prosperous quiet mind
Should after ease, misdoubt the more Plut.
his troubles to ensue:
Thus doing, after such mishap his comfort may renew.
Of women's wrath.
The serpents head most subtle is and wicked, but the ire Iesussy.

Of women, passes every wrath that burns in furies fire.
Of the learned virtuous man.
The man which learning has adioynd with virtue seems pure Plato.

And perfect clean and excellent and constant firm and sure.
Of Sciences.
Like as the little bees do suck the flowers that be most sweet: Plato.

So men should those of sciences the science is most meet.
Of women's counsel.
No man more ignorant does seem or foolish is then he: Socrates

Who by a woman's counsel seeks advised for to be.
How to live well.
If thou would move thy wicked flesh to live in godly plight:
Then let thy mind consider these and judge of them a right.
How painful the reward of sin Plato.
is after this thy life:
How vain and frustrate is the world repleate with vering strife.
How brief and short it is, how fond the pleasures of the same:
And how inuirond of thy foes thou art, which seek thy shame.
And last how death uncertainly by diverse ways does watch:
How that in privy sudden time unawares he may thee catch.
Of a virtuous heart.
Like as a precious stone does shine Plato.
and glitter in a ring:
So does a heart in virtue set excel each other thing.
Of our corrupt nature.
We virtue much desire to have Marcus aureli.
but yet our works intend
To vice, and wickedness, and ill: and to no other end.
Of measure in speech.
The prudent man demanded of Proteg.
a question, aunsweres small:
The foolish man without remorse does prate and babbell all.
Of our state.
As soon as man is borne on earth the same for to possess: Marcus aure.

Death likewise issues therwithall his life for to suppress.
Of friends duetyes.
Friends ought to be like horses good and have a little head:
By humble conversation for scorn must clean be fled. Marcus aure.

And quick of hearing to the end they may obey the call:
And soft of mouth because their tongs should never slip nor fall.
And hard of hoof that they may bear great travail to sustain:
And sure of foot they may not start for labor nor for pain.
And of a color bay that they may win renown and fame:
And so should friends employ the^ selves their love and lives to frame.
Of Charity.
Charity is a good effect or passion of the mind:
Whereby the heart of man estemes such things as be assignde. Hermes

For the perseverance of the fear and love of God before
The valor of each worldly thing or heaps of earthly store.
Of vain benefits.
The man which to the wilful fool does study to do good:
Shall gain as much as if he gave a strangers dog his food. Socrates

The which will bark and bite as well the feeder as the rest:
Although he give him of his meat the daintyest and the best.
Of a nigardes alms.
The goodness which procedes from him which in good deeds is slow:
Is like the herbs the which by chance Hermes:
upon a donghill grow.
Of a learned prince.
Unto a common wealth or realm a learned prince or king:
Is happiest stay unto the same Aristip:
surpassing every thing.
What is our best knowledge.
The greatest learning we can have or perfect purest skill: Alex: se

That we by knowledge may possess is to unlearn our ill.
Of three incombrances.
No men more ignorant be then they that trust unto their wits:
None so uncertain as the fools Socrates
that stand to fortunes fittes.
But none so combred or diseasde or troubled more with strife
Then he that has, against his will a brawling wicked wife.
Of death.
As kindly as it is for age to follow youthful race: Hermes

So after age insueth death even in as kindly case.
Of a bewtiful fool.
A fool that is well favored Dioge.
or decked with bewties cost:
Is like a pleasant house wherein does dwell a froward host.
Of fear fulness or timorosity.
Ne strength ne bigness does prevail in him that fearful is: Plut.

And therefore each thing he attempts by force must fare amiss.
Of virtue and vice.
Like as the sight or clean prospect or clearenes of the eye:
Can not at once both things above Hermes
and things beneath descry.
Even so the heart with all his pain his knowledge and his skill:
Can not at once apply himself both unto good and ill.
Of perfect good.
Of all such store or riches as by right we goods do call:
The virtues of the soul be best Pithago
and richest goods of all.
Of the wearines of nature.
There is no thing so perfect good so pure or perfect wise:
But tract of time does cause us loath and utterly despise. Hermes:

For such is foolishnes of man that that which most he may:
He least estemes, but that which least he holds for a pray.
Of abstinence.
As men be wary to receive and dainty for to take
Unholesome meats, least that their health Socrates
of body should a slake.
So likewise should they warily from vice and sin abstain:
That they thereby may likewise shun the souls eternal pain.
How to see and perseaue folly in a man.
As when a foggy miste does hide the fair and pleasant beams
Of Titans bewty, and obscures the skies with pitchy streams.
Each form therein more greater semes Socrates
and fuller does appear:
Then when such foulnes worn away the skies be clean and clear.
So likewise vice that settled is and nos^ed in the heart:
Is most perceued in ougly wrath when fury plays his part.
Of the lazy life.
The lingering lazy life wherein to much of ease dependes: Aristot.

Is most unready to forbear^ when fortune backward bendes.
How to make of foos friends.
Either with meekenes overcome the man which thou have made Plato.

Thy foe, or else with benefits his envy over lade.
How to disclose our secreats.
To such as well thou know with ease thou may thy trust repose: Zenopho

But to the man to thee unknown no secreate do disclose.
How to trust.
To try and then to trust thou may in trusting think thee sure:
But first to trust before to try Dioge.
repentance will procure.
Of pride.
Of young men pride should be eschewd of old men pride disdaynde: Alexseue.

And last of all men pride suspect and carefully restayned.
Of the eyes offense.
The eye could never once offend if ruled by the mind Cicero.

it were, but deal aright in that which du^ty has assignde.
Of fruitles labor.
Attempt not diverse things at once for they will all decay: Thesille.

Through disagrement of themselves and thou shall have no stay.
Of deliberate speaking.
First think, then speak, and last fulfill,
Let words be ruled by thought: Zenopho:

And after words employ thy will that promise may be wrought.
Of worldly pleasures.
The worldly man that seeks for fond Hermes^
and worldly vain delight:
Does hunt a shadow which is sone dispersed and out of sight.
Of advice in all things.
The man which wisely takes advice in every work or deed: Titus li ^ius.

Shall never live for to repent nor to bewail his need.
Of wits exercise.
As brass or steel do glister more in bewty of their kind:
The more that they be worn, and more to brightness are inclynde. Plato.

So wits which exercised be and practysde with good use:
Are taught the more to goodness, and are kept from ill abuse.
Of malice.
As he that wounded is does live in great disease and pain.
So likewise he is sick in soul Hermes.
who malice bears in brain.
Of reason and knowledge.
Like as a captain rules his host deuoyde of any strife: Plato.

So reason knit with knowledge leads and guides the happy life.
Of wisdom.
Even as a plough does root the thorns and thistles from the ground: Hermes*

So wisdom purges every place where vice does most abound.
Of Gold.
As by the touchstone gold is tryde so man is tryde by gold: Pitthago

The which directly does his price and valor well unfold.
Of advancement.
By nature all men equal be by fortune some aduaunst:
And some suppressed, let him therefore whom fortune has enhaunst
In his supremicy beware (...).
and wisely be aduysde:
Least that in midst of lofty fate his fortune be dispysde*
For who by fortunes favor gettes to live in happy plight:
By fortunes anger is addict to purchase fortunes spite.
Of hope and life.
Hope is in life and life must die which hope must think upon:
In life, for when the life is past Justin.
the hope is also gone.
Of knowledge.
That realm in poverty does liu^ in famine and in dearth: Socrates

Whereas intelligence is scant the king of heaven and earth.
Of a vicious man.
Like as one branch of any tree if it be set on fire:
Will kindle all the rest thereof presuming to the hier. Socrates

Even so one wicked man with vice corrupted* will defile
A great convent except he sone be put unto exile.
Of Envy.
The greatest poison of despite and envy most is owde: Seneca

To those on whom the benefits of fortune are bestowed.
Of wine and women.
That man the which in women has and wine his chief delight: Chilen.

Can neither store possess, nor health, nor wit, nor manly might.
Of foresight.
To see it is a common thing which most men do retain: Zenopho.

But to foresee a seldom thing which sight is in the brain.
Of superfluous praters.
As empty vessels lowdest sound and make the greatest noise: Socrat.

So simple wits do most abound to prate with lowdest voice.
Of envious men.
Even as a sick man healed is and cured of his sore:
By virtue of the medcine good Socrat.
which physic does restore.
Likewise of envious men the whot and great consuming rage:
Good laws with remedy do serve severely to assuage.
Of hasty attemptes.
The greatest foolishnes in men which is the greatest fault: Socrat.

Is hastily without remorse His doings to assault.
Of things surpassing our capasitie.
It is a folly for a man and thing exceeding vain: Protege.

In weighty matters which surpasss his wit, to use his pain.
Of the greatest shame.
Of all reproach or infamy it is the greatest shame:
An old man for to be vnlearnde Socrat.
which most deserves blame.
Of a fool.
A brutish beast more better is unto a commonwealth:
Then is a fool, whose simple wit can further no man's health. Mar: au*

For Oren labor on the earth and Asses serve our need:
But fools deuoyde of fruitful sense can do no such good deed.
Of tender age.
What thing a man in tender youth has practiced in ure:
He shall retain the very same in age till death be sure.
Who therefore in his age would feign Euripi des.
be glad good fruits to mow:
Must in his youth apply himself good wholesome seeds to sow.
Of Death.
Death is a thing which no man's wit can compass to eschew: Pithago.

And therefore should the less be feared because the same is true.
Of Sorrow.
Sorrow to solitarines is Cousin and the heir Mar: au*

To utter desolation and comfortles despair.
Of a sad countenance.
A grievous countenance does bewraye the sorrows of the heart: Socrat.

And shows the sprite to be inwrapt in grief and inward smart.
Of Obedience.
Of every quality the which commodity does bring: Hermes.

Obedience sonest love obtaynes before each other thing.
Of Charity.
As fire is an instrument which many things invade:
Before they can receive their end or thoroughly be made.
So charity determines still the truth of every deed:
That there without no honest work or thought may once proceed.
Of the tongue or words.
By the disposing of the tongue there is a trial true:
To know how the disposer can Socrat.
his fleshly lusts subdue.
For he that can not brydell words according as he list:
Has much less power to bridle lusts or appetites resist.
Of contented riches.
He is not rich which has great store but he which is content: Socrat.

Whose state de^ayeth not although his riches clean be spent.
Of good advice.
As a physician can not cure Hermes.
nor heal his pacients sore:
Except the cause of his disease he thoroughly know before.
So can no man imparte advice or counsel well to thee:
Except the full of thy complaynt he do peruse and see.
Of worldly care.
He is not wise which well does know this world he must depart: Pithago

And yet to worldly things imployes his care and paynfull heart.
Of the worlds misery.
In this same vale of misers, none can perfect rest attain:
Nor yet enjoy though he have reapt Seneca.
the profits of his pain.
Of a kings duty, written by Claudianus a famous Poet.
Though that thy power and prowes stretch unto the world his end:
And through at large in every place and province do extend.
And though thou rulest the heavy charge Seneca.
of rich Arabias might:
Of Seres, Medea, and the rest and have in Indea right.
If fear thy honor interrupt or small things thee offend:
Or to desire which is corrupt thy fansy do intend.
Thou art in bondage as a slave thy honor then does fall:
Thy glory and fame suppressed is and clean defaced all.
And thou shall rightly be esteemd as worthy for to reign:
When thou art ruler of thy self and flyest all disdain.
For evil custom had in ure does bring in filthy use:
That virtue clean refused is and brought into abuse.
And wanton license does intend great folly to allure:
And still pursuit of wanton sects does want only procure.
Set not thy fansy therefore still to live in great delight:
Least that thy foolishnes of will do work thee further spite.
And if that lust or hasty wrath thy stomach do assail:
Subdne occasion, which subdewd thy self shall then prevail.
What thou may do crave not to know but what becomes thee best:
Keep courage, low, and always think that measure is a feast:
Lue well thy subjects and provide the meanest to maintain:
Devise thy wealth and let them all Be partners of thy gain.
Be not addict to parcialnes except it do pretend
Thy whole estate of commons all and people to defend.
For by ensample of thy self they be informed all:
And both in virtue and in vice with thee they rise and fall.
For laws and statutes have no force nor any thing prevail:
But as a ball the people turn which every way does fail.
And if the ruler in his life and living be not stable:
Both law and counsel sone are changde and turnde into a fable.
Of meek witted men.
It is a seldom thing to find though labor long do seek: Hermes.

A man that does abound in wit and therwithall is meek.
How to know a wise man.
A wiseman well may be discernde by slacknes unto ire:
And by refrayning of his will and brideling his desire. Seneca.

And by the little pride that he conceaueth of the fame:
Or good report referde to him though he deserve the same.
Of honor and riches.
Riches moves a wanton will and lecherousnes prouokes: Dioge.

And honor, worship and renown, of malice be the clokes.
Of a good law.
A law well made with good advise is a most happy thing: Socrates

A standerd staying right and truth and an immortal king.
Of the proof of good counsel.
The man which counsels other well unto himself does gain
A good report and pleasant praise Isocrat*
for such his happy pain.
Of well doing.
If thou would labor to do well Marcus aure.
endeavor to do so:
As thou therefore may spighted be of him that is thy foe.
Of Ignorance.
The man that knows not what he seeks in seeking that is scant: Socrat.

Can never know to find the things the which his case does want.
Of evil life.
The man deserves not for to live whose life does not intend: Dioge.

To seek for virtue and provide his vice for to amend.
Of learning and knowledge.
The gain of knowledge and the proof Alexseue.
of cunning still does stay:
When substance fayles and goods decrease and fortune flytes away.
Of scornful men.
A scornful man can nere be good or perfect faithful freende: Marcus aureli.

But wavering still prouokt by pride as time will prove in end.
Of Liberty.
Where liberty does ouerflow it is hard the heart to tame:
But that affection will be bold Aristot:
for to inure the same.
Provide therefore to bridle will and appetite in time:
Least after custom thou be backte and nos^ed in thy crime.
Of friendship.
A man may many friends retain Pitthago
and lovers not have scant:
And yet when cause does raise a proof he shall of friendship want.
Of discord.
Even as a little spark of fire proceeds to greater light: Plato.

If it approach to place where wind recouereth up his might.
So discord secreatly begone perseuering more and more:
Will at the last appear in sight though it was hid before.
Of concord.
That realm or place which is addornd with concord and with peace, Pithago

By force must prosper and small things do grow to great in crease:
But where these two abandond be there does abound decay,
And great and myghtie matters melt and vanishe clean away.
Of frequenting thy friends house.
Haunt not to much thy kinsmans house for that does hatred move,
Nor tarry not to long from thense Aristip
for that suspectes thy love:
But use a mean therein and so thou frendshipp shall maintain
For it is good for to receive, but not in croche a gain.
Of vows.
Make little vows but if a cause compel thee vows to frame: Pomp^y ^s.

With ernest diligence provide for to performue the same.
Of superfluous curiosity.
Be swift for to subdue the vice thy stomach does assault: Plato.

But slow to seek and understand or search of others fault.
Of good and ill.
There is but one especial way that does to goodness lead: Hermes

To ill a thousand paths pertayne which inconvenience breed.
Of the diversity of disceites.
As diverse poisons disagree in practice and in ure:
So much that one can well suffice the other for to cure. Seneca*

So likewise vices and disceites in their effect descent:
And be as diverse to defraude and diversely be spent.
How to purchase fame.
If that thou seek to obtain a good report or fame:
Thou must attempt such virtuous deeds Pitthago
as may deserve the same.
And if thou know a man has got as worthy great disprayse:
To get thy self a better name thou must avoid his ways.
Of an evil wife.
None is so perilous a foe which fiersly maintaynes strife: Mar: au:

Unto a man, then is a shrew or else an evil wife.
What best becomes a woman.
The needefulst virtues that behoues a woman to retain:
Is for to bridle raging lust Hermes*
and tikkle tongue refrain.
Of gentleness.
The man that uses gentleness Aristot:
in his superior state:
Can never reap an ill report nor shame, nor purchase hate.
How te instruct youth.
Like as the men which bring up coltes and wanton horses tame:
Unto the bit and bridle first Seneca*
do chiefly train the same.
So they that youth instruct must first if they would have them broken:
Teach them to moderate their tongue and leave their ears wide open.
Of well doing.
As thou would other men to work thy wealth and not thy pain Alex: se

So do to them, and deal aryght with other men again.
Of Wine.
By wine the beauty is defaste and age deformed more, Isocrat.

And that forgot which crste was had and kept with wary store.
Of a licentious tongue.
A tongue the which of wickedness does babble out his fill: Plato.

Is a sustayner of the lust, and norisher of will.
Of goods ill gotten.
The treasures which a man by fraud and falsehode does augment,
By such collusion ill are got Hermes.
and worser are they spente:
Who therefore to be rich in store does purpose and intend,
Ought trewlie riches for to win and dewlye them to spend.
Of foul language.
The man which is of beutie full And vtters fylthie breath, Aris^ip:

Does draw aswoorde compact of lead, out of an yuerie sheath.
Of Lust.
if thou would think of man how much his nature does excel,
Supposing thus thou should perceive Cicero.
and understand it well:
How much unnatural it is for man for to abuse
Him self by lust, and how divine the same for to refuse.
Of a fools good fortune.
There can not be a thing which man may suffer more with pain,
Or matter harder to forbear Socrat.
or lesser to sustain:
Then for to see a fool aduaunst or sit in hie estate,
Whom foolish fortune has inhaunste to undeserved fate.
Of the pleasure in money.
It is a pleasure perrilous which woorketh heavy spite.
For man to pleasure in his goods or money to delight. Plutarch

For none is in a surer state or has less cause to crave:
Then the contented whom it does suffice the least to have.
Of man and money.
It is a better thing for man of money for to want: Pithago.

Then that the money should abonnd and that the man be scant.
Of the end.
The end of every thing is proof and trial of the same:
And the beginning must forecast the things a man would frame. Socrat.

If therefore thou woldst have thy works to grow to fruitful end:
Thou must begin with willing heart the things thou do pretend.
For the beginning is the chief whereto thy wisest pain
Must be referd, but still the end is hardest to attain.
Of authority.
Desire not with hawty mind to rule and bear a sway: Pithago:

Before thou learned have the skill and cunning to obey.
Of time.
The man that trusts unto time is ere beguiled still: Seneca.

Let therefore no time pass to far but guide it by thy will.
Of a dissembler.
The moths corrupt y^ clothes, and worms with canker pearce the bone:
But one dissembler may beguyle Mar: au:
the total world alone.
Of aduisement.
To take aduisement is a good Alex: se
and requisite delay:
Whch maintains profit and preserues endeavors from decay.
Of the body.
The fairest body lives in earth if it be wayde aright: Cicero.

Is nothing but a donghill clad with colors of delight.
Of counterfeyt things or fraud.
No thing which counterfaited is illusion so can feign,
But to his proper substance will in end return again: Aulus gel^sus.

Do therefore nothing with disceyte nor by dissembling trade,
Least y^ when time bewrayes, the same unto thy blame be made.
Of a Soldiers duty.
It death behoue a Soldier best in battle or in fight,
That he do trust more to his wit Zenoph.
and pollisye then might,
For wit in scyrmyshe proffits fare and wars does more prevail,
The^ strength of thousands whch by forse great dayngers may assail.
Of vice or wickedness.
Let nether onse thy hands to work nor heart nor yet thy will, Zenophon

To think nor yet thy ears to here the thing is naught and ill.
Of the hearts disease.
The heart is never vexte so much nor so seuerelye paynde.
As when by forse from wished things Alexse
the stomach is refraynde.
Of a friend.
A friend can nere be knoune but when occasion does requier Anacar.

For in thy wealth each man will crouch and kreepe to thy desire.
Of ydellnes.
Ydellnes is of living men a grave and does supplye Anacar

The sepulcher wherein the mind and body both do dye.
Of curiosytye.
Presume not overmuch to check nor curiously to blame,
A another man least to thy self Socrat.
thou purchase more defame.
Of vicious rulers.
Like as a broken crased ship the which does water drink,
Not only drownes her self but all Socrates.
that are in her do synke,
And thereby goods and ship and men ar broughe unto decay,
And nothing for the forse of waves Hermes
can get to escape away.
So rulers which abound in vice as wickedly intend:
To bring themselves and subjects all to wrack and evil end.
Of man and his soul.
The most exceeding thing in earth is man, that God has made
Whose soul his chiefest riches is for all things else do vade.
By which he imitates the truth Hermes
and justice does assign:
And is provoked to the things immortal and divine.
Of worldly men.
The man that to the world is bent with him it can not fail:
But one of these ensuing things his state does still assail. Socrat.

Either displeasure of his God to purchase or obtain:
Great spite of mightier men then he which is a fruitles gain.
Of a happy realm.
Most happy is that realm or place Plato.
that city or that town:
Wherein a governor does rule which vice suppresseth down.
Of mercy and justice.
If that a king be merciful his state shall prosper well:
And get him succor in his need Marcus aureli.
because he is not fell.
And if he justice do frequent his state shall not decay:
But for his wisdom be beloved and bear continual sway.
Of the auncesters.
The honor of the auncesters and their deserved fame: Mar: au

Do leave their children after them great treasure by the same.
Of freendship and justice.
No freendship nor no justice may be well retaynde of those: Zenopho^

Betwixt whom nothing common is but be as utter foes.
Of Wisdom.
If that thou would to every thing adioyne the thing is fit:
Thou must endeavor to adioyne Plato.
some wisdom to thy wit.
Of (...) men.
A wise man wisely must suppose and ponder so in all: Aristot

That he may think his error great But wisdom very small.
Of learning.
It is no shame for any man though age his years possess: (...).

To learn, or take an offered thing in need, or in distress.
Of instruction.
Instruction given unto a fool or one that is unwise: Protege.

Does make him stiffer in conceyte and fonder in devise.
Of truth and error.
When error is bewrayde by time and wilfulnes discryde: Plato.

Then does the truth appear the more by such a lucky tide.
Of fools and wise men.
A fool in fellowship of fools is hardly to be shown: Marcus aureli.

And wise in wise men's company is scantly to be known.
Of ignorant men.
The boldenes which unskillful men retain in their conceyt: Socrat.

Is that which most do let their wits and them of skyll defeat.
Of fear or doubt.
There is nothing so certain thought or counted so much sure: Marcus aureli.

But fear in hope does somewhat doubt the same for to procure.
Of fear.
Where fear abounds or doubt disturbs the heart, no quiet plight
Can rest therein but it abates Mar: au
the courage and the might.
Of virtue.
Except that man be wholly bent and unto virtue pressed: Plutare

He little differs from a swine or else a brutish beast.
Of good men.
It Is the property of good men not only to be glad
At their own wealth, but when the like Socrat.
of other men is had.
Of an evil life.
That man does lead an evil life which many do bewail: Anaxa goras.

Rejoicing at his death or harm or when his state does fail.
It is the greatest sin in earth for man to seek a praise Marcus aureli.

By feigned virtue and deceyt, and fraud, to guide his ways.
Of goodness and wickedness.
As to the good the goodness is a requisite reward: Hermes

So evil men, their wickedness does seem to punish hard.
Of faythfulnes and truth.
Be ready to reteyne the truth and faythfulnes to hold: Socrat.

For he that is a faithful freende is better much then gold.
Of love.
Love well, and loving well be bold to seal it in thy blood: Plato.

For virtue void of love may not be pure and perfect good.
Of charity.
Charity is of such effect if thou it wisely scanne: S^lon.

That there without no mortal wight can be a perfect man.
Of a liberal heart.
It is the property of him that has a liberal heart
Rather to crave a good renown Seneca.
then money have his part.
Of giving and receiving.
If thou receive a benefit do thankfully requite:
And seek to give again to him according to thy might. (...) li uius.

And when thou genest be content the same for to bestow:
And so in giving shall thou find the gain to thee will grow.
Of a faithful freende.
The freende that is a faithful freende, and minds a true pretense: Mar: au

Is he who quickly can forget and pardon an offense.
Of the wilful man.
The man that to his wilful will is wilfully inclynde: Plato.

Is likewise bound the wrath of God as vehemently to find.
Of Envy.
Like as no shadow can be seen in place where is no light. Plut.

So where as wealth abounds not no envy shows dispight.
Of thretninge.
It is a woman's fantasy and point of folly great, Pithago

For men by whot outrageous words his enemy to threate.
How to delaie spite or grudge.
The man which reasonable is and sober in request, Pithago

May soon appease his fooes dispight, and set his heart at rest.
Of warines.
A man with warines his deeds, and works must wisely use, Pithago

Least for his fooe he take his friend and friend for fooe abbuse.
How to praise.
Praise not to much least thou have need thie praise for to redress, Mar: au

Learn therefore little for to praise but yet to dispraise less.
Of sorrow.
There is no torment nor disease which does so fiercely rage:
But tract of time with easy proof may make the same aswage. Hermes

And every grief that does vpbrayde a damage or a pain
By patience well forborne, in end will turn unto a gain.
Of vain glory.
It is a foolishnes of man to challenge for his part Dioge.

A praise, the which to other men is due by their desert.
Of the misers sorrow.
No mortal more in cares is frounst and sorrows is ytost: Mar: au

Then is the auaritious wretch when he his goods has lost.
Of masters.
The gentlest masters commonly which gentleness frequent:
Have servant which be contrary of nature and intent.
But sturdy masters do compel the same to bow at beck:
And every little wink pretendes to them a fearful check. Alex: se

But if thou would retain to thee a servant which should use
Thee well: thou likewise must beware least thou do them abuse.
Of servant.
A servant both in word and deed ought only to obaye Socrat.

Their masters: pondring well whereon a servant state does stay.
Of labor and custom.
If thou thy* self to labor and to travel would invre: Alex: se

Thou must enforce to customs course thy stomach to allure.
Of a woman's duty.
A woman if she would avoid an ill suspicious name:
Must sone be ready to conceive of evil things a shame.
And in her speech for to be slow yet temperate in her tongue: Alex. se

And wise of wit, and in her deeds to offer none a wrong.
And sober in her gestures all and conuersytion meek:
And low of heart, but of disdain and envy for to seek.
And steadfast in her promise made and constant in her love:
That nothing may distemper it or cause it to remove.
And in correction pitiful regarding well her life:
For these adorn the virgins state and beautify the wife.
Of thankfulness.
It is a common needful thing and every bodies part: Alex: se

For to be grateful to his freende and have a thankful heart.
Of the husband.
The best behavior that does move a woman to be chaste:
Is for her husband to conceane Socrat.
no jealousy in haste.
But to be true and chaste himself and constant in his mind:
And by example all these things in her shall be assignoe.
Of good and wise men.
That man may well be counted good and be esteemed wise:
Who does reform his wanton tongue Plato.
unto his good devise.
Of silence.
By silence the discretion of the silent, thou may deem, Pithago.

And silence used in a fool does make him witty seem.
Of flattery.
Nether endeavor to ensue a flatterer for to be: Seneca.

Nor that thy self be not abusde by flattry likewise see.
f scorn.
Scorn not another man for that he falls to decay:
Or does sustain unhappy chance when fortune flittes away. Cicero.

But take thou head by his mishap to fall in like anoy:
That thou by his unlucky fall may maintain more thy joy.
Of hawty minds.
The hauty minds that do ascend alofte to seek renown: Plato.

Are most by fortune overthrown and clean suppressed down.
Of dronkennes.
To view the foul defaced form of dronkerds beastly use: Anacar.

Is rediest means for to allure the mind from such abuse.
Of covetousness.
Like as a member which is vexte with itch or such disease:
Has always need for to be clawde Plutarch
the itching to appease.
Even so the mind with avarice infected and molest:
Except it still receive a gain is never at his rest.
Of death.
Death to the sorrowful is life Seneca.
and to the welthy grief:
And yet to every man by faith it is a good relief.
Of instruction.
Thou oughst as much for to esteem the man that teaches thee
(...) word of wisdom, as the man Hom (...):
promoting thy degree.
Of expenses.
Expenses small frequented much bring poverty in have:
Learn therefore warely to spend^ Seneca.
but nothing for to wast.
Of substance.
The greater wealth a man retaynes of substance or of store: Pitthago

The less assured is his state but the uncertain more.
Of trial.
Endeavor for to try thy friends before thou art in need: Thales.

And so thereafter to dispose through trial such thy deed.
Of dissembling.
Devise not for to seek thy self the same for to pretend:
To which occasion may approve Thales
the contrary in end.
Of freendlines.
If thou would get a proppe to thee Cliobilus.
or gain thy life a stay:
Thou must be ready for to help another in decay:
Of importunatenes.
Be not importunate for ought thy fancy may not get: Chilon.

Nor let thy wit nor power assault the matters be to great.
Of mortal vexation.
All things which mortal men desire by pain they are attaynde:
And with great care when they are got they like wise are refraynde:
But when occasion does command Cicero.
they should therefore depart:
Then is the greatest sorest grief and dolor in the heart.
Of good fame,
A worthy fame so splendant is and bewtifull of light: Ptolome.

That though in darkness it bedrownde it can not leese his might.
Of learning.
Learning is unto the good a guider of his will: Gelasius.

But to the wicked as a spur provoking him to ill.
Of the tongue and the heart.
It is a common thing that when the stomach well is pleased:
The tongue does labor more then thought whereby the heart is easde. Marcus aure.

But when the heart in heavy plight some sorrow does sustain:
The tongue can not express the care which lies in the brain.
Of the apparel and speech.
If that in silk or sattines fine or golden brave array:
Thou decked art, devise thy speech to bear as equal sway.
For either thou should frame thy words Pithago
according to thy guise:
Or else thy garments to thy words thou equal must devise.
Of superfluous talk.
Even as a vessel never can be full if it do leake:
Or does run out but still decays and more and more does break. Seneca.

So such as prate and babbell still and never do give ear:
Can never wisdom learn because they never seek to hear.
Of slander and flattery.
Of slaundrers well beware, and see thou flattrers do despise:
If to thy self thou purchase would Dioge.
to be accounted wise.
For neither tamed beast nor brute nor beast of savage kind:
Do bite so niely, as this same does pinch and pain the mind.
Whose claws so tear and rankell all Theo frast.
they do attain to touch
That better is it to be torn of beasts then caught of such.
Of the covetous man.
Such men as miserly do live to die it is there best:
Because the longer that they live the lesser is their rest. Seneca.

For life does lead the covetous their substance to increase:
But death discharges them of care and lets them lie in peace.
Of foresight.
It is the part of him that seeks to be accounted wise:
That he foresee his works with good Plato.
and diligent advise.
And when as things in adverse fate vnluckely do frame:
It does become the valiant well for to forbear the same.
Of an enemy.
Beware of foes, when they with gloss declare a flattring face:
For then he most does seek thy harm in such a fayning case.
For serpents never byte so sore Pithago
nor poysenously so sting:
As when by soft and secreate sort they bite before they singe.
Of the fear of death.
Wisdom by grace does cause the hearts of all men to despise Hermes.

The fear of death: for therwithout no mortal can be wise.
Of Death.
Thou oughtst for to persuade thy self that death is all men's hyre: Socrates.

But yet no man can die so often as some men do desire.
Of the fear of God.
The fear of God so needeful is of each to be retaynde:
That therwithout no man is just Iesussy.
nor vice can be refraynde.
Of life and virtue.
The lesser time to live, a man enioyes: the greater care
He ought to have, for to devise Dioge.
his virtue to declare.
Of fear.
It is his best whom many fear he many fear again:
Least lack of fear be sometime cause Aristip^
he do incur a pain.
Of reproving.
It is a great virtue and a thing which each man does behoue: Thales

(...) those faults himself wherein he other does reprove.
Of the uncertainty of time.
If thou determyne for to do Pithago.
some good, do not delay
Till morrow next, thou little know what thing may chance to day.
Of sin.
Sin plucks thy soul from God by force and therefore greatly fear Anacha

To sin: because thy soul the shape of God should rightly bear.
Of a hard thing.
It is the hardest thing in earth another for to tame.
The man that frounsed in his sin is nos^ed in the same.
Of a vain thing.
To be inquisitiue of that which naught does appertain
Unto thy self, does well descry Hermes.
that thou art very vain.
Of wilful will.
What does it profit thee though thou an expert tongue possess:
Or sense that rightly understands and rightly can express. Marcus aure.

Or lively wit or memory, or perfect knowledge have:
Or science void of ignorance with all that thou can crave.
Or pleasant style and clo^uence with every matters skill:
If there withal thou do retain a wicked wilful will.
Of a misery.
If they be miserable men which serve a cruel lord:
From whom in time they may depart though not with his accord. Aristot

How much more wretched misers they which serve their vice and sin:
From whom they cannot start nor fly, but fastened are therein.
Of good deeds done to the wicked.
The man that riches does bestow upon a wicked wight: Plutar

Does give a sick man store of wine which works him further syight.
Of foolish joys.
It is a sign of courage weak when man does hunt the joy:
The which in end and tract of time Pithago
does turn to his annoy.
Of natures works.
No wit is able to douise to make the matter straight: Alex. se

Which nature with deformednes Alex. se
and crokednes does frayght.
Wherein honor consists.
The right of honor in the wealth of worship does not rest: Marcus aureli.

But in the merits which deserve the same to be encreast.
Of counsel taking.
Though great abundance of thine ease and wealth thy state supply: Cicero.

Yet counsel profred unto thee in nowise do deny.
Of riches left to a waster.
Like as an arrow which does light upon a stone by chance:
Because the stone does softnes want is forced therfrom to glannce.
Even so the riches given to him which wants wary wit:
To rule the same, is given in vain Socrat.
and is a gift unfit.
For by his necligence his store can take no tacke nor stay:
But by consumption is dispersed and brought unto decay.
Of the force of riches.
Even as a golden, bridle set with perle or precious stone:
Does serve to garnish every horse it is bestowde upon.
But cannot make the horse to be Plato.
of any better kind:
Or courage, then if no such cost upon him were assignde.
So riches given unto a man do beautify his fate:
But have no power to make him good or better in his state.
Of constant love.
That love is constant firm and sure, Mar: au
whereas two bodies be
But one especial loving heart which jointly does agree.
Of gifts well employed.
A liberal gift employed well does yield the giver gain: Aristot:

But he that gives without remorse does reap his proper pain.
Of corrupt customs.
Whereas the customs be rorrupt there liberty should cease: Mar: au

For lewdnes used overmuch abuses freendly peace.
Of will.
Though will be bridled with a cord and tamed with a whip: Alex se

Yet will endeavors what he can out of his yoke to slip.
Of a freende.
Admit no stranger for thy freende Aristot.
and warily eschew
The man unknown, for fear of that which thereof may ensewe.
Of anger.
Though anger nere so much a while with foolyshnes do rage: Plato.

Yet easy tide in tract of time does clearly it assuage.
Of wrath.
And yet though wrath is stayed, y^ shame I Socrat
thereof will never cease:
For wrath, revenge, and angers thrall, do lead it in a lease. (...) uius.

Of spite and envy.
It is impossible for spite or envy gain to find:
For spite is clokt before the eyes and envy clean is blind.
Of malicious words.
Malicious words discover all the malice of the mind: Aristot:

Let therefore reason rule thy tongue so shall thou favor find.
Of the travels of life and death.
The travels of the life are sore and painful very straight: Mar: au

But yet the pains of death are more and of a greater weight.
Of virtuous.
The fruit of wisdom and the flower of honor must be found
In men, the which disposed well Seneca.
in virtue do abound.
For virtue far excels the store Of silver and of gold
The which the evil commonly desire to have in hold.
Of truth and time.
Although thou may a while keep close thy sin and well provide Plato.

That by thy subtilty the same may scantly be descryed.
Yet truth at last will clean bewray thy wickedness in time: Plut.

The which has sworn for to detect each falshode, sin and crime.
Of wealth.
The purchasing of wealth is not so pleasant to the heart: Aristot.

As it is death unto the same therefrom for to depart.
Of virtue.
If that in virtue thou delight to use thy busy pain:
The pain departs but the fruits of virtue will remain. Musonius.

But if thou pleasure in the thing which wicked is and ill:
Thy pleasure does abate, but pain is bent to tarry still.
Of feigned friends.
The friends whom profit does allure or lucre does increase:
When substance fails there withal their freendlines does cease. Socrates

But friends which lynked are in heart with faythfulnes and love:
Ne fear, ne fortune, ne mischaunce, ne rigor may remove.
Of too much escrutiositie.
If thou would not thy travel have or labor to be vain:
Wish no such secreat things whereto Hermes.
thy will may not attain.
For thou thy self and other none art causer of thy let:
If that thy travel may not reach thou labor for to get.
Of strikinge.
If that another thou meanste to strike Pithago
suppose thou would defend
Thy self, if he to strike again did purpose or intend.
Of chorlish nature.
Of chorlish nature churlish speech proceeds by his kind: Dioge.

But gentle speech in gentle hearts a man may lightly find.
Of the profit of a realm.
That king in realms deserves fame as worthy of renown: Plato.

Which does devise to raise up right the wrong suppressing down.
Of wise men's love, and fools.
True love betwixt the fellowship. of wise men well may fall: I Socrat.

But not among the foolish route though folly be equal.
For wit by order goes, and may by right agree in one:
But folly lacks order so that concord can be none.
Of the world.
Since that the world vnstedily does often ebb and flow:
It does behoue the wise man well the very same to know. Plut.

And so to sail when as the time is clenly clear and fair:
As he may lodge in haven when corrupted is the air.
Of life and wealth.
It is much better for a man this tedious life to lose:
And so to rise to richer wealth Marcus aure.
then heart may well suppose.
Then to escape the sting of death and life for to retain:
Which is implete with vexing griefs and ouerflowes in pain.
Of deceits.
As they that fish with poysned baytes no profit can attain:
Because they do corrupt the fish Plato.
with such impoysned bayne.
So likewise they that use deceits to purchase their desire:
Through their deceits infect the^ selves and that which they require.
Of women.
There is no creature under heaven Mar: au
that more desires fame
Then women do, yet that none less endeavors for the same.
Of Wine.
By too much wine the wit and sense is dulled and decade: I Socrat.

And by a busy tatling tongue the secreates are bewrayde.
Of a vicious man.
Like as a fly does more desire to feed of stinking meat: Pithago

Then of the wholesome healthful herbs or sweetest for to eat.
So does the vicious man requier Plato.
more rather to attain,
The things be like unto him self, then purchase spiritual gain.
Of truth.
The man which uses truth, shall reap by usage of the same, Hermes

Of most men favor, and good will, and well deserved fame.
Of an evil lover.
The evil lover which does love and loves not a right, Pithago.

Esteems and loves his body more, then he regardes his spright.
Of evil men's consent.
The close consent of evil men. no perfect friendshipp is,
For though they do agree in one Aristot
yet is the same amiss:
Because that frendshipp of him self, is so surpassinge pure,
That in ill things he never will his spotles kind inure.
Of privy benefits,
Like as a good physician so secreatlie does heal,
His pacients sore, that he the same in curinge does not feale, Aristot:

So should a perfect friend devise to work his friend a gain:
In secreat sort unawares to him, when he dispayrs in pain.
Of speech and silence.
Both speech and silence they are good if they be wislie used, Socrat.

But both are naught and perilous, if that they be abbusde.
Of thankfullnes.
If thou a profitt do receive, or benefit do find,
As well as in thie hand thou must receive it in thy mind,
For he unthankful is who hides the friendship is bestowde, Seneca.

And he ungrateful, who ceceaues and pays not that is owde:
But he does least deserve to have of profit any part,
Who neither thanks nor does requite nor printes it in his heart.
Of furye.
The end of wrath or furious ire is much deserved shame: Aristot:

Because that bridled good forecast did not dispose the same.
Who lives in quiet.
No grief can commonly frequent the man that is deuoyde
Of these four things, but his estate is never once anoyde.
If he abstain from slouthfulnes Pithago
and pride, and sloth, and will:
For where the heart is full of these there grief remains still.
Sustain and abstain.
Sustain and abstain sustain grief and abstain from the same:
That either is enclynde to ill Epi^teus
or may engender blame.
Of dispraysing.
If thou pretend for to disprayse thou must endeavor so Ovid

For to disprayse that no man know thou do disprayse thy foe.
Of a king.
A king has little cause to fear Justinian
or for to live in awe.
But only for to dread his God and well obey his law.
Of a wicked soul.
A wicked soul may be discernde by hating of the right: Pithago

Because it chiefly is inclynd^ to have in lies delight.
Of wise sufferance.
When fate aduauuseth up thy state and thou in happy case
Art thoroughly pleased therwithall set up in lofty place.
Keep low thy courage and beware of scornefulnes and pride:
Least thou discende to more defame when fate has thee denyde. Plato.

And when in trouble thou oppressed have cause for to complain:
With patience stiffly suffer that and hope for wealth again.
For it is wisdom for to use in every thing a mean:
And neither too much to presume nor to despair to clean.
Of the worlds misery.
It is a misery to view and penury to see:
Now in this world all mortal things in vain compacted be.
The fathers clime for to attain unto their children wealth:
And yet the children naught regard their fathers needful health.
The fathers tediously provide to yield their children rest:
And yet the children both their pain Marcus (...).
and fathers do detest.
The fathers by their painful toil do get their children fame:
The children thankles do requite the fathers with much shame.
The fathers sometime die for grief to see the luckles state
Of such their children, yet they think their fathers death to late.
And all the goods the fathers reap with pensiuenes and pain:
The children wilfully consume and keep themselves no gain.
Of vanishing things.
Indouour not to get the same that sone will wear away: Plato.

But wisely ponder to possess the things will nere decay.
Of suffisance.
Suffisance is the castle strong which keeps wise men's wits Pithago

From evil works and idle thoughts and fond and foolish ^ttes.
Of death.
Death neither shape nor noble birth no person does esteem:
But he endeavors each thing like Boelius
unto himself may seem.
Of the mighty man.
The man is mighty who with wealth (...) is very pore: Philip.

But he who wanting wealth is rich that man is mighty more.
Of the conscience troubled.
The consequent or lequell which or (...) follow after y^: Aristo:

Is the vexation of the sprite which then torments the will.
Of measure.
Peruse what measure thou do meat to other men, the same: Seneca.

Thou shall receive in woes in wealth in honor or in fame.
Of the auaritious miser.
The auaritious miser robbes himself of all his stay:
Because his avarice chieflly tendes Seneca.
to take his fame away.
And when as fame does little fail or once does seem to fall:
Both rest and riches, and renown are overwhelmed all.
Of sensuality.
Where sensuality does reign Chilon.
no reason can take place:
But order, reason, wit, and sens^ it blindly does deface.
Of the world to come.
The man that glory in this life and that would eke procure Mar: au

In life to come h^s t^oughts and works and dealings must be pure.
Precepts of living.
Be not to busy in the things if favor to obtain Zenopho

Thou do desire, which to thy self do nothing apertayne.
Endeavor not for to reform a fool inclynde to will: Plato.

For thou shall nothing profit him but work thy self some ill.
Take heed of wanton women's baytes and wisely do beware:
Least suddenly thou be intrapt Socrat.
in their disceitfull snare.
For nothing more if thou desire in wisdom to prevail:
That hinders travel spent theri^ or forces it to fail.
Accustom not thy self to wrath nor seek not to invre
The same: for it will be a block Thessile
unto thy self be sure.
If thou intend not to do good yet bridle so thy will: Proper cine.

That it may neither once presume to do the thing is ill.
Thou duly ought for to judge or rather to suppose Properci

Thy self more weaker then the least or weakest of thy foes.
Beware least thou corrupt thy self or thine estate defile: Zenopho

And neither let thy wealth ne health ne bewty thee beguile.
Respect thy path with ready foot and then deuoyde of flight:
Thou shall no perils once incur Zenopho
but guide thy self aright
Seek not with (...) to have thy matters done in have: Cleobilus.

For when the fancy seems to rave the matters fall to wast.
But rather so thy matters use and travels do extend: Cleobu.

As thou by good forecast may bring thy matters to good end.
In every fear dissolve thy doubt by counsel and advise: Cleobu.

For by the same the doubt will cease but comfort will arise.
And thou must wisely take the same as duty does behoue: Cleobu.

In good forbearing of the words though they do thee reprove.
Eschew the fellowship of him that has not great desire
To know himself, but bent to will Dioge.
is thrall unto his ire.
If thou would be a happy wight a good and virtuous man: Dioge.

Be not a boulter which reiects the flower, and kepes the branne.
To him that full of frustrate words is given to babbell all: Dioge.

With silence answer his requests else answer very small.
Endeavor to adorn thy state and beautify thy life:
And to adioyne unto thy self Seneca.
a good and honest wife.
If thou would truly be beloved Seneca.
then must thou use thy pain:
To love as thou do wish or crave to be beloved again.
It is thy part so to forethinke Seneca.
and have so good respect:
That nothing pass but thou should know thereof the full effect.
If thou pretend to promise ought pretend likewise to pay Pomp.

The same which thou do grant in have without a further stay.
Plead not against the perfect case which justice does uphold: Marcus aureli.

But in the matter which is right to plead and speak be bold.
Invre thy self to labors use though motion do rebel: Dioge.

That thou may better it forbear when motion does compel.
Boast not thy self of none of thine Marcus aureli.
but that which is thine own:
Least after bragging thy defame and blame as much be blown.
Behave thy self in gentle sort and curtesy retain: Dioge.

And favor love and good report shall be thy proper gain.
If it would grieve thee to receive rebuke or any shame: Chilon.

Thou must disdain to do the deeds that do deserve the same.
For two especial causes thou may well be bold to swear:
For to discharge thy self of blame, if thou unguilty bear
The same: and likewise to prevent Cihlon.
the dangers may ensewe
Unto thy friends on good intent his profit to renew.
But for the purchase of the wealth or heaps of earthly store.
Thou ought never for to vow or once to swear therefore.
Desire rather to be clean then gorgeous in attire: Chilon.

For need more better then excess contents a wise desire.
Look wisely to thy self and well Mar: au
beware of thine estate:
Least youth provoke thee to be proud or scornful in thy fate.
Put rather trust and confidence in wisdom then in wealth:
Or in uncertain fortunes chance which daily changes health. Alexse

And rather seek to get renown in virtue using pain:
Then in the great abuse which seeks by wealth to get a gain.
If thou for to continue long Chilon.
in freendship do desire:
Thou must forbear thy friend in rage when he is moved to ire.
Thou must determine so to guide thy life, and it to lead: Arsaci des.

As every night thou did suppose a grave to be thy bed.
Or thus.
Thou must determine so to live and thee for to behave: Arsaci.

As every night thou did suppose a bed to be thy grave.
It is thy duty so to guide thy self in every thing:
That al thy deeds may serve thy health Arsaci.
and not delites to bring.
For it thou weigh the happy plight thy nature does adorn:
Thou shall perceive how fond excess^ thy nature seems to scorn.
But how, it measure does esteem Cicero.
which neither does suppress
Thy natures health ne maintenance but scorns as much excess.
If therefore thou would feign preserve thy self and keep thee clean:
Thou must endeavor for to get in every thing the mean.
When thou beginnest any thing remember in thy brain Cicero.

That death may visit thee before the end thou can attain.
Finis.
A Pithy and Pleasante description of the Abbusions, and Uanities, of the
World.


IF man through wisdom would himself and weigh his state: speruse
And ponder wisely the abuse that overthrows his fate:
And vnnerstande the loathsome cares contained in this life,
And know the cause of all his woes and motion of such strife.
And mark the tickle tract of time and learn the rewfull raze
Of mortal nature which abhorres the skill of mortal case:
His perfect sense considring thus perusing these with pain,
Should well perceive and so confess that every thing were vain.
For every mortal man and thing is like the withering grass, Salus^e.

And all things frustrately by kind do pass and do repasse.
The heavens by course upon their poles reu^lue in circle round:
And charm their duties to distill the same upon the ground:
And all things labor in like wise Sibilla.
the which it does contain,
And yet their labor frustrate is and travels be in vain.
So like wise Titans ramping race perseuers through the skies,
And through the burning Zones does course and through the Zodiake hies Salam^r.

And daily trafficks to the West and turns to East again,
And travels thus for mortals sake yet is it all in vain.
And silver Phoebus parts the dark and lends wholesome light,
(And Titan covered) then displayes hirselfe, in pitchy might,
And so by kind and natures craft her walking does maintain:
To each man's sight for each man's wealth yet is this same as bayne.
The winds disperse their blustering breathes and scatter them about, Salamon.

Er^ending air and elements and every place throughout,
And course from north to south and so from every part with pain:
And yet the same and all things else is frustrate and in vain.
And hoary Bortas fiercely blows his cold congeling blast,
And ^ephirus with gentle breath Salamon.
dissolues the sa^te as fast,
And with a bridell holds frost and burning does refrain:
Yet is the same a frustrate toil and labor spent in vain.
And in the like recourse by kind the elements bear sway,
The which on fire, on air, and earth, and moisture take their stay.
And rule the natures of the man and do dispose his health
By sundry means and secreate ways in working of his wealth.
And when as Titan has drawn up Plinius.
of every filthy lake:
These purge the same, and every filth and humor clenly make.
And then in season sendes it down in pleasant wholesome hew:
And lay the sap upon the earth that each thing may renew.
And so these silver drops distill the earth for to sustain:
And yet it is but frust rate fond and most exceeding vain.
For all such things for mortal use their travels do pretend: Iesu^sy

And therefore all is meare abuse and serves to fruitles end.
The earth it self with all his fruits his profits and his gain:
Is also fond and mere abuse and most exceading vain.
The ^oyles and fields with pleasant hews and greenish coats yclade:
Their fertile flowers and sappy plants displayde through natures trade.
And with odiferous virtues yield their sents to every brain:
For to rejoice each panting heart and yet the same is vain.
The wholesome blossoms once through spread the fruits do follow fast:
And every tree with plenteous store delivers up his taste.
And every seed does yield his proof and so does every grain:
And yet these labors are but fond and travels spent in vain.
The secreat hidden golden gubbes which l^e in deep of ground:
By man's device are delued up and wisdom well are found.
The which he reapeth for his use and takes for a gain
And yet the same is meare abuse and most exceeding vain. Salamon.

For all things flourish for a time and vade again in have,
And every mortal thing by kind is subject unto wast, Mar: au

And as they come they vade away, and as they vade they come:
One stands, another does decay, Jesus: sy
another filles the room.
Each thing that has been is again, and this is also true, Jesus: sy

That whatsoever is shall be for nothing can be new, Pithago

And every case is thoroughly stuffed with hazard, loss, and pain:
And therefore all is great abuse and every thing is vain.
The world is full of drowly dreams, of fears and tickle joys,
Of bitter baytes, of short delights Plato.
peri^ixed with annoyes,
Of much mishaps or fickle falls of foolish hasty fame, Hermes:

Of endless travel, of despite, of need, rebuke, and shame, 1. John. 5

Of sin, of mischief, and of vice, and naught it does contain: Pithago

But mortal is and has an end and therefore all is vain.
And man does live and use his toil and moyleth sore with care,
And still deuiseth with his wit Archilaus.
to work his own good fare,
And seeks with trouble how to get the goods of worldly gain:
And yet by death forgoeth all which thing is very vain.
And so the state of every man is bound for to sustain,
And therefore all is mere abuse ane most exceading vain.
For each thing mortal stands in need or else in fickle joy, Archi laus.

Or else in hazard or in fear or else in great annoy,
And each thing has uncertain state whereon it does depend: Socrat.

And therefore all is mere abuse and serves to no good end.
Both high, and low, and rich, and poor, as also great and small,
To hazardes, troubles, loss, and woes, they be addicted all,
And every state and each degree is subject unto pain:
And therefore all is mere abuse and most exceeding vain.
The prince whom most men do repute to live in happy stay,
Is most subdewd to troubles yoke and subject to decay. Marcus au^e.

Whose wits not only frounses are in drowsy dumpish cares:
By weighty charge the which himself upon his shoulders bears.
But also is dismayed by fear of open foes despite,
And also of the privy foe which works out of sight.
And is suppressed by the force of fortunes tickle whele
Which cannot stand but stackring still vnstedily does reele.
And as his case is most aduaunst so most suboewd to call,
(Of fortune) which when fortune fails attaynes to greatest fall.
For as his members many be whereon his state does stay,
The greater likewise be the harms that work his own decay.
And thus he lives in travel, pain, in fear and fickle joy,
In doubt and hazard of his wealth but certain of anoy.
And if it chance that favor do befrende his happy fate,
That never mischefe do suppress the glory of his state,
Yet notwithstanding such his joys his wealth and his renown
By death are finished in fine and clean suppressed down.
And then of all his glory, naught thereof he does retain:
And therefore such his state is fond and most exceeding vain.
For though he were of greater wealth then Midas miser he,
Or power then Alexander great Salamon
by any means could be,
And though he could devise to live with such an idle heart
That both from tedious works and thoughts his fancy could depart:
And neither trouble nor annoy his diet could disease,
But that his humor should receive the things his stomach please.
And wear of purest gold with stones of passing precious kind,
Such costl^ robes as nere the like no mortal man can find,
And tread as subject underfoot the scepter and the crown,
Of every nation under heaven suppressing all things down,
And did an epicurish life with all delights sustain:
Yet were his state uncertain still Salamon
and most exceading vain.
Each ruler likewise under him which bears rule and sway,
For all his rule is ruled himself by ruin and decay,
And though with noblenes of birth his state be set alofte,
And though his bones is rested well upon his pillow soft.
And though with dainty fare his mouth is satisfied with taste,
And mirth delites his senses well yet all these things do wast,
By sinking sorrow which apares his great considering heart,
By painful toyling how to deal and execute his part,
The which as well does weaken wit as also troubles brain:
And therefore all his rule is fond and also very vain.
For he does live in no such state so certain or so sure,
That he in maintenance of ease or wealth shall still endure,
But all his pleasure still is mixed with pensiuenes and pain: Salam^.

And care and peril of his case which thing is very vain.
Since therefore thus the lofty states of earthly tedious race,
Be so subdued to casualties and yrksome painful case
How much the more is simple sort oppressed with further woes,
When thraldomes pester and his yoke is bent so much to those
Agree therefore with open throat with me for to complain:
And say that all things is abuse and every thing is vain.
And mark from highest to the least and note with busy cure:
If thou can vewe one thing in earth Mar: au
is stable firm and sure:
But all things be addict to waste and each thing to decay,
And there is nothing in the world but it does wear away:
And yet in life and being be the subjects all to pain:
And therefore all is mere abuse and every thing is vain.
And in our life no life does live so much at certain ease
That it can satisfy the heart or stomach thoroughly please.
Because that every life to cares Plato.
is bound, and every state
To travels, hazardes, loss and fears, and yokte to wavering fate.
The noble captain whose renown is hautily displayde,
Through martial feats which well deserve no praise to be delayde:
Though y^ in glorious plight he spendes his daxes in happy time,
When forsing cause of manly proof espruddeth not in prime.
Yet after pleasant easy tide and weather clean end fair:
When tempests rage and storms he rude and misty is the air.
His easy state from great delight is turnde to greatest pain,
Respect therefore and see of right if each thing be not vain.
Can pleasure more thy stomach please or gain thy fancy feed
Of earthly store, then get renown through manly martial deed?
Or is there any thing or things so pleasant to the life
Of man as fame? or any case more grievous then in strife?
If not behold and ponder well the captains tickle trade,
The which to both these fickle things is most a subject made.
Now lifted up and much aduaunst through worthy hie renown,
Now by reprofe or great reproach as much suppressed down,
Now at his ease when as his heart is pleased through repast,
Now at his pester when with smart he feels his force to wast,
Now in a certain sure estate deuoyde of every care:
And now in hazard and in flight abounding all in fear.
Now in suffisance of his store and maintenance of wealth,
Now through drownde in deep despair diminishing his health,
Now preaching pleasantly to those which gratify his pain:
Now dealing rudely with his foes which yield the like again.
Now flourishing with semely hew and comely brave and trim
Now mangled, torn, and all dispersed in every part and limme.
Now bearing life when healthful sap his lusty senses shield,
Now like a beast berest of breath remaining in the field.
And now of all his race and course what profit does remain,
Or of his toils and labors all what thing does he retain?
Himself is dead, and says no more and strikes no more his foe,
And cannot show the reason why or cause that he does so.
And all the substance that his care has reaped in his days,
He leaves behind him to his heir the which as fast decays.
And all the pleasure that himself has gained of his fame,
Is also dead, and no man knows where he may seek the same.
And if perchance through actual deeds he used in time past,
He after death receaues renown what is it but a blast.
And yet to him no pleasure is nor profit, nor a gain:
And therefore see how his astate is most exceading vain.
The veutrous merchant whose degre^ is maintaynde by his toil,
And does devise and labors hard and trafficks every soil.
And learneth this, and knows that, and yet is still to seek:
What is his trauall but a pain which still does come to wreke.
Is labor sweetenes, or the toil that makes the sweaty brain,
May it by right accombted be a profit or a gain?
If not, peruse and ponder well the merchants tickle state:
Whose wealth is guided by the frauds of fortunes fickle fate.
With great abundance of his woes and anguish of his mind:
He seeks, and at the last does get the things which he would find,
He does provide by good forecast and seeks with earnest pain
To purchase credit which well got he cares for to maintain.
And learnes to know of every ware the certain easyest price:
And then does warily pursue to follow his device.
He byeth wisely with his wit and makes near account
Of each expense which follows, then what profit will amount.
And then with diligent advice according to the same:
With expedition to the effect his matters he does frame.
He ways the thing, the time and place whereto he means to send:
And these considred follows more and further does extend.
He bargaynes with the sayler then in seeking his resort,
How that with diligence his goods the sayler will transport.
And after some accustomde talk he shortly does agree,
And then again peruseth all how every thing will be.
This done he packeth up his wares and every thing in haste:
But so that still he viewes that naught be framed unto waste.
And shippeth it with busy cure and looks to the sail
And taklyngs, seeinge all things sure that naught in need may fail,
And for his own and proper use such things he does provide,
That nothing needful is should want, or lacking be espide.
And then when all things finished be and each thing well assinde,
He tarrtes for a prosperous tide, and for a luckye wind.
The which by chance, or else in time allot unto his pray,
And then with speed and wary wits they hoyse and pack a way:
And then by course the waves arise and boisterous blastes do blow,
And storms do rage the shipp above and eke the shipp below,
And beats the hatches, and by force do break the steaddye maste,
And tears the sails, and over whelmes the vessel at the last.
And then the raging rampyng seas, so fearslie do abound
That shipp, and man, and goods, and all, are turned to the ground.
This is the end of all his toil, this is his only gain:
Consider therefore of the same, And say that all is vain.
And if that fortune favor so this same his rufull case,
That it do grant the selye wretch such casualties to pass:
And after heavy shipp wrackes, brings by chaunges of the air
His fearful heart to good relief, abandoninge despair.
And after long exspected time does harbor him at last,
Deuoyde of fear in haven sure which yeldes him more repaste:
Yet not withstandinge vewe the end, of all his toil and pain,
And thou shall see, and say that he and every thing is vain.
By former travel he has paste the pykes and scapte great cares,
And vanquished the force of waves, and now deuoyde of fears,
He is arrived at the port which well does please his mind,
Where as he does devise agayue his profit how to find.
And there with diligence prouides and wittely prepares
By crafty means for strangers sight to lay his subtle snares.
And with his care he purges clean the wrack his goods sustaynde
Upon the seas by great mischaunce when he himself was paynde.
This done vnlading such his wares by credit he does get
A room or warehouse where he works the trial of his feate.
And wisely ordring all such things according to the skill
Of merchants secreat knowledge, then he moves his wit and will,
By wary usage and advise of cunning to allure
His merchants, so that at the last he thereby does procure
The happy sale of all his goods according to desire:
And then this done he thinks again how homewarde to retire.
Now know thus far the wretch has wrought and moyld with careful pain
And now to rage of cruel seas he yeldes himself again:
And mark the misery of this whereto it does extend:
And thou shall see the great abuse which serves to fruitles end.
He did begin his voyage first with travel fear and doubt:
And as he feared every thing is painfully faulne out:
He ends likewise with the same and yet for all his toil,
He has least part of that wherein he used thus to moyle.
Suppose of this, judge of this grief, and ponder of this pain:
How man shall toil and moyle with car^ and fear, and reap no gain.
And well perusing thou may see that all the world is bent
To such unhappy toyling stat^ which is as vainly spent:
But pass not thus the tickle state of merchants frustrate race.
But thoroughly peruse the same considring of his case,
That thou may fully see and think and deem of all his pain:
And thereby know and understand his state to be most vain.
As first with care he did provide and then did escape annoy:
And then again did use his care so now he leaves his joy:
And to the raging seas returns which troubles stomach sore
Because he enters perils where his heart was vexed before.
And yet occasion moves so and cause does so constrayne,
That needs of force unto the same he must return again:
Now note that he as likely is with all his store and goods
For to remain in deep of seas inuironde of the floods.
As by good chance the wished port with safety to ariue:
Whereas his heart with more of ease may purpose for to thrive.
Yet not with standing though he have the full of his desire,
So much that fancy may not crave nor stomach more require,
And though he bring of happy store sufficient to extend:
For maintenance of him and his, yet vewe the frustrate end.
He long has bin at easles state and at unquiet stay,
For filthy luker, which as draffe or durte does wear away,
And has escaped dangers great and perrills with much fear
And now at last with joyful heart he is approached where
He hopes to live at better ease and to receive relief,
And yet it turns to his disease and most unto his grief.
For shortly after life departes from this unhappy man,
And he in wrapped in the ground of gain or pleasure than:
What does he reap though he with care have traueled for the same,
Which often times when he is dead does work his utter shame:
Learn therefore, see, peruse, think, judge and then thou shall well know,
The full effect of merchants case and matter which I show:
To day possessing wealth and store to morrow worn away.
His goods and riches all are lost he brought unto decay.
To day i^ estimation great to morrow very small:
The next day lesser then before the next day leesing all,
Sometime abounding in his joys and sometime drownde in care:
Sometime in happi luckye state sometime in mornefull fare.
Sometime at ease sometime at payn^ sometime in quiet place:
Sometime at loss sometime at gayn^ sometime at perilous case.
And thus his state uncertain is and never has a stay:
But as it is adict to joys so likewise to decay.
And he therefore in such his state can naught at all prevail,
But with his state does rise aloft and fall when it does fail.
Agree therefore with open throat with me for to complain:
And say that all things is abuse Salamon
and every thing is vain.
As well the man indewde with wealth as vaunsed by renown:
As also he that both by fat^ is raysde and pressed down.
And likewise he who by his toil or travel does pursewe,
To purchase store or to his life a profit to renew.
And now consider of degree which bears a lower sail
If that the same be not addict as suddenly to fail.
That by perusing of the same though lowest and the least,
Thou may discer^e it for a state though vain, yet most at rest.
And think upon the man who lives by labor of his hands,
With whom no profit nor increase nor gain nor comfort stands:
Except he get it by the sweat of brows, or earnist pain
Of bodies force which still applies his living to sustain.
He beats, he breaks, he batters, bows, he writheth, and he bendes:
He digges, he delues, and to his toil his labor still extendes.
And never cease all his life to moyle with all his strength,
Till foul deformed tedious age or death aproch at length:
And yet a common thing it is for man in youth to plye
His pain and labor, and in age in wretchedness do die:
Uiewe therefore from the top to to^ of every such degree,
And wisely ponder of the same and thou shall plainly see:
That in conclusion each and all is bent to care and pain:
And yet does tend to no good end but frustrate and in vain.
Of painful livers who does live (permirt with tickle joy,
And yet in travel and in loss and diverse much annoy,)
More better then the simple man whose race and vital scope:
Does both depend on wealth and woes and fear and fickle hope.
And yet receaues the natural use and kindly happy wealth,
Which does proceed from fertile earth maintayning manly health
In winter he adornes the ground and sowes in meetest time,
And after seeds espruddeth forth he purges them in pryme.
And all these things he gladly does and with a joyful heart,
Because that hope his fancy tells he shall receive his part.
And then in Somer does proceed from earth his hoped gain:
The which enioyes his doutfull sense and does relent the pain.
The which his stomach did forbear with doubtfulnes before:
And so by fate and fortune good he heapeth up his store,
And in a season does procure to him such great increase:
By former labor that at length he does agree to cease
From moyling and determines now to live in happy rest,
But mark how fond is his estate when he does judge it best.
The myser is compelde to leave by death his pleasures all,
And other flourish in the same when he has got the fall.
And this is most a vexing grief which worldlings do retain:
And therefore all is mere abuse and every thing is vain.
For every man that lives in earth does live in carpe and care,
To reap the wealth of earthly store and hardly to prepare:
Such benefits as may suffice the stay of his estate,
And does sustain misfortunes great by frowning froward fate:
And yet it is not for himself to use or to enjoy:
But for another which receaues the same without annoy.
And thus the profit is not his but his is still the pain:
And other men do reap the wealth which thing is very vain.
If therefore this thou do peruse and weigh the ample tract
Of each estates effect, and think how each thing is compact.
And from the highest to the least thou ponder in thy heart,
And from the simplest to the best considring every part:
Thou shall perceive and understand that each thing earth conta^ues:
Which is (...) to greatest port is subject most to pains.
And every thing that is the least and bears least of swa^:
Is charged least and least subdewde to ruin and decay.
For still the higher that a thing does stand, the greater fall
It does attain, but lower less for lowest least of all.
And note that nothing in the world remaynes at better ease:
Then the degree which kept allow no fortune can displease.
For what does live in less misdout or has less cause of fears
Or most occasion of a stay or motion least to tears.
Then that which ever trodden down could never rise a hye,
To know what fall should mean, or else of pleasure to discry:
The poorest therefore and the lowst Protege.
estate, and least degree
That is, and may be so maintaynde is most from troubles free.
For it by losses is not vexed nor cares distempered sore,
Because it is refraynde of that which it possessed before:
Nor trembles not through quaking fears nor is no more oppressed
But still does live at certain stay and one especial rest:
Nor is not threatened to decay by fortunes frowning cheer
Nor death, nor doubt, nor once despair for ought then can appear.
Nor seeks not for to scratch with care the heaps of earthly store,
But is contented with his own and does desire no more:
Nor fears not to be deprived of that he does possess,
Nor need not care least any man his substance would oppress.
Nor does not crave the wanton sects of pleasure or delight:
But is by abstinence inforst to live and deal aright.
And therefore such estate does both Dioge.
himself to right subdew:
And matters most which duty craves it rightly to infew:
And also least is bent to feel though naturally the pain
And travel of the world the which in every thing is vain.
And therefore thus amongst the (...) Mar: au
of mortal things abuse:
I find the poorest state to tend^ to best and wisest use.
And yet the wisest and the best is but a frustrate pain:
And therefore all is great abuse and every thing is vain.
For what assured ease does grow unto the wise man more
Then any other? not a whit, but as to them before.
For though his wisdom by forecast may diverse harms eschew: Salam^n

Yet notwithstanding do his lets as plenteously renew.
What tedious travel does he bear^ his wisdom to attain:
What loathsome days does it import to spend in endless pain.
And yet when amply he has got the full of his request,
What wretch does live at his disease and more at his unrest:
For both his wisdom and his skill especially pretend:
To vex himself, and thus his toils is spent to frustrate end.
It brings cause of great complaynts and motion unto tears:
And sobbes and sighs, and pensive thoughts and thus the time it wears.
And does allure unrestful tract and lothsomnes of life:
And thus does nosell in the heart such diverse vexing strife.
Can there be more unease to man when he vneased most
Remaynes, then thus in hearts uncase for to be vexed and lost? Mar: (...)

Or is there more a misery that worldlings do retain
Then in the heart or inward parts to ouerflow in pain?
If not: suppose of wise men's woes the which engendered be
By wisdom who co^playnes of world the vanities to see.
Be wayling greatly to behold the fondnes of the same:
And works thereof which only tends to foolishnes and shame.
And the presumption of the life and nature of the mind,
And disposition of the corpse by nature so assignde:
And endless travel it forbeares unto a fruitles end:
And what dispite and injury it chiefly does extend:
And the annoyous harms and hurte^ the living do assail,
And the dispituous cruel foes which in our life prevail:
And the incombrances and stoppes that hinder earthly health,
As also the unhappy lettes that hinder heavenly wealth:
And last the mortal end of man his ruin and decay:
How every mortal thing by right is bound to wear away.
And the rewards which after death approach with joy or pain: Salamon

Which thing especially does move the wise man to complain.
Thus see how wisdom does provoke the mind it does enjoy:
To such vnceasing pensive thoughts which bredes his own annoy.
And can not stay but think upon his own unhappy case,
Who happy should esteem himself if ended were his raze:
And mark and note if thou may view the wise man's state so free:
From pain or death in any poent or so deuoyde to be
Of natural decay but that his state does fall at last,
When all his wisdom with himself is brought to utter waste:
And then of all his wisdom naught he reapeth for a gain:
And yet in life it does intend his travel and his pain.
Thus therefore pondring of the case perusing the effect:
How that the wise man's wisdom seems his pleasure to detect.
And can not get no rest of all the travel he does use:
Me thinks his wisdom only tendes himself for to abuse.
And therefore feel I that the fool Salamon
does live at better ease:
And more at rest with quiet state which does his stomach pease.
And better is (...) with all that nature has assignde
Then is the wise man who complains of each thing in his mind.
For fools be void of each suspect and another mind decay
Of things, nor matters weight nor think of every matters stay:
And neither ponder of them selves, nor use their pain to learn
Of other matters to discrye or rightly to discearne,
But thinks upon the present thinge^ and lets the other pass,
And so supposes of the same, as does as Ox, or Ass,
Whose in ward parts is never vexed but when at present time
It has occasion whereunto, capassitie must clime.
For so a fool, determines that the which does appertain,
Unto his common ^uslenance or present ready gain.
But little we^eth the cause or case or seeks to define:
The proof or (...) of any thing whereto it should incline.
And therefore since that nether care nor anguish do oppress
His heart nor toil his stomach tear^ in any such distress.
And that he lives and does not moyle in body nor in mind
But is at rest: his foolish state is most a^ ease I find.
What profit more does there redound unto the sparers pain:
Then to the spender who deuo^de of cars does wast his gain.
Even as the one by wast full will does beg when all is spent:
And so does purchase to himself the wrack of ^uch intent. Cicero.

So does the other pass his life in sparing of the same:
The which (...) unto himself for most exceading shame.
Can there be more a greater grief or terror to the heart,
Then for a man to break his brayn^ to reap his proper smart?
Or is there more a painful thing for any to forbear,
Then for to labor for the same the which ingenders fear?
Or is there more a witness sharp against the dread of mind:
Then when a man against himself a witness seeks to find?
No: neither worldly care ne pain ne travel, ne misdoubtt
Ne loss, ne hazard, which by chance may diversely fall out:
Does so distemper worldly har^s in seeking of their gain:
As he witholding of the same which they would feign retain.
For after labor long bestowed and travel much pursewde:
And care much used yet in end they be again renewde.
And though a man have lived long and spent his travel much:
For his revenues yet his heart is vexed more by such.
Not only by the wretched care that seeks it to increase:
And by desire insaciate which therein can not cease.
But also by his own abuse and by the further shame:
Which does by such abuse amount to his deserved blame. Cicero.

What misery is this for man to moyle with all his care:
To get the ease which may suffice to work his own good fare. Plato.

And yet when he has got at large the thing he did desire:
It should be cause that more and more his stomach should require.
And yet not only that, but eke his state for to abase:
As also through his own abuse the same for to deface.
And mark what great ungratefulness is rendered for the store:
Which he does leave to the success of other, though before
He used his care and pain so much and thou shall plainly see:
How frustrate, fond, and very vain his sparing all should be.
For what more better is it said of him when he deceast:
But since the chorle could not be filde now shall it be my rest.
For he though still incessantly did seek for such a stay:
Yet when as he possessed it it was his own decay.
And therefore now the miser gone has left against his will:
The fruits of all his pain to me and it shall be my fill.
Since therefore thus in this same world the man which does retain
The full of worldly wealth his state, is so exceading vain.
What may be said of those which live in needefulnes and want:
With whom ne wealth ne ease abounds but every thing is scant?
What may it now be thought of him which all has spent away:
And by deserved wilfulnes is fallen unto decay.
No more but briefly to conclude he reapes deserved pain:
And therefore all is mere abuse and every thing is vain.
For so the world is diversely tormented with his own:
And all the travels of the life are sundry ways yknowne.
Some by their high estate are vexed and some for want of wealth:
Some by presumption which they use and some through lack of health.
Some by their greedy appetite which never has his fill:
Some by the (...) worm in mind some by their wanton will.
Some by the loss of their delight some by frequented use:
Some by superfluous pleasures fond some by their own abuse.
Some by their fancy, some by fear, some by compelled pain:
Some by the tickle joys of fate some by their wilful brain.
And thus the world is full of griefs which every man does bear:
Though some in this and some in that their tedious times do wear.
One travels far with doubt and pain in dangers and annoy:
And grief, and anguish of his mind a profit to enjoy*
Another in his native soil tormented is as much:
And lives in trembling fear and toil though not in cases such.
For every thing and each estate though that a little space
It may attain to little joys surmounted in his place.
Yet if thou mark, it nere assende^ so lofty or so ^ye:
But at the last it does discende and fall as low thereby.
What man can compass so to reach Esayas.
the full of worlds delight,
But that his case is diverse ways Salamo.
inclyned to dispite.
Or who can ^o devise to gain Jesus: sy
himself to hi^ renown:
But that occasion may suppress and over whelme it down.
Or who can comprehend so much experience of his time?
But that as long as life does last he is a slave to crime,
No man can bridell so the world nor worldlines refrain:
But still the world infecteth all and each thing puts to pain.
And therefore with a loathsome heart I forced am to say:
That every thing is vain, because it comes to vain decay.
What pleasure more does he attain that has the chief of all
The pleasurs which the world co^tayns and has at last a fall?
Then he which never could discern what such delites should mean,
But is from such abusions kind by force excluded clean.
Does gold adorn the sprite of man or beautify the mind:
Or is there grace by worldly wealth into the soul* assignde?
Or is the raging lust restraynde by heaps of earthly store?
No, no, but wickedness and crime is thereby moved more.
For earthly treasure is the bag which vices does maintain:
And vice is that same very thing which makes all things vain.
Who therefore gladly would receive the happy life and time:
Must in his mortal race avoid the motions unto crime.
Regarding each thing in this vale as I have said before:
To be but frustrate, vain, and fond, no better nor no more.
For mortal trace a passage is unto another life:
Which is not mortal but deuoyde of foolish mortal strife.
And therefore he that willingly would other life attain:
Must seek for to reform this life because it is but vain.
Finis.
Imprynted at London in Fleetstreate, beneathe the conduit, at the sign of
Saint John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed. etc.


