A very true report of the apprehension and taking of that Arche Papist Edmond
Campion the Pope his right hand, with three other lewd Jesuit priests, and
diverse other Lay people, most seditious persons of like sort. Containing also
a controulment of a most untrue former book set out by one A. M. alias
Anthony Monday, concerning the same, as is to be proved and justified by
George Ellyot one of the ordinary yeomen of her Majesty's Chamber. Author of
this book, and chiefest cause of the finding of the said lewd and seditious
people, great enemies to God, their loving Prince and Country.

Veritas non quaerit angulos. Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the
Vintree by Thomas Dawson. 1581.

To the Christian reader, George Elliot wishes all due reverence.
SOme experience (Christian Reader) that I have gathered by keeping company
with such seditious people as Campion and his associates are, partly moves me
to write this book, and partly I am urged thereunto (although my wisdom and
skill be very slender to set down and pen matter of less moment then this)
for that I being one of the two in commission at that time, from her highness
most honorable privy counsel for the apprehending of the said seditious
Campion, and such like, and the chiefest cause of the finding out of the said
lewd people, as hereafter more at large appears: do think it a great
abuse, that the most part of her Majesty's loving subjects, shall be seduced to
believe an untruth, and my self, and he which was in commission with me,
whose name is David Ienkins, one of the messengers of her Majesty's Chamber,
very vilel^ slaundered with a Book set out by one Anthony Monday, concerning
the apprehension of the said lewd people, which for the truth thereof, is
almost as far different from truth, as darkness from light, and as contrary
to truth, as an egg is contrary in likeness to an oyster.

And therefore, considering, I am able to report a troth for the manner of the
finding and taking of the said seditious persons, (although fine skill be far
from me to paint it out) hoping the wise will bear with my want therein, and
esteem a true tale, be it never so bluntly told, rather then a lie, be it
never so finely handled: I have imboldened my self to take this Treatise in
hand wherein (God willing) I will describe nothing but truth as in brief by the
sequel shall appear. Which is this: That aboutes four years past, (the
Devil being a crafty Fox, and chief Patron doubtless of the Popes prelacie)
having diverse and many Officers and inferior substitutes to the Pope his
chief Viear, and inte^ding by them, to increase the kingdom of this
Antichrist. Dispersed his said officers in diverse places of this Realm, where
like vagrant persons, (refusing to liuewithin the lawful government of their
country) they lead a loose life, wandering and running hither and thither, from
shire to shire, and country to country, with such store of Romish relikes,
popish pelf, trifles and trash, as were able to make any Christian heart
(that has seen the trial of such practifes as I have done) eve for sorrow to
bleed, only-thereby to draw the Queens Maiestres subjects their hearts and
faithes both from God and her highnesss, as namely by delivering unto them
Bulls from Rome, Pardons, Indulgences, Medalls, Agnus Dei, hallowed grains
and beads, Crucifixes, painted pictures, and such other paltrie* every part
whereof they will not let to say to be matters very necessary for salvation. By
reason whereof (most loving Reader) I my self about that time by the space of
one quarter of an year together, was deeply be witched and drawn into their
darkness, as the blindest bayarde of them all. But at the last even then, by
Gods great goodness, mighty providence, and especial grace, all their
inchauntments, witcheraftes, sorceries, diuelishe devises and practices we are
so broken and untied in me and the brightness of Gods divine Majesty shining
so surely in my heart and conscience, that I perceived all their doings to be
as they are in deed, only shows without substance, manifest errors and
deceitful iugling castes and none others. Notwithstanding, I determined with my
self (for certain causes which I omit) to sound the depth of their devilish
drifts (if I might) and the rather therefore used and frequented their
companies, whereby appeared unto me not a few of their ungracious and villainous
false hearts faiths, and disloyal minds, slanderous words, and most vile
treasons, toward my most excellent and noble mystrys the Queens majesty,
and toward diverse of her most honorable privy council, in such sort as
many times did make mine eyes to gush out with tears for very sorrow and
fear to think of it. Wherefore lately I made my humble submission unto the
right honorable her Highness privy council for my unlawful living as
aforesaid: at whose hands I found such honorable dealing and by their means
such mercy from her Majesty, that I wish with all my heart all the papists
which are subjects borne to her high nesse to run the same course that I have
done, and then should they easily see what difference there is between the
good and merciful dealing of our most gracious loving and natural prince: and
the great trecheries of that great enemy to our Country the Pope. For her
highness freely forgiueth offenders, but the Pope pardons for money: her
graces hands are continually full of mercy, ready to deliver enough freely
to any that will desire and deserve it, and the Pope his great clutches and
fistes, are ready to deliver nothing but devilish devises and paltrie stuff
of his own making, to set Country and Country together by the ears, and yet
for these has he money. Truly it is a most lamentable case, that ever any
Christian should be seduced and drawn from the true worshipping of God, and
their duty to their Prince and Country (as many are) by the Pope and his
satanicall crewe. I beseech God turn their hearts, and grant us all
amendment, which can neither be too timely (if it were presently) nor never too
late, whenever it shall happen, unless wilfully they proceed in their
dealings, which God forbid: for humanum est errare, perseuerare belluinum.

Shortly after my submission and reconciliation as aforesaid. It pleased my
Lords of her Highness most honorable privy council to grant the
commission that I before spoke of, to my self, and to the said David Ienkins,
for the apprehension of certain lewd Jesuit Priests, and other seditious
persons of like sort, wheresoever we should happen to find them within
England. Whereupon we determined a certain voyage, in which Edmond Campion
the aforesaid Jesuit and others were by us taken and brought to the Tower of
London in manner as hereafter follows*

The true manner of taking of Edmond Campion and his assotiates.
IT happene^d that after the receipt of our commission aforesaid, we consulted
between our selves, what way were best to take first, for we were utterly
ignorant, where or in what place certainly to find out ye said Campion, or his
compeeres. And our consultation was shortly determined, for the greatest part
of our travel and dealings in this service, did lie chiefly upon mine own
determination, by reason of mine acquaintance and knowledge of diverse of like
sect. It then presently came to my remembrance of certains acquaintan^e which
I once had with one Thomas Cowper a Cook, who in November was ^wo years,
served M. Thomas Roope^ of Kent, where at that time I in like manner served, and
both of us about the same month departed the said* Master Rooper his
service, I into Essex, and the said Cowper to Lyforde in Barkeshire, to one
master Yates, from whence within one half year after, I was advertised in
Essex that the said Cook was placed in service, and that the said master
Yates was a very earnest Papist, and one that gave great entertainment to any
of that sect: which tale being told me in Essex two years before we entered
this journey, by Gods great goodness came to my memory, but even the day
before we set forth. Hereof I informed the said David Jenckins being my
fellow in Commission, and told him it would be our best way to go thythee
first, for that it was not meant that we should go to any place, but where
in deed I either had* acquaintance, or by some means possible in our journey,
could get acquaintance, and told him we would dispose of our journey in
such sort as we might come to the said master- Yates upon the Sunday about
eight of the clock in the morning, where, said I, if we find the said
Cook, and that there be any Mass to be said there that day or any massing
Priest in the house, the Cook for old acquaintance, and for that he
supposes me to be a Papiste will bring me to the sight thereof. And upon
this determination, we set front London the xiiii. day of July last, and came
to the said Master Yates house the xvi. of the same month being Sunday,
aboutes the hour aforesaid, where without the gates of the same house we
espied one of the servants of the house, who most likely seemed by reason of
his lying aloof, to be as it were a scout watcher, that they within might
accomplish their secret matters more safely. I called the said servant, and
inquired of him for the said Thomas Cowper the Cook, who answered that he
could not well tell, whether he were within or not. I prayed him that he
would friend me so much as to see, and told him my name, the said servant
did so (it seemed) for the Cook came forth presently unto us, where we sat
still upon Horseback, and after a few such speeches as betwixt friend and
friend when they have been long as under were passed, still sitting upon our
Horses, I told him that I had longed to see him, and that I was then
traveling into Darbiesheire to see my friends, and came so far out of my
way to see him, and said I, Now I have seen you, my mind is well satisfied,
and so fare, you well, No, says he, yt shall you not do before dinner. I made
ye matter very earnest to be gone, and he more earnest and importune to stay
me. (But in truth I was as willing to stay as he to have me.) And so perforce
there was no remedy but stay we must, and having lighted from Horseback, and
being by him brought* into the house, and so into the Buttery, and there caused
to drink: presently after, the said Cook came and whispered with me, and
asked whether my friend (meaning the said Jenckins) were within the Church or
not, therein meaning whether he were a papist or no, to which I answered, he
was not, but yet (said I) he is a very honest man and one that wishes well
that way. Then said the Cook to me will you go up, by which speech, I
knew he would bring me to a Mass, and I answered him, and said, yea for
Gods sake, that let me do, for seeing I must needs tarry, Some men blame me
for dissembling the matter as I did but to do my Prince and country service,
I hold it lawful to use any reasonable policy. For the field is not always
woone by strength.
let me take some thing with me, that is good. And so we left Jenckins in
the Buttery, and I was brought by the Cook through the hall, the dinening
Parlour, and two or three other odd rooms, and then into a fair large
chamber, where there was at ye same instant one Priest called* Satwell saying
Mass; two other Priests kneeling by, whereof one was Campion, and the other
called Peter's alias Collington, three Nuns, and xxxvii. other people. When
Satwell had finished his Mass, then Campion he invested himself to say
Mass, and so he did, and at the end thereof, made holy bread and delivered
it to the people there, to every one some, together with holy water, whereof
he gave to me part also. And then was there a chair set in the chamber some
thing beneath the Altar, wherein the said Campion did sit down, and there
made a Sermon very nigh an hour long, the effect of his text being as I
remember, That Christ wept over Jerusalem, etc. And so applied the same to
this our I had once my commission in my hand to have dealt with them my self
alone in the chamber. If I had, I pray you judge what had happened unto me.
Country of England, for that the Pope his authority and doctrine did not so
floorishe here as the said Campion desired. At the end of which Sermon I gat
down unto the said Jenckins so soon as I could. (For during the time that
the masses and Sermon was made, Jenckins remained still beneath in the Butterie
or Hall, not knowing of any such matter, until I gave him some intelligence*
what I had seen) and so we departed with as convenient expedition as we
might, and came to one Master Fettiplace a Justice of peace in the said
Country, whom we made privy of our doings therein, and required him, that
according to the tenor of our commission, he would take sufficient power,
and go with us thither. Whereupon the said Justice of peace, within one
quarter of an hour put himself in a readiness with forty or fifty men very
well weaponed, who went in great have together, with the said Master
Fettyplace and us to the said M. Yates his house. Where at our coming upon
the sodeine, being aboutes one of the clock in the afternoon of the same day,
before we knocked at the gates (which was then) as before it was continually
accustomed to be fast shut, the house being moted round about, within which
Mete was great store of fruite-trees and other trees, with thick hedge rows,
so that the danger for fear of loosing of the said Campion and his associates
was the more doubted). We beset the house with our men round about without
the Mote in the best sort we could devise, and then knocked at the gates,
and were presently heard and espied, but kept out by the space of half an
hour (In which time as it seems, they had hidden Campion* and the other two
priests in a very secret place with: in the said house, and had made
reasonable purueiance for him as hereafter is mentioned) and then they let us
into the house, where came presently to our sightes mystrys Yates* the goodwife
of the house, five Gentlemen, one Gentlewoman, and three Nuns, (the Nuns
being then disguised in Gentlewomans One Nun got away in country maids
apparel.
apparel not like unto that they heard Mass in) All which I well remembered
to have seen the same morning at the Masses and Sermon aforesaid, yet every
one of the^ a great while denied it, and especially the said Mystrys Yates, who
could Mystris Yates proffered us a good some of money to have given over our
search.
not be content only to make a plain denial of the said Masses, and the
priests, but with great and horrible oaths forsware the same, betaking herself
to the Devil if any such were there, in such sort, as if I had not seen
them with mine own eyes, I should have believed Master Yates was then as he
is still in prison in Reading for papistrie.
her. But knowing certainly that these were but bare excuses, and that we
should find the said Campion and his compeeres if we made narrow search, I
estsoones put Master Fettyplace in remembrance of our Commission, and so he,
my self, and the said Jenckins her Majesty's messenger, went to searching the
house where we found many secret corners, continuing the search (although
with no small toil) in the Orchardes, hedges, and ditches, within the Mote and
diverse other places, and at the last found out Master Edward Yates, brother
to the goodman of the house, and two Countriemen called Weblin and Maunsfielde,
fast locked together in a pidgeon house, but we could not find at that time
Campion and the other two Priests, whom we specially sought for. It drew
then something toward evening, and doubting least we were not strong enough,
we sent our Commission to one master Foster high sheiriffe of Barkeshiere,
and to one master Wisemen a Justice of peace within the same County, for some
further aid at their hands. The said master Wiseman came with very good
speed unto us the same evening with ten or twelve of his own men, very able
men and well appointed. But the said master Foster could not be found as
the messenger that went for him returned us answer. And so the said house was
beset the same night with (at the least) threescore men well weaponed, who
watched the same very diligently. And the next day being Monday, in the morning
very early, came one Master Christopher Lydcot and Justice of Peace of the
same sheire, with a great (...)? his own men all very well appointed, who^
together with his m^n, showed such earnest, loyal, and forward service in
those affairs, as was no small comfort and encouragement to all those, which
were present, and did bear true hearts and good wills to her Majesty. The
same morning began a fresh search for the said Priests which continues with
very great labor, until aboutes ten of the clock in the forenoone of the
same day, but the said Priests could not be found, and every man almost
persuaded that they were not there. Yet still searching (although in (...) void
of any hope for finding of them) the said David Jenckins by Gods great
goodness, espied a certain secret place, which he quickly found to be
hollow, and with a p^^^e of iron which he had in his hand, much like unto an
harro^tine, he forthwith did break a hole into Master Lydcot was then hard
by.
the said place, where then presently he perceived the said Priests, lying
all close together upon a bed, of purpose there* laid for them, where they
had bread, meat, and drink, sufficient to have relieved them, three or four
days together. The said Jenckins then called very lowdly, and said, I have
found the Traitors, and presently company enough was with him, who there
saw the said Priests, (when there was no remedy for them, but no: lens
volens) courteously yield themselves. Shortly after came one master First my
self rode post to the court. And after me the said messenger.
Read an other Justice of peace of the said sheire to be assistaunt in these
affairs. Of all which matters news was immediately carried in great haste to
the Lords of the Privy Council, who gave further Commission, that the said
Priests and certain other their associates, should be brought to the Court
under the conduction of my self and the said Jenckins, with commandment to
the sheirife to deliver us sufficient aid forth of his sheire, for the safe
bringing up of the said people. After that the rumor and noise for the finding
out of the said Campion, Satwell and Peter's alias Collington, was in the said
house some thing assuaged, and that the sight of them was to the people there no
great novelty. Then was the said high sheirife sent for once again, who all
that while had not been seen in this service, and but then came and received
into his charge the said Priests and certain Anthony Manday says, the
sheriff and his men gave him instructions for the setting out of the said
untrue book.
others from that day until Thursday following. The fourth Priest which was
by us brought up to the Tower, whose name is William Fylbye was not taken with
the said Campion and the rest in the said house, but was apprehended and
taken in our watch by chance in coming to the said house to speak with the
said Peter's as he said, and thereupon delivered likewise in charge to the
sheirife with the rest. Upon Thursday the xx. day of July last, we set
forwards from the said Master Yates his house toward the court, with our
said charge, being assisted by the said Master Lydcot and Master Wiseman,
and a great sort of their men, who never left us until we came to the Tower
of London. There were besides that guarded us thither fifty or threescore
^orsemen, very able men and well appointed, which we received by the said
sheirife his appointment. We went that day to Henly upon Thames, where we
lodged yt night, and about midnight we were put into great fear by reason of
a very great cry and noise that the said Fylbye made in his sleep, which
wakene^d the most that were that night in the house, and that in such sort
that every man almost, thought yt some of the prisoners had been broken from
us and escaped, although there was in and abouts the same house a very strong
watch appointed and charged for ye same. The foresaid Master Lydcot was the
first that came unto them, and when the matter was examined, it was found no
more, but that the said Fylbye was in a dream, and as he said, he verity
thought one to be a ripping down his body, and taking out his bowels.

The next day being Friday, we set forward from Henly, and by the way
received commandment by a purse^^unt from the Lords of the privy Council,
that we should stay that night at Colbrooke, and the next day after being*
Saturday to bring them through the City of London unto the Tower, and there to
deliver them unto the charge of sir* O win Hopton, Knight, her Majesty's
Leyuetenant of the same, which accordingly we did. And this in effect is the
true discourse* that was used in the apprehension of the said Campion* and his
associates.

Some men may marvel that I would be silent so long for the setting out of
the manner of their takinges, considering I find my self agreeued with the
same untrue report set out before by the said A. M. In good faith I meante
nothing less, then to take any such matter in hand, if so great an vutruth
had not been published against us, that were doers in those affairs, and
besides hitherto diverse other waightier business have partly hindered me
therein.

But now at the last, although very late, I have rudely set down the verity
in this matter, thinking it, better to tell a true tale by leisure, then a lie
in hashe, as the said A. M. by his former book has done to his own
discredit, the deluding of her Majesty's liege people, and the slander of some
which have intermedled in the said cause.

The names of those that were taken and brought up to the Tower of London as
aforesaid.
1 Edmond Campion Jesuit and Priest. Priests.
2 Thomas Satwell. 3 John Peter's alias Collingto^ 4 William Fylbye.
Gentlemen.
5 Edward Yates. 6 Edward Keynes. 7 Humfrey Keynes. 8 John Co^^o^. 9 William
Ilsley. 10 John Jacob.
Husbandmen and neighbors thereby.
11 John Manusfielde. 12 William Weblyn.

Since the committing of the persons before named to the Tower as aforesaid,
there has been for my service done in those and such like affairs, no small
nor few bragges, threatninges, Campion when he first saw me after his
apprehension, said un to me, that my service done in the taking of him would
be unfortunate to me. And in our journey toward the Tower, he advised me to
get me out of England for the fafetie of my body.
curses and evil wishes given out against me by such as (if they were known)
deserve both little liberty and small favor. Some of my friends have doubted
least that sort of lewd people would do their good wills to hurt me, by
some secret devise, as coniuration* witchcraft, or such like, the which I
rather think to be true, for that shorly after the foresaid business ended,
it pleased GOD to visit me with some sickness after I was gone to bed at night
which in deed for two or three hours handeled me something hardly. But God I
take to witness I never was of that opinion, that it came to me by any other
means, but only by ryding post two or three iournies about the business
aforesaid, yet within one day or two after my sickness, there came to a
neighbors house where I lodged in Southwarke one Mystrys Beysaunt a widow,
whose abode is most about Saint Mary Oueries, and at the least by report
smells of Papistrie, and asked the good wife of the house for me, and what
she had lately heard of me, she answered she knew me not, nor nothing
she had heard of me. Then said mystris Beysaunt, the very truth is, it is
he that took Campion and the rest of the company that are in the Tower, and
was the cause that master Roper and diverse other good men are troubled, and
the last day (says she) he did fall mad in the It seems she was privy
to some secret practice against me.
street, and was carried so into his lodging, and is not like to escape with
life. I pray you inquire further of him, and let me have knowledge thereof. So
that hereby I may plainly see, that the Papists take great care for me,
but whether it be for my weal or woe, and what her meaning was let the world
judge. But let the Devil, the Pope, and them do what they can, my faith
stands so sure on Christ Jesu my savior, that through him I defy them all.

There has been great murmuring and grudging against me, about the
committing of the foresaid master Thomas Roper, and many faults have been
found for the same. What I did therein I mean not here to recite, but my
dealinges in those causes are known to such as before whom I think the fault
finders dare not show their faces. But whatsoever I did against him I would
have done against mine own Father, the case standing as it did, yet such
find faults to make the matter seem more odious to the world against me,
do not stick to report and say that the said master Roper has brought me
up from my childehood, to this day, at his only charges, which is is so false
as God is true. For although I was his servant, I continued with him in all,
not past one year.

But to conclude, a great number of such like untruths have been publyshed
against me, and no few bold bragges as report goes. I could name some if
I would, but I let them pass, unless I be commanded to the contrary by
such as have authority to deal with me therein. God grant them amendme^t
(I mean not toward my self) or else make their doings known in such sort
as they may have their deseruings, or at least be put to the mercy of her
Majesty, to whose highness Jesus send long life, a prosperous reign, with
all joy and felicity.

Amen.
George Elliot.

Imprinted at London at three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson* 1581


