The Lamentation of Folly:
To the tune of New Rogero.
ALas what means man,
with care and greedy pain:
To wrest to win a worldly fame
which is but vile and vain.
As though he had no cause to doubt,
the drift of his desire,
Not pleased though he rule the route,
but still to covet higher.
And wander after will,
far passing his degree:
Not so contented still,
but a king himself to be.
Subuerting law and right,
detecting trial true:
Wringing every wight,
that all the realm does rue.
Whose deed and ill desert,
compart and false consent:
I think no Christen heart,
can choose but needs lament.
Alas it seemed strange,
such thraldom in a realm:
Which wealthy was to wast away,
by will that was extreme.
Since virtue was professed,
most famous frank and free:
Yet men transposed clean,
more vile and worse to be.
And such as did pretend
to show themself most holy:
Have swarued in the end,
and fawned after folly.
Whose words so disagree,
as waters come and go:
Their livings to be contrary,
that should examples show.
And fawning after fame,
pursue their own decay:
As though there were no God,
to call their life away.
What surety is in man,
what truth or trust at all:
Which frames what he can,
to work unworthy thrall.
Oppression has been free,
the poor alas be spoiled:
Maids and wives be ravished,
the simple are beguiled.
Law is made a liberty,
and right is overthrown:
Faith is but a foolish thing,
falsehood is alone.
Pride is counted clenlinesse,
and theft is but a slight.
Whoredom is but wantonness,
and waste is but delight.
Spoiling is but pleasure,
riot is but youth:
Slander is a laughing game,
and lying counted truth.
Marriage is but mochage,
the children counted base:
Thus right is wronged every way,
in our accursed case.
Flattery is the Forte of Fame,
and truth is trodden down:
The innocent do bear the blame,
the wicked win renown.
Thus Satan has prevailed long,
and we for want of grace:
Have trodden virtue under foot,
and vice has taken place.
But God that is most righteous,
has seen our fatal fall:
And spread his mercy over us,
to shield us from the thrall.
Whose mercy is so infinite,
to such as were oppressed:
He has restored them to right,
and has their care redressed.
And though that our unworthiness.
has not deserved so:
Now let us cease our wickedness,
and graft where grace may grow.
And let us pray for our defense,
our worthy Queen elect:
That God may work his will in her,
our thraldom to correct.
That God be chiefly served so,
as does to him belong:
That right may have his course again,
and vanquish wicked wrong.
That we may live in fear and awe,
and truly to intend:
And have the justice of the law,
our causes to defend.
That truth may take his wonted place,
and faith be fast again:
And then repent and call for grace,
that wrought our care and pain.
That God send us a short redress,
with wealth and great increase:
And to our Queen, to reign and rule,
in honor, health, and peace.
W. E.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Edward Allde.

(...) new Ballad of the Merry Miller of Mansfield was lodged in the Millers
house, and of their pleasant communication.
To the tune of the French Lau^
HEnry our royal King would go on hunting,
To the green forest most pleasant and fair:
(...) ^aue the ^art chaced, the dainty Does tripping,
(...) merry Sherwood his nobles repair.
(...) and ^^^^^, was vabound, all things prepared,
(...)or the same, to the game with good regard.
Al a long Summers day, rode the King pleasantly,
(...)ith all his princes and nobles each one:
basing the Heart and Hind, and the Bucke gallantly,
All the dark evening inforst them turn home.
then at last riding fast he had lost quite,
all his Lords in the woods, late in dark night.
I ^andring thu^ wearily, all alone up and down,
(...)ith a rude Miller be met at the last:
^^king the ready way unto fair Nottingham.
"quoth the Miller your way you have l^st.
yet I think, what I think truth for to say,
you do not lightly go but of your way.
say what do thou think of me quoth our king merrily
^^uing thy judgment upon me so brief:
(...) ^ood faith quoth the Miller I mean not to flatter,
(...) guess thee to be but a gentleman thief.
(...)nd thee back in the dark ^ight not a down,
(...)east that I presently crack thy knaves crown.
Thou do abuse me much (quoth our king) saying thus,
(...)a gentlem(...)n, lodging I lack:
you have quoth the miller not a grote in thy purse,
(...)ll thy inheritaince hangs on thy back.
I have gold to discharge all that I call,
If it be forty pence I will pay all.
(...)f thou do a true man then answered the miller,
I swear by my tole dish i will lodge thee all night,
(...)eres m^ hand quoth our King that I was ever:
(...)ay soft quoth the miller thou may be a sprite.
better i will know thee ere hands I will shake,
(...) none but with honest men hands I will take.
Thus they went al along unto the millers house
Where they were seething of Puddings and souse:
(...)he miller first entered in after him went the king:
(...)ever came he in so smokie a house.
now quoth he let me see h^ere what you are,
quoth our king look your fill, and do not spare.
(...) like well thy countenance thou have an honest face,
With my son Richard th^s night thou shall lie:
Quoth his wife by my troth it is a good hansome youth*
(...)et is it best husband to deal warily
art thou not run away, pray thee youth tell,
show us thy pasport and al shall be well.
Then our king presently making low courtesy,
(...)ith his hat in his hand, thus he did say:
I have no pasport nor never was seruiture,
(...)ut a poor courtier ro^e out of my way.
and for your kindness now proffered to me,
I will require it in every degree.
Then to the miller his wife whispered secretly,
Saying it seems this youth's of good kin:
Both by his apparel and eke by his manners,
to turn him out certainly were a great sin.
(...)quoth he, you may see, he has some grace,
(...)hen he speaks unto his betters in place.
Well quoth the millers wife, young man welcome b(...)
And though I say it, well lodged shall thou be:
Fresh straw I will have, laid in your bed so brau(...)
Good brown hempen sheets, likewise quoth she.
I quoth the goodman and when that is done.
you shall lie with no worse then with mine own
Nay first quoth Richard good fellow tell me true,
Have thou no creepers in thy gay hose,
Or art thou not troubled with the scrubado?
I pray you quoth our king what things be those?
Art thou not lousie, or scabbed quoth he?
If thou be, surely thou lie not with me.
This causde our King suddenly laugh out most h(...)
til the tears trickled down from his face:
then unto supper were they set orderly,
With hot bagpudding, and good applepies.
Nappyale good and stale in a black boule,
which did about all the boorde merrily troule.
Here quoth the Miller* good fellow I drink to^t
and to all courtnoles that courteous be,
I pledge thee quoth our King, and thank thee ha(...)
For me good welcome in every dear^r.
and here in like manner I drink to thy son,
do so quoth Richard and quick let it come.
Wife quoth the miller now fetch me forth light(...)
that we of his sweetness a little may taste:
A fair Venson pastie then brought she forth pres(...)
Eat quoth the miller, but sir make no waste.
Her is good light foot, in faith quoth our King,
I never eat so dainty a thing.
Ywis said Richard no dainte at all it is.
For we do eat of it every day,
In what place said our king may be bought like (...)
We never pay penny for it by my faye:
from merry Sherwood we fetch it home here,
now and then we make bold with the Kings d(...)
Then I think quoth our King that it is venison,
Each fool quoth Richard full well may see that
Never are we without two or three (...) the raffe,
Very well fleshed and excelent fat.
but pre thee say nothing where ever thou go,
we would not for two pence the King should it k(...)
Doubt not quoth our King my promised secrecy,
the King shall never know more on it for me,
a cup then of lamps wool they drunk strait unto
and so to their beds they past presently:
the nobles next morning went al up and down
for to seek out the King in every town.
at last at this millers house some did espy him pl(...)
as he was mounting upon his fair steed:
to whom they ran presently falling down on th(...) (...)
Which made the millers heart woefully bleed,
shaking and quaking before him he stood,
thinking he should have been hanged by the rood
The King perceiving him fearful and trembling
Drew out his sword, but nothing he sed:
The miller down did fall crying before them all
Doubting the King would have cut of his head.
but he his kind curteste strait to requite,
gave him great living, and dubbd him a K^^^^^

