An Epytaphe upon the Death of the Right Reverend and learned Father in God.
I. Iuell, Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Sarisburie. Whom God called to his
marcie the. 22. of September. 1571.
THe Iuell of our joy is gone, the happy heavens have won,
The greatest gift that ever was, with us beneth the son:
Which makes such weepinge eyes, in Sallesbury they say,
As all the ronning streams thereof, can never wash away.
(Alas) is Iuell dead, the folder of the flock.
If Death have caught the Dial up, then who shall keep the Clock?
O God, what greet is this, thye charie Church should want,
A Bishop of so good a grace, where good men be so skant:
We fear the plague (they say) but such a plague as this,
Since I was borne I never knew, nor never shall iwis:
Yet are there some behind, I trust will learn to know,
How Iuell to his dieng day, his Talents did bestow.
So busy at his book, to bring the truth to light,
As they that like the ready way, may look and find it right,
His house and household was so kept for his degree,
As Paull in his Epistles wrightes a Bishops house should be:
His Diocese I believe, he kept in so good awe,
As Virtue is content to swear, they lived within her law.
His hands and heart were free, the needy could not lack,
Such peace and concord planted he, as nothing went to wrack:
And charie went to Church, himself by break of day,
That his example might procure, the rest to go that way:
And gave unto his men, their duties when he died,
With large and Lordly recompense, this can not be denied.
(Alas) with piteous moan, all Christians now may weep.
That we have such a Shepard gone: God help the selie sheep:
Meethinkes I see in heaven, triumphant truth appear,
And faythfulnes, which speak alowde let Iuell now come near.
Thappostelles all do prease, meethinckes to see his face:
And all the Angels go about to bring him to his place:
Even Christ him self me thinks, I see begins to smile,
And says: behold my chosen friend, I lookte for all this while.
And Abraham rendes his clothes, and bowels out his breast,
And says to Iuell iumpe in here, and take thye quiet rest.
Finis
Quod. W. Elderton.

Imprynted at London, in Fleetestreate beneath the Conduit at the sign of S.
John Evangelist by Thomas Colwell.


