HER MAJESTY'S most Princely answer, delivered by her self at the Court at
White Hall, on the last day of November 1601: When the Speaker of the Lower
House of Parliament (assisted with the greatest part of the Knights, and
Burgesses) had presented their humble thanks for her free and gracious favor,
in preventing and reforming of sundry grieuances, by abuse of many Grants,
commonly called Monopolies.

The same being taken verbatim in writing by A. B. as near as he could
possibly set it down,

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London. ANNO 1601.

HER MAJESTY'S most Princely answer, delivered by her self at the Court at
White Hall, on the last day of November 1601. When the Speaker of the Lower
House of Parliament (assisted with the greatest part of the Knights, and
Burgesses) had presented their humble thanks for her free and gracious favor,
in preventing and reforming of sundry grieuances, by abuse of many grants,
commonly called MONOPOLIES: The same being taken Verbatim in writing by A. B.
as near as he could possibly set it down.
M. Speaker,
WE perceive by you, whom we did constitute the mouth of our Lower House, how
with even consent they are fallen into the due consideration of the precious
gift of thankfulness, most usually least esteemed, where it is best deserved.
And therefore we charge you tell them how acceptable such sacrifice is
woorthily received of a loving King, who doubts much whether the given thanks
can be of more poise then the owed is to them: and suppose that they have done
more for us, then they themselves believe. And this is our reason: Who keeps
their Sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance, and not by
intent, they might have fallen; what thank they deserve, we know, though you
may guess. And as nothing is more dear to us then the loving co^seruation of
our subjects hearts, What an undeserved doubt might we have incurred, if the
abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the
poor, had not been told us! which, ere our heart or hand should agree unto,
we wish we had neither: and do thank you the more, supposing that such griefs
touch not some amongst you in particular. We trust there resides, in their
conceits of us, no such simple cares of their good, whom we so deerly prise,
that our hand should pass ought that might iniure any, though they doubt not
it is lawful for our kingly state to grant gifts of sundry sorts of who^ we
make election, either for service done, or merit to be deserved, as being for a
King to make choice on who^ to bestow benefits, more to one then another. You
must not beguile your selves, nor wrong us, to think that the glosing luster
of a glistring glory of a Kings title may so extol us, that we think all is
lawful what we list, not caring what we do: Lord, how far should you be off
from our conceits! For our part we vow unto you, that we suppose Physicians
aromaticall savors, which in the top of their potion they deceive the Patient
with, or gilded drugges that they cover their bitter sweet with, are not more
beguilers of senses, then the vanting boast of a kingly name may deceive the
ignorant of such an office. I grant, that such a Prince as cares but for the
dignity, nor passes not how the raines be guided, so he rule, to such a one it
may seem an easy business. But you are cumbred (I dare assure) with no such
Prince, but such a one, as looks how to give account before another Tribunal
seat then this world affords, and that hopes, that if we discharge with
conscience what he biddes, will not lay to our charge the fault that our
Substitutes (not being our crime) fall in. We think our selves most
fortunately borne under such a star, as we have been enabled by Gods power to
have saved you under our reign, from foreign foes, from Tyrants rule, and
from your own ruin; and do confess, that we pass not so much to be a
Queen, as to be a Queen of such Subjects, for whom (God is witness, without
boast or vaunt) we would willingly lose our life, ere see such to perish. I
bless God, he has given me never this fault of fear; for he knows best,
whether ever fear possessed me, for all my dangers: I know it is his gift; and
not to hide his glory, I say it. For were it not for conscience, and for your
sake, I would willingly yield another my place, so great is my pride in
reigning, as she that wishes no longer to be, then Best and Most would have me
so. You know our presence can not assist each action, but must distribute in
sundry sorts to diverse kinds our commands. If they (as the greatest number
be commonly the woorst) should (as I doubt not but some do) abuse their
charge, annoy whom they should help, and dishonor their king, whom they
should serve: yet we verily believe, that all you will (in your best judgment)
discharge us from such guilts. Thus we commend us to your constant faith, and
your selves to your best fortunes.

decorative figure

