A Special grace, appointed to have been said after a banquet at York, upon
the good nues and Proclamacion thear, of the entrance in to reign over us, of
our soueraign lady ELIZABETH, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France
and Ireland, defendour of the faith, and in earth the supreme head of the church
of England, and also of Ireland, in November. 1558.

Psalm. 21. Qui timetis dominu^, laudate eu^ Psalm. 65. Qui terribilis in
consilijs super filios hominu^. To the ghestes.
THE chief part of your chere is, that ye are welcum all.

A word with your favors, I would say, and that is this. It is a manner after
meat, no less ancient then commendable, to have a grace to be said, ear water
be given: which, though it more aptly perchance appertein to sum of these
Clerks, that have vouchsafed to be here with us this day, then unto me. Yet
forasmuch as with my self I have conceived a far further cause of thanks
giuyng to God, then peradventure sum of them have, I will with your patience
take the office upon me. And say: that since it has pleased Gods mighty
mercy, to have called unto his grace, our late Queen, a Lady that of her own
inclinacion, wished all for the best, and would (I believe) even so have wrought:
wear it not that she had been so miserably seduced, and so pitiously abused, by
certain evil and most ungodly persons of her spiritual counsel about her.
Who first forced her to alter religion, then fecht in foreign powrs over us, of
the late king here, and that wicked usurper ye Pope. After that, pluct away her
lands and revenues, brought her into wars, lones, and subsidies: and ended
at last with the lamentable loss of Callis. Such was the thrift of their
ghostly government, such was the proffites of those prelates aduises about
her, these has been the fruits of their Catholic counsel. That what was
thear leaft of our utter vndooyng, but only to be over run by the Spaniard or
Frenchma^? After which they both gaped, and only thus disapointed by God.

But since (as I said) that it has pleased his almighty Majesty, now thus to
have called her to his mercy (as most humbly I beseech his highness he have)
whearby Queen Elizabeth our most gracious Sooueraign is cu^men to her just
enheritaunce and kingdom, thus to reign over us. I Prince (as ye wot all) of no
mingled blood, of Spaniard or stranger, but borne mere English here amongst
us, and therefore most natural unto us. Of educacio^, brought up and instruct
in all virtuous qualitees and Godly learning, specially (that may be most
cumfort and joy to us all) in the sincere knowledge and following of Gods holly
word. Of natural inclinacion, so Godly disposed as without revenge she
patiently suffered so much malice and wro^ges. Of wisdom so ware, as she may
shun the inconveniences and follies that her sister fell in. Of circumspection
(we may trust) so wise and politic, as she may straightly stay back, the
dangerous rashness, of those deuaunt currours that run before laws, and
seuearly keep short the wicked kind of libertines that pass for no law, but
will make their belefe, and live as they list. Of mercy so gracious toward her
commo^s, as her highness pitifully regardyng the dangerous estate of both body
and solle, that the Spiritualty of this Ream, has of late brought the^ in, may
vouchsafe to set sum Godly and charitable order, for restraint and reformacion
of their extreme outrages and abominacions.

Whose Pride has been soche as first amoong all degrees of men, they knue
neither make nor fellow, but still striuyng for soueraintee have with might and
main, endeavored to cast of all yoke of obedience to their Prince, conte^ding
to keep that estate under them, and to swear them selves subjects unto a
Bishop. To contemn nobilitee, and to be the only sooueraignes them selves.
The calling in and setting up, of their patron the Pope (contrary to their
natural ligeaunce and former oaths) The chekmate of his faithful minister,
our coosin the Cardnall, and the importable arroga^cie of all the residue
beside, what else has it showed?

Their Avarice so insaciable, as they held them not content so farforth
miserably to have insensate and dudled their Prince (alas poor woman) as at
one chop to make her give away a fifty thousand pound and better yearly, from
the enheritau^ce of her croun unto them, and many a thousand after, unto those
idell hipocrites biside: but even at one self and same Parliament to cause her
crave a subsidy, when she had done. In the grant whearof on their part, it is
worthy to be noted, the pure honesty and great wisdom of these men. That
whear the Lords and Commons, like good faithful and true meaning subjects,
did freely and sinceerly, for good will to their Prince, and relief of the
State, made their grant thereof unto the king and Queen, her heirs and
successors: Our Clergy of a further forecast, could woork with a caution, and
grant it no further, then unto the King and Queen only (like as under that
tenor, was ye oother subsidy they passed) Wise men I warrant you, lads of
circumspection, and vere filii huius saeculi: Luke. xvi.
That as Christ says, ar always more wise in their generation, then the
children of light. What good heart they bare toward their Queen's successor:
though we wear not in their Conuocacion amoong them, yet by this and oother, we
may give a good guess.

And yet this great profusion of their Prince, did so smalli serve their hu^gri
guts as like storuen tikes, yt wear never content with more then enough, at all
their collacions, assembles, and sermons, never lind yellyng and yalpyng, in
pursuit of their pray: Restore, Restore. These devout deacons, nothing regarded
how sum for long service and trauail abroad, while they sat at home. Sum for
sheddyng his blud, in defense of his princes cause and country, while they with
safety al careless in their cabains in luxe and leudnes, did sail in a sure
port. Sum sellyng his ancient patrimony, for purchase of these lands, while
they must have all by gift a gods name. They nothing regardyng I say, what
injury to thousands, what vndoinges to most me^, what danger of uproar and
tumult through out the hole reame, and what a weakenyng to the State, should
thereby arise: and then by that means, what a gap opened to the enemy, to run
in as he list, and ruin us all, (which thing sum thynk they little forced for,
so they might have had their purpose) that wot not I in deed, but this wot I
well: that with none of these matters wear they moved a whit, but still held on
their cry, Restore, Restore. And that ye may be the surer, they me^t nothing
more then how to have all, and that with all have. After that their Pope, this
sedicious Poule the fourth, that now is, had sent hither his Bulls and his
thunderbolts, for that cause and oother, and yet little restored (because the
world in deed would not so be faced out of their liuelod) Sundry of our
Prelates, like hardy champions of the Church, stacke not a whit themselves,
to thrust Lords out of their lands, and picked quarrels to their lawful
possessions. Well let nobilitee consider the case as they list, but as sum
think if Clergy cum ones more to be the Masters again, they will teach them a
school point. But how trow ye in time, would these douty divines have dealt with
poor men, that grue so presumtuous, and durst without law be so bold with their
betters?

And (now to ye purpose before) though by sum men it wear wisely told them. Why
restoryng is made now, and ye can be content: for, from the temporaltie those
possessions came: and now, allthough not so cheaply as ye had the^, yet ar they
thither sum restored again. Tut, tut, that was none answer to them for they
call nothing restored, but that is given them a gods name. And then (hardely) a
good kind of people for the commonwealth have we of them, that have a capacitee
thus still to take of us, and never to give us. Marie, as needful may we count
them amoong us, as amoo^g gamners, is ten and fowr for a Christmas box, that in
small process of play (if the banks be not the bigger) is like to rob all ye
board. It was time in deed for princes aforetyme to stay them with Statutes of
Praemunire and Mortmain which they yet now (taking advantage upon the time that
served them) like the popes true squiers, and for the liberty of his church
(as they term it) have won (I warraunt you) to be set at large, and if it
wool hold. Much adoo God wot, have they made for this restoryng, but if God
send us ones a world, whearin we may mete with them on an even ground, so as
with patience and indifferency, it may be quietly reasoned: whither by law
politic and divine, that te^porall possessions, may more aptly square with
the estate of Princes, lords and laifee, then with the office of bisshops and
abbots and profession of Preesthod: I believe then it shall easily be found, and
fall out full well: that as the Princes benignitee, may vouchsafe the^ sum
tithes or pensions: even so as for lands and temporal possessions, they shall
have as mooch as they may be born unto, and as our Savior Christ appointed out
for them, and as his holly Appostles had, whose successors they say they be.
And when that day cums (as with Gods grace it may shortly full well) then shall
we cry as fast for our Prince, as they have done for themselves, upon a better
ground, and with a more equitee Restore Restore. They have set us a sau^ple,
that we must not be silent, if occasion may serve. That if to say truth, they
be not better sum oother way provided for, so as they may be curteisly
unburdened of their great cares and study, which nedefully now they take poor
solles, about keeping of their courts, lookyng to their fines, considering of
emprouments, harkenyng to their best proffers, aduisyng upon new leaces,
scanning of old couenaunts, consultyng upon sum suits of proffit with the
prince, advise with their learned counsel for matters in law, exchaunges of
their Lordships and lands for the better, co^moditees of fisshyngs, sales of
Woods, provision of household, storyng of pastures and shepegates, regard to
their game in parkes, bildyng of Palaces, amplifiyng their sees and estates,
maintenance of their Churches liberties, and sooch oother infinite of troobles
biside, whearwith they are now so continually combred alas: Let us never trust
after at their hands, either more virtuous example of living, more
contentacion with their more tha^ enough, more charitee to their even christen,
love to their cuntree, or else any firmer obedience to their Prince. And as for
sinceer Religion: how may we ever look, for to have gods word truly taught us
of the^ that by means of their possessions, are so tied to the world? What a
mockery is it, both to God and man, that under Popeholly profession of wilful
poouerty, Penance or prayer, thus to wallter and wallow in worldly wealth, of a
three or four thousand pound a year? Under semblaunce of shepherds, with sheep
hook of silver, and surcote of raynes, to rule over all men, and to reign as
Princes? Under name of humilitee, to live in luxe and excess, of wine and
spices, and costly garments, and train of household, and all kind of affluence
biside, able to compare, or rather excede any Lord in the land? That if they
would be in deed, as their would seem to be: Why leave they their charge? Why
bear they office of so great gain and fee, and leave their cure unserved?
How think they that they may not be spared out of Princes Courts? Why will
they be called Lords? Why have they sooch ample possessions? Why maintein they
a foreign Bisshops power aboou their own princes, and that in her own la^d? why
rob they their prince and empouerish their cuntree by sendyng that gold over,
for their first fruits and ootherwise to the Pope, that is due to their Prince?
And why abide our Religious in bowres of sooch sumpt and easment, and so ny to
good tounes? Christ taught the young man, that perfection was in Vade, Mat. xix.
vende, and da, and not in mane, acquire, accumula. why get they not into
deserts, or desolate places, as holly Ierom and Polle Hermit, and diverse
oother did? That if their devotion to God ward, and contempt of the world,
wear so fervent as they make for.

Why tarry they at home? Why do they not Ire and praedicare, hye them to
Hu^garie, and toward Turkey, or into the parts whear Christ is contemned,
orels unknown? Dout to be cared for, they should need to have none, since gods
goodness provides for ye birds of the air, Mat. xvi.
that neither sow nor reap: how mooch the rather will he provide for them that
do his commau^dements, and trust in him? Death or violence should they not
have cause to dread, since (as they well wot) no pour can hurt them, whoom Gods
pour sheeldeth, no violence empair, y^ Gods might defe^deth. That if in case
for our Master Christ, and his holly doctrine, and for the confirming of them
they had won they should be drawn to it: Joan. x.
then like as a good shepherd gives his solle for his Shepes sakes, Mat. x.
and he that leeseth his life that way for a while, wins his life an oother
way for ever. Eue^ so (O lord) how sure is theirs all ready, the kingdom of
heaven that suffer smart and persecucion for righteousness sake? Mat. v.
But (shall I tell you) they ar wise men I warraunt you, they will tarry at home
and (if time serve them) call for more la^d, they have a nerer way to heaven,
with more eas and less pein, and that by many a mile.

Now, as touchyug their malice, that has been so despiteful and cankerd, that
biside their deuelish malignitee toward all good men, they have not spared
openly i^ their sermons, co slander and rail at their own late natural
Princes: that noble king Henry, and that virtuous King Edward: calling them
heretics, scismatikes, or what vile name else their rancour could devise. Put
them quite out of their beads biddyng and beadrolles (whither I ly, look in
the bisshops Iniuncions) and not so ceasyng: have hatefully procured, utterly
to be defaced the toomb of the tone, and could never afoord any cost to be done
on y^ toother. To the intent to make of the^, either no me^tio^, but
slau^derous: orels (if they might) to have put them both quite out of all
memori. Nay, what may we say, if thear wear amoong them (without horror and
trembling, alas can I skant rehearse it) that could enter into meditacion and
practice, so farfoorth to have profaned the hurtles corpses of those sacred
princes (Gods holly anointed, the Masters, the makers, and sooueraigns to them
all) as to have pluct them out of their toombes, to have burnt their bones? O
merciful god what impietee, what malice matchable with these men's? What
malignitee co^parable with these spites of the spirituallty?

Their doctrine again, so falls, so wicked, so blasphemous against GOD and all
goodness, and thearwith so inconsta^t, specially inducing error and blindenes:
as they have not stuck to enforce and procure us, to a greater obedience unto a
foreign Bishop (whom ones yet they themselves exploded, preached, and swear out
of doors) tha^vnto their own natural Sooueraign: to that Archapostata the
Pope (I mean) then to their liege Prince. Forbad us our Bibles, and commanded
us beads. Pluct away our prayers, and forced us to talk to God in a strange
la^gage. They took gods book, his holly testame^ts out of churches, they wiped
out his word, and stack up images without caution of idolatry. Condemned
their Marriages, and taught that hoordoom amoong the^ is more sufferable, tha^
sacred matrimony. Which doctrine in deed, like fervent followers of their own
laws, they have stoutly expressed in their order of living. And have bisily
taught, diligently preached, earnestly written, solemnly sworn, fully and
hoolly at one time in those points: which within a little while after, as
they saw oportunitee to serve the^. O merciful God, how soon forsook they?
Making no bones most impudently, so open, so often, to cant, incant, outcant,
disca^t, and recant: And like most vile curres, to turn to their vomit. To
the utter destruction of both body and solle (in as much as in the^ lay) of
many thousand of the poor Christen flock. Against their own teaching, their
sincere preaching, their godly writing, their sacred oaths: yea, and that is
most execrable both before God and man, against almighty God him self, and
his holly doctrine, and against their own consciences (if we may think they
have any conscience at all). For as it seems, they have showed plain sign,
that they believe thear is none oother Godhed, but their kingdoom in this
world, none oother life after, but only this here.

For maintenanuce yet of this their wicked, inconstant and recanted doctrine, O
mighty GOD, what malice is it that they have not showed? What mischefe have
they left un put in praictise? What kind of cruelty unattempted? What tyranne
unexecuted? First, as soon as ever they had felt, how easy the Prince was to be
seduced by them, and to be brought to their lure: straight by and by, against
law and conscience, the poor married ministers, they put out of their
benefices, co^peld them to forsake cuntrie, wife and children, drove the^ to
distress of vndooyng and beggerie, and only forsooth, because they wear
married: which nevertheless, by the laws of ye ream was then sufferable, and by
themselves also assented unto: by the ancient popish laws permitted, and with
the laws of God directly agreyng (as out of saint Polle and oother Scripture,
they had often told us in sermons themselves) they yet persecuted them from
place to place, orels to be reconciled a Gods name, and to recant: and confess
them selves knaves, and call their wives hoores. Tha^ procured they commissio^s
for heresy, in which as they had pluct in diverse of nobilitee amoo^g them, for
face of their doings: and as thear wear sundry biside, of wisedoom and
woorship, that by policy had insinuat themselves, for mitigacion of matters,
and for fence to their friends: even so a wonder was it to see sum oother
again, of our great Iusticers and learned men (that would not sit out) how
wickedly and willingly they becam their rackers and tormentours, and what
matters by the omnipote^cie of that commission, they durst enterprise to deal
withal, and with what corrupcion and briberie, they did execute the same
commission. That surely it was commonly thought (I am sorry to say it) to have
crept into favor, or if the bishop had bid them: For their parts, they would
little have stuck to have made Ione Moon a Martyr, and James Ellis a Saint. But
(as they said) for sooch a commission, they wear a great deel meter, then they
that sat still. Then gat this our Clergy Proclamacions, under great pains for
Books, which as they wear of matter most true and Godly, and of doctrine
sincere (yea, and though of their oun making) so wear they sureliest remembered,
and soonest forbidden. And because they would be sure, Anno. v. Richardi. 2.
ii. Henri. 4. ii. Henri. 5.
yet none estate should eskape them, they renewed those three catholic statutes
for heresy, that thearby if need be, they might convent all kind of men before
them alone as they list. And in these matters me thynkes I wear mooch to blame
if I did not a little remember ye, of the catholic service and pollecies
prelantine of that blessed bishop stout Steue^ of Winchester. Who, as his
fatherhode co^sidred, how mooch it should be for his fame and honor at Room,
though wear it never so mooch against his Book De vera obedientia, and against
his oath and his honesty at home to have y^ hole praise to bring in y^ pope
again. How mooch it shoold be for his glory, though never so mooch vnfittyng
for his degree: to reign and rule over lords, and triumph like a tyrant, how
mooch for his proffit and po^pe (wherein by his will he woold excede all me^)
though nothing at all for his pastoral profession: to have sooch abostdau^ce
of revenues, by lands and office and oother fetches beside. He brought the
Queen to that point that after appointment of parliament the writ her letters
to shriues for choice of good Catholics, a Gods name: himself biside commendyng
many, and in a manner by name, commanding sum to serve for y^ turn as he
thought best. Whearby he still placed in y^ house right many: That if any
biside, with wisedoom and reverence had told his tale fra^kly, after the ancient
liberty of the place, and happily detected the mischefs of the matters that this
prelat preferred: then was he by and by sent for, and sought for, and fetched up
in post: and sure to have pict to him, one quarrel or oother, whearby he should
be shopt up for sunburnyng: or ootherwise punished, that he and all oother might
have warnyng, what matters they talked in, and teach them from thensfoorth, how
they stick and be stiff, in points with the Prelacie. Had not this Postle
mooch wrong of the people in King Henry's dais trow ye, that ever did count him
and call him a papist? Well, he is as one said, Mortuus and sepultus, descendit
ad inferna. I will say the less of him. God have mercy of his solle, if he be
in state to be prayed for. But if it had pleased God, I would he had lived, to
have seen this season: that ones more at Polles cross to the people, as before
that to King Henry, he might have reca^ted again. His Catholicalitie, was so
well skild in the feat, that I dout not, he would have set sooch a sa^ple to
the rest of our Prelates, as they would never stick to follow a pace. And whear,
for these letters, and stop of free speech, all contrary to the laws of the
la^d, he was author with his Sooueraign of those so fowl and unlike sum
examples, as ever Prince amoong us here showed to her subjects, and in deed
tendyng to mooch toward oppression and tyranny: Even so biside many
inconveniences, that else might thearby arise, this might she be sure to be one:
that, The laws that are forced, will never endure. But as for those laws that he
procured, abide they or go they, he played his part kindly, to bring them to
pass. And after all this, what meant they, what meant they may we guess, by the
forcyng of y^ late statute of Armor? But only (as the wisest could deciphre)
because having color to have armor themselves, under name of qua^titee, they
might take to them as mooch as they list. So yt if need wear, when they saw
time, they might strengthen their matters hereafter, as well with Polles bloody
sword as they have done already with Peter's cou^terfet key of theirs. That if
their provision may plainly appear, it shall well be seen (I dare warrant) they
ar furnished at full: and have a great deal more, then for men of the church, or
likely by the^ to be kept for a good purpose. Now then, their popely
Iniunctio^s, their homly Homelies, who can not but with extreme wonder, be
merueilously amassed to consider, with what impudency and tyranny, they thrust
forward their abominable impities: read them advisedly, confer them with
scriptures, and with sincere religion, nay with their own former teachings:
then shall ye see how shamfully they have discovered themselves, and bewraid
their own wickedness. Bye them, bye those precious pa^phlets I pray, they ar
worth the moony, and it wear but to look on, and laugh at their foolish
gloses, and detestable devises. Well, thus beginning with the ministers: as for
oother, sum they threatened, sum they cursed, sum they put out of office and
living, to sum procured they y^ Princes displeasure, to sum, banishment, sum
whipped they their own hands, sum kept they in their colehous, sum cast they into
prison. And thear (O GOD) sum maimed they with torture, sum lamed they with
ierns, sum famisht they with hunger, sum burnt they in the hands with candell,
sum pined they away with ill keeping: And from thens again, sum heaued they to
hangyng, sum trapt they with treasons, so that none shaped free, that they
could catch in their clouches: if they did but ones talk of that doctrine, that
they before time had taught them, and woold not recant, and be as wicked as
they. And yet to, how unmercifully, how cruelly, how tyra^nously dealt they with
that good and virtuous prelat doctor Cra^mer archbishop of Canterbery? Who^
they themselves vau^ted they made to recant, and set it out sole^nly in print,
and yet soon after (see the charitee of their church) stack not a whit most
tyrauntly, against their own laws to burn him. Wear it mete trow ye, that
after repentance of their fautes, by their own examples, they shoold be so
served themselves? Mary God defend quod sir Tristram. And while I remember me,
this would not be forgotten unto you, the pure devotion, the sacred sanctimonie
of our opely prelat: that most virtuous, most godly, and well learned man (as
their Injunctions call him) the lord Cardnalls grace, And ye look in the
sermon yt Cuthberte the Bishop of Durham (that now is) made before king Henry,
a xix. year ago, and after put it in print: for the Kings supremacy, and
against the popes vsurpacio^. Thear amoong oother, calls he this Card^al,
Archtrai^our to his king and cu^^rey. Upon what sprite I know not.
who al though he wear bishop elect and sure of the Sea of Canterbury, a long
while in bishop Cra^mers time of trooble, yet woold he by no means meddle
with the matter, until it must be a little more mended, with a too or three
thousand pound a year forsooth: yea, and then neither woold he of his catholic
conscience, take the promocion upon him: till he was sure his predecessor was
burnt. And then woold he be preeste straight, and enstalld out of hand. O
precious preesthod, O pient prelate, O catholic Cardnall, most worthy to have
been a pope, that GOD save his life, while he have his deseruyng.

But now further: for any man to talk of this their wickedness, to stand by
Gods word, to hold that doctrine that they before so long time had taught us
and preached: this forfoorth was stark heresy. For strait, quick, and seuear
poonishment whearof: Lord God how they laid about the^. They spared neither
bishop, priest, clerk, nor lay man, ge^tleman nor vnge^tle, rich nor poor,
learned nor unlearned, gilty nor unguilty, wise nor foolish, good nor bad, man
nor woman, boy nor girl. Still most unmercifully co^demnyng in earth, and
da^nyng to hell (as mooch as in them lay) both bodies and solles of those poor
wretches, for the self same doctrine (I say) that they before had openly
professed preached, sworn, and taught them. Merciful GOD, was thear ever
vncharitee, hate, ungodliness, malice, cruelty, or tyra^nie, able to be
co^paard with this of theirs? But as they saw that their market grew great, and
had not help enough as they woold, to cut yt throtes of the sely sheep, so fast
as they had procured them to be brought to their boochery: a nue devise upon an
old ground and a full charitable fetch (hardely) for dispatch of their woork
had they, and that was this. They procured the shriues, to sit present with
them at the conviction of those, whom they had appointed before to condemn for
heretics. That as the prelate had ones pronounced his sentence upon them, the
shriue was straight charged to see execucion of burning: and then might he not
tarry for any warrau^t of writ from the Prince (as good law and custom before
time had been) but straight to the fire with the^: and thus made they a
riddau^ce of their slaughter a pace, and alleged it for law, that the Shriues
being present at those condemnacions, was warraunt and commandment
sufficient, without further process to burn those persons, that they had
condemned. And though in deed sooch an old law thear wear, ii. Henri. 4^
yet by them now, with sooch vncharitee and crueltee revived: it was thought
amoong us, a thing very hard and strange, that our Prince might have her people
by the^ thus still made a way, and never to wot either who^ when, or how.

And why, and why, I pray ye, all these their merueilous persecutions,
cruelties, and tyra^nies? But only (as I said) for the self same doctrine that
they before had taught us themselves. For who taught us to take the Pope, to be
a wicked usurper upon us? Who taught us, that by scripture and Gods law,
preesthod must be subject unto Princehod, and not Princes to Preests? Who
taught us, that it sta^ds most with Gods law, the Prince to be Sooueraign of
all, and supreme head of the church of that land, whearof he is lord, and not of
a foreign priest or potentate? Who taught us, that the same Supremitee, stands
not upon the qualitee or kind of the person, but upon the state of Princehod?
Who taught us, that it is no more repugnaunt to Gods law, under one head we
shoold have several Churches of England and Ireland, and yet both as members
to the universal, and true Catholic church of all christen, whearof Christ is
the head: then it was that saint Ihon in his Apocalips Cap. primo.
shoold write unto the Churches of Ephesus and Smyrna, and to the rest of the
seven Churches in Asie? who taught us that the Popes pour at the best, was no
better then a Bisshops in his own dioces? Who taught us that Thomas Becket was
no saint but a deuell, no true subject, but a false traitor, that did disobey,
and contend with his Prince, and took part with the Pope. And yet that precious
perle of prelacy that constaunt Constaunce, Marcus Antonius Co^stantius.
Lord with what pein did he bisy himself, to saint him again? who (I pray ye)
put into ye prayers of ye Primer: From the tyranny of the bishop of Room, and
all his detestable enormitees, O Lord deliver us? and whither ye acts of our
blessed bisshops, ye Popes execurioners, have been soch as we have neded (if we
might) so to pray still: I report me to you. Who made it allwais one chief
part of their matter in pulpits, still to show us of his intolerable
arrogancy and abuse of Princes, of his tyranny, war, quarelling, avarice,
apostasy, simony, sacrilege, hoordome, buggary, sodomie, malice, pride,
poysonyngs, and all kinds of wickedness and abhominacions biside, so
continually exercised by him, and all his hole holly company his Cardnalls and
court? Who taught us that his dispensacions, his pardons and bulls, wear but
false trumperie, wicked for him to give, and folly for us to receive, and
utterly damnable for any to trust in? Who taught us, that scripture never made
never mention of Purgatory after this life, or if thear wear any sooch peines:
yet wear they not redimable by the Popes pardons, by monks masses, or preests
penypraiers? Who taught us, y^ it was metest for us to have y^ law, that we
all professed, and to have divine service in that langage, that we best knue?
Who taught us, that sacraments wear ever most frutefully ministered in that
tongue, that the people best understood? and specially those whearby we made any
coouenaunt or promise to God, or received any cu^fort of his mercy and goodness:
as Baptim Matrimony, and the holly Communion. Who taught us to pluck images
out of churches for dout of idolatry? Who taught us to make our prayers, not
to our Lady, or any oother bisaints, but only to GOD? whose mercy by promis
was sooch as woold soonest here us, and his pour by experience sooch as coold
best help us. Who taught us, out of texts of Saint Polle, that preesthod and
matrimony in one person might very well stand with the laws of God? Who taught
us yt Scripture never mentioned, Kept at Room. (...)
nor ancient fathers (before the Counsel of Laterane) ever knue this term of
transubstanciacion, in the blessed Sacrament? Who preached unto us what
parcialitee, what sacrilege it was, in ministracio^ of the holly Sacrament, to
receive it themselves in both kinds, and to defraude the laitee of the one
half, ootherwise then it was ordained, Bibite ex hoc omnes. Mat. xxvi. Joan.
vi.
and against our savior Christ's Institucion? Who taught us, that as it was a
most Christen cumfort unto the worthy receiuour: even so was it neither to be
kept in boxes for dout of corrupcion, nor to be hanged up for woorship, for
aduoiding Idolatry? Who the deuell so ma^gled and minst it amoong us, as not
content with the old doctrine of our ancient fathers: that it was Gods body in
foorm of bread: but must with the mischefe, enter into fine siftyngs, questions,
and quidditees, of substance, nature, qualitee, qua^titee, dimensio^,
realitee, accidence, relacion, action, passion, and all the elenchs I wene of
Logik biside? Who sent out their Injunctions, and made their visitacions to be
suer to see that their teachings might accordingly be coo^d, as they had bisily
taught the^? Who taught us all this, and ten times more then I have layser to
tell, or ye to here: and now ca^ reca^t it every whit? who I sai who, and who I
pray ye? Mary who but eue^ they and they of their cote. Our Bisshops, our
suffragans, our doctors our deanes, our deacons, our parsons, our vicars, our
chaplens, our hedge preests and all, whearof many yet alive both quick and
queathyng. But if they will now (as they can ever full well) unsay and forswear
each for himself, that they wear none of the^: whear then a Gods name, beca^
they in all that hole season of scisme and wicked time? (as they term it)
Whear hid they their heds y^ we hard not of the^, when they shoold rathest have
showed themselves, and have vttred their learning? Whear was then their true,
their ancient, their universal and catholic doctrine? (as they call it) Whear
was their conscience, their conscience alas, to suffer so many Christen solles
to be mistaught, and led to the deuell (as they say) and they to stand by, and
say never a word? Whear was then their foritude of mind and trooble for
Christ, whear by we might have known they had been hizze^? How remembered they,
or else past upon the promise of Christ, that he woold acknowledge that parson
before his father in heaven, Math. ^
yt confesses him before men: like as he will utterly deny him before his
father in heaven, yt has denied him here before men? whear was then that
desire to truth, constancy of belief, and contemt of the world, that still
they now found, inthose poor simple solles, that daily alas they slew? That
sorry I am, my tale is so true, not a whit amoo^g them all. But when they had
thus liberally preached and taught a toside, and recanted a toother, and amassed
the poor people, with this their most pernicious inconstancy, and confusion of
doctrine: then soon after so to persecute the^, prison them, torment them, rak
them, hak them, hang them, and burn them? O merciful GOD, O heaven, O earth.
Was thear ever vncharitee like to this of theirs? Ever slaughter so unnatural,
for their own doctrine, to kill their own cuntree me^? Ever tyranny so cruel
for the teachers, to slay their own disciples, for cu^nyng of their own lesso^s
they gave the^? and send the^ both body and solle, utterly to the deuell (if
their tale be now true) and give the^ no leisure, either to learn better of
oother, nor take time with the^ to teach them better the^ selves? O terrible
Godhed, how fear they not flies, fleas, vermen, frogs, pestilence, plages,
serpents, venoms, water, fire, tempests, swalloyng of earth, ruin of houses,
falshod of fre^des, treason of seruau^ts, wrath of the world, indignacion of
Prince, torment of conscience, or else the dreadful furour of the Lord: which
so justly without his mere mercy, they have deserved, and is all wais in every
place impe^daunt upon them? How ar they not moved with ye horrible examples
even now of late dais, This, in a little laten book entitled the story of
Frau^cis Spiera, 1548. appears, and I ween is since turned and printed i^
English
of Frau^cis Spiera at Padua in Italy, and of James Hales of Kent: who both
for renouncyng Gods holly doctrine, and agnitam ueritatem. most lamentably
languisshing in desperacion: the one by will and a wait to cut his own throat,
thoother by drownyng himself, so wickedly ended their lives? How ar they not
troobled with the terrible cry of the solles (as Scripture tells them) of the
people they have slain for the word of GOD, Apccal. vi.
and for the witness they bare, which solles lie under the auter, and cry out
unto ye Lord with loud voice for vengeance upon them, and revenge of their
blood? How have they not been warned with these sundery unlucky Comets, these
uncouth signs in the air, these frequent monsters, and these strange,
terrible, and hurtful te^pests? whearby as Gods displeasure might be apparaunt
unto all men, eue^ so his wrath to be feared of them chefely, as chefely
deseruyng the same?

O how great cause have we again to magnify, extolle and heartily to
acknowledge that divine power, Majesty, and Godhed: that they seemed either to
despise or to dout on. Whose wisedoom sooch, Gods wisedoom.
as (seeming to the^ sumwhat to slacken the reins of his rule, castyng bridell
in their necks whearby they might at their wills, take the bit in their teeth,
and run the race they best liked) can set up a Prince, whoom they might abuse
as they list. And thearby might plainly disclose their affection how little it
was toward his divine Majesty, how mooch toward their own worldly estate,
their ambicion to reign and contencion for Sooueraigntee, their indissoluble
leag with the Papacy, their obedience to the Pope, their hipocriticall hearts
and dissemblyng with princes, their contempt of Gods word in respect of goods
gettyng, their extreme vncharitee their cruelty and tyranny toward their even
Christen, all which before time with countenance dissembled, and contentacion
counterfeit, they coold keep so coouert. Gods might
His immesurable might again sooch, that (as we see) in a moment, can ouerturne
all their foundacions and bildyngs, seem they never so depely cast, and so
strongly reared: It ca^ call the mighty from the seat, Luke. i.
and aduau^ce thearvnto the meke: It can regard the humblenes of his handmaid,
and cause her called blessed from age to age amoo^g all nations. It can incline
the heart of the Prince, to harken after his laws, and even in the same to
goouerne his people. It can make the stiff necked to boowe, be they never so
sturdy and stubborn.

And here with his most benign mercy sooch, Gods mercy.
as allthough for our most unworthy demerites (for I sai not, yt we are
fautles) we have been sumwhat touched with danger by one means and mischefe
by anoother, of foreign goouernment: with extraordinary taxes, with war, with
sickness, with seductio^ of doctrine and tyranny: yet his benignitee never
forgettyng y^ tender affection he bears, toward the flock of those his sheep,
that gladly here his voice: Luke. xi.
and y^ promis he made that if we ask it shall be given us, if we seek we shall
find, if we knock it shall be opened unto us. Math. xi.
And will refresh all them that cum unto him and ar in pein and pressed with
burden: and has accordynly (as we see) thus graciously vouchsafed ye same his
mercy upon us. Which since it has pleased his Majesty so benignly to show
us: Let not us then so soon forgettyng the same and our selves, be ready to
revenge, and be (as they wear) celeres ad effundendum sanguinem. But rather
(partly deterred by the danger of pein, that for our vncharitee we may
woorthily suffer and chefely provoked with the example of him, whose steps we
shoold endeavor to follow) remember his words spoken to us all: that take our
selves to be hizzen. Joan. xiii.
I GIVE ye a nue commandment, that ye love toogither, as I have looued you,
that ye also love each oother: herein shall all men understand that ye ar my
scholars, if ye have love and charitee each toward oother: and again how saint
Polle shows us of himself, i. Cor. xiii.
that if he had knowledge of toongs, ye wear it of Angels, gift of Prophecy,
Science of mysteries, faith to remove mountains: and yet lack charitee he is
nothing at all. If he bestow all that ever he has upon the poor, yea, and yield
his body to the fire, and yet have no charitee, it is utterly no proffit unto
him. And of the three divine virtues, faith, hope and charitee, that charitee
is chefest. That sins for their part, they may be right sure (onles they repent
them and show sign of amendment) thear is one that most mightily can, and
most certainly will, pay them their hire to their utter confusion. Even so
again on our part great impietee and presumpcio^ wear it for us to meddle in
his office that has said Mihi uindicta^ and ego retribuam. Deu. xxxii. Roma.
xi.
And against all conscience and Christen charitee, to charge the^ all with the
evils of most. It is not unknown, thear wear sum amoo^g the^ that being right
heartily sorry to see their lewd leaders ungodly demeanours, wear in deed rather
violently drawn, then either did redily cum, or willingly follow. And sundry
fled from them. Diverse again like poor ignorant lewdlyngs, (most vnwityng in
that they shoold best have been skilde) taught GOD wot as they thought, and
followd their conscience: which thing toward sooch, take I a great cause of
commiseracion upon them. And as for the residue (me thinks I see that now at
erst considering with them selves how through over mooch trust of their
worldly wit, theihaue so unhappily co^fou^ded ye board, and disordered their
game, by misgidyng the paunes, misusyng the knights, misrulyng the rookes, and
through the false draughts of the bisshops, ar like to receive chekmate of a
Queen) they keep them at home, and sigh in their celles, to think upon how
mooch they have begilde themselves in the reconyng, and lament alas how to late
they remember that, Bonu^ est sperare i dn^o, Psalm. cxvii.
quam sperare in pricipibus. They see that we see, their world will not last,
and yt well may they whisper in corners for eas of their hearts: but they flok
not in assembles, for consultacio^ and counsel. And those of them that have
cause to cum abroad, me thinks I sai I see, how they leave of their rochets or
cloak them for rain, put their tippets in their purses, pluk their caps down
before or hood the^ with hats, and ar full sore ashamed alas and woofully bewail
them, that ever the Devil had so mooch poor upon them. And being thus sorily
beested, and in this case of care, let us consider how little manhod it is to
strike at the^, that are down allredy. Who cannot but rather pity then revenge?
And rather regard, that as at the best they may live and amend, and as s.
Polle was (through Gods grace) of cruel persecutours, becum Godly teachers:
eue^ so at the woorst, be they our neighbors, our brethren, our eue^ christen.
Who^, if we regard our religion, and be as we shoold be, we ought no less to
love, then our oun selves, to wish their amendment and not to will their
destruction. Let us thearfore have in mind, not what deeds they have done or
what they have deserved, but what is our duty and how we woold be dealt with
all our selves. Even like also as (if I had my desires) woold I heartily wish
the Queen's Majesty, to show forth and extend her Princely pity upon them and
not to remember their evil deseruyngs but her noble dignitee, and how the
magnificence of a Prince is as well in Parcere subiectis as in debellare
superbos. Considering again: how easy, how slipper, how wretched, how wicked it
is for man to err and offend: and how hard, how magnific, how princely and
divine it is, to do virtue and forgive repe^taunt offenders. How well it
agrees with her sex, for a virtuous virgin to be pitiful upon her humble
subjects. With her estate of a Queen to be merciful. With her highness
profession of a Christen Prince and no papist, to be charitable. That had never been their heinous offenses, then shoold her majesty's mercy never had matter,
whearupo^ so Princely to woork. And suerly me thinks that as thear shall be
found but few amoong them, but will be content to renounce their unlawful
obedience unto that foreign tyrant the Pope* and can well assent in love of
their cuntree, to afoord their first fruits and oother proffits again, rather
to the state of their native soil here (out of which but of late they wear
taken) and to their natural Sooueraign and liege Lady, then unto Gods enemy
and ours the Pope. Even so conceived I a great hope, that upon cu^fort of
mercy, and for gettyng of their fauts, they will redily return to their
moother holly Church here amoongst us again, cast up their wicked Papisticall
heresies, and forsake that scisme and division from us, acknowleging (as with
true catholic consent before time they have) one God, one faith, one obedience,
and one supreme head under Christ, of the same his church here, the head of us all
the Prince of this realm the Queen's Majesty that now is, or her Uicegerent in
that case (if it pleas her to make any) her highness shall find I hope, they
will show themselves, as ready to render to the estate of the Croune, as ever
they wear greedy to pluck from it, or hu^gry to have. Yea, they will preach I
warraunt (if it pleas her to trust them) the pure and perfect doctrine again.
And none of likelihod, ca^ better skill of the engines of the lock, then those
that know whear they wrinched ye wards of y^ key. And so may her Majesty more
rejoice upon the cummyng home of one of those stray sheep, then upon nienty and
nine, that never ran out of the flock. And pity wear it to lose yt thus might
be saved, so that considering what use may cum of them, ones more to try them
me thinks wear not amiss: since in deed if they preach well, they may do
mooch good, if they preach ill they must look to make answer. and surety is
thear enough of them, for they can not start, and I hard ones old Roch
Alderman of London say, that upon good suerty, a man might trust a dog with a
puddyng.

Now to conclude (for right loath wear I to make ye weary with sittyng) since it
has pleased Gods allmighty majesty, thus merciful to have hilde his holly
hand over us, as to have called to his grace the late Queen. The wicked and
unhappy goouernment of those spiritualls under who^: began (as before is said)
first to allter religion, then to bring in a stranger King, to fetch in the
Pope, to make her abase her Royal estate, to deface her Princely title, to
pluck away her patrimony of the Croun, to take it to the^ selves, to let her
self lack it, to drive her thearby into everlasting lones, taxes, and
subsidies, to raise up religions more perfect then Christ's, to maintein with
sooch wast so many idle hypocrites. And they themselves so to triumph, and
tyra^nize over the world by persecucio^ of her subjects, and slaughter of
innocents: and ended at last with forcing her to fall out with her neighbors, to
draw us into war, to neglect her pieces, to contemn calling upon, and (with
utter dishonor) to the loss of her lands. And that his merciful goodness
again: has vouchsafed thus to preserve us from the immine^t danger of
distress of us all, and so graciously to have placed our Queen that now is in
her Royal seat over us, by who^: for her natural birth amoo^g us and
affection unto us, for her divine disposicio^, her virtuous educacion, her
Godly wisedoom, her Princely Majesty, her gracious circumspection,
affabilitee, justice, and mercy. We have good cause to conceive an assured
hope: that as her highness stands greatly in the love and fear and favor of
almighty god: even so by her grace, shall we have Gods word and Religion
restored amoong us, honorable marriage to her highness best likyng, noble
issue of her body for cumfort of us all, expulsion of that poisond vicar the
Deuels deputy the Pope, auauncement of her Royal estate and Princely title of
her predecessors again, resumpcion of the rights of her Croun from the Clergy
for eas of her commons, chastisement or chasyng away of those idle hypocrites
or else they return into the christen congregation amoong us again, quenchyng
of the Clergies execrable thirst of tyranny, reduction of them to the knowledge
of themselves and to a woorshipfull estate after Gods law most meetest for
them, amitee and peace with her neighbors and friends, love and obedience
unto her at home, a gracious regiment over all estates, and a likesum living
and a loouyng here amoong us under her reign. Unto that most mighty and benign
majesty divine therefore that has so graciously, thus wrought his mercy upon
us. Let us most humbly and heartily offer and yield all honor, glory, impery,
thanks giuyng, that lives and reigns world without end. And say with David:
Psalm. cxvi.
Laudate Dominum omnes gentes, laudate eum omnes populi. Quoniam co^firmata est
super nos misericordia eius: Et veritas domini manet in aeternum. Gloria PATRI
and FILIO and SPIRITVI SANCTO. Sicut erat sprincipio et nunc and semper, and in
saecula saeculorum. Amen. God save the Church, the Queen, send us peace, and
have mercy upon all Christen solles. AMEN.

Masters, mooch good dooit you. I have been the bolder to lengthen my process,
because me thought ye sat at eas, and wear content to here me speak. I thank
you of your patience and ye ar ones again all heartily wellcum. How sirs give
water.

Et veritas Domini manet in aeternum.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston, for Nicholas England.


