The DICTIONARY of sir Thomas Eliot knight.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

THE COPY OF THE KINGS GRACIOUS PRIVILEGE.
HENRY THE EIGHT, by the grace of God, King of England and of France,
Defendour of the faith lord of Irelande, and supreme heed in earth
immediately under God of the universal Church of England, To all prynters of
books within this our realm, and to all other officers, mynysters* and
subjects, these our letters herynge or saying, gretynge. we late you wit,
that we of our grace especial, have given privilege unto our well beloved
servant Thomas Berthelet, that no manner person within this our ^ealme during
the natural life of the said Thomas, shall printe any manner of books, what so
ever our said servant shall prynt first or shall prynt again upon other men's
corrections the same within the space of six years next ensuynge the
pryntynge of every (...) he book so printed by our said servant. wherefore we
woll and command you, that ye nor none of you presume to prynte any of the
said books, during the time of this our privilege, as ye intend to eschew
our displeasure.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE, AND OUR most redoubted soueraygne lord king
HENRY the.VIII. king of England, and France, defender of the faith, lord
of Irelande, and Supreme heed in earth immediately under Christ, of the
Church of England, his humble and faythefull servant, Thomas Elyot knight
desires perfect felicity.
TRVELY I am, and ever have been of this opynion, most noble, most
puissaunt, and most virtuous Prince, that the Royal astate of a king here
in earth, next unto god, is of men most to be honored, loved, and feared in an
incomparable degree and facion. For no man having the free use of reason,
beholdynge at his eien the disposition most wonderful set by divine
prouydence in things above us, about us, and underneath us, with the sundry
alternations of time, will deny, to be of those things one principal ruler
and moderatour, by whose eternal sapience all things ben governed. Unto that
office of governance is (as it were by the general consent of al people) one
name appropried, in the which although by diversity of langages, the letters
and syllables are oftentimes changed, yet the word spoken has one
signification, which implies as much as a KING in english, as it may appear
to them, which do read holy scripture, and will mark how often god is there
callid king, and also the prophets do so frequently name him. More over the
paynims being only ladde with natural affections, called Jupiter, to whom
above other their goddis, (...)
they reserved the power universal, king of goddis and of men: as who says,
there may be no greatter name given unto him, whom they supposed to be the
gyuer of life unto creatures. To the which example, for the similitude of that
divine office men did attribute unto their soueraygne governors that excellent
denomination, calling them semblably kings, and assigning to them the common
distribution of Justice: Whereby the people under their governance, should be
kept and preserved in quiet life, not exercysed in bestiall appetite, but
passed forth in all parts of honesty, they finally should of god be rewarded
with immortality. This well consydred, it shall be to all men apparent, that
they, which rebel against kings, be ennemies to god, and in will confounders
of natural order and providence. But above all things, I have in most
admiration, the majesty of you, which be very kings raygnyng in Justice,
when I consider, that therein seems to be a thing supernatural, or (if it may
be spoken without derogation unto goddis honor) a divine influence or spark
of divinity: which late appeared to all them that beheld your grace syttyng
in the Throne of your royal astate, as supreme heed of the church of England
next under CHRIST, about the descision and condemnation of the pernicious
errors, of the most detestable heretyke John^ Nicolson, called also Lambert,
at the which time your highness, more excellently than my tunge or pen can
express, declared to be in your royal person the perfect image of kyngely
majesty, compacte of these excellent qualities, true Religion, Sapience,
Justice, and Mercy, all men reioycinge at the manifest and most honorable
declaration of your evangelical faith: meruaylynge at the fulmination of the
most vehement arguments procedyng from your hyghnes in the confutation of
abhomynable heresies: extollynge the just reprehencions of the perverse
opinions and interpretations of the arrogant masters of the said Lambert, in
whose writings, and his own propre wit, he more trusted (as your highness
trewely alleged against him) than in the plain context of holy scripture,
and the determinate sentence of holy and great learned doctors: Inioyenge also
as well at your gracis most wonderful pacyence, in the long sustayninge of
the folyshe and tediouse objections of the said Lambert, as also at your most
christian charity, in mouynge and exhorting so stubborn an heretic, with
the most gentle and perswasible langage, to recant and forsake his myscheuouse
heresies. This majesty your true and loving subjects beholdynge, and than
herynge the spirit of god speaking in you, his enoynted King, and mynister
elected: they were with joy so replenyshed, that when they desired to express
each to other the comfort, which they than received, the same comfort was of
such importance, that it might none otherwise be declared, but by abundance
of tears, sent out of their eyes by unspeakable gladness. More over the presence
of you, which are kings, do minyster to them that be inferiors unto you, an
amplification of powers called natural, contained as well in the wit and
senses, as in the force or puissance of corporal members. to the confirmation
whereof, how many men have been known, which er they have attained to the
familyar acquayntaunce of kings, have been demed to be, some but of a mean
wit and knowledge, some but of a base courage or prowess, which afterward
have exceded in wit or courage all men's expectations, and finally been of all
men allowed for honorable and notable personages. Of this wonderful majesty
in your royal person, most gracious souerayn lord, I have my self, in my
self, late found a meruaylous experience. For about a year passed, I began
a Dictionarie, declaryng latin by english, wherein I used little study,
being than occupied about my necessary busynes, which let me from the
exact labor and study requisyte to the making of a perfyte Dictionarie: But
whiles it was in printyng, and uneath the half deal performed, your hyghnes
being informed thereof, by the reports of gentle master Antony Denny, for his
wisdom and diligence worthily called by your highness into your privy
Chamber, and of Wyllyam Tildisley, keeper of your gracis Lybrarie, and after
most specially by the recommendation of the most honorable lord Crumwell,
lord privy seal, favorer of honesty, and next to your highness chief
patron of virtue and cunnyng, conceived of my labors a good expectation, and
declaryng your most noble and beneuolent nature, in fauouryng them that will
be well occupied, your highness in the presence of diverse your noble men,
commending mine enterprise, affirmed, that if I would ernestely travail
therein, your highness, as well with your excellent counsel, as with such
books as your grace had, and I lacked, would therein aid me: with the which
words, I confess, I received a new spirit, as me seemed: whereby I found
forthwith an augmentation of mine understanding, in so much, as I iuged all
that, which I had written, not worthy to come in your gracis presence, with out
an addition. Wherefore incontinent I caused the printes to cesse, and beginning
at the letter M, where I left, I passed forth to the last letter with a more
diligent study. And that done, I eftesones returned to the first letter, and
with a semblable diligence performed the temenant. In the which my proceeding,
I well perceived, that all though dictionaries had been gathered one of an
other, yet nethelesse in each of them ar omitted some latin words, interpreted
in the books, which in order preceded. For Festus has many, which are not
in Varros Analogi: Nonius has some, which Festus lacks: Nestor took not all
that he found in them both. Tortellius is not so abundant as he is diligent:
Laurentius Valla wrate only of words, which are called elegancies, wherein he
is undoubtedly excellent: Perottus in Cornucopie, did omit almost none that
before him were written, but in wordis compounde he is to compendiouse: Fryere
Calepine (but where he is augmented by other) nothing amended, but rather
appaired that which Perottus had studiousely gathered: Nebressensis was both
well learned and diligent, as it appears in some words, which he declares in
latin: but because in his dictionarie words are expound in the spainyshe
tunge, which I do not understand, I can not of him show mine opinion: Budeus
in the exact trial of the native sense of words, as well greek as latin, is
assuredly right commendable, but he is most occupied in the conference of
phrasis of both the tunges, which in comparison are but in a few words:
Diverse other men have written sundry annotations and commentaries on old
latin authors, among whom also is discord in their expositions. When I
consydred all this, I was attached with an horrible fear, remembryng my
dangerous enterprise (I being of so small reputation in lernyng in comparison of
them, whom I have rehearsed) as well for the difficulty in the true expressing
the lively sense of the latin words, as also the importable labors in
serching expending and discussing the sentences of ancient writers. This
premeditation abated my courage, and desperation was even at hand to rent al in
pieces that I had written, had not the beams of your royal majesty entered
into my heart, by remembrance of the comfort, which I of your grace had
lately received, wherewith my spirit was reuyued, and has set up the sail of
good courage, and under your graces governance, your highness being mine only
master, and styrer of the ship of all my good fortune, I am entered the
goulfe of disdaynous envy, having fynished for this time this simple
Dictionarie, wherein I dare affirm, may be found a thousand mo latin words,
than were together in any one Dictionarie publyshed in this royalme at the time
when I first began to write this commentary, which is almost two years
passed. For beside the conference of phrases or fourmes of speaking latin and
english, I have also added proper terms belonging to law and phisike, the
names of diverse herbs known among us: also a good number of fishes founden as
well in our occean, as in our rivers: Moreover sondrie poysis, coin, and
measures, sometime used among the ancient Romans, Greeks, and Hebrews,
which knowledge to the reders not only of histories and orations of Tullie, but
also of holy scripture, and the books of ancient physicians, shall be found
pleasant and also commodiouse. Nor I have omitted proverbs, called Adagia, or
other quick sentences, which I thought necessary to be had in remembrance.
All be it for as much as partly by negligence at the beginning, partly by
untrue information of them, whom I trusted, also by to much trust had in
Calepine, some fautes may be founden by dilygent redynge, I therefore most
humbly beseech your excellent majesty, that where your highness shall happen
to doubt of any one word in the first part of this warke, or perchance do
lack any word, which your majesty shall happen to read in any good author,
that it may like your grace to repair incontinente unto the second part,
which is mine addition, sekyng there for the same word in the letter, wherewith
he begins, trusting verily, that your highness there shall be satisfied. And
for as much as by haste made in printyng, some letters may happen to lack,
some to be set in wrong places, or the ortography not to be truly observed,
I therefore have put all those fautes in a table following this preface: whereby
they may be easily corrected: and that done, I trust in god no man shall
find cause to reject this book, but rather thankefully to take my good will
and labors, gyuynge to your majesty most hartye thanks, as to the chief
author thereof, by whose gracious means men being studious, may understand
better the latin tunge in six months, than they might have done before in
three years, without perfyte instructours, which are not many, and such as
be, are not easy to come by: the cause I need not to rehearse, sens I ones
declared it in my book called the Governor, which about.viii. years passed,
I did dedicate unto your highness. And for my part, I render most humble
thanks unto your majesty, for the good estimation that your grace retayneth
of my poor lerning and honesty, promising therefore to your highness, that
during my life natural, I shall faithfully employe all the powers of my wit
and body, to serve truly your majesty in every thing, whereto your most
excellent judgment, shall think my service convenient and necessary, In the
mean time and always, as your bounden servant, I shall heartily pray unto god, to
prospere your hyghenes in all your virtuous procedynges, granting also that
your majesty may long reign over us, to the incomparable comfort and joy
of all your natural and loving subjects. AMEN.

THO. ELIOTA EQVES LECTORIBVS VERE DOCTIS.
ETSI NIHIL DVBITO DE VESTRO candore, prudentia, ac benignitate lectores
candidissimi, metus tamen liuoris alieni me uehementer cogit, ut in huius
operis principio uos aggrediar praeoccupatione quadam, non tamen artificiosa,
sed perquam simplici ac uerecunda: qua solum erratula, perpauca nimirum
deprecando, morsus inuidorum, qui nusquam non sunt, facilius euitarem. Nostis
optumi uiri quam periculoso certamine, lis adhuc pendeat inter huius aetatis
medicos de re herbaria: qua, me hercle, ut nihil extet humanae saluti
conducibilius, si probe cognoscatur: ita nihil pene deterius, aut magis noxium,
si quicquam in ea, male intelligendo, quod lectori futurum sit fraudi, perperam
committatur: quod cum ipse cognorim, alioqui cupidus redigendi in hos
co^mentarios quorumcunque uerborum quae apud latinos authors reperiantur,
sensus integros ac genuinos: coepi cum quibusdam herbariis ac pharmacopolis
agere, quos existimaueram ea in re perquam gnaros fuisse, ac perdiligentes, ut
stirpium non solum nomina, uerum etiam figuras ipsas mihi scribenti
suppeditarent. at homines uel improbe suam ignorantiam dissimulantes, uel ut
mihi imponerent (quod magis existimo) turpiter mentie^tes, alias figuras,
aliaque nomina mihi praebueru^t, qua^ earunde^ herbaru^ fuisse, quas ego nosse
cupiebam, postea diligentius inuestigando per meipsum comperi: quo factum est,
ut ab his delusus, uel potius proditus, aliquot herbas ac arbores aliena fide
male deceptus, huic Dictionario sub falsis nominibus inseruerim: quod tandem
cum ex solidioris doctrinae uiris, sero propemodum consultis, tum ex
inquisitione perdiligenti, tam in libris Dioscoridis et Galeni, quam in ipsis
styrpibus a me ia^ uisis ac multo penitius consyderatis deprehendissem, adeo
tantae negligentiae me certe poenituit, ut eo nomine tot mensiu^ labores (ut
mihi uidebatur inaniter exhaustos) flammis consumpsissem: ni me potentissimi,
ac long sapientissimi Principis nostri Henrici octaui Regis Angliae numen,
interpellasset: cui meam fidem in perficiundo hoc negotio paulo ante
obstrinxeram: facturum igitur me satis existimabam uobis uestrique similibus,
uiris utique bonis aeque atque doctis, si in tabellam, appendicem huic
epistolae, herbarum uocabula uel a me perperam interpretata, uel non satis
cognita diligenter coegero, quo minore cum periculo lectores quicquid mihi
deciderit imprude^ti resarcire possint. Abest enim quam plurimum, ut huiusce
rei me quicquam pudeat, cum in manibus tractentur cottidie libri doctissimorum
hominum, tertium aut quartum recogniti, nouisque additionibus iterum atque
iterum in lucem aediti, quod hercle cur mihi tantum non liceat, neque moribus
ne du^ legibus ullus quisquam praeiudicauerit. Sed mihi obiicient aemuli, multa
quidem uerba, quae apud Calepinum reperiantur, uel a me sponte praetermissa,
uel mihi nimium festinanti stolide dilapsa. Neutrum confitebor hercle nam cum
primum statuissem Dictionarium latino anglicum (ita iam lubet rei nouae, nouum
nomen effingere) pro quodam meo nepote co^ficere: in animo tum erat neque
plureis graecas dictiones aggerere, quam quae uideri possent ualde necessariae,
ad eos authors intelligendum, qui latin scribentes clarissimi reputantur.
Igitur non alia graeca uocabula desumpsi mihi, qua^ ea quae uel in ciuitatem
receptae (ut dicere solent) locum quempiam apud probatum aliquem authorem
adornassent, aut maiorem copiam, aut sensum illustriorem praebuissent. caetera
quaecunque penes huiusmodi authors uel nusquam reperta, uel ab iis ipsis
circumscripta, ne meam operam in depingendis chartis nimium otiosis imprudenter
luderem, libenter praetermisi, quod scirem, graecas literas nosce cupientibus,
alioru^ librorum, quos Lexica uocant, haud minorem copiam extare, nec mihi duos
parietes de una fidelia dealbare admodum uacabat: nam quid per deum immortalem
arrogantius dici possit? quid equidem stultius? quam in latino Dictionario ex
uerbis graecis, aceruos ingentes colligere, miscellaneasque co^sarsinare, cum
ad rem literariam plaeraque nihil faciant, imo nonnumquam officiant cum
inquirentem sedulo latinam aliquam dictionem, diu^^us quam par sit retineant.
Denique praetermisi nimia uetustate iam obsoleta uocabula, quae Terentii,
Plautique uenerandam antiquitatem long praecedere, aut plebeiorum sordes
nimium olere uideantur. tum quod authors quibus usui fuerunt eiusmodi uoces
nusquam extent: tum quod nulla in re, latin loquentibus utiles, plurimum
stylo, puritatique sermonis officere uehementer poterint. Si quis obscoena
uocabula desyderet, quibus iacentem uenerem inter legendum suscitare queat:
alios dictionarios consulat, meu^que contemnat, hoc nomine (si lubet) quod
eiuscemodi uocibus careat. Noueram humani sensus quantum fuerint semper ad
incendium prompti, si delitescentem igniculum ex lasciuiusculis uerbulis uel
modice delibauerint: sciebam quam auidi sint homines tam foede, ac demu^
poenitendae uoluptatis illecebris animos perluendi, qua^ praecipites fueri^t ad
exequendu^, quod libido suaserit. Praeterea non ignoraba^ ipsam Venerem non
tantopere solicitatam omnino quiescere: leuioresque impressiones efficere.
Malebam igitur (conscius futurae rationis, quam apud Christu^ iudicem initurus
sum) uideri quibusdam gratum aliquid subtrahere, ob idque male audire apud
cinoedos quamlibet procaces: quam damno cum meo tum aliorum inexpiabili, facem
saeuienti Cupidini, lasciua uerbositate subministrare. Viculos quosdam, pariter
atque rinulos et monticulos admodum ignobiles, quos extra Cosmographorum
tabulas, uel nusquam reperietis uel perquam raro, id tamen cum sui situs
descriptione satis commoda non curarim tantopere, ut in his uellem tempus and
chartam inaniter decoquere, contemptus idem accidit in otiosis nominibus, quae
neque tropu^ afferant, nec in quopiam authore fabulam illustrent. Ceterum pro
tam inani farragine comparaui lectoribus suppellectilem long commodiorem, ex
his dictionibus, quae in legendis authoribus, ob sensus diuersitatem, haud
mediocrem difficultatem afferant. Adieci praeter herbarum ac piscium cognomina,
quorum nullus dictionarius ante hunc meminit (ni fallor) mensuras ac pondera,
tam ueterum graecorum atque latinorum quam etiam Hebreorum. hanc equidem
operam, cunctis hominibus qui in literis tum sacris, tum prophanis studiose
uersentur, me pulchre nauasse iudicaueritis, quoties memineritis, quam insigni
uecordia ad lectionem iucundissimam rei tam uulgaris ignorantia per docti
homines caecutire uideantur. Tandem ne nimis longa praefacione, uobis in rebus
maioribus atque grauioribus occupatis, potius fastidium quam benefitium
afferam, id breuiter a uobis impetrare cupio, ut meam uoluntatem in hac re
aequi bonique consulatis. cogitetisque apud uosipsos, id operis iam coeptum ab
equite britanno, barbarissimo scilicet, utpote in paternis tantum aedibus
educato, nec ab anno aetatis duodecimo ab altero quopiam preceptore literis
instructo, sibi ipsi nimirum duce tam in scientiis liberalibus, quam in utraque
philosophia: quod procul abest, ut ostentando dicam uel arroganter: sed ut
gratiis DEO OPT. MAX. cum a me tum ab his, quibus hic meus liber fuerit utilis,
utrinque redditis: alii musarum uberiori benefitio freti, meo quidem exemplo,
parem aut maiorem operam aggredi, pro sua Republica non dubitarent. Vos ualete,
memores, primos conatus, cuiquam scribenti, uix unquam feliciter cecidisse.

THE TABLE OF CORRECTIONS.
ACETABVLVM, read a saulcer, wherein vyneger or other like sauce is put. Put out
the resydue, and read it in the table of measures. Acinicula, read Acuncula.
Acus, read it in the addition. Aedilitas, litum, read litium. Agaranomus, read
Agoranomus. Ambrosia, read in the addition. Antista, read Antistita. Apiastrum
read an herb, which has leaue^ like to black horehound, but greatter, and
more tender, and are not so rough, and smells like a cytron, some do take it
for March. Appositus, iette to, read set to. Archarius, read in the
Addition. Assiptor, read Ascriptor. Assec^a, read Assecla.
BIothenatos, read Biothanatos. Biremes, add to, also ships, having it
raunges of ores, Bon, add to, also the people of Benar or Berne, and the
marches thereof. Brabenta, read Brabenta. Buglossa, read, is that herb, which
is commonly called Borage.
CAdus, read in the Addition, and also in the table of measures. Calix, read in
the addition. Calydonia, read, It is also a country in the north part of
Scotland. Calta, read in the addition. Camerinam mouere, read in the
addition. Carcritoma, read Carcinoma. Cardinum, read Cardamus. Carpatine, put
out okers, and read cokars. Cerates, read the four score and sixtenthe part
of an ounce. Chameleopardus, read like a panther. Censio, read Censeo. Chena,
read clena. Choenix, read in the table of greek mesures. Chus, read in the
table of greek measures. Climacterius, read climactericus. Commeats, read
commeatus. Consuersco, read consuesco. Coriarius, add to, also a curriar.
Cura, carae, read curae. Cynomia, read Cynomyia. Congius, read in the Table of
Romayne measures.
DEcussis, read in the addition. Demeanculum, read demeaculum. Demensum, read
in the addition. Duellium, read Duellum. Haematices, read haematites. Increpo,
pere, add to, uel pare.
LApathos, read in the addition. Latico, read latito. Legacitius, read
Legatitius. Leucantha, read Leucacantha. Latumae, read Latumiae. Lonem radere,
read Leonem radere. Lesbos, for Ageum, read Aegeum. Lingua bula, read Lingua
bubula. Litem suam facere, there for one, read one. Lucifigus, read Lucifugus.
MAlo, mauul, read mauule. Marconiani, read Marcomanni. Mastiche, add to
commonly called Mastix. Matter matrina, read and has a mother living.
Medimnus, read in the table of measures. Mediocris, dlere, read mediocre.
Medius, a, um, in the myddell. Melamirus, read Melanurus. Membraneus, read of
parchmyn or velum. Merdo, oreur, read ordure. Metreta, and metretes, read the
greek table of measures. Mina, read in the addicion and in the tables of poyse
and money. Modius, read in the table of measure. Muralis, add to the end
pelitory of the wall
NEdum, after, for fundere, read funderem, Nihil cum fidibus graculo nihil cu^
amacino sui, read, cum amaracino sui. Nucamenta, things on the bowghes of
nutte trees or pitche trees hangyng down like frynges, and be not leaves.
Numeris omnibus absolutus, on every part perfyte, put out ly. Olus atrum, for
persely read Alysander. Ozinum, read ozimum.
PAralleli, for lon read son. Patrizo, for like a father, read like his
father. Pectunculus, a little fyshe, add thereto, I suppose it is a cockyll.
Pharmacentice, read Pharmaceutice. Pituita, for rowme read rewme. Puuia, read
pluuia. Pollex, read a finger breadth, and the third part of a finger. Polus,
of extre, read of an axe tree. Pupugi, read the pretertence of pungo. Putitius,
a fool, read a fool.
Qui, read after the latin, wherefore was Epicurus more happy that he lived in
his own countray, than Metrodorus which lived at Athenes. Quinarius, read at
the end, which is of our money.iii. pens farthing, or therabout.
REmuncopae, for driven read drawn. Renones, read after wherein the ancient
Almaynes.
SAlillum, read a little saltsellar. Salinum, read a saltesellar. Saxatilis,
pisces saxatili, read saxatiles. Scytae, Scythia, put them out there, and
read them after. Scorpiuros, put out all the description of the herb, and
read a little herb called also Scorpioides, having small leaves, and the sede
thereof is like the tails of Scorpions. Sestertius, and sestertiu^, read them
afterward in the table of coin. Sextarius, read in the table of measures.
Singillatim, for every ouche read eueriche. Specimen edere, to show a proof.
put out the residue. Sprarchus, read spirarchus. Spithama, read after in the
table of measures. Squilla, read at the last end, I suppose it a prane.
Sernunt se somno, read sternunt. Struma, for which is, read wherein is. Sulcus,
sometime it is put of a dyche, read for a dyche.
TThysus, put out all, for as much as it is before declared in Thyrsus.
Trachelum, read for tho sail, the sail. Trulla, read a treye. Tucetum, read
at the end. also a sausage.
Vafer, for fly, read slye. Vlex, for to ti, read to him.
In the addition.
Adarca, for grownyng, read growing. Agger^^, read aggerere.
Here ends the Corrections.
coat of arms or blazon

A. ante B.
A Sygnifieth of, or from. Ab, and Abs, be of the same sygnification, only A,
goth before a word, which begins with a co^sona^t: ab and abs goth before a
word that does begin with a vowell. Abatis, two words made of the preposition,
a, and the ablative case plurell of Batus, which in english is a measure,
signifies an officer, that has the orderyng of measures, Esdra.
as a clerk of the markette, Abaccidentibus, an officer, unto whom it
belongs to write such things as do chance. Abacti, officers deposed, or such
as be constrained to resygne their authority. Abactores, thieves that steal
cattle. Abacus, a countyng table, or cupborde. Abaculus, of Pliny is taken
for account. Abalienatus, he whom a man puts from him Abalieno, aui, are, to
put or turn away. Abana, a river in the country of Damask under the hill
called Libanus. Hieron.
Abanec, a gyrdell that the priests of Jews did wear. Abambulo, aui, are, to
ascend or mount up. Abaphus, vndied or vncoloured. Abauus, my great
grandefathers father. Abax, abacis, a cupboorde, or dresser, also an
astronomers tables. Abaci, the tables inbowed, whereon pylars do stand. Abbas,
atis, an abbotte. Abbatissa, an abbess. Plinius.
Abarimon, a countreye in Tartari, where men have fete turned backwarde, and
be wonderful swifte, and be wild. Abaster, one of the horses of Pluto king of
Hell. Abdera, a city in the realm of Thracia. Abderita, a citesyn of Abdera.
Abdias, the name of a prophet. Abdico, aui, are, to expel or put out of
favor, or resygne an office, or to refuse his son or kynsman. Abdicauit
filium, He refused him for his son. Abdicauit se magistratu, He has resygned
his office or dignity. Abdico, ixi, cere, to deny or forsake. Abdo, didi,
dear, to hyde. Abdomen, the fat about the kydneyes. It is also the vdder and
teates of a sow, full of milk, which is in Italy had for a delycate meat.
Abduco, xi, cere, to lead away, or lead out, or pull away, or take with.
Abellinae, fylberdes of Abellino, a city in Naples. Abemo, emi, ere, to take
or put of a garment. Abemito uestem, Put of thy cote. Plau, ce.
Abeo, iui, uel ii, ire, to depurte, or go away. Aberceo, to forbid. Eam
abercet domo, He forbyddeth her his house. Aberro, aui, are, to err or wa^der
very much, to depart far of, or a sonder. Aberu^co, aui, are, to wede out,
or pluck out. Abessa, the name of a Judge in Israel. Abfore, to be away.
Abgrego, aui, are, to sever or take out of the flock, or to draw sheep.
Abhinc, before this time. Abhorreo, ui, rere, to abhor, to hate. Abhorresco,
to fear to behold. Abiecto, aui, are, to cast often away. Abies, ietis, a
fyrre tree. Abietarius, a carpentar. Abigeatus, tus, felony in stealing
cattle. Abige^us, a stealer of cattle. Abigo, egi, gere, to drive away any
thing, that is evil or noyous. also to drive away cattle by theft or
deceyte. Abiicio, ieci, iicere, to cast away, to renounce to despise.
Abintegro, yet again eftesones. Abintestato, intestate or without testament.
Abiudico, aui, are, to recover or take away by judgment. Abiugo, aui, are, to
unyoke, discharge, or put asonder. Abiungo, xi, ere, to fever or sonder.
Abiurati, sworn brethern, or confederatis. Abiuro, aui, are, to deny by an
oath, or to keep a thing wrongfully. Abiudicatum, adjudged, given by judgment.
Ablacto, aui, are, to weaue. Ablaqueo, aui, are, to rydde the earth from trees
or vynes, and cut away the upper rotes, that they may bear the more fruit.
Ablego, aui, are, to send away. Abligurio, iui, ire, to consume in banketting
or farynge delycately. Abloco, aui, are, to set or let to an other. Abluo,
ui, ere, to wasshe of. Abnego, aui, are, to deny utterly. Abnepos, otis, A
son in the fourth degree in lyneall descent. Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or
refuse with countenance or beck, to beck away. Abnuto, signifies to do the
same oftentimes Aboleo, eui, uel ui, ere, to put out, or raze out to anulle, or
undo for ever. Abolesco, to bring to naught. Abolla, a Senators habyte, or a
sowldiours cloak. Abominor, atus sum, nari, to take for ylle luck, or have in
detestation. Aborigines, people, which first held the country about Rome,
and lived abroad having no houses. They may also be taken for any other
people, whose beginning is not known. Abonor, abortus sum, aboriri, to be
borne before natural time. Aborsus, an untimely birth, nygh to the conception:
which may be called aborsion. Abortus, an untimely birth, nyghe to the just
time of delyueraunce, whereby the child dies. Abortio, onis, et Abortinus,
the birth dystroyed with some hurt, or other mysaduenture, or medycine.
Aborno, tiui* tire, to bring forth a child, (...) be perfect. Abortrium,
idem quod abortus. Abortinus, a, um, that thing, which procures the said
untimely birth. Abpatruus, My fathers great uncle. Ab^ado, ^i, dear, to pare
or scrape away. Ab^^e, out of the matter, or out of the purpose* unseemly,
inconvenient. Abte^o, aui, are, to renounce, or forsake. Ab^tua, against thy
profit. A^, p^^ ere, to take fro, or take by fors. Ab^^gu^, they which being
at liberty, (...) them selu^s to an other man's rule, by their consent. (...),
aui, ^re, to take away. (...), to dissolve or repel a law. (...), an herb
called southern wode. (...), tumpere, to break of, pluck (...) cut of.
(...), of or fro. (...), a river of Armeny, that incloseth the (...) Armente.
(...), dear, to go away. (...), et ab^cen^o, a departing. Ab^us, is of
phisytions taken for an impos^ume or botche, or for a course of evil humors
to some part of the body, whereby matter is engendered. Abse^do, di, dear, to
cut of. Abse^do, signifies the same. Abscio, iui, ire, to go out of
remembrance. Abscondo, di, dear to hyde. Abscus, it is, absent, or away.
Absentaneus, a, um, that which in absence is done. Absentia, absence.
Absentio, tire, to think contrary. Absento, aui, are, to be absent. Absimilis,
much unlike. Absis, idos, the struck of a cart whele, wherein the spokes he
set Absisio, tere, to depart from a place* sometime it signifies to
abstain or leave of. Absoleo, ere, to be out of use. Absoletus locus, a place
unoccupied or neglected. Absoluo, ui, ere, to loose that which was bounden.
also to perform or accomplish. Also to spare or forgive, to pardon, to speed,
to assoyle. Absono, absonaui, absonare, to discord or sown euylle. Absonus,
na, number, that which sowneth not well, or discordeth, or scantly may be herd.
Absorbeo, bui, nel absorpsi, ere, to swalowe, or suppe of all, to devour or
consume. Absque, without. Abstemius, he that drinks no wine. Abstentus,
accursed out of the church. Absterreo, ui, ere, to prohybyte or let, or
put fro. Abstinentia, abstinence, a virtue in forbearynge to take an other
man's goods. Abstineo, ui, ere, to absteyne or forbear, or tempre. Absto,
stiti, stare, to stand far of. Abstorqueo, torsi, quere, to get by force
or tourmentes. Abstraho, xi, ere, to take by force or by craft Abstrudo, si,
dear, to hyde. Abstulit, of Aufero, he has birefte, taken away, or borne away.
Absum, fui, abesse, to be away, or far of, or to fail, or to be distant or
absent. Absumo, psi, ere, to spend or consume. Absurdus, surda, surdum,
inconvenient, foolysshe, discordinge, dishoneste, abhorringe, or odious.
Absynthium, wormewoode, Absyrtides, be ylandes in the Venitian see. Absyrtus,
the brother of Medea, whom she did cut into pieces, and threw into the sea,
when she fled from her father with Jason. Abundantia, haboundance, more than
sufficient richesse. Abunde, habu^dantly, plentuously, enough, and more than
enough. Abundo, aui, are, to habunde, to have out of measure more than enough.
Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away. Abutor, abusus sum, abuti, to abuse, to use a
thing: dishonestely, uncomely, contrary to that, that it serves for, out of
order, or in vain. Abusiue, improprely, against Nature, or custom. Abydena,
trifles, things of small estimation, wanton toys, things unseemly for
men to use. Abydeni, a people in Asia, which having their City distressed
with a long Syege, fell into a furye, or madness, and slew all their wives,
their chylderne, and afterward them selves. Abydos, the city of the said
people. Abyla, a hylle in the occean See against Spain, which is called oone
of Hercules pylars. Augustinus Ambrosius.
Abyssus, is a depenes without bottom.
A ante C.
AC, signifies sometime, and. as Doctus ac iustus es, Thou art kunnyng and
just. Sometime it is taken for Than, as Haud secus ac iussi faciunt, They do
none otherwise than they be commanded. Sometime it does signify as, as
Superbis perinde, ac si Rex esses, Thou art as proud as if thou were a king.
Acatia, is the juice of a fruit called siliqua. It may be called also in
England veriuyse. Acadoemia, a university, which took that name of a place
nighe to Athenes, where Plato the great philosopher taught phylosophye.
Academici, were a sect of philosophers, which followed and taught the
opynyons of Plato. Acanthis, idis, a bird that feeds on thystelles, and
makes her nest with claye, and is called in english, a Tytmusse. It was also
a boy, which the poets do feign was transformed into a flower of his name.
It is also a bushe, like a white thorn, with less leaves, mosy, and
pryckynge. Dioscorides says, that it is an herb, that grows in stony and
moist ground, and has leaves brother and longer than letyse, in form like to
rockette, somewhat black, and in broysynge soft and fatty, having a stalk of
two cubytes high, of thyckenesse of a man's finger, garnyshed under the top with
little long leaves and pryckynge, whereunto grows a white flower. Acapna,
dry wodde that smoketh not. Acara, a town in the myddelle of Hungarye.
Acarnania, a part of a royalme in Greece, named Epirus. It is also a little
countreye in Egypt: and it is a city by Syracusis in the royalme of Sycile.
Acarpia, lack of fruit. Acatalectos, a verse, wherein one syllable lacks.
Acatium, the greattest sayll in the ship. Accalaurentia, the name of her,
that nourished Romulus and Remus, the first builders of Rome. Accedo, accessi,
dear, to goo to, or approach. Sommetyme it sygnifyeth to give an ear or
harken, to take heed, and to make much of. Accelero, aui, are, to make haste
or speed. Accendo, di, dear, to kendle, inflame, provoke, or give boldness.
Accensi, were sowldiours appointed to be about great officers for defense of
their persons. Festus says, that it were they, which after the death of
soldiers were put in their places. Varro affirms, that they were ministers
ready at the commandments of principal officers. Accentus, an acce^t or
tune, whereby a syllable is pronounced. Accepso, in the stead of acceperim, I
have taken. Acceptabula, all vessayle or other thing, that may receive and
keep what so ever shall be put into it. Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a word
of the law, which happens in this wise. One says to an other, Art thou
contented with that that I have promised the? or that by my bargain I owe to
the? The other says, ye I am contented. This is Acceptilatio. Also wherein so
ever I have bounden my self by receyuynge of any thing, it may be called
Acceptilatio. Acceptum, thankful, pleasant, allowable. Acceptum fero, to
knowledge my self to have received, that is not yet paid, also to take
thankfully. Accerso, siui, sire, to call forth, or send for. Accerso, sere,
tertiae coniugationis, to goo to call, or fetch. Accidens, is an accident,
which may be, or not be, without corruption of that, wherein it may be.
Accido, di, dear, to fall down in doing reverence. Accingo, cinxi, cingere,
to gyrde, to prepare, to make redye to do some thing. Accinctus, gyrte, redye,
quycke in his business. Accio, iui, ire, to call to. Accipio, coepi, cipere,
to take, to here, to suppose, to know, to understand, to receive, to entreat
or entertayne. Accipiter, a hawke. Accliue, stepe bendynge. Acclino, aui, are,
to enclyne or bend to. Accliuis, sieve accliuius, rysynge upward to a small
top. Accludo, to shut to. Accola, the next inhabytant. Accola campi, He
that dwellethe next to the field. Also he that comes out of one countreye,
and dwells in an other. Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, specially hills or
waters. Acco^modo, aui, are, to accommodate, appropre, to apply, make apt,
set in order, give, or inclyne. Acc^edo, didi, ere, to give crede^ce, to
assent. Accresco, creui, crescere, to grow to. Accubi^um, a bed or couche to
lie on by day time, as it was the manner of the old Romans, to eat lyenge
on their beddis. Accubicus, the lyenge in the said manner. Accubo* accubui,
bare, to lie by, or to sytte, or lie down to cate. Accumbo, cubui, bear, to
lie down, to lie by, to lie or sytte down at feasts and bankettes. Accu^bere
mensa^, to sit at one table. Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate or gather in
heaps, to increase. A^^uro, aui, are, to take good head. Accu^a^us, ta, tum,
wherein is much dylygence, curtouse. Accurate, diligently, curiousely.
Accu^^^o, (...), ^ere* to ru^ne to, to speed thither Accusato^ius, ^^a, tium,
which conteyneth an accusation. Accuso* aui, are, to accuse. Ac^dra, siouthe,
pen^ysenes, heaviness of heart, werynesse. Acc^^^^, ^^^tas ^um, to be weary, or
to wax slouthefull. A^ et acentreta, things whereof the paynt in the mids is
not known. (...) acere, to be sour or sharp. (...)* ^um, without a heed.
(...) a tree, the wodde whereof is most gentle to work in, and is named in
english Dowgeon. (...), et Aceracris, acre, sower as (...) sommetyme it
betokens strong, sometime sharp. Acer inimi^us, a sharp enemy. Also
sore, as Acres animaduersores, soore punysshers. Acredo, A^^tudo, Acritas,
sharpness, or sowernesse. Acriter, sharply, or sowrely. Acer, ace^^s, chafe
of mylsede. Acerosum frumentum, vnkleane wheat. Acerbitas, bytternes of taste,
sharpenes of time, cruelty in man. Acerbo, baui, are, to trouble, to make
bitter, or abhomynable. Acerbus, ba, bum, unripe, bitter, difficult, or
peynefulle, as, Robustorum iuuenum acerba mors, The death of young men is
peynefulle, as who says, they dye with greatte difficulty. Acersecomes, He
that never cuttethe his hear. Aceruatim, in heaps. Aceruo, aui, are, to
gather into heaps. Aceruus, a heap or gatherynge together* specially of
grain. Acesco, sci, scere, to wax sour or tarte, specially in lykour.
Acetabulum, a kind of vessel, which may be called a charger, or a basyn, and
was a vessel, wherein were things sacrified. Acetare, to move or stir.
Acetarium, a salate of herbs. it is also a gardeyn, where salate herbs do
grow. Acetum, vynegre. Achaei, people in Grecia. and sometime they be taken for
greeks generally. Achaeron, it is, is of poets taken for a river of hell.
Achaia, a region in Grecia. Achareon, the main sail of a ship. Achates, was
the name of the companyon or mynton of Aeneas the Troiane. It is also the name
of a precious stoone found in Sicile, which is in color brown, and has
cerkles black and white. Achetae, gresshoppers, which chirpe loud and
pleasantly. Achilleum, a sponge, which is very soft, and has small holes.
Aciaeris, a hatchet of brass, which among the paynyms was used in sacrifice.
Acicula, a pynne. Acidula, pears that be sower. Acidus, da, dum, sour, or
sharp. Acies, betokens the edge of a knyfe, or other weapon or tool. Also
the front of an host, at the ioynynge of battle, more over that part of the
eye, which is called the syghte. Acinacis, a crooked sword that the Persyans
used. Acini, be little kernels, which be in grapis, raisons, pomegranates,
and other beries. Accipenser, or Aquipenser, a kind of syshe which has the
scales turned toward the hedde. Aclanes, he that never cries. Aclytes, a
weapon used in the old time. Aconitum, an herb, wherein is most fervent
poison. Acontiae, certain impressyons in the fyrmament like to fyrye darts,
which do seem to fly. Acopa, medicines to remedy werynesse. Acopis, a
precious stone like a glass, with small golden dropes, wherewith if oil be
heat, and the body therewith anointed, it dissolueth all werynesse. Acor, ris,
a tartenes like unto unripe wine or pomegranates. Acquiesco, eui, escere, to
lean, as to lean my heed or arm upon any thing. Also it signifies to
assent to other men's sayings. Acquiro, siui, rere, to attain a thing that is
sought for. Acraton, pure wine, without a lay, or vnmixte. Acredo, dinis, the
sharpnes that is in fruits, which be not ripe. Acredula, the wodde lark.
Acrimonia, tartnes, which biteth the tu^ge, and perceth the heed, as in the
taste of garlyke, oynions, and other like things. It signifies sometime
sharpnes in speking or mind: sometime lyuelynes and quyckenesse of wit.
Acrochordones, a kind of wertes, as great as beans, so small at the roots,
that they do seem to hang by a synewe. Acroma, a subtle sentence or lesson,
requiringe much study and search. it is also taken for all things to be
recited or done, to delight the audience. Acta, water ba^kis, or which me^ do
call stro^des, whereon the sea flows. Also it is that which we call acts,
concerning men's lives or private busynes put in writing. also such deeds as
have happened out of judgment. Acri^ata be those, which have happened in judgment,
proprely they, which be in doing. Acreon, the name of a man, whom Diana,
because he did se her nakid, turnid i^to an heart, and so was he torn and slain
of his own hou^dis. Actio, onis, betokenith sometime pronunciation, sometime an
oration written, sometime an action in the law, sometime an history, sometime
a defense, otherwhyle a recompense in words for benefit received, as
gratiarum actio, for thanks. generally it is taken for act or deed in every
thing. Actiosus, busye. Actito, aui, are, to practice, specially in civil
causes. Actor, which both the deed. Also in the law the plaintiff,
complaynant, or demandaunt. Also a player of enterludes. Also a man's factour
or baylyffe, that has the charge of his business. Actualia nomina, names,
which do proceed of act, as Rex, a regendo, of gouernynge, Dux a ducendo, of
leadynge. Actuarius, ria, rium, active. Actuarius, a substantive, signifies a
notary or scribe, or any other that writes spedily. Also it betokenith a kind
of ships, which be callid barkis. Actum est, it is lost. Actuosus, full of
acts. Actus, ta, tu^, performed, also arrived, thrust in, brought to, or
feared. Actus, tus, a deed, the parts of a comedy or play, a days warke in
tyllage. Actutum, anon, without tarienge. Aculeus, a prycke or slynge. Acumen,
the sharpnes of every thing. it signifies also clerenes of wit. Acumino,
aui, are, to sharpen. Acinicula, a small nedell. Acuo, ui, ere, to make
sharp, as a knyfe, or other thing like. sometime it betokenethe to teach,
otherwhile to steer. Acupictores, imbrowderers. Acus, ci, a fish called a
banstikle or ba^ning. Acus, aceris, chafe. Acus, acus, a nedell, also chafe
of corn, also an order in battle. Acutus, ta, tum, sharp, but in voice it
betokens high and small, as a treble.
A, ante D.
AD, by him self, or joined to an other word, signifies to, or at, as Vado ad
oppidum, I go to the town. Erat ad ripam fluminis ingens arbor, There was at
the ryuers iyde a great tree. Some time it signifies against, as, Ad illum
mihi pugna est, Against him is my war. Sometime it betokens in comparyson,
sometime cause, as, Ad quid hoc fecisti? For what cause, or whereto did thou
this? Sometime about, as Ad duo millia hominu^ occisa sunt, There be slain
about two thousand men. Also after, as, Ad haec, After this. Ad annum, during
a hole year. Ad diem, at the day appointed. Ad tempus, for a while. Ad
exemplum, to the example or lykenes. Ad extremum, finally at the last. Ad
pedes defilio, I light on my fete. Ad rem facit, it makes for the matter, or
is convenient. Ad rem pertinet, it belongs to the purpose. Ad uerbum, word
by word. Ad unum, unto the last. Adaeque, semblably, so much: as, Adaeque
miser, so much a wretch. Adagia, an old wife, which late had a child.
Adagium, a proverb, or as I might say. an old said saw. Adamas, adamantis,
a precious stone, called a dyamant. Adamo, aui, are, to love very well.
Adamussim, by rule, straight as a line. Adapto, aui, are, to join to. Adaquo,
aui, are, to water horse or cattle. Adarea, a frothe or foam growyng on reeds
in the fennes. Ad calendas graecas, signifies Never. For the old greeks had
no calendes. Addico, xi, dicere, to say, to judge, to appoynte, or depute.
Addictus, he that is judged, appointed, or deputed. Addictus, ta, tum, openly
sold. Also Addicere was when the judge in the old time delivered the dettour to
his credytours, to do with him what they lysted. Addisco, didici, discere, to
learn well, or add to in learning. Additus, ta, tum, added or put to. Addo,
didi, dear, to add, join, or put to. Add^^^^, ^m, cere, to learn. Add^^mio,
miui, ^e, to sleep. Add^^^, xi, cere, to bring to, or bring forth, sometime to
draw or pluck together. A^^^^tations, a frownyng forcheed. sometime ^^ducere
is to ertende or thrust out. Ad^^^, di, ^e^e, to devour. Ade^^^, so much,
moreover, surely, without doubt. Sometime it signifies even, as Ture^^ ^o eras
audies uerba, Thou thy self (...) shalt here his words. (...), to go to, to
demand, to attempt, to make assault. (...), the fat of all thing. (...),
opteyned gotten, or founden. (...), ta^i, ta^e, to dwell by. (...), moreover.
(...), to clean fast, to set sure, to (...) to. (...), to blow or to
breathe on a thing. (...), aui, are, to bind to, or tie, or (...). (...), ui,
bear, to put to, to have by me. (...) thermore. (...), at time appointed.
Ad^^^, yet, hitherto. Ad^^^, (...), cere, to lie by. Adid^^, short battes of a
cubyte long and an half, having pikes of iron in them, and were tied to a
line, that when they were thrown, he that did cast the^, might pluck them
again unto him, hurlebattes. Adigo, egi, adigere, to procure or styre, to bynd
by oath, or promise, to bring or drive to, to fasten or join to. Adirciales,
feasts that pryestes made in the old time. Adiicio, ieci, iicere, to cast
to, to add or put to, or increase. Adiicere oculum, to look on, or consider.
Adimo, emi, ere, to take away, or diminishe. Adineo, iniui, i^e, to put in.
Adinstar, like to. Adipales, feasts that priests were wont to make.
Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, basted. Adipiscoi, adeptus sum, to get or optain:
ioynid with a person it signifies to overtake. Aditio, tionis, an access, or
repair. Adito, taui, tare, to go to. Aditus, tus, access, coming to, or
entry. Adiudico, aui, are, to adinge. Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or join to.
Adiungo, xi, ere, to join to, to apply. Adiuro, aui, are, to deny with an
oath, to conjure. Adiuto, aui, are, to help often. Adiuuo, aui, are, to help.
Adiutorium, help. Adiumentum, help. Adlimina, a porter, which does keep the
utter gate. Ad liquidum, clearly, evidently, plainly. Admando, aui, are, to
send to, to deliver any thing to one to bring to an other. Admanus, at
hand, ready. Adminiculor, aris, et Adminiculo, are, to aid, to succor.
Adminiculum, aid, supportation. Admiratio, a wonderynge. Admiror, raris, ratus
sum, rari, to wonder. Admissarius equus, a stalyon horse. Admissionales, vshers
of the chamber. Admissura, the act or time when beasts does their kind in
generation. Seasoning. Admitto, misi, mittere, to admit, to put to, to bring
in, to suffer, to sustain, or take. Admodu^, very much, somewhat, resonably.
Admodum, as it were. Admolior, iris, molitus sum, liri, to put or add to.
Admoneo, nui, ere, to warn, to exhort. Admordeo, momordi, dear, to byte
soore. Admoueo, ui, ere, to move to, or put to. Adoleo, leui, lui, ere,
adultum, to begin to grow, to do sacrifice with incense, or other fumes, to
burn sweet things. Adolescentia, is the aege between chyldehode and man's
age, which is between xiiii. and.xxi. Adolescentior, aris, atus sum, to be
wanton, or full of youth. Adolescenturio, iui, ire, to play the boy. Adonia,
festiual days, which were kept in the honor of Adonis, the derling of Venus.
Adonis, the name of a child, which was son of Cynare, king of Cypres, whom
Venus had for her derlynge, which was slain with a bore, whom the poets
fained, that Venus turned into a purple flower. Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a
little time pleasant, which shortly decayen. Adoptio, an election of an
heir out of the course of inheritance, as by will or gift. Adoptitius, he that
is adopted or taken in the stead of a son. Adoptiuus, the son of him that is
adopted. Adopto, aui, are, to elect or apoint an heir. Adoratio, reverence due
to god, or saints. also an inward devotion and affection to him that
reverence is done unto: and is an express mocyon or act of reverence done
with the body. Adorea, et adoreola, A praise that is given to them that have
victory. Also a cake of fine wheat, which they used in sacrifice. Adoreum,
sede corn. Adordior, iris, adorsus sum, riri, to speak to, to begin.
Adorior, adortus sum, to set on suddenly, to begin. Adorior hunc, I set
on him. Adoro, raui, are, to honor with inclination of the body, to bescche.
Ad plenum, perfectly, fully. Adprimus, chief of all. Adpulsus, Adpulsio, the
dryfte of sheep to the water. Adrepo, psi, ere, to crepe to. Adrumo, maui, to
grudge or make rumor. Adruo, rui, ere, to turn the earth in tyllage. Adscire,
to join or put to. Adsum, fui, esse, I am here, er present, or at hand.
Adsummam, in conclusion, finally. Adtempus, for a time. Adueho, uexi, uehere,
to bring to or carry to. Aduena, a stranger. Aduenio, ni, uenire, to come to.
Aduentitia bona, goods which do come unlooked for. Aduentitius morbus,
syckenes that comes without our defaute, and of some men is called an
vncome. Aduentitius, He that commethe to a place by chance. Aduentito, aui,
are, to come often to. Aduento, aui, are, to come nigh. Plautus in Mustellaria.
Aduentores, commune resorters, or haunters to a place. Aduersarius, an
adversary. Aduersitores, servants, which do fetch home their masters after
dynar or supper. Aduersor, satus sum, sari, to repugne or be contrary, or to
refuse. Aduersus, contrary, or against. Aduerto, ti, tere, to turn to.
Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to live yet. Adulor, atus sum, lari, to flatter.
Adulatio, flatterye. Adulter, adultera, a man or woman auoutrer. Adulterinae
claues, counterfaite keys. Adulterinus, na, nu^, counterfaite, or forged.
Adultero, raui, rare, to cou^terfaite or forge. Adulterium, auoutry. Adultus,
ta, tum, full grown. Adumbro, aui, are, to make or give shadow, to represente
or express, as peynters do, that do shadow images in plain tables, to make
them show imboced or round. Adunco, aui, are, to make crooked. Aduncus, crooked
or hooked. Adunguem, to the perfection. Aduno, aui, are, to gather together.
Adunum, eueryche one. Aduocatus, an advocate. Aduoco, caui, care, to call to,
or call to help. Aduolo, saui, are, to fly to, or nygh a place. Aduotu^, after
mine, or thin, or his appetite. Adusque, until. Adytu^, the chauncell or other
secret place of the temple, where none came but priests, or persons
sanctified.
Ae, ante D.
AEdere spiritum, to yield up the ghost, Cicero ad Attic.
to dye. Aedere facinus, to do an ill deed. Aedere stragem, to make a slaughter
of me^. Tit. Liuius.
Aedere nonuna, to tell the names to be written. Aedere librum, to set forth
such a book. Cicero in V^^e.
Aedere scriptum, to show forth writing. Aedere praelium, to make battle.
Aedepol, an oath among gentyles, sygnyfyenge by Pollux house. Aedes, a house.
and if there be joined thereunto the name of god or of a saint, it sygnifieth a
church, or temple. Aedes saluatoris, saint Saviors church. Aedieula, an
oratorie, or place, where images were kept. Aedificiu^, all the hole building
of the house. Aedifico, caui, care, to build. Aediles, officers, whose charge
was to see to the keeping up and maynteynyng of temples, and private houses,
and to make provision for solemn plays. Aedilitas, litum, the office of the
Aediles. Aedilitius, He that had been ones in that authorytie. Aeditiuus the
prelate of the temple. Aediticius, a Judge or arbitratour chosen of the one
part. Aedituor, ari, to rule over the temple or house Aeditus, ta, tum, high
and strong. Aedituus, the prelate of the temple or church, and may be now
called the person or paryshe priest. Aedo, aedidi, tum, to set forth or
publyshe. Also it signyfyeth to bring forth by generacyon.
Ae, ante G.
AEger, gra, grum, sick. Aegipanes, beasts like to men, having fete like to
gotes. Aegre, greuousely, or heuily. Aegrumonia, syckenes. Aegroto, aui, are,
to be sick. Aegrotatio, syckenesse. Aegrotus, ta, tum, sick.
Ae, ante M,
Aemulor, emulatus sum, aemulari, to envy without malice, or to follow, or
study to be like to an other. Aemulus, he that follows or enuieth another,
only for desire of glory.
Ae ante N.
Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes. Aeneus, aenea, aeneum, brason. Aenigma, it is,
a derke question, hard to be understood. Aenigmatistes, he that pourposeth
hard questions. Aenum, a cawdron.
Ae, ante Q.
Aequabilis, equal. Aequabilitas uitae, wherein is no variety or ^^^ble.
(...), of one age. (...), equal, plain, like, of like age. (...), like wise.
Aequamentum, indifferency. Aequaminis, he that is neither extolled with
prosperity, nor disco^forted in aduersite. Ae^ua^mitas, taking in good part.
Aequa^mite^, moderatly, pacie^tly, coldly. Aeque^ustly, or as well.
Aequabonique facio, I take in good part, I seek not, or care not. Aequid^ale,
the time when the days and the nights be of one length. Aequilibrium, of even
weight or poyse. Aequimanus he that uses the one hand as well as the other.
Aequinoctium, the time of the year, when the day is as long as the night,
which is twice in the year. In spryng time about the viii, Calendes of Aprile:
And in Autumn about the.viii. calendes of October. Aequinoctiale, the
adjective of aequinoctiu^. Aequiparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal
Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to have like power, or be of like estimation. Aequitas,
equity, justice, or enennes. Aequiualco, ui, ere, to be equiualente, or of
like valor. Aequiuocum, one word having diverse sygnifycations. Aequo, aui,
are, to make even or plain. Aequor, the sea, sometime other waters. Aequus,
even or plain.
Ae, ante R.
Aer, the air sommetyme wind, blaste, breathe, or sound. Era, rae, money
numbered. Aerarii milites, sowldiours waged. Aerarium, a tresory, where tresure
is kept. Aere diruti milites, sowdiours, which for some defaute were put out
of wages. Aeripes, which is as swyfte as the wynd. Aerius, of the air or like
to the air. Aeratus, myxte with copper. Aerugo, ginis, rust or canker in
metal, specially in copper or silver. Aeruginosus, rustye, or cankred.
Aerumna, labor paynfull, care of mind, with heaviness, infelicitie. Aeruscate,
to get money by falsehode.
Ae, ante S.
Aes, aeris, is proprely copper or brass. It is oftentimes taken for money,
sometime for trumpettes. Aes nostrum, Money that other men do owe unto us.
Aes alienum, money that we do owe to other men. Aes suum, money that other men
do owe unto him, whom we speak of. Aes ductile, metal that wol be sone
molte^. Aesculum, an oak that bears maste. Aestas, Summer. Aestimabile, that
which may be valewed. Aestimatio, a pain set. Aestimo, aui, are, to esteem,
to value. Aestiua, places to be in for shadow in the summer time. Astiuo, aui,
are, to dwell or be in a summer place. Aestuaria, places whereunto the sea
flows and ebbith, or meres, filled with salt water. Aestuo, aui, are, to wax
hot, to bourne, to flow like the sea. Aestuosus, hot, or feruente. Aestus,
tus, tui, heat of the wether, or burning of the sun. Also the vyolence or
troublous motion of the sea.
Ae, ante T.
Aetas, age. Aetate, an aduerbe, signifies long time. Aeternus, everlasting.
Ether, the fyrmament. Aethera, rae, the air. Aethra, sygnifieth the same.
Ae, ante V.
Aeuum, long or everlasting time.
A ante F.
AFer, or Apher, a man born in Affrike. Affabilis, a man easy to be spoken
unto. Affabilitas, gentylnes in heryng. Affabre, counnyngly, craftily.
Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought Affaniae, tryfles. Affatim,
abundantly. Affecto, aui, re, to seek affectualli, to trouble when it is put
with damno, or other like. Affectata oration, a curyouse form of speaking.
Affectatio, curyositie. Affectate, curyousely. Affectus, ta, tum, troubled or
vexed. Affectus, tus, tui, et affectio, affection or natural motion, as
gladness, desire, and such like. Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to bring to.
Afficio, eci, ere, to move affection or disposition, either to good or to ill.
Afficit me gaudio, It makes me glad. Afficit me dolor, It makes me sorry.
Affecit cum laetali uulnere, he gave to him his deaths wound. Affigo, gere,
to nail to, or fasten. Affines, in fields betokens adioynyng: In men it
betokens alyance by marriage. Affirmo, aui, are, to affirm. Affirmatio,
affyrmaunce. Affligo, flixi, gere, to punyshe. Afflictatio, punyshement of the
body with syckenesse. Afflare, to blow wind. Affluo, fluxi, fluere, to
ouerflow or abunde. Affore, to be present. Africa, The third part of the
world, wherein is Carthage, Numidia, and all the countries now called
Barbarye. Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Also the most noble captain Scipio,
was called Affricanus, because he subdewed that country to the Romans.
Affrico, cas, caui, uel affrixi, to rub. A front atque a tergo, A proverb
signifieng the conferring of things passed, with the state of things
present.
A ante G.
AGame^non, was the general Capytayne of the greeks, at the syege of Troy.
Agamnestor, was king of Athenes. Age, Go to. Agedum, go to yet. Agellus, a
little syelde. Ager, agri, a field. Sometime a territory belonging to a
town, wherein is includid fields, meadows, woddes, and waters. Sommetime a
manor with the demeanes. sometime the arable field only. Agger, eris, a heap
of stones or turfe. also a bulworke, or a countremure to a fortress or camp
in battle. sometime it sygnyfieth a caulsey. Aggero, aui, are, to heap up.
Agglomero, to make up on heap, by adding to. Agglutino, naui, nare, to
join together. Aggrauo, aui, are, to be bourdenouse or chargeable. Aggredior,
gredi, to goo to, or come to, to invade, to begin, to attempt. Aggrego, aui,
are, to gather to gyther. Agilis, nymble, or light. Agilitas, nymblenes,
dexterity. Agina, wherein the beam of a pair of balance is hanged. Aginator,
he that is meuid with a little gain. Agiographa, books of holy scripture. Agito,
tare, to do often, to pryck, to compel, to trouble, to persecute, to vex, to
consider, to reuolue, to solycite. Agmen, an hooste of men. Agnati, kynsmen of
the fathers side. Agnatum, that which is in birth more than need requires.
Agnomen, the surname that I have by my father. Agnosco, noui, noscere, to
know. Agnus, a lamb. Ago, egi, agere, to do, to lead, to drive, to labor,
to here, to speak, to pronounce, to feign, to goo. Nudi agunt, They go naked.
I extend or sprede. Radices agunt, Pom. Mel.
They sprede their roots. I treat of a thing, I give. Ago gratias, I give
thanks. I bring forth, also to expel. Venena membris agit, It expellethe
poison out of the members. Agolu^, a staff to drive cattle with. Agonia,
fere and heuines, or vexatio^ of mind. Agonisma, the reward of victory.
Agonista, a champyon. Agonizo, aui, are, I contend, or fight valyantlye.
Agonotheta, he that makethe a commune game, and payethe the reward to them
that do win it. Agaranomus, he that sets the price of vyttayle, a talker.
Agoraeus, a markette manne, a haunter of markettes. Agrarius a landed man. Also
he that favors the laws, which be made for the ordering of possessions.
Agrarius, ria, rium, pertaining to lands or possessions. Agrerus, a greste,
wild grown, without culture. Also he that is rude and beastlye, without
gentle manners. Agricola, a husband manne. Agricolator, the same. Aggripetae,
they that do ask their portion in division of lands. Agrippae, they which be
borne with their feet forewarde.
A ante H.
AHenum, a port to heat in drink. Ahenus, a vesselle of white brass or
copper, which is bryghte both within and without.
A, ante I.
Aio, ais, ait, I say, thou say, he says.
A, ante L.
ALa, a wynge of a bird, and a wyng of a battle, which is proprelye of
horsemenne. A^er* et alactis, alacre, quycke of spirit, (...) wit, lusty of
courage, merry, and he that lives in hope: proprely he that is in a mean
between glad and sort. Sometime it betokens a man ready and willing, thereof
comes Alacritas, redynes or promptnes of will. also feruentnes of mind.
Al^tas* ta* tum, wynged. Alaeda, a lark. Albanum, the parget of a wall.
Albedo, albeuido, albor, whytenes. Albeo, ba^, b^re, to be white. Albeus, et
albeolus, a chessebourde. Albieo, aui, are, to be white. Albidus, a, um,
somewhat white. Albo, aui, are, to make white. Albugo, gitus, a white spotte in
the eyes. also the white of an egg. Album, a table openly set up, wherein
either the names of officers, or some public decree is written. Albumen,
albuminis, the white of an egg. Albumum, the fat that is in some tree.
Albus, ba, bum, white. Alcedmes, et Alcyones, are birds of the sea, which do
hatche their young chykens on the land, and do lay their eggs on the sands,
in mids of the winter, and wha^ the sea is most troublous, if they do lay,
it becomes suddenly calm, and the storms and wyndes do cease, until these
birds have all hatched, and brought up their chykens, and made them ready to
flee: which is in the space of.xiiii. days. This bird is little more than a
sparowe, his feathers be purple of color, myxt with white, and has a long
neck and a small, his byl somewhat grene, long, and sclender, and this bird is
seen very seldom. Alea, a dye, playinge at dies. sometime it signifies chance.
Alea fortunae, The chance of fortune. sometime peril. Aleator, a dysar.
Alecula, a sprotte. Ales, alitis, a bird, sometime it signifies swyfte in
fleing, or runnyng: as Alite planta, swyfte of foot. Alexicacon, a remedy to
put away myschiefe, or any ill thing. Alexipharmacum, the general name of
medicines, which do expel syckenes. Alga, reyte, or wedes of the sea. Algeo,
alsi, algere, to be in pain, proprely for cold, to chyll for cold. Algor,
grefe, sometime it signifies cold. Alias, an aduerbe, sygnifieth, or else,
else where, an other time, sometime. Alias res agis, Thou take no heed what
is spoken. Alibi, else where. Alica, a drink made of wheat brayed in a stone
mortar, the husks of the wheat being taken clean away. Alicubi, somewhere,
aliubi. Alicunde, from some place. Alienigena, a stranger borne. Aliemgenus,
na, number, that which comethe out of an other country. Alieno, naui, nare, to
alienate, to put away, or put of. Abalieno, are, to separate, to put a
sonder. Alienus, na, nu^, diverse, unlike, not agreeable. Aliger, any thing that
has wings. Alimentum, alimonia, sustynaunce, fode, or living. Alioqui, or
else, except that. Aliorsum, to some other place. Alipedes, swyfte runnynge
horses. Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a surgion that heals wounds.
Aliqua, by some place. Aliquando, sometime. Aliquantisper, a little while.
Aliquantum, aliquantulum, somewhat. Aliquatenus, in some part, by some reason.
Aliquid, some thing. Aliquis, some man. Aliquis est, He is a man of no small
estimation. Aliquo, to some place. Aliquorsum, toward some place. Aliquot,
some, nor many, nor few. Aliquoties, at sometimes. Aliter, or else, contrary
wise. Aliunde, from an other place. Alius, alia, aliud, other, or an other.
Allabor, labi, to flow by, sail by, or row by Allatus, brought. Allecto, aui,
are, to allure or draw to, by fayrenes, to allure. Allectus, allured. Allego,
lexi, gere, to ascrybe, to cheese, to assygne. Allego, aui, are, to send, to
allege, or bring forth, to depute, or give authority. Allegoria, a figure or
inuersion of words, where it is in words one, and an other in sentence or
meaning. Alleluya, praise ye our lord. Alleuo, aui, are, to lift up. Allex,
and allux, the greatte toe, when he lies over the next toe. Alliatum, a
sauce made with garlyke. Allicifacio, feci, re, to allure, to draw to.
Allicio, exi, licere, to allure. Allido, si, ere, to squatte or throw any thing
against the ground or walls. Alligo, aui, are, to bind to. Allium, garlyke.
Allophylos, a stranger. Alloquor, to speak to. Allubesco, to do it gladdely,
to obey, to favor, to consent. Allucinatio, a blyndenes of mind. Allucinor,
to be deceived in opinion, to fantasye. Alludo, allusi, alludere, to do a
thing in iape, to speak merrily, or consent. sometime it sygnifieth to speak
some thing, which secretly has some other understanding. Alludere ad
hystoriam, to speak or do some thing agreeable with sum history before
written. Alluo, lui, ere, to flow nigh to, to wash as the water does the
ground, when it flows over it. Allunium, a floode caused by rain, or by
ryuers when they rise. Alluuies is when abundance of water mixed with claye,
covers the ground. Almus, ma, mum, al thing that norysheth us, properly the
earth is so called, Alma tellus, because we have thereof our sustinance. Sometime
it signifies quiet, Almus dies, A quiet day. in Virgile. Alma, a virgin
hid, or secret. Alnus, an alder tree. Sometime it signifies a ship or
bote. Alo, alui, alere, to nouryshe or feed. A long, far of. Alopecia, a
syckenes of the heed, whereby the hears do fall of. Alps, the mountains,
which do depart now Italy and France. Altar, an altar. Alter, rius, teri,
an other, the other, one of the two. Alius, an other, the other. Alter, the
other, the second. Sometime it sygnifieth both. Vnus aut alter, one or both.
Vnus et alter, The one and the other. Alter, teris, sieve alteres, teris, poyses
of lead, made to lift up with both hands, to exercise men, which may not
otherwise labor: whereof there be now many in England, specially in the
chambres of stud^tes. Altercor, caris, to contend with words one with an
other on sundry parts. Alternatim, by turn, one at one time, an other at an
other time. Alternis, now one, now an other. Alternis diebus, sondrye days,
where one day is between. Alternare, to do things by turn, now one and than
an other. Alternatio, succession by turn. Altero, aui, are, to alter or
change. Alteruter, both the one and the other. also or the tone or the
the other. Althaea, the great malowes. Altilis, in plurali, altilia, all thing
that is franked to make fat, be it beast, fyshe, or foul. Altilis gallina,
a hen franked or fed Altisonus, he that makes noise from above, Altitonans,
he that thoundereth, which name the paynyms gave to their god Iupyter.
Altiuolans, all thing that flies high. Altrinsecus, to the tone or the the other,
Apuleius.
to the tone part, between the one and the other, in the higher part. Altus,
ta, tu^, high, deep, proprely in the sea. Vergilius.
it sygnifieth also excellent, glorious, ancient. Aluearium, et Alueare, a
place where hiues be set. also a stock of hyues. Alueolum, et alueolus, a
basket or mawnde, also a culuerhole, a chessebourde, or tables to play on.
Alueus et aluus, a hyue for bees, a vessaile to wash in, the bealy of any
thing that lacks life. sometime it signifies a ship. Aluini, they which
be much vexed with freattynges in the bealy. Alumen, alumme. Alumnari, to
nourse or bring up. Alumnus, a son or scolar that is brought up of a man, as
of his own father, either with sustinance, manners, or learning. Aluta, lether
properly tawed. sometime it is put for a bag or a pourse. Alutamen, any thing
made of lether. Alutarius, a tawyer. Aluus, the bealy. also a hyue.
A, ante M.
AMabilis, bile, amyable, worthy to be loved. Amabo, of fellowship, a good
fellowship, a familiar word used among friends. Amabundus, he that is a great
lover, or amorous. Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde. Amans, amanus, a lover
be it man or woman. Amante^, louyngely. Amanuensis, a clerk or secretarye,
always attendynge. Ama^acus, maioram. Amo, aui, are, to love heartily. Amaresco,
sci sce^e, to wax bitter, or to be bitter. Amaritudo, dinis, bytternesse.
Ama^^l^ntus, vexed with malice. Amasius et Amasia, he or she that louethe,
(...) loved. Ama^or, a lover, or he that is amorous. Amato^culus, a small or
simple lover. (...), like a lover. (...), a drink charmed, to make a (...).
(...), ria, rium, that which per^th to love. (...), a servant. (...), a
cyrcuite of words, or a tale ^wen in length. (...), sa sum, that abounds in
such form of speaking. Ambidexter, he that uses both hands like well.
Ambigo, to compass, also to doubt. Ambigue, doubtefully. Ambiguum, a doubt.
Ambio, iui, ne, to compass, to seek for promotion, to desire, to pray, or
entreat. Ambitio, nis, inordynate desire of honor or authority. Ambitiosus,
he that immoderately desires honor. Ambitus, ambitus, a cyrcute: also the
offense of ambition, made by the laws. Ambo, both. Ambrosia, was called of
the Paynyms the meat of goddis. Some do say, that it is an herb of the kind
of Mugworte. Ambulacrum, a private place to walk in, a walk or galerie.
Ambulatio, walkyng, and a walking place. Ambulator, a walker or styrer. Ambulo,
aui, are, to walk or stir about. Amburo, bussi, rere, to bourne all about.
Amens, mad. Amentum, a thonge, or that which is bounden to the mids of a
darte, or iauelyne, to cast it. Ames, amitis, a perch for a hawke. Ametor, he
that lacks his mother. Amice, frendely. Amicinum, a can or pot, wherout
they power wine. Amicio, ciui, cire, to clothe, to put on a garmente.
Amicitia, amity or frendshyppe. Amictus, cta, ctum, cladde. Amictus, ctus,
ctui, a garment or apparayle. Amicus er amica, a friend, a lover. Amicus, ca,
cum, joined to a thing, lacking life, signifies profitable, or wholesome. Amita,
my fathers sister, mine aunte. Amitini, cosyn germayns by brother and sister.
Amitto, misi, tere, to suffer to depart, to lose to send, to let pass, to
take fro. Amnis, a river, or brook. Amodo, from hensforthe. Amaeno, naui,
nare, to make merry, or glad. Amaenus, na, number, pleasant or dilectable. Locus
amaenus, A delectable place. Amaenum ingenium, a pleasant wit. Amaenitas,
tatis, pleasure, dilectablenesse, or myrthe. Amolior, I remove with great
pain. Admolior, I put to, or set upon a thing. Amor, love. Amoueo, moui,
mouere, to remove, to put from a place or a thing. Amphora, a measure, which
every way contains a foot it may be used for every pot that is carried
about. Amphorarius, he that bears the pot, a tankarde bearer. Amplector,
ti, to embrace. Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to draw to. Ampliatus, a man
repried, or delayed in judgment, upon some difficulty or consyderation.
Amplitudo, greatness of power or majesty, sometime it sygnifyeth largenes,
Terrae amplitudo, The largenes of the country Ampliuagus, much wandryng.
Amplius, more. Amplus, pla, plum, large, wide. Amplustra, Amplustria, uel
Aplustra, The takelynge of the ship. Ampulla, an oil pot. Also a bottelle
or flagon. sometime it signifies a thing that is blown or puffed. Suetonius
in Domitiano.
Suetonius uses that word for a drynkyng glass. Ampullor, I swelle for
pride. Amputo, taui, tare, to cut of. Amula, a water pot, and it may be used
for holy water pot. See Calepine. Amuletum, any thing that is ordained
against poysonynge. Amurca, the mother or some of all oils. Amussis, the
masons or carpenters rule. Amigdalus, an almonde tree. Amigdalum, an almonde.
A, ante N.
AN, whyther, or if. Anas, natis, a ducke. Anatinus, like a ducke. Anatarius,
ria, rium, of a ducke. Anathema, in holy Scripture betokens separation, else
where it signifies a thing offered or set up in a temple or church, as
things offered and hanged up. Anathematizo, aui, are, to curse or give to the
deuylle. Anatomia, anotomie or cuttyng of men by phisytions, to consider the
inward parts and members. Anceps ancipitis, doubteful. Anchora, an anchore.
Ancile, a shield without corners, such one in the time that Numa was king of
Rome, was seen fall out of the sky. Ancilla, a maiden servant it was proprely
taken for a bondewoman. Ancillor, to serve humbly and diligently. Anclo, aui,
are, to draw wine or other lykoure. Anfractus, windinges and turnynges,
specially in the ground. Angaria, a constraynt or compulsion. Angelus, an
aungelle. Angina, a disease in the throote, called the Quynse. Angiportus, a
great hole in the earth with many tournynges, or that which has none issue
out, or a lane in a town, which leads the next way to a street, or that
which lies on an haven, whereby marchandyse is carried from the water, or
recaryed. Ango, anxi, angere, to tourmente or vex. Angor, anguyshe of body or
mind. Anxieras, anxietudo, anguysshe or sorrow. Anguilla, an eele. Anguis, a
snake. Angularis, lare, cornerde. Angulatim, cornerwise. Angulosus, full of
corners. Angulus, a corner. Angustia, straytnes, or perplexity of mind.
Angustus, ta, tum, strayte. Anhelitus, brethe or wind of a man. Anhelo, aui,
re, to fetch wind, or draw breath. Anhelus, he that drawethe his breathe
peynefullye. Animaduerto, tere, to consider, to take heed, to set my mind,
to behold, and to think. Animaduersio, consyderacion, punishment.
Animaequius, maequia, quium, pacyente, or sufferynge. Animal, all thing that
has life, and is sensyble, commonly it is taken for a beast. Animalis, le,
that wherein is life. Animans, idem quod animal, saving that it is more larger.
For it may sygnyfye all thing that has spirit, as well in heaven, as on
earth. Anima, the soul. sometime life. Animatus, animata, matum, that has
soul or life. Animo, aui, are, to give courage or boldness, to quycken:
Animositas, boldness. Animosus, bold. Animus, the mind, the will. sometime it
is put for the soul: sometime for affection or delectation, sometime for wind
or blast, sometime for wrath, sometime for a sown. Annitor, to resyste, or to
help, to set to my mind. Annals, Histories of acts yearly done. Annalis,
le, Annarius, ria, rium, that which is done yearly. Annascor, to grow or to be
borne by a place or manne. Anniculus, la, lum, that which is of done year
old. Annilis, le, aged. Annilis fabula, an old wives tale, or a tale without
fruit. Annona, vyttayles, sustynance, or living. Sometime it betokens
fyndyng in board and apparayle. Annonariae expensae, expenses in vitayle.
Annosus, sa, sum, aged. Annoto, aui, are, to note, to entitle. Annotinae naues,
ships that carry corn. Annuatim, yearly. Annuus, a year. Annus, a, um, that
duryth one year. Anquina, the cord wherewith the sail is bound to the maste.
Anquiro, to seek. Ansa, the ear or handel of a pot or cup. And sometime it
sygnifieth occasion. sometime a bouckle. Anser, a goose. Anserinus, na, number,
like a goose. Antae, the poostes on every side of the door. Ante, antea,
before. Ante alios, above other, before other, more than other, or beside
other. Antecapio, coepi, capere, to prevent. Antecedo, cessi, dear, to go
before, to excel. Antecello, cellui, lere, to excel or have preemynence.
Antecessum, paid before hand. Anteccoenium, a colation or drinking between
dynar and supper. Anteeo, iui, ire, to precede or excel, or goo before.
Antefero, to put before, or set more by. Ante ha^, before this time, or
before that time. Ante^^quium, the first turn in speaking. Antelucanus, na,
number, that which is before (...) light. Anteluco iui, are, to wake before day.
Antelucuio, before day light. (...), the cross piece whereto the sail (...).
Antepagmentum, a portall. (...), ^ere, to prefer. (...), ^^nge before. (...),
outward pyllars or posts, whereby (...), or frame to sustained. (...), they
which be next the stan^ appointed for to defend it. (...), to excelle, or
stand before. (...), to make my judge. (...), neui, nite, to preuente. (...),
to prevent. (...), the bear of a woman, that is laid (...), foreheed, now
gentylwomen do (...) their rolls. (...), all (...) is before us. (...), to
preuente. (...), a book of medicines. (...), a medicine to expel poison.
(...), an example. Ann^^na, a pentiell. Antipa^^us, he that sercheth for
antyquities, or redethe old warkes, or uses old form of speaking or
writing. Antiquo, aui, are, to make void, to reduce to the first state, to
repelle. Antiquare legem, to repel a law. Antiquus, a, um, ancient or old.
sometime it signifies noble or worshypfull. Antiquitas, tatis, auncientie.
Antiquitus, of ancient or old time. Antistes, antistius, a prelate. Antisia,
an abbess or prioresse. Antistitium, prelacy, or preeminence. Antistitor, he
that has over other preemynence. Antila, a Pumpe to draw water. Antrum, a
den. Anularius, a ^eweller that sells rings. Anulus, a ring. Anus, nus,
an old wife. Anus, ni, an arse. Anxifer, he that causes sorrow. Anxius,
anxia, careful or heuye. Anxietas, anxietudo, care or heaviness.
A, ante P.
Apage, remove, put away, or drive away. Also it has a signification of a
more vehemence: as Apage hanccanicula^, Away with this bytche: or, hens away
with this bytche. Apage sis, let be, get the hens. Apella, without a
skin. So be the Jews called of Horacius, because they be cyrcuncyded. Aper,
apri, a boore. Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to disclose, to expownde. Apes uel
apis, a be. Apex, apicis, the crown of the heed, the top of every thing.
it sometime sygnifyeth a mytar. Apexabo, the gutte which is full of blood,
mixte with grease. Apluica, one of the three partis of the world whereof the
inhabitants be at this day called generallye Moors or Morynes, the countries
be now called Tunyse, Fese, Marocke. Apianus, na, number, that wherein bees do
delight. Apiarium, the place where as hyues be set. Apiarius, he that
nourishes bees. Apiastra, a bird which doothe deuowre Bees. Apiastrum,
smallage, an herb. Apicaeones, sheep, having small bodies, and little
wolle. Apicula, a young be. Apinae, nurtes without shales. Apionia mala,
round appulles, which I take to be they, that are called pomeroyall. Apium,
an herb called ache, sometime it is taken for our commune persely. Apologia, a
defense or answer to a rebuke. Apologo, aui, are, to require or ask.
Apologus, a fable, wherein beasts or trees do speak. Apophoretum, a present.
Apopthegma, matis, a short and quycke sentence. Apoplexia, a sodeyne palsy.
Apostata, a Rebelle. It is now used for them, which do forsake the relygion,
that they have ones received. Apostema, an impostume, wherein corrupted humors
have recourse in any part of the body. Apostolus, an apostel. it proprely
signifies a messanger. Apotheca, a wine seller, or shop, wherein things be
set to sale. Appareo, rui, rere, to appiere. Apparitores, officers of
justice, attendyng on the great ministers, to somon or attache whom they will
command. Apparitura, the office of a Sergeaunt or baylyffe. Apparatus, tus,
apparaylynge or deckyng. Apparatus belli, preparation for wars, artyllerye.
Appellatio, a namynge, or appelynge to a higher judge. Appello, aui, are, to
name or call familiarly to me. Also Vlpian the great lawyer will have it to
sygnyfye, to wowe a maiden to have her virginity. sometime it sygnifieth to
arryue: Sommetyme to appeal to a higher judge. Appello, appuli, appulsum, to
aryue. sometime to apply or set my mind, to direct. Appulsus, appulsus,
coming of beastis to wateringe. Appendeo, appendis, pendere, to hang by or
nighe. Appendix, that which hangs at an other thing. Appendo, dis, dear, to
hang up, to way in a balance or beam. Appero, ui, tere, to desire much, to
go to. sometime it signifies to be at hand. Dies appatebat, The day was
come, or at hand. sometime to wound or stryke at, as, Leua^s se alis, os
oculosque hostis, rostro et unguibus appetit, Rysynge with his wings, his
talons and beke, he wounded the face and eyes of him that faught on the other
part. Applaudere, to move hands or feet for joy, or to beat any thing to
the ground. Applico, applicaui, applicare, uel applicui applicere, to join to,
to lay to, or set to, or to apply. Applodo, plosi, dear, supra applaudere.
Appluda, chafe. Apporto, aui, are, to bring to. Appositus, ta, tum, put to,
or set to. sometime it signifies convenient, or to the purpose. Apprime,
chiefly, principally. Approbus, very honest. Apricari, to sytre or go abroad
in the air, or in the son. Apricus, a place set against the son.
Aprilis, the month of Apryll. Aprinus, bores flesh. Aprono in genua, to knele
on my knees. Aptitudo, aptenes. Apto, aui are, to join, to agree two things
together. Aptus, ta, tum, apt, agreeable, mete, necessary. Apud, at, when it
is joined with a person, it signifies with.
A ante Q.
AQua, water. Aquagium, a cundyte. Aqualiculus, a little trowgh. Aqualicus,
the panche. Aqualis, A basyne to wasshe in men's hands. Aquaricola, a place,
wherein water is cast. Aquariolum, Aquarium, a wasshyng place. Aquaticus, that
which haunteth the water, or lives therein. Aquatilis, the same. Aquatus, ta,
tum, that, wherinto water is put. Vinum aquatum, Alayed wine. Aqueus, a, um,
watrye. Aquila, an egle. Aquilex, he that sercheth for water, or co^uayeth it.
Aquilifer, the standarde bearer of the Romans. Aquilo, the northest wind.
Aquilus color, russette. Aquiminaria, all water pottes. Aquitania, Guyen. Aquo,
aui, are, to fetch or bear water. Aquosus, sa, sum, full of water. Aquula,
little water.
A ante R.
ARa, an Aultare. Aranea, a copwebbe. Sommetyme a spyder. Araneus, a spyder.
Arator, a ploughmanne. and sommetyme a ploughe ox. Aratrum, a ploughe.
Arbiter, tri, an arbitratour. Arbitrarium, arbitrable. Arbitrium, arbytrement,
will, an espyall. Arbitror, to trow, to judge, or awarde. Arbor, et arbos, a
tree. Arborator, a lopper of trees. Arborescere, to wax to a tree. Arboreus,
ea, reum, of a tree. Arbustum, a place where trees be set, proprelye Elmes,
wythye, or Salowe, it may be taken for an orchard, or a hoppeyarde, or a
vyneyarde, where vynes do grow up by trees. Arbustum, a vine that runs up
in height by a tree or a pole. Arbusto, aui, are, to set vines by trees.
Arbutu^, an appull called a wyldinge. Arbutus, a wyldyng tree. Arca, a coffer.
Arcanum, a thing secret, or of few known. Arcatus, bent like a bow. Arceo,
cui, ^re, to strain, to put of, to drive away. Arcera, a horse lytter.
Arcesio, to accuse, to call for. Archa^^us, a steward of householde.
Archerypus, the first example or pattern. Atch^at^t^ti, a chief phisytion.
Archima^nus, chief Look. Architector, aris, ari, to make craftily. (...), the
counnyng of diuysyng of (...). (...), et architectus, a diuiser of buil^^^^, or
a master of the warkes. (...), master of the feast. (...), the treasone of
Minumentes (...) belonging to a king or a (...). (...), to strain
oftentimes. (...), ^um, straight. (...) ^a^^ened like a bow, (...), a
crossebowe. (...)* a little coffer or caskette. (...), a relle that womenne
do wear (...) beedes, to bear water or milk (...). (...) a bow, the rant
of a roufe. Ard^a, a by^^^e called an heron. Ardei^o, a b^sy manne medlynge
with many things. Ardeo, a^^, dear, to burn, to love ardently, or excedyngly*
to make haste, to be co^sum^d, to desire. Ardens, it is, hasty in doing, quycke
witted. Ardesco, to be hasty. Ardnus, high and difficult, hard to com to. Area,
a large place in a City kept ever clean, where merchants do assemble: as I
have seen in diverse cities in Almayne. Also it is every place marked out to
buyld or to set an house in. Also a floor, where corn is thrashed. Areator, a
thresher. Arefacio, to make dry. Arena, sand. Arenaceus, ea, eum, sandy.
Arenatus, arenata, natum, pargetted with lyme and sand. Arenosus, sandye.
Arenula, fine sand. Areo, rui, rere, to be made dry. Areola, a bed in a
garden. Aresco, scere, to wax dry, or to be made dry. Aretalogus, a bragger
or a vaunter of his own virtues, sometime a forger of lies, to make men merye.
Argentaria^ facit, he makes or occupies a bank for exchange. Argentarius, a
banker, with whom men do make their exchange of money. Argenteus, a, um, of
silver. Argentum, silver. sommetyme it sygnifyeth plate. Argilla, potters
claye. Argumentatio, the declaration of an argument. Argumentor, mentaris,
mentari, to argue or raison. Argumentosus, sa, um, that which is done with
great reason. Argumentum, is a raison, making a proof, whereby one thing is
gathered by an another, and the which confirms that, which is doubtefulle,
by that which is not doubtefull. sometime it signifies a mattier, sommetyme
coiecture, sometime a short exposition of that which follows, other while
sentence. Arguo, gui, ere, to reprove, to impute, to accuse, to show.
Argutiae, sharp words or shrewde. Argutor, aris, ari, to speak sharply,
shrewdly, or pertely. Argutulus, somewhat perte. Argutus, ta, tum, reproved.
sometime it sygnyfyeth shrewde, and he that can in speaking sharply inserche
a man's mind. Also shryll of voice. Arguti hommes, they that speak much in
few words. Argutum, s^lender or small. Ariditas, et aritudo, dryenesse.
Aridus, dry. Aries, arietis, a Ram. Also a piece of ordinance or engyne,
made like a rams heed, to beat down a wall. It is also oone of the.xii.
signs that the Sun passes by. Arietinus, of a ram. Arieto, taui, are, to
hytte or throw down. Arista, the berde of corn, sometime it is put for
wheat. Arithmetica, aulgoryme, the science of noumbrynge. Arma, orum, harneyes
and weapon. Also the instruments of all manner of crafts, Also standards and
baners, sommetyme battayles. Armamenta, tools, instruments, all store for
wars or ships. Armamentarium, an armorie or storehouse for ships or
ordinance. Armarium, a study where books are laid, or a dry larder. Armati,
armed men. Armatura, armure. Armator, an armorer. Armentarius, the keeper of the
armorie, Armentum, store of horse or nete. sometime it sygnifyeth cattle.
Armiger, geri, proprely an esquyer for the body, as he, which always
attendynge about a knight, bears his hedpiece, his spear, and his shield, a
custrell. Armillae, rings that gentylmenne used to wear about their arms,
as at this day some men and women do use, called bracelettes. Armille neutri
generis, a facyon of deceit. Armillum, a vessel wherein they vsid in their
sacrifice to put wine. Armipotens, puissant in arms. Armo, aui, are, to arm.
Armus, the shoulder of a beast, or the pynion of a foul. Aro, aui, are, to
ear or plowe land. Arquatus morbus, the syckenesse calledde the iaundise.
Arreptitius, he that is obsessed with an ylle spyrite. Arrha et Arrhabo, ernest
money. Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water ground. Aripio, pui, ere, to take. Arrogo,
aui, are, to give to much, to presume, to make mine heir. Arrogans, arrogant
or presumptuous. Arrogantia, arrogance, presumption. Ars, artis, a craft,
subtyltie. Arteria, a synewe like to a vain, wherein the spirit of life does
walk, as the blood does in veins. Articulatim, from ioynte to ioynte.
Articulo, aui, are, to join one ioynte to an another. Articulus, a joint. also
a moment or parcel of time. also a color of Rhetorike. Artifex, a crafts man.
Aruficium, the practice of a craft. Arto, aui, are, to strain, to thraste
together, to wrynge. Artocopus, a baker. Artoptitius panis, breadde made of
wheat, which to hard and soore dried, biskatte. Artuo, aui, are, to cut a
sonder. Artus, members. Aruina, talowe. Arundinetum, a place where reeds do
grow. Arundo, a read, or cane. Aruspex, he that tells of things to come by
lokynge in beasts bowelles. Aruum, a falowe field. Arx, arcis, a fortress or
castelle, specially standing high.
A ante S.
AS, assis, a pound weyghte. In the old time in the partition of land, or
other like thing inherytable, they called the hole, As, and the parts
divided, ounces. Asaronim, peynted pament, which may not be swepte. Ascendo,
di, ere, to clymme, to ascend, to goo up. Ascia, a chyppe axe. Ascio, aui, to
chyppe or cut with an axe. Ascio, is, to know surely. Ascisco, sciui, scire,
to presume, to take upon me a thing. Ascisco, ascisci, asciscere, to admytte,
to take to me. Ascribo, psi, bear, to add to, to attribute, to impute.
Asscriptitius, he that is added to the nombre of other. Assciptor, oris, he
that follows the example of an other, or he that writes many copies of others
exaumples. Asella, the arm hole. Asia, one of the three parts of the world.
Asinarius, an asseherde. Asinus, an ass. Asotus, prodigal, wanton,
incontynente. Aspecto, aspectaui, aspectare, to behold stedfastely. Aspectus,
sight, beholdynge. Asper, unpleasant, as well in sight and herynge, as in
taste, also hard or grievous. Aspergillus, a holy water stycke. Aspergo,
aspersi, gere, to spring or cast water. Aspergo, ginis, a spryngynge of
lycour. Aspernabilis, he that is worthy to be dispysed, or refused. Aspernor,
aris, ari, to despise, to refuse, to abhor. Aspero, asperaui, asperare, to
make sharper or hard. Asphaltum, the deed see. Also a certain claye there
founden, which ones burning, will never be quenched. Aspicio, aspexi,
aspicere, to behold, to see. Aspiro, aui, are, to aspire, to look to come to a
thing, to blow, to favor, to give aid, to give all my study and wit to
obtain a thing, to touch, to go to. Aspis, an adder or serpent. Aspo^to,
aui, are, to carry away. Assatu^a, roste meat. Assec^a, a page, and he that
follows in all thing the will of an other man. Assector, a^^s, ari, to keep
company. Assenso^, oris, he that consents. Assenno, ^i, ^^^e, and assentior,
to consent, or assente. Assentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an other man's
acts that be ill. Assequor, eris, qui, to follow, to get, to obtain.
Asseres, bourdes. Asse^^^, ^is, to sow, or plant by. Also to claim, to
affirm or approve, to manumise or make free. Assettio, an affyrmaunce.
Assessor, oris, associate to a man in office or auctorytie. As^^^no, to keep
diligentely, to take heed of one. Asse^^^^, as, are, to affirm. (...), (...)
lytte with or by an other, or I am assocyate. (...), is, de^e, to rest me, to
sytte down, t^ sytte by. (...), centynuall, or sufficient. (...) fiderassores,
Sufficient sureties. Assigno, aui, are, to assygne or appoint. A^, ^e, to leap
forth also Assilire, is to leap, as a horse leapeth a mare. Assis, is, a sawen
bourde. Assino, (...), assis^ete, to be here, to defend a man's cause. Asso,
aui, are, to lay bourdes, to roste. Assue^ac^o, wont. Assuetudo, went, or
custom. Assuetus, accustomed. Assula, a chyppe. Assulatim, in chyppes. Assumo,
assumpsi, mere, to take proprely it sygnyfyeth to take to much on me. Assuo,
ui, assuere, to sow to, or piece. Assurgo, rexi, gere, to rise to an other
better than my self, to give place, to grow upward, Assus, a, um, roasted.
Ast, but. also therefore, as well, moreover. Aster, a Sterre. Asteriscus, a
little mark in writing like a Sterre, Asthmaticus, he that drawethe his
wind short. Astipulor, to lean to, to favor. Asto, astiti, to stand by, to
be present. Astragalizo, to play at dyse or tables. Astragalus, the play at
tables. Astringo, to join, or bind together, to bind by covenant or promise.
Astrolabium, an Astrolabe or instrumente of astronomy. Astronomia, the part of
astronomye that concerns judicials and practice. Astrologia, the speculation
and reasonyng concerning the celestial or heavenly motions. Astrum, a celestial
body compacte of many sterres, as a sign. Astruo, to build, to join oone
house to an other, to fortify, to affirm. Astus, craft or subtlety. Astu,
craftily, or subtylly. Asturiae, subtylties. Astutus, ta, tum, subtle or
crafty. Asylum, a saynctuarie.
A, ante T.
AT, a voice, which signifies in the words that do follow, wrath or
indignation. Sommetyme it signifies (but yet) which is a discrepaunce in the
words that are spoken. Sommetyme it sygnifyeth Sed. At contra, contrary wise.
Attamino, aui, are, to foul or defyle. At at, russhe, or sye. Attauus, a
greatte graundefather. Atar, tra, trum, black or dark. Athleta, a greatte
wrastler, or a great runner at commune games. Athletica, the craft of wrastlyng
or ru^nyng. Athletheta, the judge in games of wrestling or runnynge. Atomus, a
thing so small, that it may not be divided or made smaller. Also Atomi, be
motes of the son. Atque, and so, as it were. Atqui, surely, all be it. Atra
bilis, Melancoly. Attramentarium, an ynkehorne. Attramentum, ynke, blache, that
showmakers do occupy. Atratus, a mourner that gothe in black. Atri dies,
dysmall days. Atricus, a porter that keeps a gate. Atriensis, an huyssher of
the halle. Atrium, an inner court. Atrox, atrocis, cruel, terrible, or sour
in countenance. Attendo, di, dear, to take heed, to consider, to intend.
Attente, intentifely, with a fyxed mind. Attentio, a mind set or fyxed.
Attento, to attempt. Attenuo, to appeyre, to make weaker. Atticismus, a
peculyare eloquence used in Athenes. Atticisso, to speak like a man of
Athenes, Atticus, ca, cum, of Athenes. Attiguus, by or nigh ioynynge to.
Attineo, ui, ere, to pertayne. Attiner, it besemeth, it is conuement. Attingo,
attigi, tingere, to touch almost. Attollo, to auaunce, to lift up, to bring
to, to take away. Attonitus, ra, tum, amassed or abashed. Attrecto, aui, are, to
feel. Attribuo, bui, ere, to attribute, to put upon one by blaming or
accusynge, to assygne, to commytte.
A ante V.
AVceps, a fowler or byrder. Auctio, onis, an increase, or an open sale of
private goods. Auctio hastae, portesale of the goods of men attaynted for
treason or felonye. Auctionarius, the salesman. Auctionor, to sell by port
sale. Aucto, aui, are, to gain, to win. Author, he that begins any act, or
is the first causer or procurer of any thing. Autoramentum, an indenture or
obligation whereby a man is bounden to do service. Also ernest money. Autorare,
to bind by erneste or writing to serve. Autoratus, he that is bound to
serve, specially in wars. Autoritas, tatis, authority. sometime it signifies
power. Auctuarium, uel auctarium, over measure or weyghte. Aucupatorii, lyme
twigs. Aucupium, et aucupatio, byrding or fouling. Aucupor, to go a byrdynge,
or a foulyng, or hawkynge. Also it signifies, to search by craftye means.
Audacia, hardynesse. Audacter et audaciter, boldly, adue^turously. Audaculus,
hardye, spoken in derisyon, or contempt. Audax, audacis, bold or hardy, or
trustyng well in him self. Audeo, ausi, audere, to dare, to presume. Audio,
diui, dire, to bear, to consider, to perceyne, to grant that which is asked,
to do the thing that is commanded. Auditio, herynge, or audience. Auditorium,
a place where men do here lessons, or propositions. Auditus, tus, heryng, one
of the flue wits. Auelio, to carye away. Auellana, a fylberde nutte. Auena,
otes. Sometime it is put for an ote straw, or a wheat straw, or reed. Aueo,
uere, to couaite. Aue, be thou glad or joyful, as the vulgar people says,
Rest you merry. Auersor, aris, to abhor, to refuse. Auersus, backewarde, or
on the backehalf. also angrye. Aduersus et anersus, forward and backewarde.
Auerto, ti, tere, to turn away. Auertor, teris, ti, to disdain. sommetyme it
signifies to turn away, to turn fro. Auerunco, aui, are, to turn away,
or put away. Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee hense. Augeo, auxi, gere, to
increase. Auctus, ta, tum, increased. Augesco, sci, scere, to wax greatte, or
be great, to be grown. Augmento, mentaui, me^tare, to increase, or make more.
Augur, auguris, he that tellethe by birds voices, or by their flyeng or
sytting, what shall happen. Auguro, as et auguror, aris, rari, to tell by
such craft, what shall happen. Augusins, noble, or full of majesty, wherefore
the emperors of Rome were and yet be called Augusti. Augustus is also the
month next after July. Auia, a grandame. Auiarium, a thycke wodde without
way. Also a place where birds be kept and nourysshed. Auiarius, a keeper of
birds. Auicula, a little bird. Auidus, a, um, couetyse. Auis, a bird.
Auitus, ta, tum, that which is left by auncetours. Auitus ager, Old
inheritance. Auius, a, um, without way. Aula, a haule. sometime the palaice or
court of a prince. Aulea, tapesry, hangynges of noble men's houses. Auoco,
caui, care, to call away. Auolo, aui, are, to flee away. Aura, sometime
betokens a soft wynd, sometime brightness, sometime favor. Auramentum,
gyltynge. Auraria, a gold mine. Aurarii, gylters. Auratus, ta, tum, gylte.
Aureae, the hedstall of a horse. Auris, an ear. Aureus, a piece of gold in
money. Aureus, a, um, of gold. Aurichalcum, latin metal. Auricomus, be that
has hear as bryghte as gold. Auricula, the care lap. Auricularius, a
secretarye or priuye counselor. Auriferum, that bears gold. Aurifex,
ficis, a gold smyth. Aurificina, a gold smythes shop. Aurifin, a thief that
steals gold. Auriga, a carter or driuer of a cart. Aurigor, aris, to drive a
cart or some thing like. Also to govern. Auri^calpium, an ear pyker. Auritus,
great eared. Auro, aui, are, to gylte. Aurora, the morning, or son risynge.
Aurum, gold. Aus^ulto. aui, are, to bear diligently, or give good care.
Auspex. auspicis. idem quod augur. Also it signifies the person that makes
the marriage on the man's part. Also the chief capytayne in wars.
Ausp^^^im, the sign or token showed by ^yrdes of things that shall follow.
Also if betokens fortune governance, or disposition of a capytayn. Also it is
a token or signification of things to come. Ausp^^o^, a^is, cari, to take
lykelyhode. Also to begin or enter into a business. Aus^er, in, the southe
wind. Austerus, sour or sharp. Also soore or without pity. Autho, aui, are,
to make moist. A^^, or, either. Autem, verily, but, or else. Autograplium, his
own hand writing. Autumo, to suppose, to affirm. Autumnus, harvest.
Auunculus, the uncle of the mothers side. Auus, the grandfather. Auxihor, aris,
ari, to aid or help. Auxiliarius, he that commethe in aid of an another.
Auxilium, aid, or help,
A, ante X.
AXis mundi, is a line imagined to go straight from the north to the south,
dyuydynge the world as it were in two parts: at the ends are supposed to be
two points in heaven, which are called the north pole and the southe pole.
Axungia, swynes grease.
B, ante A.
BAcca, a berye, as a baye bery, an hawe berye, an eglantine berie. Baccatus,
garnysshed with precious stones. Bacchanal, lis, the place where the solemnity
of Bacchus was kept. Bacchanalia, feasts of the paynyms, which they did
celebrate with all abominations of lechery. Bacchar, a wine port. It may be
called a quaxinge pot. Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feast of
Bacchus, to run up and down like a mad man. Bacchus, among the Paynims
the god of wine or drunkenness. Baculus, a staff. Balius, a horse of bay
color. Baiae, arum, a place in the royalme of Naples, where be naturalle
bathes of warm water both pleasant and wholesome: And by translation some poets
do so call all other natural hot bathes. Baiulo, aui, are, to bear. Baiulus,
a porter or cariar of bourdens. Balaena, a greatte fish, which I suppose to
be a thurlepoll. Balanus a kind of acornes. it is also a suppositorie to help
them that be costife. Also a sweet oyntme^t made of Mirabolanes. Balo, aui,
are, to blete like a sheep. Balbucinor, aris, to mastle in the mouth. Balbus,
he that can not pronounce well his words when he speaks. Balburio, iui, ire,
to stamer or stutte. Balinea, a bayne or a bathe. Balius, balia, liu^, baye
color. Balista, a crossebowe, or a brake. It may be used for a gunne.
Balnearia, all things belongyng to a bain. Balnearius, of a bayne,
Balueatorius. Balneator, the keeper of a bayne, or he that serves in a bayne.
Balneum, a private bayne. Balnea pluraliter, a commune bayne. Baltheus et
baltheu^, a belt, a sword girdel. Bambatium, cotton. Baptisterium, a bathe or
vessel to wasshe in the body. A dienge vate, a font. Barathrum, a
unmeasurable depenes. Baratro, an unthrift that in lechery and glottony
deuoureth his substance. Barba, a berde. Barbari, in the old time were all
people, except greeks. proprely it be they, which do speak grossly, without
observing of congruite, or pronounce not perfectly, specially Greek or latyne.
Also they that abhor all elegancie. Moreover it signifies them, which be
without letters, fires or cruelle of manners or countenance, barbarouse.
Barbaria, the countreye where dwellythe people rude or beastly. Barbaricarii,
weauers of cloth of baudekin. Barbaricus, barbarous. Barbarismus, the corrupt
form of speaking or pronouncynge. Barbatus, ta, tum, berded. Barbitium, the
berde. Barbitos, an instrument of musyke, which I suppose is that, that men
call doulsimers. Bardiacus, a garment. Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a
shepardes cloak. Bardus, a fool. Sometime a mynstrel that syngeth iestes or
fables. Barrire, to braye like an olyphant. Barritus, the brayinge of an
oliphant. Barrus, an olyphaunt. Basia, honest kysses, sweet kysses. Basiator, a
kysser. Basiatio, a kissing. Basilica, a place where people do assemble for
suites in the law, and civil iugementis be exercised, and counsayles holden.
Also it may be taken for a halle, or other large place, where suitors do
attend, or men do wait on rulers, or great feasts be kept. It also
sygnifyeth a cathedral church. Plaut. in Epi.
Basilica nux, a wall nutte. Basilicon, a kings robe. Basilicus, ca, cum,
royal. Basilice, royally. Basilicanus, he that keeps the place called
Basilica. Basiliscus, a Cocatrice, which is a serpent in the deserts of
Aphrica, with a white cyrkle about his heed, having a sharp heed, red eyes, and is somewhat black of color, and is so venymous, that he sleeth men
and beasts with his breath, and with the sight of his eyes. Basis, the foot of
a pylar, or that which susteyneth any like thing. Also it signifies the
foundation or ground of a matter. Batris, a vessel with a long handell.
Batillus, a sire pan. Battiola, a wine pot or flagone. Batuo, i, ere, to
beat with a rod. Batus, a measure for wine or oil. Baubare, to bark like a
dog. Baxiae, slyppers, proprely of philosophers, or such other. Beatus, is
he, which has abundaunce of all thing that is good, and is perfect in all
things that be worthy praise, or ought to be desired of a good man. sometime
it is taken for noble or fortunate. Beatitudo et beatitas, is a heap of good
things gathered together, of it self sufficient without lack, and a very
perfection according to virtue. Bellaria, bankettynge dysshes, as tartes,
marchepaynes, and other like. Bellarius, ia, um, apt for the war. Bellator,
a warryour. Bellatrix, a woman warrior. Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton word,
which is as much to say, as little fair one, well favored child, praty
maiden. Bellax, acis, used or haunted in wars. Bellicosus, fires or warlyke.
Bellipotens, puissant in battle. Bello, and Bellor, aris, ari, to make war.
Bellus, la, lum, fair, pleasant, good. Bellulus, la, lum, somewhat fair.
Bellum, signifies all the time that the wars do continue. also battle or
war. Bellua, a great cruel beast or a monster. Beluata, tapesry, wherein is
wrought or painted the fygures of beasts. Beluinus, na, number, beastely. Beluina
rabies, A beastly furye. Been, well, honestly, or prosperously. Been de te
mereo, I entreat the well, Thou art beholden unto me. Benedico, dixi, cere, to
praise, to say well of a man. Benedicus, a man well tunged, or fair spoken
Beneficiarius, he that receives a benefitte or good turn of an other.
Beneficus, he that is beneficial or lyberall. Been uertere, to turn to good.
Precor deu^, ut haec res been uertat tibi, I pray god this thing may turn
the to good, or may be for thy profit. Been uolo tibi, I would the good.
Beneuolus, favorable. Beneuolentia, favor or good will, an intent to do
well. Benignus, na, number, gentylle, benygne, and bounteouse. Benignitas,
bounteousenes. Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happy. Berillus, is that
which is commonly called Crystalle. Bes, bessis, a weight of.viii. ounces.
Bestia, a beast. Bestiarii, men which in old time faughte with beasts in
the syghte of the people. Beto, to walk forth. Varro.
Bibaculus, he that drinks often. Bibax, cis, bibosus, a great drynker.
Biblia, the wife of Duilius the Romayne, which was of so great chastity,
that she was at that time an example, when it was a thing monstrous to here of
unchastity. Bibliopola, a stacyoner, or a book sellar. Bibliotheca, a lybrary.
Bibo, bibi, bear, to drink. Bibulus, la, lum, that souketh up shortly. Biceps,
bicipitis, that which has.ii. heedes Biclinium, a chamber with.ii. beds.
Bicornium, that which has two horns. Bicorpus, that which has two bodies.
Bidental, a place where they used to sacryfyce sheep, when any house was
bourned with lyghtnynge. Bidentes, sheep with.ii. teth, called in some place
hogrelles, or hogattes. Biduum the space of two days. Biennis, bienne, any
thing of two years old. Biennium, the space of two years. Bi^a^^am, in two
parts, or two manner of ways. Bi^^^ie, the same. (...) arbor, that bears
twyse in a year. (...), clefte. (...), that has two doors. (...), he that
has two foreheedes. (...), a double thief, or he that has stol^^^ (...).
^^^^^^atus, ta, tum, double forked. (...), a carte drawn with two horses.
(...), he that has badde two wives. (...), beasts commen of two sundry
kinds. (...), cattaylle or beasts yoked two together. (...), a beam with two
balances. (...), a town in Spain. Bi^^^^^s, waying two pounds. Bilinguis,
double tunged. Bilis atra, the humor of Melancoly, proprely that which
brings a man to fransy or madness. Biliosus, he that has abundaunce of that
humor. Bimaritus, he that has had two wives. Bimembris, of two parts,
having two members. Bimestris, two months old, or two year, accounted of the
moon. Bimulus, of two years age. Bimus, of two years. Binus, na, number, two,
idem quod duo. Binae litterae, two letters. Bini tabellarii, two messangers,
bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen Binarius numerus, the number of two. Binominus
et binominis, he that has two names. Bion, the name of a philosopher.
Biothenatus, he that is violently slain. Bipalium, a spade to dygge with.
Bipara, she that has had two byrthes. Bipatens, open on both sides. Bipennis,
having two wings. Also a twyebyll, wherewith carpenters do make their
mortaises. Bipertior, iris, tiri, to diuyde in two parts. Bipes, pedis,
having two fete. Bipedalis, et Bipedaneus, two foot long or broad. Biremes,
ships with two tops. Bis, twyse. Bisaltae, a people in Scythia. Bisellium,
a seat or form, whereon two men only may sytte. Bisextus, one day added to,
in four years. Bisextilis annus, the leap year. Bison, it is, a beeste having
oone horn, and a very long mane. Bistonis, a city, and also a great meare
or poole in the country of Thrace. Bisulcus, ca, cum, cloven footed. Bythynia,
a royalme in Asia, which now the turk has. Bithynium, a city in Bithynia.
Bitumen, a kind of natural lyme, whereof the old walls of the City of
Babylon were made. Biuium, a way having two paths. Bizen, a city of Thracia,
Plin, li. 4,
of Plynie called Bizian.
B ante L.
BLesus, he that stamereth, omittynge some letters in speaking. Blandicus, he
that flattereth. Blandidicus, a fair speaker, or flatterer. Blandior, iris,
iri, to flatter, to speak fair for advantage. Blanditiae, flattering, fair
speech. Blasphemia, cursynge, reprochynge, commonly blasphemy, which is now
only referred to the despite of god. Blasphemo, aui, are, to curse, to
reproach, to speak in the derogation or despyte of an another. Blatero, aui,
are, to babble in vain, and from the purpose. Blatta, is proprely the long
fly that flies in the leame of a candell, and is of the kind of mothes. It
is also a silk worm: and blatteus, being an adjective, is purple color.
Vestis blattea, a purple garment. Blattaria, an herb, also called Verbascon.
Blax, soft, delicate, wanton, that can not decerne things, and which vaynely
bosteth him self. Blepharo, onis, he that has great brows. Bleprae, a people
in Aphrike, which have their visages in their breasts. Blittus, an herb
being of the kind of betes, having no sent, Blittea meretrix, an unsavory
queen.
B ante O.
BOa, a serpent in Italy, so greatte and large, that on a time when one was
kylde, there was a child all hoole found in his bealy, Plin. lib. 8. capi. 14.
as Pliny writes. Boarium forum, the markette place, where oxen be sold.
Bocchyris, a man's name. Bodellium, a kind of sweet smelling gum. Boemia,
the royalme of Boeme. Boeotia, a country in Greece, wherein was the city of
Thebes. Baetis, a river in Spain by the country of Granado. Boiae, gyues or
fetters. Boii, people of Germany. Boletus, a musherom. Bolis, idis, a darte
with wild fire. Bolus, a mass or lump of metal, or other like thing.
Bombitatio, the noise that bees make. Bombus, a great sown or noise, as it
were of a trumpe, or gunne, a bownce. Bombycinus, na, number, of sylke, Bombycina
uestis, A garment of sylke. Bombix, icis, a sylke worm. Bonae fidei possessor,
a feffee of trust. Bonaria, calmenes of the sea. Bona nenia, By your license,
No displeasure to you. Boni consulas, take it in good part. Bonitas,
goodness, honesty and justice. Bonum, good, which is contrary to ill. Bonus,
a good man: Also beneuolent, peasyble, lyberall, plain, easy to speak to,
worshypfull, treatable, merciful. Boo, oas, are, to below like a cow.
Boots, a sterre which follows Charles wayne. Boreas, the northesterne wynd.
Boreus polus, the north sterre, called the lode sterre. Boristhenes, a great
river in the countreye of Scythia. Borith, a herb that fullers use. Bos,
bouis, a rother beast, be it bulle, ox, or Cow. Bosphorus, the name of a
part of the sea, which lies in two sundry costs: one by Constantinople, the
other more north. Bostar, an ox house. Bostrychites, a precious stone like to
womennes hear. Botrys, a cluster of grapes. Botrytes, a precious stone like to
a black graape. Botulus, a puddinge made of the inward of a rother beast.
Bouatim, like an ox. Bouicida, a sla^ter man. Bouile, an ox stalle. Bouillae,
larum, a town not far from Rome. Bouinator, he that with great noise cries out
on a another man. Bouinor, aris, to below out like a cow.
B ante R.
BRabenta, he that is ordained a judge in any game of wrastlynge, runnynge, or
leaping. Bracca, that kind of mantell, which now comes out of Irelande, or
a long garment made of rough frise. Braccharii, the makers of such clothe.
Brachiale, the wrestebone of the hand. Brachialia, bracelettes, which some
gentylmen and gentle women do use about their arms. Brachiatus, that which
like an arm holds any thing up, a proppe, or shore. Brachium, an arm.
Brachylogia, shortenes of speech. Bracmanae, philosophers of Inde. Bractea,
thynne plates of mettalle, horn, or wodde. Bractearius, a worker of plates.
Bracteator, the same. Bracteola, leaves of gold or silver. Bragada, a river
nere to Vtica. Branchiae, the gylles of a fyshe. Branchos, the rewme or
cattarre, which falls down by the chekes. Brassica, Colewortes, proprely
Cabeges. Brauium, the reward for wrastlynge, runnynge, or leaping, commonly
called the chief game. Breno, a captain or leader of the frenchemen called
Galli, which, builded Verona a city of Venece. Brephotrophia, an hospitalle,
where children be kept and nouryshed. Brene, Shortly, et breuirer, et breui.
Breuiloquus, he that speaks his mind a few words. Breuiloquium, a short
form of speaking Breuiloquentia, the same. Breuitas, shortenesse. Breuis
breue, Short. Breuiarium, a brigement. Briarcus, a giant, which was of an
exceeding greatness. Britannia, Brytayne, which does contein England,
Scotland, and wales. Britannus, et Brito, a man of that country. Bronchus,
the inner part of the throat, Bronchi, they which have their mouth and tethe
standing far out, tut mouthed. Bruchus, a fly, which eats corn, as it
grows. Bruma, winter. Brundusiu^, a city in the royalme of Naples. Bruseum,
an herbour or hedge made with thorns and briers wound together. Brutii,
people in the royalme of Naples, ioynynge to Sycile. Brutus, dull and gross
witted like to a be. Brionia, an herb called with wind, Brisso, aui, are,
to bruise out.
B ante V.
BVbalus, a beast called a bugill. Bubastis, a city of Aegipte. Bubo, a
shriche oule. also a botche. Bubsequa, a coweherde. Bubulcito, tas, to play
the herdeman. Bubulcus, a herd man. Bubile, an ox house. Babulus, la, lum,
that which longs to an ox or cow, as Lac bubalum, cow milk. Bucardia, a
stone like to a bugles heart. Bucca, the holownes of the cheke. Buccea, a
morsel. Buccella, the same. Buccellatum, breadde called byskat. Buccina, a
trumpette. Buccino, aui, are, to blow a trumpette. Buccinum, the sown of a
trumpette. Buccones, they which have great chekes. Bucculenti, idem. Buccula,
a little cheke. Also that part of a helmet, whereby wind is taken.
Bucentarius, a great ship or carrike. Bucentes, styngynge gnattes. Bucentrum,
a goodde prycke. Bucephalus, an ox heed. and the horse of Alexander the great
was so called. Bucera armenta, herdes of nete, Bucolica, the same. Bucula, a
heckfar. Buculus, a bullock, or steer. Bufo, onis, a tode. Buglossa, an herb
called langedebefe. Also a fyshe called a sole. Bugones, bees. Bulbito, aui,
are, to cast durte on one: proprely it is of children, which nourysses do
name cackynge. Bulbus, wyld garlyke having a leaf like to a lylly. it is
taken generally for all rotes that be round. Bulga, a male of lether, wherein
clothes be carried. Bulimia, great famyne or hunger. Bulis, a name of a city.
Bulla, a tablette or other thing hanged about ones neck, proprely when it is
holowe. A bobell of water, sometime the heed of a nail, otherwhyles studdes in
girdels or other things. Bullatus, he that is garnyshed with tablettes or
studdes. Bullio, iui, ire, to boil, or sethe. Bullare, to bubble, as water
when it boyleth. Bumastos, a great teate. Bumelia, a kind of ash. Bupina,
great thirst. Bupodes, great feet. Bura, or Buris, the hinder part of a
plough which is crooked. Burcana, an i will in the occean of Germany. Burdo, onis,
a mulette. Burgundia, Burgoyne. Busyris, a tyrant, which was king of
Aegypte. Bustum, a place where dead bodies have been burnt. Buteo, a kind of
hawks, which has three stoones. Buthysia, was called a great sacrifice,
such as Hecatombe is. Butyrum, butter. Buxentum, a town that the greeks call
Pyxunta. Buxeta, a place where box trees grow. Buxus, or Bussus, box tree.
B ante Y.
BYrsa, a hyde of a beast. Byssus, fine sylke. Byzantium, a city of Thrace
now called Constantinople, which was sometime builded by a king of Spartane,
called Pausania, whereof the people and inhabitants were called Byzanta^.
Afterward it was augmented by Constantine the emperor. and was the chief and
heed of all the empire oriental. Byzari, fantastical men, and of strange
inventions. Byrseus, a tanner, or cordynar. Byssus, a manner of fine flax or
lynnen. I suppose it to be cotton.
C ANTE A.
CABALLI, people of Asia. Caball^s, an horse, yet in some parts of England,
they do call an horse a cable. Cabyle, a cite in Thracia Cabytin, a city of
the lower Asia, all though Cabytli, be people in India. Cacabus, a pot or
cauldron, wherein meat is sodden. Cacus, a giant, whom Hercules did slay.
Cacabo, as, are, to call like a pertryche. Cacodaemon, an ill spirit.
Cachinnus, a scorn, or a loud lawghter in derysyon. Cachinnor, aris, ari, to
laugh immoderately and with a loud voice. Caco, cacaui, care, to shyte.
Cacaturio, idem. Cacoethes genesis neut, an ill manner. Cacosyntheton, an ill or
defourmed composytion. Cacula, a page. Cacumen, the top of a hylle. Cado,
cecidi, cadere, to fall, to dye. Cadere to happen. Cadere causa, to be
nonsuite in an action. Cadere formula, idem. Cadauer, eris, a dead body, or
carrayn. Caducus, ca, cum, falling, decayinge. Caducus morbus, the falling
evil. Caducarii, men having the falling evil. Caducor, ceris, duci, to be
overthrown. Cadulae guttae, drypyng of roasted meat. Cadiuus, ua, uum, that
which falls by it self, as Cadiua folla, leaves fallyn down by them self.
Cadiua poma, appulles fallen from the tree. Cadus, a wine vessel, it may be
taken for a pipe. Caduceus, et Caduceum, a rod, which poets supposid that
Mercury bare in his hand, as messanger of Jupiter. Caduceato^, an ambassatour
or Herault sent for peace, or to take a truse. Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen,
most proprely a quilte. Cadiscus, a vessel wherein lottes for election or
consent of a multitude be put. Cadinus, the name of a Prince, which browghte
out of Phaenicia into Greece syxetene letters, and was the first that wrate
in proof, and found out the fusynge and casting of mettalles. Caecias, the
east northest wind. Caecus, ca, cum, blind, also dark. Caeci morbi,
syckenesses which be not apparent* the causes whereof, be hid from physicians.
Caecilia, a sloworme that is blind. Caecutio, tiui, tire, to se but little,
to be half blind. Caeculto, aui, are, to have a tymme sight. Caeco, caui, are,
to make blind* Caede^, death, slaughter or murder. Caedo, dis, caecidi,
cedere, to beat, or whyp* to cut, to stryke, to kylle, to me^ke. Caedere
ianuam saxis, to break the door with stoones. Cedo, to depart, to give
place, to obey. Cedere bonis, to leave the goods. Cedere iuri, to give over a
right or title. Cede manum, give me thy hand. Cedere, to succeed. Cedo, say,
Cedo cuium puerum, Tell or say, whose child or servant. Cedo, give, Quin tu
mihi argentum cedo, But yet give thou me thy money. Caedua sylua, woddes used
to be cut, Copeyses. Caesim, edgelinge. Also at one cut or choppe. Caelum,
heaven or the firmament. also a granynge iron. Coelestis, caeleste, heavenly, or
of heaven. Caelicus, ca, cum, idem. Caelitis, heavenly. Caelitus, heavenly
creatures. Caelicola, he that inhabiteth heaven. Caelebs, a syngle man or woman.
Also every chaste person. Caelibatus, a single life without marriage. Celsus,
a, um, high. Celius mons, a mountain in Rome. Caelo, aui, are, to grave in
metal. Caementu^, mortar, or any other gross matter, wherewith walls be
made. Caemen^arii, daubers, pargetters, rowghe masons, which do make only
walls. Caementitius, a, um, of mortar. Caene, a city. Caepe, an oynyon.
Caepula, a chybboll. Caepi, the preter perfect tense of Capio, I have taken.
Caeruleus, a blewe color. Caera, wax. Also Caere were writynge tables covered
with wax. Caero, aui, are, to lay wax on any thing. Caeratura, the waxinge.
Caereus, caerea, caereum, of wax. Also fat or tydye. Caeratum, a seared
clothe. Caerefolium, an herb called cheruyll. Caerrus, a taper, or wax
candell. Caereolus, a size candell. Caerulus, la, lum, et Caeruleus, lea, leu^,
blewe of color. Caerosus, a, um, that which is myxte with wax. Caerium, a
soore, which is like to a honye comb. Caeroma, an ointment made with oil and
netes dunge, wherewith men that wrastlyd used to anoynte their bodies. Also it
sygnifyeth the place where wrastlers were anointed. Caerete, an ancient city
in Tuskay. Caerinthe, three leaued grass, which brings forth white honey
suckles, called clyuer grass. Caesar, the emperor. Caesarea, a city in the
country of Palestina. Caesaraugustana, a city in the realm of Arragon.
Caesareus, ea, eum, pertaining to the emperor. Caesaries, hear, or a bushe
of hear. Caesenna, a city in Italy. Caesa, a waipon, sometime used in France.
it is also a part of an oration, not concludynge a sentence: as it were a
pyece of a sentence. Caesura, a piece as it were cut of from the remenaunt,
proprely of a verse. Caes^^um, an instrumente, wherewith iuorye ^^e bored. Also
a weapon like a dagger. Caesirium, a sheet. Caesius, gray of color or
blunket. Also he which has gray eyes. Caesones, they which be cut out of
the mothers or dames belyes. Caespes, cespiris, a turfe. Caespititius, a, um,
made of turfes. Caespito, taui, tare, to stumble. Caestus, tus, a weapon having
great plummates hangyng at the end of a clubbe. Caesius, caesti, a gyrdell or
corse, which the husband did put about his wife, when he was married, and
at night did pluck it of. Caeter, caetera, caeterum, the remenaunt or
resydewe. Caeterum, et caetera, be aduerbes sygnyfyenge, sometime moreover,
sometime from hensforthe, sometime Caeterum, is a conjunction, and signifies
sed, but. Caycus, the name of a river in Phrigia. Cain, in hebrewe signifies
envy. Caius, a propre name of a man. Cala, a byllette. Calabra, a convocation
place, where matters concerning devotion were treated. Calabria, a country
ioynynge to Naples. Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber. Caladrius, a bird. Calae,
arum, a city in India. Calagurium, a town in Biskay. Calamintha, an herb
called calame^t or nep. Calanus, a philosopher of Inde, which in the presence
of the great Alexander, being of the age of.lxxiii. years, feeling him self
sick, made a bonefyre, and went into the top thereof, and bourned him self.
Calaris, a city in Sardin^. Calamus, a read, or wheat straw, Also a pen.
It is also taken for a pype, or whystell. Also a fyshynge rod, and a twigge,
whereon bird lyme is put. Also small branches of trees, also it is a pole to
mete with, containing six cubytes and a spanne, a met polle. Calamarium, a
pennar. Calamitas, generalle dystruction, or myserye. Calamitosus, miserable or
full of adversity. Calamistrum, a pynne of wodde or iuorye, wherewith men and
women do set or trim up their hear. Calantica, attire or burlette for a
woman. Calones, boys and knaves, which do follow hosts, and do either carye
the weapons of soldiers, or serve them of wode or water. Calathis, the name
of a city. Calathus, a baskette or hamper. Calx, hic, calcis, the heel. it
sometime signifies the end of a matter. sommetyme a stroke with the heel.
Calx, haec, lyme made of burned stones. Calcatus, cata, catum, pergetted or
white lymed. Calcaria fornax, a lyme pytte. Calcarius, a lyme burner.
Calcaneus, et calcaneum, the heel. Calceus, a show. Calcearium, a showmakers
shop. Calceolarius, a showmaker. Calceo, aui, are, to put on shoen.
Calceamen, et calciamentum, a show, pynson, or socke. Calcar, a spur.
Calcitro, aui, are, to kycke or wynse. Calcitro, tronis, a horse that does
flynge or kycke. Calcitrosus, a, um, that oftentimes flyngeth or kycketh.
Calculus, a peble stone. Also the stoone in the body. Also a chesse man. also
account. also the least weight or poyse that may be. Moreover a knyfe made of a
stone. Calculosus, he that is much diseased with the stone. Calculosus locus,
a stonye place. Calculo, aui, are, to cast account. Calco, aui, are, to
tread or press down. Caliga, a hose, or leg harnaysse. Caligatus, hosed.
Caligo, ginis, darkness. Caliginosus, dark. Caligo, aui, are, to make dark,
or be dark. Calor, er caliditas, heat, Caldor idem. Caleo, calui, calere, to
be hot or warm. Calesco, to wax hot. Calefacio, to make hot. Calefio, I
am made hot. Calidus, da, dum, hot. Calorificus, ca, cum, that which
makethe hot or warm. Callus, brawn, or hardness of the fete made with goinge.
Callidus, slye, or craftye. Calliditas, slyenesse. Calleo, ui, ere, to be hard
as drawn. Also to know perfectly. Calendae, the first day of every monthe.
Callis, a way much used. Callimachus, the name of a poet. Calisthenes, the
name of a philosopher. Cales, a town in France. Calistho, the mother of
Archias, which gave the name to the countreye of Archadia, whom poets fained
to be transformed into a bear. Calypsos, the name of an isle, also of a woman,
which received Ulysses when he escapyd drownynge. Calyptra, a woman's cappe
or bonette. Calliope, oone of the vyrgines, which be named Musae. Calix, a
cup to drink wine in. Also a pot, wherein potage is sodden. Calyx, the
paring or skin of an apple, or other like fruit. Also a keueryng made of
clay. Also that part, wherout springs a flower, which is grene.
Calliblepharon, a medycyne to make the eyes fair. Callirohe, a fountain in
Greece. Calydon, et Calydonia, a city in Greece, also it was a great forest and
wodde in Brytain, now called England. Calypso, the daughter of Athlas, a
Nymph or woman of the sea. Calopodium, a patyn, or slypper. Calopus, a beast
in Syria, which with his horns throws down great trees. Calaen^^, a city
in the country of Naples. Calpae, a mountain in the southwest part of Spain.
Calua, the sculle. Caluities, et caluitium, baldness. Caluo, aui, are, to make
balde. Calueo, I am balde. Caluesco, to wax balde. Caluaria, all the heed,
when the flesh is away. Caluo, ui, ere, to deceive or disapoynt. Calumnia,
a false or crafty accusation. Calumniator, he that accusethe or seweth a many
unjustly. Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuse or sue a man unjustly. Caluinarius
porcus, a swyne fed with grains, and such other vile things. Calastri pueri,
singing boys. Calta, an herb growing among corn, having a yelowe flower.
Cambio, iui, ire, to change. In the old time it signified to fight, to begin
a iournay, or to turn in a journey. Campso, aui, are, to turn an other way.
Cambyses, a king of Persia, grandfather of Cyrus. It is also the name of a
river in the country of Hyrcania. Camera, the false roufe of a house, sollar,
or chamber. Camerare, to make a fauce roufe of a house, or to make a solar, or
to sylde. Camerium, a town of Italy in the country of Picenum. Camertes, the
inhabitauntes of Camerine, a town in Sycile. Camerina, an herb, which being
bruised, provoke a man to vomit: whereof camme this proverb, Ne moueas
camerinam, for, procure not harm to thy self. Camillus et Camilla, was in old
time a boy, or a wenche that served the bishop, when he did sacrifyce. Also
the name of a man or womanne. Chamamelum, et Camomilla, an herb called
Camomyll. Caminus, a chymnay or fournayse. Caminatus, ta, tum, made like a
fournayse or chymney. Camaenae, idem quod Musae. Campana, a belle. Campania,
the royalme of Naples. Campus, a field. Campestria loca, plain countries.
Camparius, the keeper of the feldes. Campsores, exchaungeours. Camp, a worm
which eats herbs, and is rough with many fete, and is called a palmer.
Camus, a bytte or snaffyll. also a rain or cord, wherewith men being
condemned were bound. Canabus, a wine sellar. Canna, a cane, also an oil pot
or can. Canales, pipes, whereby water does run into a cundyte. Canalicula, a
little pipe. Canaliculatus, facioned like a pipe. Cannabis, hemp. Cannabinus,
na, number, made of hemp. Cancelli, latteses, or any thing made lattese wise.
Also secret places to look out. Also windows made with bars of wodde or
iron with diverse holes. Cancello, aui, are, to raze or put out, to cut or tear
any thing that is written. Cancer, cri, a kind of fyshe called a crabbe, also a
sign in heaven. Cancer, eris, a disease called a canker. Cancti, is the same
that Cancelli be. Canctis, a pylle in medicine. Candax, acis, a queen of
Aegypte. Candifacio, to make white, to bleache, to make to glowe like a burning
cole. Candela, a candell. Candelabrum, a candelstycke. Candeo, ui, dear, to
glowe like a burning cole. Also to be white. Candico, aui, are, to be white,
or to make white. Candidatus, was be among the Romans which labored for
some of the great offices in the publyke weal: and they were so named by cause
they did wear in the time of their election white apparayle. It may be
taken by translation at this time, for them that in universities be called
incep^oars, or regent masters. Also for them that be lately christened, or
newely entered into some honorable or worshypfull state. Candido, aui, are, to
make white. Candidus, da, dum, white. It is somtymes taken for gentle or
easy: as Candidus lector, a gentle reder, which does not openly reprove
that which he redeth. Candidus index, A gentle or easy judge. Candide, gentylly
or easily. Candidus, sometime sygnifyeth fortunate, and it sygnifyeth more than
Albus, as oryente white. Candifico, aui, care, to make white. Candor, oris,
bryghtnesse. Canentae, were of the old Romans named the apparayle pertainyng
to the heed. Caneo, et canesco, scere, to be hoar, or gray heared. Canephora, a
maiden, which bare on her heed a basket or cofer, wherein were jewels or images
of the gods. Cangrena, a sore called a canker. Cani, be taken for white
hears for age. Canica, branne, gurgeons. Caniceps, a beast, which has
only the face of a dog. Canicula, a little dog or bytche. Also a sterre,
whereof canicular or dog days be named Dies caniculares. Caniculus, a whelpe.
Caninus, doggisshe, or of a dog. Caninum prandium, a dinar without wine.
Canis, a dog, a kind of fyshe called dogfishe, a play at tables, a sign in
heaven, whereof there be two sterres, oone called Canis mayor, the other canis
minor. Canistrum, a baskette. Canities, graynesse of hears. Canna, a poet
which was in the time of Martialis. Canna, a cane or read. also a can or
pot. also a village in the country of Galilee. Cannae, naru^, a town in the
country of Apulia, where a greatte hooste of Romans was slain by Hanniball.
Cannetum, a place where kanes or reeds do grow. Cannitie, thatched houses.
Cano, cecini, nere, to sing, to play on the shalme or other instrument. Also
to praise, to prophecye. Canere receptui, to blow the retraicte in battle.
Canon, a rule, also the inner part of a targate, which keuereth the hand.
Canopus, a city in Aegypte. Canor, oris, melody, loud. Canorosus, a, um, full
of melody. Cantabri, people in Spain. Cantabria, a country in Spain.
Cantharia, a stone which has the prynte of a black fly called a byttell.
Cantharis, idis, uel Cantharida, cantharidae a green worm shynynge with a
gloss of gold, which is bredde in the top of ashes, and laid to a man's
body, makes it to blyster. Cantharus, a pot or a judge. Also a beast, whereof
there is found no female. Also a kind of fysshe. also the black fly called
the bytill. Cantherium, a manner of a charyot or wagen. also a perch or a
rail. Cantherius, a geldynge. Also a traunsome of timber. Canthus, the iron
wherewith the extremytie of wheels be bounden, the straake of a carte. Canthes,
organ pipes. Canticum, a pleasant or merry song. Cantilena, the melody of the
song. Cantio, a song. Cantiuncula, a little song. Cantiro, aui, are, to
sing often. Canto, aui, are, to sing or to charm. Cantus, tus, a song.
Canus, an old man. Canus, na, number, graye or hoar. Canustum, a town in the
countreye of Apulia. Capax, acis, that takes or conteyneth any thing, able to
receive. Capedo, the greatness of a vessel, or like thing that contains.
Capena, a town by Rome. Caper, a gelded got. sometime it is taken for the
bucke got. it also was the name of an old grammarion. Capero, aui, to frown
or lowre. Capesso, si, sere, to take, or to goo about to take, to receive.
sommetyme it sygnifyeth to bring in. Plautus.
Caperus, the name of a king. Caphareus, a mountain in Greece. Capharnaum, the
chief city in Galslee. Capillamentum, the hear of a man's heed. sometime the
tops of herbs, where the seeds do grow. Capillo, are, to make hear.
Capillatus, a, um, that has hear. Capillitium, the hear of the heed.
Capillotenus, just to the hear. Capillus, the hear. Capillus ueneris, an
herb called Maiden hear. Capio, coepi, capere, to take wyllyngely, or
vnwyllyngly. Sommetyme it sygnifieth to delight, to mitigate, to deceive, Capti
dolis, deceived with cautels. sometime to co^teyne. Du boni, quid turbae? aedes
nostrae uix capiunt, Good lord, what a company? vsieth our house woll conteyne
them. Also to make. Capri o ciuis, blind, also great lovers be named capti.
Capis, dis, a cup. Capistro, are, to halter, or put on a rope, or cord.
Capistrum, a haltar. Capitale, et capital, an offense punyshed by death.
Capitalis homo, a man that deserves death. Also that is prone and ready to
murder. Capitalis ira, mortal wrath. Capitalis locus, the place of execution.
Capitatus, ta, tum, that growethe greatte in the head. Capite censi, were
among the Romans the poor* sort of the people, which were discharged of
all exactions, and remained in the city only for generation. Capitellum, a
little heed or top of a thing. Also the highest part of a pyllar. Capitili,
any thing that covers the heed, commonly they do call it a hoode. Capitis
diminutio, a condemnation, whereby a man loses either liberty of his person, ^
is made bond: or is banished his country, or put out of the kings protection,
or renouncing his own family, is adopted or take into an other, which is
not now used. Capitolinus, was the surname of him, that found the heed, when
the Capitole should be builded. Capitoliu^, the palaice of the city of Rome.
Capito, tonis, he that has a great heed, also heddy or obstinate in opinion.
Capitosus, he that has a great heed, or a dull heed. Capitulatum, any thing
that is grown to a heed. Capitulu^, a little heed, also a chapter. Cappa, the
name of a greek letter, for which the latins use C. Cappadocia, a country in
the less Asia. Cappadox, docis, a man of that country. Capparis, a fruit
called Capers, wherewith we do make salates and sauce for mutton, which eaten
before meles, be very good for the stomach, and against diseases of the spleen.
Capra, a goote. Capella, a little goote. Capreolus, a kydde. Capraria, an isle
in the sea called Ligusticu^. Caprarius, a goote herd. Caprea, a beast which
does see wonderful quickly. It is also a kind of vynes so named. Moreover an
isle by Naples. Capreolus, a beast called a roo. It is also the tendrell of a
vine, which wyndeth diverse ways, called also Pampinus. Capreus, a, um, that
which is of a got. Caprillus, a, um, idem. Capricornus, a sign in heaven,
conteininge xx. sterres. Caprificacio, the paryng away of the bark of a tree.
Caprificus, a wild fygge tree, which runs up by walls. Caprigenus, na,
number, that which is of the kind of a goote. Caprile, a stable or pen, where
got* be kept. Caprimulgi, birds like to gulles, which appear not by day, but
in the night they come into got pens, and do souke the gotes, whereby the
vdders of them be mortified. Caprinus, na, number, of a got. Caproneae, the coppe
of lyttel mane, that is in the forheed of a horse, or other beast. Caprunculum,
a greatte vessel. Capsa, a coffer or cheste. Capsaces, a vessel wherein oil
is kept. Capsarius, he that kepith chestis, or apparel. Capsus, a covered cart.
Captio, nis, the act of taking or deceyuynge, or that whereby any thing is
taken. Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio. Captiosus, captious or
deceytfull. Captiuus, a prisoner taken in wars, or a sclaue. Captiuitas,
captivity or bondage. Capto, aui, are, to get the favor of oone with tayre
words, pleasant deeds, or rewards. Also to deceive or take quyckely.
Captator, oris, he that uses that craft. Captatio, the act or craft to
get favor. also deceyte or subtyltie. Captura, the apprehendynge or gettyng.
Captus, ta, tum, taken. Captus, tus, chance. also deceyte, perceiving of a
thing, or capacity. Captus hominum, Men's capacity. sometime dilectation, Non
possum adduci et suscipere e pecunia captum, I may not be brought thereto, and
take dilectation of the money. Capua, a city in the royalme of Naples. Capula,
a cup with a handell. Capularis senex, an old manne redye to be laid in his
beer. Capulum, a riding knotte. Capulus et Capulum, what so ever may receive
any thing into it: proprelye it is a beer, wherein deed corpsis are borne:
also the hyltes or handell of a sword. Capus, a capon. Caput, a heed. Also the
beginning of every thing. Also a chapter of a book. Caput tacere, to gather
a soore to a heed. Capys, a man's name that builded Capua. Carabus seu Caramus,
a fysshe calledde a Crabbe. Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus. Carbasus i^
plurali Carbasa, a kind of lynnen cypres: also the saylle clothe of a ship.
Moreover it is a syne garment of women of sylke or lynnen. Carbo, a cole. It
was also the name of a Romayne. Carbunculare, to have a Carbouncle or botche.
Carbunculus, a botche, which comes of inflammation. it is also a kind of
precyouse stones, which do shine like a bournynge cole. Moreover a defaulte in
a vine, and other trees, whereby they are burned, which happens about the
canicular days. Also it signifies earth, wherein is found black slatte
stones. Carcer, ceris, a prison. Also Carceres were stables, wherein horses were
set, when they should run. Carcerarius, ria, rium, of a prison.
Carchesium, a standing cup with handelles. Carchoquios, a kind of frogs,
having on their bealyes yelowe spots. Carcina, a city. Carcritoma, atis, a
soore called a canker. Cardamomum, a kind of spice. Cardiacus morbus, a
syckenes which happens by weakness of the body, with much sweatte and
feblenesse of the stomach. Cardinalis, le, chief or principal. Cardineus, the
same. Cardinum, an herb, which some do suppose is Cressis. Cardo, dinis, the
post, whereon the door hangs, and is moved. Also a mere or bounds, which
passith through the field from the southe to the north. Cardo rei, the effect
of the matter or thing: the chief point of the matter. Cardo causae, the
matter in law. Carduelis, a bird called a goldefinche. Carectum, a place full
of sedges. Careo, rui, rere, to lack proprely those good things, which ones
were had. Sometime it sygnifieth to be without a thing: as Careo culpa, I am
without fault. Careo febre, I am without fever. Cares, the name of a caruer,
the scholar of Lysyppus. Carex, ricis, an herb hard and prickinge. Caria, a
region in Asia the less. Caries, a lyttel worm that eats wodde: It is also
putrefaction or fylthe grown by age or contynuance. Carina, the keele or
bottom of the ship. Carinae, narum, a street in Rome, wherein Pompey dwelled.
Carino, aui, are, to make a thing of the facion of a ships bottom. Also to
speak to a man's reproach. Caritas, tatis, scarcity, proprely of that which
serves for the sustinance of man. Carius, the name of Jupiters son.
Carmania, a country of the less Asia. Carmelus, the name of two sundry hills
in Judea. Carmen, minis, a verse or meter. Also the hole warke which is made
in versis. Sometime it signifies a charm. Carmenta, the name of a lady, which
had the spirit of prophecy, and gave answer in verses. Carminare, to card
wulle, or other like thing. Carminarii, they that do pike or make clean wulle,
or card. Carmon, a place in Messenia, and the temple of Appollo in Laconia.
Carnarium, a larder, wherein hangs salt flesh, sometime it sygnifyeth a
bowchers shambles. Carnarius, a boucher. Carnarius, a, um, that pertayneth to
flesh. Carneus, a, um, that which is of flesh. Carni, the name of certain
people in Italy. Carnifex, ficis, a boucher of men, or hangman, that cutteth
them in pieces. Carnifleina, the place where such execution is done. Also
the office or act of a hangemanne. Carnificium, the same act. Carnificinus,
na, number, pertaining to the said act. Carnificor, aris, ari, to play the
hangmannes part. Carniuorum, any thing that deuourethe flesh. Carnositas,
abundance of flesh. Carnosus, flesshye. Carnotum, the mydle region of al
France. Carnuntum, a town in the border of Germanye. Donatus.
Caro, carnis, flesh, proprely of that which is dead. Carpatinae,
plowghemens boots, made of vnta^ned lether, they may be called cokers.
Carpathos, an I Will against Aegypte, the mids between Rhodes and Candy.
Carpentarius, a carte wright, or carpentar. Carpentarius equus, a carte horse,
or charyotte horse. Carpentum, a chariot or wagen. Carpinus, a kind of trees.
Carpio, a fyshe called a carpe. Carpo, psi, pere, to gather or pluck. Also to
chese, to reprove, or taunt, to use.i. fruor. Also carpere uires, is to make
feeble. Carpere uiam, to walk. Carpere uirales auras, to live. Carpere lanam,
to tose woll. Carpere cibum, to eat. Carptim, pykynge out here and there.
Carra, re, a city of Arrabie. Carruca, a carte. Carrucarius, a, um,
pertaining to a carte. Carrus, a charyotte. Carreia, a town in Spain.
Carthaginensis, pertaining to Cartage. Carthago, thaginis, the city of
Cartage in Affryke. Caruncula, a little flesh. Carus, a, um, dear. Carya,
the name of a city in Greece. Caryatides, the images of women holding
garlandes, or other like thing set up to garnyshe howses. Caryca, a fygge,
specially dry. Caryota, a date. Casa, a cotage. Casaria, the woman that keeps
the cotage Cascus, a, cum, old. Caseus, chese. Caseus musieus, Rowen chese.
Casius, a hill, in the borders of Aegypte. Casia, a spice, which has the
virtue of Cynamome, and is wonderful soote in sauoure. Casito, aui, are, to
fall or drop oftentimes. Caspiae porrae, certain Mountayns in Asia. Caspium
mare, the sea which joins to the said hills. Casses, sis, nets which may
be called hays. Also an helmette, but than it has Cassidis in the genitife
case. Cassiculus, a little hay. Cassida, ae, an helmette. Cassiope, a sign
in heaven, that has.xiii. sterres, and is figured like to a woman, sittynge in
a chair. Cassita, a lark. Cassitias, the gum that droppeth out of afirre
tree. Casso, aui, are, to put out, or make of none effect. Cassius, a propre
name of a man. Cassus, a, um, void and of none effect. Castalius, a fountayn
in the foot of the hill of Pernassus, which was dedicate to the Musis. Casta
mola, was a kind of sacrifice, that the vyrgins Vestales made. Castaneum, a
chesten, or cheste nutte. Castellani, the inhabitauntes of a lyttelle walled
town. Castellarim, one lyttelle walled town after an other. Castellum, a
little walled town. It is also a cundyte, out of the which water rounnethe.
Casterium, a docke where ships be laid up. Castigo, aui, are, to chastise
with wordis. also to correct or amend* Castiras, taris, chastity. Castor, a
Beuer, which has the tail of a fyshe, in the residue is like to an ottar.
Castor et Pollux, were brethren both at one birth, which were honored for
goddi. Castra, castroru^, an army of men of war, when they lie or abide in
any place. Also the place where the host lodgethe. Also the Pauilions being
pyched. Castrametor, to lay or lodge an army. Castro, aui, are, to gelde.
Sometime to cut of generally. Castrensis, castrense, that which pertains to
an hooste or army. Castrum, a castle or fortress. Castula, lynnen clothe,
wherewith maidens did gyrde them self under their pappes. Castus, ta, tum,
chaste, honest, and contynent, or uncorrupted. Casura, a fall a decay. Casus,
hap, ruin, mysfortune, or myserie. also a case. Cattabathmus, a town in
Aphrica. Catechesis, instruction or informacyon to him that begins any
thing. Catechiso, aui, are, to instruct, to infourme or teach. Cataclysmus,
an universal fludde. Catadromum, the place where horses be coursed.
Catalecticum merrum, a verse wherein one only syllable lacks. Catalogus,
speech or writing where things be recyted in order and number, a rehersalle.
Cataphractus, armed at all pieces. Cataphracti equites, horsemenne on barbyd
horses. Cataphractae naues, keuered ships. Cataphrygae, Certain heretics,
which said that the holy ghost was not in the apostels, but only in them
selfs. Cataplasma, a plaster made with herbs and sewet. Catapotia, pylles in
medicine. Catapulta, an arowe. Catarthaera, a portculious, Also clouds.
sometime caves in the earth. Catarthactae, great courses of water, falling down
from high places. Also the places from whens they do fall. Catarthus, a rewme
or styllynge down of water or fleme from the heed. Catascopium, a ship that
watches or espieth for other. Cata^ta, a cage, wherein men be set, which are
to be sold. also wherein they were punysshed. Catastroma, part of a ship or
paueme^t. Catastrophe, a subversion, or a volume. Catechumenus, he that is
newly instructid. Categoria, accusation. Catellus, catella, a little hounde.
Catena, a chain. Cateno, aui, nare, to chain together. Catenula, a little
chain. Caterna, a company of men of war. some time a multitude of people.
Cateruarii, they that do assemble in companyes. Cateruatim, by companyes.
Catharctica, purgative medicines. Cathedra, a benche or stool. Cathinea, a
kind of earth, whereof latyne metal is made. Catholicus, vniuersalle. now it
is used for him that keeps the faith, as the universal church has obseruyd
it. Catillatio, a great reproach laid to gentylmen, which had robbed the
countries, that were alied to the Romans, and had riottously consumed the
goods. Catillones, lycke dyshes, glottons. Catillus, the over stone of a
mylle, called the runner. Catina, a city in Sicile. Catinus, a potage dyshe.
Catillus, idem. Cathortoma, the right work of virtue, a right deed.
Cathortosis, a right affection. Catus, wise, or wytty. Also the name of a noble
and wise familye in Rome. Catularia, one of the gates of Rome. Catulire, the
desire of female kind, to company with the male kind, proprely to goo assaute,
to rudder, to horsynge, or to blyssonynge. Catulitio, the goinge assault. etc.
Catullus, the name of a poet. Catulus, a kytten or young catte. Also it is
put generally for the young kind of all beastis. also for a dog. Catus, a
catte. Caua, a hole, wherein birds do bread. Cauedium, is a place at large,
having many porches, which serves to a commune, like a market place.
Caucasus, a very high mountain in Inde. Cauda, a tail of a beast. sometime a
man's priuye membre. Caudacus, gentle and pleasant. Caudax, dacis, the lower
part of a tree next the root. Also a table, having many leaves or tables.
Caudicariae naues, a ship which caryeth vytayles. Caudis, a town of Samnie.
Cauea, a cave or dark place in the ground. Also a cage or cowpe, wherein
birds be kept. Moreover a place where a comedy or interlude is playde. Caueo,
caui, cauere, to beware, to eschew: also to provide diligently, to take heed.
Cave tibi, Take heed of thy self. Cauerna, a cave or holowe place in the
ground. Cauilla, uel Cauillum, a mock or a ieste. Cauillo, aui, are, uel
cauillor, ari, to ieste to mock, to bourde. Caula, a sheep house, but proprely
a fold. Caulescere, to grow into stalk. Cauliculus, a tender stalk. Caulis,
a stalk or stem of an herb or tree. Also it is an herb called colewortes. It
is sometime taken for all pot herbs, the ru^pe of a beast, and for a shafte or
iauelyn. Caulon, a town, which of Pliny is situate in the first region of
Italy. Cauma, aris, heat. Caunus, an isle in the occean see. Cauo, aui, are, to
make holowe. Caupo, onis, a howkster that sells meare and drink. Caupona, a
woman that sells wine. Also the tauerner. Cauponaria, tauerners craft.
Cauponius, ia, iu^, ptaynyng to the tavern. Cauponor, to sell as howksters do.
Cauros, was an isle, which afterward was called Andros, and after that
Antandros. Caurus, a western wind. Causia, a hatte or cappe after the facion
of Macedonye. Causon, nis, a burning fever. Caussa, a cause or matter in
suite. Caussarii milites, soldiers, which for causes reasonable, were
discharged out of the army. Caussaria missio, a discharge of a soldier for
a reasonable cause. Caussatio, an in ward syckenes. Causatiuus, tiua, tiuum,
that is cause that a thing is done. Caussidicus, a man of law. Caussificor,
aris, to complayn me of a thing that does grieve me. Causso, aui, are, to
cause. Caussor, aris, to find the matter, or to bring for excuse. Caustica
medicamenta, medicines, which do burn the skin or the flesh. Caureres et
cauteria, is a markynge iron, or an instrument, wherewith soores ar burned.
Cauteriatus, ta, tum, marked or burned with that instrument, or marked with an
iron. Cautes, a ragged rock, or hylle fulle of greatte stoones. Cautum est, It
is ordained or provided by an act of parlyament or counsel. Cautio est, it
is need to provide or beware. Cautus, a man that is circumspecte. Cauus, a, um,
holowe. Cauus, an holowe place. Causter, a fludde of Lidis. Caystrus, foem.
genesis a city of Cilycie.
C ante B.
CEcrops, pis, the first king of Athenes. Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops.
Cecropidis, a man or womanne, coming of him. Cecropide, men of Athenes.
Cecriphalea, a rock in the sea, or an isle. Cedar, a region of Arabie. Cedo,
cessi, dear, to give place, to goo away, to void, to withdraw, to grant, to
give. Cedo bonis, I leave my goods to an other. Cedere intercessioni, to
proceed no further, to admytte the contrary. Cedo iuri, I release my right.
Cedunt mihi ea bona, those goods ar com or happened unto me. Cedite manus,
give me your hands. Cessit, it happened. Cedo, in the imperative mode, Tell
thou. Cedir dies, among lawyers is, The time is come, that the debt is due to
be paid. Cedria, the first swearyng of the pitche tree. Cedrides, the fruit of
the cedre tree. Cedropolis, a town in Caria. Cedros, an yland in the costis of
Germany. Cedrosis, a white vyneyarde. Cedrus, a kind of trees, which is
excellent for buyldinge, forasmoche as the tymbre thereof is great, and very
light: also it dureth long, and is never eaten with worms, and is soote in
savor, having leaves like to a cypress tree. Celebresco, I am in great fame,
or am renoumed. Celebris, bre, famous. Also swifte, honorable. Celebritas,
tatis, renoume. Also a great assemblye. Celebriter, honorably. Celebro, aui,
are, to celebrate or bring in renoume, to make good report. Also to haunte,
to honor, or worship. Celer, eris, swyfte, quycke. Celero, aui, are, to do a
thing quyckely, to make haste. Celeres, runnynge horses. Celeustes, he that
calls on the mariners, to row or labor. Celeusma, the shoute or cry that
shypmen or botemen do make, when the master does whystell or call. Cella, a
cellar, wherein any thing is kept. Also where we be pryuily washed. Also a
secret place in the temple. Cellaria, a wine sellar. Cellarium, a storehouse.
Cellarius, he that has the charge of a cellar or storehouse. Celatim,
privily. Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or will not know. Celox, a swyfte ship, or
bark. Celsus, high. Celtae, French men. Celtiberi, a people in Spain, of
Celtis, French men, and Iberis Spayniardes assocyate together. Celtis, a kind
of sweet trees growing in Affryke. Celydrus, a womannes apparayle. Cemellio,
a town in Ligursa. Cenchris, a byrd like an hawk, which makes a great sown
when he cries. Also it is the name of a town or country in Greece. Cenina, a
city of Italy. Cenomani, people in Lombardy. Cenodoxia, vain glory.
Cenotaphium, a tomb, where no man is buryedde. Censio, sui, ere, to suppose,
to show mine opinion or sentence, to determyne, to be discontent, to number
people, to the intent to take them, which be apt for the wars, or to leuye
or tax a subsidy. Censio, nis, a chastysement. Censor, a judge of men's
manners. Also such as was appointed to valewe men's goods. Censorius uir, he
that has been a Censour, or is worthy for his gravity to judge and correct
other men's manners. Censualis, he that does assiste or accompany the iuges of
manners called censors. Censui agri, were those fields, which by the law
civil might be boughte and sold. Censu^a, the authority or judgment of a
censour. Also correction of manners, law, or decree, concerning manners.
Census, sus, yearly revenues. Also valuation of goods. Also a subsidy, the
numbering of the people. Census, si, he that is assessed or taxed, capite censi,
taxed by the polle, or he that pays heed silver. Centaurea, a kind of herb
called Ce^tory Centauri, a people in the country of Thessaly, whom the poets
did feign to be the one half like a man, the other half like a horse. Also they
be certain great ships. Centaurus, a river, which was first called Euenus.
Centimanus, having a hundred hands. Centipeda, a worm called a Palmer,
which is heary, and has many feet. Cento, a quylte, or a iakke, or other
like thing stuffed with linen, floxe, or cotton, or a cushyn made of pieces
of cloth of diverse colors. Centrum, the point, which is in the very mids of
a thing. Centum, a hundred. Centies, a hundred times. Centum uiri, certain
judges in Rome, being of the number of a hundred and five. And their
iugementes were called Centum uiralia iudicia. Centunculus, a vile garment.
Centuria, a part of an host, containing an hundred men. Also a portion of
ground in the field, containing an hundred acres. Centuriatim, by a hundred
together. Also plentuousely, or in a great number. Centurio, nis, a capitayn
over one hundred of foot men. Centurio, aui, are, to divide men into a
company, contaynyng an hundred persons: or feldes into a hundred acres of
land. Centussis, a hundred pound weyghte, or a hundred pieces of that money
that were called Asses. Cephale, or lis, sygnifieth the heed. Cephalea, the
heed ache, when all the heed does ache. Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a
fish. Cepheus, the name of a king of Ethiope. Cephisia, the region Attica.
Cephisis, a laake nere to the sea Athlanticu^ Cepites, a precious stoone,
having many white strikes. Ceporus, a gardyner. Ceramicus, a place in
Athenes, where men being slain in battle, were buried. Also an another
place, where commune women dwelled. Cerastes, a serpente, which has horns
like a ram. Cerasus, a chery tree. Cerasum, a cherye. Cerates, a small
weight or poyse, which is the fourth part of a scrippule, the.xlviii. part of
an ounce. Ceratinae, is of Quint. called a spece of reasonynge inexplycable.
Cerberus, the porter of hell. Also a dog with three heedes, which Hercules
drew out of Hell. Cercopithecus, a beast called a Marmoset. Cerdo, nis, a
cobblar. Cereale, pertaining to Ceres the goddess. Cerebrum, the brain.
Cerebrosus, a man being braynsycke, or wild brayned, trusting only to his
own will. Ceres, the goddess of corn. sometime it is used of Poets for the
self corn, or breadde. Ceretani, a people in Spain. Ceretum, a town in
Italye. Cerinthe, es, an herb called a honysuckle. Cerinthus, a thing which
is found in honey combs, whereon bees do feed. Ceritus, madness or frensy.
Cice. Dolobelle. and ad Attic.
Cerno, creui, cernere, to see or perceive also to consider: sometime to judge,
or determine. sometime to try out. Also to sight in battle, to enter into
land, which is happened unto me by inheritance or gift. Cernuus, stowpynge or
lookynge downewarde. Certamen, a conflycte or byckerynge. Certatim, oone
contendynge or stryuynge with an other. Certisso, aui, are, to be certified or
sure. Certitudo, dinis, certainty or surety. Certo, aui, are, to contend or
strive. Certus, ta, tum, certain, sure without dout. sometime it sygnifyeth
even as we would have it. Certe et certo, surely. Ceruus, a heart, or a forke,
wherewith cotages be propped up. Ceruinus, na, number, of a heart. Ceruicale et
ceruical, a bolstar. Ceruisia, ale or beer. Ceruix, uicis, the hinder part of
the neck. Cerunina, ear wax. Cerus, a kind of oken trees. Cerussa, Ceruse,
or white lead, wherewith some women be painted, and cold playsters be made of
it. Cerix, cis, a pursyuant or bedyll. Cespes, cespitis, a tirfe. some do call
them sottes, grass and earth together. Cessim ire, to recule or go back.
Cesim ferire, to stryke edgelynge. Cesso, aui, are, to cease, to leave warke,
to abide. Cessator, he that is slow in dooinge his dewtie. Cestrum, an
instrument, wherewith iuorie is made holow. also a dagger, or a wunbyl. also an
herb, which is called Berayne. Cetariae, places nyghe the sea side, where
Tunye and other greatte fysshes be taken and saltyd. Cetarius, a fyshemonger,
or taker of great fysshes. Cetra, a light tergate. Cetrati milites, Sowldyours
with lyghteter gates. Cetus, a great fyshe called a whale.
C ante H.
CHabrias, the name of a noble philopher and captain of Athenes, which used
to say, that more terrible was an host of hearts, having to their capitayn a
lion, than an host of lions, having an heart their captain. Chalame, a city
of Perse, which now is called Aetisiphon. Chalaza, a gatherynge under the
skin like the disease called Bubo. Chalastra, a certain apparayle.
Chalcedonia, a city in Asie against Constantynople. Chalcis, dis, the name of
a city in Greece. also of an isle, and of a bird. Chalcites, a stone of the
color of brass, but more black. Chaldaea, a region in Asia, joining to
Arabie, wherein was the great cite of Babylon. Chaldei, be taken for great
astronomers of the country of Assiria. Chalestra, a city of Thessaly on the se
cost. Chalyx, a flynte stone, out of the which fire is stryken. Chalybes, a
people in the less Asia, in the country called Pontus, which people do dygge
greatte plenty of iron naked. It is proprely taken for steel. And also it is
the name of a fludde in Spain. Chamaecissos, an herb called ground iuy.
Chamaedaphne, an herb which grows in length wynding together in diverse
parts, and has leaves like to laurel or bays, and has a flower like to a
vydlette, and is called of some men perwyncle. Chamaedreos, an herb called
Germander. Chamaeleon, ontis, a little beast, having his skin spotted like
to a lybard, which changes into diverse colors, according to the thing that
he sees. They be engendered in Inde, and is of the quantity and figure of a
lysard, but that his legs be longer, and goes vpryght, and has a snoute
like a swyne, a long tail, and small at the end, his eyes be never closed,
he does never eat or drink, but is nourisshed only by air. Chameleon is
also an herb. Chamaemelon, an herb called camomylle. Chamaeterae, maidens
which were wont to sytte at their maystresses feet. Chamelopardalis, a
beast which is as great as a camel, of skin and color like Panther,
having spots of sondrye colors, and has his forelegges and neck long,
and the heed like a camel, his fete and legs like an ox. Chamelus, a beast
called a camelle, communely known. Chania, the country called Epirus,
Chaones, men of that country. Chaos, a confuse matter without form, made
first of nothing, whereof poets supposed all other things to proceed.
Characote, a frame, about the which vynes be wound and turned. Characias,
an herb called Spourge. Character, a token, a note made with a pen, a figure,
a style or form of speaking. Characteres, letters. Charadrius, a greatte
deuowrynge bird of the sea. Caraxes, the brother of Sapphus. Charistrium, a
grene marble stone. Carrisius, the name of a grammarion. Charistia, the plurell
number, is as it were a Christmas feast, or a wake, where kynnesfolke do
resort together, bryngyng or sendynge presents mutually. Charitas, charity
or love, proprely toward men, or a man's country. Charites, the graces, which
were supposed to be the daughters of Jupiter, which were three in noumbre, whose
names were Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne: And where in speaking or writing
appeared to be a meruaylous dilectation or swetenes, ir was said that therein was
a grace, in latin, Charis. Chariophilon, a kind of soote spyce that grows
in India. Charon, it is, was named of the Paynyms, the booteman, that carried
sowles over the three ryuers of Hell, Acheron, Stix, and Cocytus. Catopus,
amyable, pleasant, gracious. Charta, paper. Also a leaf of paper, or other
like thing, wherein we do write. also a maiden that had never child.
Chartaceus, of paper. Chartilago, ginis, a grystell. Chartophylacium, a coffer,
or other like thing, wherein papers and rolls be kept. Charundas, the name of
a man, which gave laws to the Atheniens. Charus, well beloved. Charybdis, a
gulf of the sea by Sicyl, where in is dangerous saylynge, by reasone of stremes
flowynge contrary each against other, whereby ships be therein deuourid.
Chasma, a gapynge. or openyng of the firmament, or of the earth. Chelae, the
klees of a Crabbe, Crauaise, or Scorpyon. Chelonophagi, eaters of snayles.
Cheledonia, an herb called Selandine. also a western wind. Chelys, a snayle.
sometime it is taken for an harp or lute. Chelydros, a see snayle. Chemites, a
manner of tomb, like to yuorie. Chemiscus, a part of the foreshyp, whereby the
ancre does hang. sometime it is taken for all the ship. Chennis, is an
yland, as Pompon. writes. Chenoboscion, a place where geese be fed. Chenopus,
a goose foot. Cheospes, a king of Aegypte. Cherronesus, the part of Greece
callydde now Morea. It is sometime taken for the north part of the great Asia,
it is also callid Chersonesus. Chersina, a kind of land snayles. Chersydros,
a serpent, which abides as well in water, as on land. Cherubin, one of the
holy orders of aungelles, wherein is the science dyuine and mystycalle.
Cherusci, a people of Germany. Chibis, an herb. Chilorus, a river of
Macedonic. Chiliarchus, a captain of a thousand me. Chilias, adis, the number
of a thousand. Chilon, one of the.vii. wise men of Greece. Chilones, men
having great lyppes. Chimaera, a got. Also a mountain in Lycia. Also a
monster, having three heedes, one like a lion, an other like a goote, the
third like a dragon. Chimerinos, a cerkle of heaven, into the which when the
son comes, the days be at shortest. Chymus, the juice procedynge of meat
digested, which by the veins comes into the members, and restores that
which is consumed by heat. Chios, an isle in the sea called Eous, which was
sometime called Aeolia, where mastix growith. Chiragra, the gout in the
fyngers. Chiragricus, he that has such a disease. Chiridota, a cote with
long sleues. Chirographum, et chirographus, an obligation or like instrumente,
whereby a man is bounden, and has put to his hand. Chiromantia, palmestry.
Chiron, nis, the name of a man, whom poets do feign to be the one half of a
man, the other half like a horse: who first did find the virtues of herbs,
and taught Aesculapius phisike, and Apollo to harp, and Astronomy to
Hercules, and was master to Achylles, and excelled all other me^ of his time in
virtue and justice. Chironium, is a sore in the legs or fete, which is hot,
and swells by the two sides. Chironia, wild vine. Chironomia, a facyon of
gesture with the hands used in daunsynge, or in keruynge of meat. Chirotheca,
a glove. Chirurgia, surgerye. Chirurgus, a surgion. Chaena, a cloak. Chlamis,
idis, a cloak, which proprely is worn by men of war. Chlamidatus, cloked.
Chobar, signifies all the greatte floodes, which be in the region of Caldee.
Choenix, ici^, a certain measure, contaynynge four times the measure called
Sextarius. Cholera, an humor called choler. Also a syckenes called the colyke.
Choliambi, a certain kind of verses. Chondros, a grain of frankensence.
Choragium, stuff, proprely wherewith that place is adorned, where as shall be
enterludes or disguysynges. Choragus, he that kepethe such stuff or
apparayle. Chorannel, certain men that live in woddes in Persia, which are so
swyfte, that they take hearts with runnynge. Choraula, the craft to blow
trumpettes, or to play on shawlmes, or other like pypes. Choraules, players on
the said Instruments. Chorda, a cord or rope. Chorea, a daunse. Choriambus,
a foot in meetre, which has the first syllable, and the last long, and two
in the myddell short. Chorius, a foot in meter, which by an other name is
called trochaeus, and is but of.ii. syllables, the first long, the second
short. Chorobates, a measure to meet ground with, or a masons rule. Chortos,
hay, or grass mowen. Chorus, the company of players or dauncers. also a quyar.
Chresis, is use, and carachresis is abusyon. Chreston, an herb called cycorie.
Chytrapus podis, a treuytte. Columella
Chrestus, the name of a noble author of Athenes. Chria, a notable sentence
spoken shortly, to exhort to virtue, or dissuade from vice. Chrisis, unction.
Christus, anointed. Chromaticus, whose color never changes, but is always
one. Chronica, little, an history of acts done, with the times expressed,
Cronicles. Chronicus, ca, cum, temporal, or pertaining to time. Chrysia, a
city in Phrigie, and an ylande in Indie. Chrysendeth, any thing bounden with
gold. Chryses, the name of a Prophet among the gentiles. Also of a maiden
given by the greeks to king Agame^non at the battle of Troy. Chrysippus,
the name of a famous and noble philosopher. Chrysoaspides, knights that had
shyldes of gold. Chrysocolla, a stone with the powder where of paynters do make
a golden color, also goldsmythes do use it to sowder gold. Chrysocoma, golden
hear. Chrysocomus, he that has golden hear. Chrysogonum, that brings forth
gold. Chrysolampis, a stone of fyrye color by night. Chrysomela, apples of
the color of gold. by an other name callid apples of Armeny. Chrysolitus, a
precious stone of the color of gold. Chrysopastus, a stone with golden
spots. Chrysothemis, the daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestre.
Chrysostomus, the name of a bishop of Constantinople, and also of an
hystoryen, which were so called for their eloquence. for Chrysostomus is in
english a golden mowthe. Chus, a certain measure containing syx times the
measure called Sextarius. Chytra, a pot with feet, or a tryuette.
C. Ante I.
CIbale, pertaynyng to meat. Cibarium, meat. cibarius, a, um, vile. Cibarius
homo, a vile person. Cibarium uinum, ill wine. Cibo, aui, are, to feed.
Ciborium, a kind of appuls of Alexandry. Cibus, meat. Cicada, a grassehopper.
Cicatricosus, he that has many tokens of wounds. Cicatrix, icis, a token or
scarre, where a wound had been. Cicer, eris, a grain like to peason.
Cicercula, differs from Cicer oonely in color. Cicero, onis, the name of
the most noble Romayne, which was the father of latyne eloquence. Cichorea,
and Cichorium, an herb callydde Succorye. Cicina, a night crow. Cicindula, a
fly which shines by night. Cicinia, a little lean serpent in Italy.
Cicones, a people of Thrace. Ciconia, a bird called a storke. also it is a
certain rule or measure. Ciconius, the name of him that buildid Brixis
Cicorium, an herb that grows every where. Cicum, the thyn rynde of
Pomegranates. Cicur, uris, tame. Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame. Cicuta, a
venomous herb, which grows two cubytes in height, with a grene stalk full
of knottes, bushy in the top, having leaves smaller than Coriander, and
seeds greatter than anyse sede, and is horrible in savor: Some does now use
that name for Hemlocke. Cidaris, a cappe, which the kings of Persia did use,
and also the bishops in the old law. Cieo, and cio, ciui, to move a thing,
or to call. Bellum ciebam, They did set forth to battaylle. Cileo, lui, ere,
to move or stir a thing. Cilicia, a country ioynynge to Syria. Cilicium, any
clothe or garmente made of hear. Cilium, the over skin wherewith the eye is
closed. Cilix, licis, an inhabytant of Cilicia. Cillibe, and cilliba, a round
table. Cilones, men having great round foreheedes. Cima, the tender part of
the stalk of herbis. Cimana, things that be four square. Cimbri, a people
called Danes. In the old time they inhabyted not only Denmark, but also all
the yles from Selande to the north see. Cimerii, people of Scythia, they that
do dwell in the countries, where as is continual cold and much darkness.
Cimex, a stynkynge worm bredynge in wodde or paper. Cimolia creta, fullers
klaye. Cinediae, stones found in a fyshes heed. Cinedus, a wanton boy without
shamefastnes. Also a daunser of galyardes and wanton maskes. It is also taken
for a tumblar. Cincinni, hears that be trymmed. Cincinnati, men having their
hear trymmed. Cincticulus, a short cote called a ierkyn. Cinctus, tus, a
short garment, which the Consulle did wear, when he proffered battaylle.
Cinis, neris, ashes. Cineraceus, and Cinereus, a, um, of the color of ashes.
Cinericius, a, u^, bake^ or roasted under ashes. Ciniflo, nis, he that makes
hot the instruments, wherewith men or womenne did trymme their hear. Cingo,
cinxi, cingere, to gyrde or compass about. Cingria, a short pype, having a
small sownde. Cingula, a gyrthe for beasts. Cingulum, a gyrdell for men.
Cinna, a city of Thessaly. also the name of a Romayne, which exceded in
cruelty. Cinnabaris, a stone called a Sanguinary. it is also called in latin
Sanguis draconis, dragons bloudde. it is put into sondrye medycynes to staunche
bloudde. Cinnamomum, and Cinnamum, a spyce called Cynnamom. Cinniligium, a
gyrdell, which a bryde or new wedded wife wears, a corse. Cinnus, a hear
of a man or woman's heed, or a medly of diverse things together. Cipetum, a
soote plant or herb, which is good to break and expulse the stone. Cippus,
a pair of stocks. Also a lyttelle hylle, which men call a barowe. Also a
tomb, a pyllar. Circa, about, nyghe. Circe, the name of a woman, by whom a
city in the country of Campania, called Circium, was builded. Also a wytche,
which turned the company of Ulysses into beasts. Circe^ses ludi, were
certain games in Rome wherein horses ran with chariottes. Circerus, a great
ship, which they of Asia used. Circino, aui, are, to compass, to make a
cerkle. Circinus, an instrument called a compass. Circiter, about: and it is
referred sometime to time, as Circiter calendas Iunias, About the first day of
June. sometime it is referred to the place. Circiter in media arce, About the
mids of the castle. sometime to the thing. Circiter duo millia hominum caesa
sunt, There were nygh two thousand men slain. Circites, hoopes of brass or
iron. Circitores, officers in cities, which do go about to see that good rule
be kept. Circius, a sowtherne wynd, which is wonderfulle vehement.
Circuitores, the serchers of watches. Also they which do go about the streets
to sell garments or lynnen clothe. Circulo, aui, are, to compass or close
with a dyche, or other like. Circulatim, by cerkles, or in the form of a
cerkle. Circulator, he that gothe about to show him self, or what he can do,
or to deceive the people. Circulatorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to such auaunters
or deceyuers. Circulatrix, she that gothe about to get money with daunsynge
or tumbling. Circulus, a cercle or compass. Circum, about. Circumago, egi,
agere, to lead about, to turn about. Circumiaceo, ieci, iicere, to put
about. Circumlitio, onis, bournishinge, klensynge, or polishinge. Circummitio,
to send about. Circummunio, iui, ire, to enclose, wall in, or dyche in.
Circumnascor, to grow about, Circumplector, to embrace or close in.
Circumscribo, psi, bear, to write, or draw about with a line. Also to deceive
one in bargaynynge with him. Fratre^ circumscripsit in diuisione haereditatis,
He deceived his brother in particion of the inheritance. Also to gather,
comprehend, or descryue throughely. Cuius scientiae summam breuiter
circumscribo, The effect of whose learning I will comprehend or descryue
shortly. Apulcius.
Circumsecus, on both sides. Circumsedeo, cessi, sedere, to besiege.
Circumsido, sedi, sidere, to go about to besiege. Circumsisto, stiti, sistere,
to stand about one, to defend him. Circumspectus, Circumspect. Circumspicio,
exi, cere, to look about. Circumspicuus, a, um, that may be beholden on all
parts. Circu^sto, steri, stare, to stand about. Circumuado, to invade, or
perce on al parts. Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to carry about oftentimes.
Circumuenio, to compass a man, to deceive him, to close him i^, as in wars,
to opp^sse. Foenore circu^uentus, Oppressed with usury. Circumuolito, aui, are,
to flee about. Circumcelliones, tavern haunters, or raylers about.
Circu^cido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing. Circumcolo, colui, colere, to
dwell now here now there. Circumcolumnium, a place set about with pillars.
Circundare, to go about as a ring does about a ma^s finger, or a diche about
a close. Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thing. Circumfero, to carry or
bear about. Also to cleanse. Idem ter socios pura circumtulit vnda, Vergil. 6.
Also be cleansed his company three times with clean water. Circumflexus, bowed.
Circumfluo, to abound. Circumfluere, is also to flow or rounne about, as
water about a city or Countreye. Circumfluus, a, um, that flows about.
Circumforaneus, a, um, that may be, or is often carried about. Circumforanei,
malaperte guestes and tellars of tidings in markettes. Circuo, iui, ire, to go
about. Circus, a Cercle. Also a round place walled about, of the which
there were three in Rome, where there was made certain games. Circius, the name
of an isle in Mysia. Cirnea, a cup. Cirri, hears curled, or feathers that do
grow on the top of abyrdes heed, as a lark or an heron. Cirracus, a kind
of baume. Cis, a worm among corn, which I suppose to be called weuyls. Also
it sygnifieth on this side: as Cis Rhenum, on this side the River of Rhyne: Cis
Alps, on this side the mountains called Alps. Some time it sygnyfyeth less.
Cis naturae leges, Less than the laws of nature may suffer. Salust uses it
ones for beyond. Cis Rhenu^ atque intra mare nostrum er oceanum, Beyond the
river of Rhine, and within our see, and the occean see. Cisalpina Gallia, was
sometime that countreye, which is from the mountains callydde Alps, unto the
River of Rubycon. Cicium, a carte. Ciciarius, a cartar. Cispius, a mountain in
Rome. Cisseus, a king of Thrace, father of Hecuba, queen of Troy. Cissybium, a
cup or bolle made of iuy. Cissites, a precious stone like an yuy leaf,
bright of color. Cista, a cheste, coffer. Cisterna, a cesterne, Citatus,
called, sommoned, or cited. Cithara, a harp. Citharis, a byshopes myter.
Citharista, an angle of France by Marcile, lyinge out to the sea.
Citharistria, a woman harper. Cithariro, aui, are, to harp. Citharoedus, a
harper. Cytisus, an herb called chickwede. Citimus, ma, mum, the last. Cito,
aui, are, to cite, to sommon, or call. Citorus, a mountain where grows
ple^tie of box trees. Citra, on this side. somety^me without. Citra
adulationem, without flatterye. Citreum, an orange. Citrus, a tree called a
citron tree. Citrum, a fruit called pome citron. Cittium, a town of Cyprus.
Citus, quycke, hasty, swyfte. Sommetyme divided or parted. Cito, soon,
shortly. Ciuicus, ca, cum, is the same that ciuilis is. Ciuica corona, a
garlande of oken leaves, used to be given to them that had saved a citesyn in
battle. Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a cytesyn. Ciuilis homo, a man
expert in those things, that appertain to the ministration of a common
weal. Ciuilitas, tatis, courteysy, civility. Ciuis, a citesyn or demsen. Also
Ciuis meus my country man. Ciuitas, tatis, a city, proprely it is the
multitude of cytesens gathered together, to live according to law and right.
Cius, a river of Thrace. Cizicus, a city in Asie the less.
C ante L.
CLades, dis, a discomfyture in battle, a destruction of men. Clam, priuilye,
unawares. Clam me profectus est, vnwaares to me, he went his way. Clamo, aui,
are, to cry, to call. Clamor, oris, a cry, a clamor, a noise. Clamosus, a,
um, clamorous or full of noise. Clandulum, secretly. Clandestino, privily, or
secretly. Clandestinus, a, um, privy, or secret. Clango, xi, gere, to sown a
trumpette. Clangor, oris, the sown of a trumpet. sometime the cry that geese
or other like birds do make. Clanius, a city of Champayne, nere to the city
Acerras. Clarco, ui, ere, to appear, to be well known, and to be clear. Clare,
clearly, apparently. Clarifico, eci, cere, to make clear or apparent
Clarigatio, a clerynge, a subsydie or task granted by a commune consent.
Clarigo, aui, are, to ask clearly. Claritas, tatis, clerenes, sometime
nobylitie, or honourablenes. Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable.
Claros, a city in Greece. Clarus, a river, which rounneth from the high
mountains of Alps, into the river called Danubium. Clarus, ra, u^, clear,
noble, honorable, famous Classiarius, diligent. Classicus, an officer, which
with a tru^pette or tabore called people together. sometime a man being in
reputation. Classicum, a people or noise of trumpettes, or belles to call
menue together, or to goo to battle. Classicus, ca, um, pertaining to
nauyes. Classis, a navy of ships. sometime it is taken for one ship.
sometime companyes or sorts of people, ordered in a city alter the value of
their substance. Also Classes be degrees or forms in schools: as prima
classis, the first degree or form. etc. Clatro, aui, are, to shut a
wyndowe, specially a lattyse wyndowe. Clatrum et clatrus, a lattyse wyndowe, or
any thing made like a lattyse. Claua, a clubbe. Clauarius, an offycer
appointed to deal the emperors gift of money or coin among the soldiers.
Clauator, he that uses a clubbe. Clauatus, set with nails. Claudeo, to
halte. sometime to err. Claudianus, the name of a poet. Clauditas, halting,
lamenesse. Claudius, the name of an emperor of Rome Claudo, si, dear, to
shytte. sometime to compass: also to put of: also to halte. Salustius.
Claudus, a, um, lame. Clauicula, a little kay or clubbe. Clauicularius, he
that bears the kayes. Clauiculus, the tendrelle of a vine. Clauiger, idem
quod clauicularius. Clauis, a kaye. Claustrarius, a maker of kayes and locks.
Claustrinus, a keeper of the cloister, or of any other place, wherein any living
thing is enclosed. Claustrum, a cloister, or other place, where any living
thing is enclosed. Clausula, a little sentence, or a part of a sentence.
Clausura, a shutting in. Clauus, a nail. Also the stern of a ship. Also a
corn on a man's toe or fingar. Moreover, Claui be little swellynges of hard
flesh in the corner of men's eien. Also puffes growing in the stemmis of great
trees. Also in harneys, that which is called the river. Moreover Clauus is a
garment pirled or powdered with spangles, like nails heedes. wherefore the
propre garmente of a Senator was called Iatus clauus. Clazomenae, a city of
Iome, which Paralus builded. Clazomenia, an ylande, which is called
Marathusa. Cleantes, the name of a philosopher, which succeeded Zeno in his
schole. Clearchus, the name of a philosopher. there was a noble capytayne of
the same name, of whom Xenophon writes in the expedition of Cyrus the less.
Clemens, it is, merciful. Clemencia, mercy. Clementer, mercyfully. Cleobulus,
the name of oone of the seven wise men of Greece. Cleodamas, the name of a
geometrician in the time of Plato. Cleombrotus, the son of Pausanias,
captain of the Lacedemons. Cleopatra, the name of a lady queen of Egypt.
Clepo, psi, pere, to stele. Clepsydra, a dyall, which dyuided the hours by the
rounnynge of a certain measure of water. It was also the name of a fountain
in Athenes. Cleronoma, heritage. Cleronomos, an heir. Clerus, chosen by lotte.
Also a worm, which distroyeth and corrupts honey co^bes. Clibanarius, he
that fyghtethe in iustynge harnayse. Clibanus, an oue^, or the mouth of a
furneis. Cliens, it is, a clyent or servant retained. Clientela, the nombre of
clyentes or of servants retained, also their office or duty. Clientularium,
an yearly fee, for counsel, or assystence. Clima, it is, is a portion of the
world between south and north, wherein is variacyon of time in the length of
the day, the space of half an hour, which is set out in the tables and
chartes of Cosmography Climacterius, ca, cu^, signifies the degrees of man's
life by seven years, in the which he is in danger of death or mysfortune.
Climactericum tempus, the said daungerouse time. Climacterum, idem. Climax, a
ladder, and the figure callydde gradation. Clinicus, a physician, that heals
with medicines. Also he that is so syck, that he can not arise out of his
bed. Clinopodion, an herb. Clinopale, wrastlynge in the bed. Clio, the
name of one of the mu^^s. Clisis, declynation. Clitellae, a packesaddell. Also
the name of a place in Rome. Clitellarii, packehorses of mules, that do serve
for caryage. Clitomaclius, the name of a philosopher. Clitorius, a fountain in
Greece. Clitumnus, a river in Italy. Cloaca, a synke, whereby water passethe, or
gutter. Cloris, a maiden or nymphe, which was married to Zephyrus, unto whom
was assygned for her dower, to have reuie over flowers. Clotho, one of the
fatal ladies, having power over man's life, in dyssoluynge thereof. Cludo,
si, dear, to shytte. Cluo, ui, ere, to contend or fight. Clumae, the husk of
barley. Clunaculum, a bowchers choppyng knife. Clupea, a cite of Affrike, next
to Cartage. Clunes, the buttockes or haunehes. Clymene, the mother of
Promotheus, daughter of Oceanus. Clypeus, a shield or targate of fotemen,
Clismus, a pourgation or washing. Clytemnestra, the wife of Agamemnon.
Clyster, eris, and Clysterium, a glyster.
C ante N.
Cneus, the name of a man.
andC ante O.
COacesco, coacesci, coacescere, to wax all sour. Coaetaneus, of one age.
Coagmento, taui, rare, to join together, or make like. Coagulo, aui, are, to
gather into a kourde or cream. Coagulum, curde or cream. Coalesco, coalui,
coalescere, to gather together, to increase. Coarcto, aui, are, to strain or
press together. Coasso, to planke or bourde. Coaxare, to make a noise like a
frogge or tode. Cocalus, a king of Sycile, to whom Dedalus fled out of
Creta, whom Minos king of Crete pursued. Coccentum, a meat made of honye and
popye sede. Cocceus, a, um, et Coccineus, a, um, of scarlette color. Coccina,
a scarlette vesture. Coccinus, et Coccus, scarlette color. Coccum, grain
wherewith cloth and silk is grayned. Cochlea, a snayle, sometime the shelle,
sometime cokles. Also a winding staire or vyse. Cochleare, a spone. Cochlium, a
wyndynge stayre. Cochlides, round ladders. Coclites, a man, having but one
eye. Coctie, a part of the mountayns of Alps. Coctilis, hoc coctile, soden or
baken. Coctito, aui, are, to boil. Coctiuus, a, um, easy to be boiled.
Coctonum, cotton. Coctus, ta, tum, sodden enough. Coculum, a pot to boil in.
sommetyme cocula do sygnyfie styckes, which will soon be on fire. Cocus, a
Cook. Cocynthum, a mountain in Italy, that divides two sees. Cocytia,
sacrifices that were done in honor of Proserpine. Cocytus, a river of Hell.
Coccis, igis, a bird called a cocowe. Coda, a tail. Codarremula, a bird
callydde a wagge tail. Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a great book or
volume. Codicillus, a lybell. Codiculus, a dyminutife of codex, when it is put
for a book. Codonia, an yland, that the almayns keep. Codius, the propre name
of a king of Athenes, which to save his country, willingly lost his life.
Coeliacus, he that is sick of the colycke. Coemeterium, a church yard.
Coena, a soupper. Coenacularia, the way or craft to ordain a supper.
Coenaculariam facere, to let a house in diverse parts to sundry persons,
wherein are many parlers or drinking houses. Coenacularius, he that does let
such houses to hyre. Vlp. de pignor. act. l. Solutum. Coenaculum, a parler, or
other place where men do soupe. Coenaticus, ca, cum, pertaining to suppers.
Apparatus caenaucus, ordinance for supper. Sermo caenaticus, communication mete
for suppers. Coenatio, a low parler for to soupe in, a summer parler.
Coenatorius, a, um, bilongynge to suppers. Coenaturio, ii, ire, to labor or
endeavor my self to soupe. Coenipera, a goer about to suppers vnbode^. Coeno,
aui, are, to soupe. Coenobium, a Monasterye or other place, where men live in
commune. Coenula, a light soupper. Caenum, myer. Coeo, iui, ire, to come
together with other, to join to, to draw together, to gather together, to do
the act of generation. Coerceo, cui, cere, to restrain, to bind hard or
straight, to compel or constrayn. Coetus, an assembly of people. Cogitatim,
aduysedly. Cogito, aui, are, to think. Cogitatio, onis a thought. Cognati,
kynnesmen. Cognitor, oris, he that pleads an another man's cause, his clyent
being present. Cognobilis, known. Cognomen, a surname, which a man has of
his auncetours. Cognomines, diverse men of one surname. Cognomino, aui, are, to
give a surname. Cognosco, noui, noscere, to know, to consider, to understand,
to lie with a woman, to judge a matter, or here a mattier to judge it. Cogo,
coegi, cogere, to constrayne, to gather to gyther, to milk a beast, to make
lycour thycke or hard, to press into, to set or bring in order. Cohibeo, ui,
ere, to restrain, to keep of, to let. Cohors, it is, a company of men of
war, a court wherein pultrie is kept. Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhort.
Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherewith the ox bow and the yoke are bounden
togider. Coinquino, aui, are, to soil, or make foul. Cois, a garment of fine
sylke. Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette. Colaphus et colaphum, a buffette.
Colasis, a kind of punysshemente that is done for chastisemente. Colax, a
flatterer. Colchis, an I Will in Asia, where Medea was borne. Coleus, the codde of
a man. Coliculus, a tender stalk of an herb. Colidos, an Island in the occean
of Inde. Coliphium, a kind of breadde. Colis, the branch of a vine. Colitia,
a great furrowe for water to run into, for saving of the corn. Colla, a
kind of glewe. Collabello, aui, are, to join lyppes in kissing. Collactimo,
aui, are, to weep with other. Collare, a collar for a hounde. Collactaneus, he
that souketh with me one norise, a foster brother. Collatina porta, the name of
a yate in Rome Collatinus uenter, a great swollen bealye. Collario, onis, a
conferring together. Collatis signis pugnare, to fight in a field pyghte.
Collectanea, things written, gathered out of many warkes. Collectitius, a, um,
that which is gathered. Collega, a fellow or companyon in office. Colliculus, a
hyllocke. Collido, si, ere, to beat together. Colligo rationem, I make
account. Colligo, legi, ligere, to gather together, to take a way, to bring
together. Seipsum colligere, Ci. Tus. 4
to bring home again the parts of the mind, that were dispersed. Also to
prepare. Virgilius.
Se colligit in arma, he made him ready to fight. Colligo, aui, are, to bind
together. Collimare, to wynke with one eye. Collina porta, a yate at Rome.
Collino, to line, or lay by line. Collis, a hylle. also colles the back.
Colossus, an image as high and great as a tower. Colluco, aui, are, to make a
glade in a thycke wodde. Collum, a neck. Colluuiarium, a synke or gutter.
Colluuies, when the earth is covered with water by greatte floodes. Collutilo,
aui, are, to defyle. Collyrida, a cake. Collyrium, a medicine for soore eyes.
Colo, aui, are, to strain out lycour. Cola, a streynour. Colo, ui, ere, to
worship, to love, or favor, to haunte, to inhabyte or dwell, to lead, Hanc
uitam colo, I lead this life. to tylle, or husband ground. Colobium, a
iacket or cote without sleues. Colocasia, a bean of Egypt. Colochynta, a
fruit which purges fleme. Colon, a gutte, which goth from the left side unto
the right, in the which the dunge takes his form, and there is the disease
called Colica, the colyke. It is also a membre or part of a sentence. Colonia,
people sent to dwell in a place, which is not inhabyted. Also a house of
husbandrye. Colonicus, ca, cum, pertaining to housbandrye. Colonus, a
husbandemanne. also coloni be they, which are sent to inhabyte a country or
town. Also a high place in Athenes, where Neptune was worshypped. Colophon,
onis, the name of an isle: and also of a city in Greece. Colophonem addere, to
make an end, or fynishe a warke. Color, oris, color. Coloriae uestes,
garments made of wolle vndyed. Colorificus, he that makes color. Coloro,
aui, are, to give or make a color. Colos, the fundement. Colostrum, cream of
milk. Colotes, the name of a man that was a peynter. Quint. li. 2. Coluber,
a serpent, which lies in the shadow of woddes. Colum, a strayner. Columbar,
aris, a pyllory. Columbaris, et hoc columbare, of a dove. Columbarium, uel
columbaria, a douehouse or culuerhouse. Columbatim, in the manner of doves.
Columbarius, he that takes doves. Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuskayn see.
Columbus, et columba, a culuer or dove. Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer.
Columella, the name of oone that wrate of husbandry most eloquently.
Columellares dentes, cheke tethe. Columen, luminis, the succor or stay, the
wind beam of a house. Columis et hoc colume, hole. Columna, a royal city in
Bruce. Columna, a pyllar. Columnus, was in old time that we call now culmus.
Coluri, certain cerkles in the celestialle Sphere. Colus, a distaffe.
Colymbades, olyues, or oil beries. Collybus, an exchange of money.
Collybistes, an exchaunger. Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portyngall, or
other like things. Coma, all the hear together called a bushe Comagena, a
country in Syria. Comare, to have much hear, or a great busshe. Comatus,
ta, he or she that has a greatte bushe. By translation it is said of trees
or herbs, that have long leaves or flowers. Comata, a shepardes name in
Theoer. Comata Gallia, all France, a this half the mountains. Comatulus, a
boy with a fair busshe of hear. Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confederate
together. Comburo, bussi, burere, to burn or consume with fire. Come, an herb
called gotes bearde. Comedo, edi, edere, to eat. Comedo, donis, he that
consumes his own goods ryotrously. Comes, mitis, a companyon or fellow. Also
a name of dignity, which we call an earl. Comessatio, a bankette after soupper.
Comessari, to bankette. Comessabundus, vsyng to bankette. Cometes et cometa, a
blasynge sterre. Comis, gentle, full of good humanity. Comiter, gentylly.
Comitatus, tus, a felowshyppe. Comitialis dies, the day when people assembled
at Rome, for the election of officers. Comitialis morbus, the falling sycknes.
Comitium, a congregation or assemble of the people for election of officers.
Also the place where the election is made. Comitor, aris, to accompanye or goo
with one, or keep fellowship with other. Comma, a point ending a sentence, where
many sentences be: as, Nihil tibi profuit nocturnum praesidium palacii, nihil
urbis uigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil concursus omnium bonorum: There is
Comma four times. Commanducatus cibus, chewed meat. Commanducate, to chewe
meat. Commeat^s, tus, a saulfe conduct, or leave to depart. sometime vytailes
for an army or multitude of men. sommetyme for a passage of men. Commemoro,
aui, are, to remember. Commendaticius, a, um, that wherewith a man is remembered
or recommended. Commendo, aui, are, to commend or praise, sometime to
recommende. Commentaculum, a marshals or huyshers rod. Commentor, tatis, to
think on, to make mencyon, to dispute, to write commentaries, or books for
remembrance. Commentarium, uel commentarius, a brigement or other book,
containing things briefly written. Also it signifies a comment. Also a book
of remembrance or a Register or exposition. Commenticius, a, um, feigned, or
devised for the time. Commentum, a comment or exposition, a matter feigned.
Commeo, aui, are, to go hither and thider, or to go to, or with an other.
Commertium, an intercourse or liberty to carry marchandyse from one place to an
other. Also a commutation or form of bieng and selling together. Also a
famylyarytie or custom. Commereo, ui, ere, to commytte. Si senserit ^e timidum
pater, arbitrabitur commeruisse culpam, If thy father do perceyuethe to be
aferde, he woll suppose, that thou art gyltie, Terent. in Phor.
or haste committed the offense. Also commerere, to deserve. Q. Curtius
Commessari, to feed more than enough. Commigro, to goo with one to a place.
Co^militones, fellows together in wars. Commilitium, fellowship in wars.
Comminiscor, sceris, to call to remembrance. Comminus, forthewith at hand,
hand to hand. Commissura, a joint of any thing that is closed and opened, as
proprely of tables, which be joined. Commitigo, gaui, gare, to knock.
Tere^tius.
Tibi uti co^mitigari uideam sandalio caput, That I may see the knocked on the
heed with his slypper. Committo, misi, mittere, to commyt, or inioyne, to
offend, to join together. Also to do and begin. Salustius.
Quibus dictis mox praeliu^ commisere, That spoken, they began battle. Also to
deliver, to compare, to bring in contencion, to put together, to confiscate or
sease for a forfayture. Ci. in Ver. act. 3.
Commodata res, a thing lend without advantage. Commodatarius, he that
takes a thing of lone, he that boroweth. Commoditas, tatis, a commodity.
Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other man's commodity. Also to lend.
Commodum, profit or commodity. Also good, apt, or conueniente. sometime it
is an aduerbe, and than it sygnifieth the same time, in good time, scarsely.
Commodum discesseras heri, cum Trebatius uenit, Thou were scasely departed,
when Trebatius was come. Commodus, a, um, profitable, or apt. Commoereo,
rui, rere, to be all heavy or sorry. Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warn.
Commoneo, nui, ere. Idem. Commotria, a maiden that does array or apparayle her
maystresse. Commoueo, ui, ere, to trouble, to turn or change a man's mind. to
hurt. sometime to depart. Tu et cura, ut ualeas, et te istinc ne temere
commoueas. Farewell, and take heed that thou depart not hense to hastily. Ci.
Ty^^,
Communico, aui, are, to communicate or depart some thing with an another,
which I have. Communis, commune, common. Commuto, aui, are, to change one
thing for an other. Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to give a shrewde word for
a good. Como, psi, ere, to apparayle gorgiously, to trymme, proprely it
belongs to women. Comoedia, an interlude, wherein the common vices of men and
womenne are apparently declared in personages. Comoedice, gentylly and
pleasantly. Comoedior, aris, to ieste, or scoff. Comoedus, a player in
enterludes. Comicus, a maker of enterludes. Compactum, an agreement or
appoyntme^t Compagino, aui, are, to put or join together a thing that is
lowsed. Co^pago, ginis, a ioining together of things. Compa^, aris, equal, or
even like, Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatiue, wherein begins excess
incomparyson. Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal, or more, to
ordeyne, to prepare, to join, to deuyse, to bye. Comparatio, comparyson,
preparation, or byenge, Compasco, to feed or keep cattle. Compascuus ager, a
common field. Compedes, gyues or fetters. Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued.
Compello, pull, pellere, to compelle or constrayne, to join or bring
together. Compello, aui, are, to speak to, to accuse. Compendiarius, a, um,
co^pendious or brefe. Compendiosus, a, um, very profitable. Compendium, a
saving or sparyng, or advantage, a compendious or short form in wrytinge
or other act. Compendifacio, to make compendious. Compenso, aui, are, to make
recompense, or amends. Compensatio, onis, a recompense, or satisfaction.
Co^perendino, to defer, or put of, or delay. Comperendinatio, a delay.
Comperendinaria dies, a day over in matters of law. Comperio, ii, ire, to
know of an other man. Comperior, iris, to find, or imagine in mine own
opinion. Compertus furti, founden gyltie of felony. Compertum habeo, I know or
perceive. Compernis, he that has his knees nyghe to gither, or long fete.
Compesco, scui, scere, to assuage, to mitigate Competo, tii, tere, to ask, or
sue for an office, or other like thing against an other that does the
semblable. Competit, It is mete or couenient. Hoc illi competit, That is mete
or conueniente for him. Also it is suffycyent. Compilo, aui, are, to take by
extorcyon or wrong, or as the vulgar speech is, Compilare is to polle and
shave. Compilati, polled by extorcion. Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruste.
Quid faciam nunc, si tres uiri me in carcerem compegerint? How shall I do
now, if the officers thruste me into prison. Sommetyme Compingere is to
compact, or put togider. Compita, many paths going into oone way,
Compitalia, feasts or drynkynges, made where as be many paths. Compitalicius,
cia, um, belonging to the said feasts. Complector, eris, to embrace or hold
strait Complector te amore, I love the ba^ttlye. Complector cogitatione, I
bear in mind. Complector animo, I consider. Compleo, eui, are, to fulfylle, or
fill to the top, to fynyshe, or perform, to make up. or supply that lacks.
Complex, plicis, partener, co^panyon in act. Complexus, imbracynge or collynge.
Also agreement in words or sentences. Complico, aui, are, to fold or wrappe
together. Complodo, si, dear, to clappe together the hands for joy. Complura,
right many. Compluries, very often. Compluuium, a gatter, wherein fallyth rain
from many houses. Compono, to put or ioyn together, to make ordeine, or
dispose. Also to compare, to adorn, to gather, to recreate, to appease, to
conclude, to accord or agree, to redeem, to dissemble or feign. Compos, potis,
he that has his purpose or desire. also ever content. Compos animi, of sownde
remembrance, not mad. Compos uoti, he that has his own desire or appetite.
Compositio, onis, a making, an ornament, a composition or agreement.
Compraedes, sureties or pledges together. Co^primo, pressi, primere, to press
or thrust together, to hold or refrain. Also to defloure a woman. Compressus,
a defloration or rauyshement. Comptus, tus, fresh apparayle. Compulsus, a, um,
compellyd or hytte with any thing. Compunctus, a, um, marked, or spotted.
Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or prycke, or stryke. Computo, aui, are, to
deem, to accounte, to decerne, to impute. Comum, a city of France on this side
the mountains, the inhabytantes whereof are called comenses.
C ante N.
COncateno, aui, are, to bind together with chains. Concauus, a, um, holowe.
Concedo, cessi, dear, to grant, to permit or suffer, to depart away, to go
to a place, to consent. Concentus, tus, a consent, many voices in one tune,
or accord in musyke. Concept^culum, or conceptab^ilu^, any thing holowe and
apt to receive or hold, as a vessel. Concepta uerba, words expressed and
pronounced. Conceptus, ta, tum, conceived. Conceptus, tus, a conception of a
child within a woman. And also a conceyte or thing conceived in thought.
Concernere, to concern. Concertatum, debated in reasonynge. Concha, proprely a
muskle. sometime the shell of a muskle, oyster, or cockle. Also every vessel
that is holow, and open above, proprely a bolle, wherein lynnen clothes be
washed. sometime a wine vessel. Also a trumpet, as it semethe made of earth,
like to such as the poor men do use, which have the falling sycknes, and do
come from the place in Ducheland, called saint Cornelius. Conchis, a meat made
of beans. Conchon, is called a vessel of the greeks, or the holownes of the
eyes. Conchus, a perle. Conchile, and conchilium, a kind of shelle fyshe, out
of the which a lycour is taken, wherewith sylke is dyed purple. it is sometime
taken for the purple color. Conchiliata uestis, a purple garmente. Concido,
cidi, ere, cisum, to cut in pieces, to die. Caesar. Concido, concidi, ere,
concasum, to fall down all together. Et muri ciuitatum concidem, (...).
And the walls of all cities shall fall all together. Conciliabulum, a counsel
house. Conciliabundus, he that is redye to give counsel. Consiliatrix, a
woman that endeavors her to make agreemente between men and their wives.
Concilio, aui, are, to accord or make friends together. Conciliare
affinitatem, uel pacem, to make alyance or peace. Conciliare odium, uel
inimicitias, to get hatred or displeasure. Concilium, counsel, or the
assemblye of counsaylours. Concinnitudo, dinis, aptenes, or proprenes.
Concinno, aui, are, to make apt, or propre, or fytte. Concinnus, a, um, apt,
fytte, propre. Concinere, to agree in one song, or one tune. Concio, ciui, cire,
to call together a multitude. Concio, onis, a pulpet or stage, wherein he
stands that exhorts people. Also an assembly or congregation of people,
called together, to here the commandment of the king, or other in authorytye
in the weal publyque. Also it is the oration or proposition made unto them,
called a co^cion. Concionalis, he that is wont to make orations or propositions
to the people. Concionatorius, ria, rium, pertayninge to a Concyon. Concionor,
aris, ari, to preach or purpose a matter to the people. Concionator, oris, he
that preachethe or purposes an oration. Concipio, coepi, cipere, to conceive
or apprehende, to delyberate, or determyne in mind. Concipere iusiurandu^, to
swear in recyting the oath, as it is ministered. Concito, aui, are, to steer.
Conclamatum est, it is at a point, or paste remedy. Conclaue, a privy or
secret chamber. sometime a bankettynge chamber. Concludo, clusi, dear, to
conclude or make an end. Conclusio, onis, a conclusyon or end of a mattier.
Concordare, to be at a co^corde or agreement. Concoquo, coxi, concoquere, to
digest. Concordia, concord or agreement. Concorporo, aui, are, to make one
thing of diverse. Concors, dis, of one will or mind. Concrepare, to make a
greatte noise, or to creke, as a door does in the openyng. Concretum,
congeled or conglutinate. Concubitor, oris, he that medlethe with a womanne.
Concubium, the first sleep in the night, or the depest of the night.
Concumbo, bui, concumbere, et concubo, aui, are, to lie together, to accompany
together, in the act of generation. Concupisco, piui, piscere, to coueyte or
desire fervently. Concupiscentia, a fervent desire or appetite carnal.
Concutio, tii, tere, to shake. Condecet, it well becomes. Condecenter,
agreably. Condecentia, a besemynge. Condemno, aui, are, to condemn. Condecoro,
aui, are, to make cleanly, or honest, to polyshe. Condico, xi, cere, to
appoint, to ordeyn, to promise, to ask again, to deny, to assign by mouth,
to denounce, or declare. Tit, ^^. ^^.
Condictio, onis, an action in the law, or appointment to a day certain.
Condictum, a promise. Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to season meat, to powder,
or otherwise order it, to preserve it from corruption. Condimentum, that
wherewith things be preserved from corruption, or else made dilectable in
taste. Conditaneus, a, um, that which is to be preserved. Conditio, onis,
Condition, fortune, estate, election, or choice. Conditionem accepit, He took
the bargain or promise, or he agreed. Condititia cibaria, powderid meat, or
other wise preserved. Conditiuus, a, um, that which may be powdered or kept.
Conditor, oris, A maker. Conditorium, a Sepulcher, a place wherein ordinance
for war is kept. Condo, didi, dear, to lay saulfe, or hyde. sometime to
make, or build. Ci. Tus. lib. 5.
Condocefaceo, foeci, facere, to make to know. Condris, an herb, called false
dittayn, by cause it is like dyttayne, but it has less leaves. Conducibile,
profitable. Conduco, xi, cere, to bring with me, to hyre, to take a house or
land. also to gather, to convert. Conducere, to profit. Conducit, it is
profitable. Conductitius, a, um, that which may be hired or taken, or is used
to be hired. Condalium, a ring. Condyloma, atis, a swellynge in the fundement,
sometime hard, sometime soft. Condylos, the knuckle of a finger. Confecta,
things voyded or concluded by reason. Confercio, to stuff, or porre.
Confertus, ta, tum, gathered as people be gathered in a prease, thycke set.
Confertissima turba, in the thyckest prease. Confero, tuli, far, to put
together, to set forth, Plautus.
to prepare, to put in. Ne posterius in me culpam conferas, Put not at the last
the defaut in me. Consilia conferunt, They keep their counsels together. To lay
to, or join. Nouissima conferam primis, Terentius
I will lay to, or join the last to the first. Confer, to profit.
Confer in pauca, To conclude shortly. Columella
Also confer, to lay together. Sitque uttique proximum horreum, quo
conferatur rusticum instrumentu^, To both, next there must be a barn, wherein
may be laid up together instruments longyng to husbandry. Also Confero, I
give. Multa contuli in Catonem, I have given or attribute much to Cato, I have
favored much Cato. Contuli me domum, I went home. Contuli me ad Catonem, I
went unto Cato. Conferua, an herb which grows in fresh waters like to a
sponge. Confessor, oris, a confessor. Confestim, eftesoones. Conficio, eci,
ficere, to perform or finyshe, Lacta^tius.
to perish or be consumed, to distroy or sle, to explicate or declare.
Honestatis pars co^fecta est, qua^ tibi cupio esse notissimam, The part of
honesty is declared, which I would should be unto the perfitely known. Cic.
offic.
Also to bring to pass, Si me amas, co^fice, If thou love me, bring it to
pass. Also to gather money. Permagnam dices ex illa re pecunia^ confici posse,
Thou wylt say, that a great sum of money might be made of that thing.
Conficere to break. Plinius.
Nucem dentibus conficere, To break a nutte with his tethe. Also to consume or
waste. Terentius
Qui cum hic non uideant me, credant me conficere argentum suum, who because
they se me not bear they believe I waste their money. Also Confici, to be made.
Quomodo potest ex multorum deorum aceruo unus deus confici? By what means may
there be of a heap of gods one only god made? Co^fido, di, dear, to trust,
to be sure, to dare. Confidens, it is, he that regards no laws, nor fears
any thing. sometime it sygnyfieth constant, assured. Confidenter, constantly,
assuredly, sometime hardily, boldly, aduenturously. Confinis hoc confine, next
to or adjoining. Confinium, a border or march of a country or land. Confit,
it is made to gither. Confiscare, to sease for a forfaiture. Confiteor, eris,
to confess. Conflages, places, wherinto many wyndes do blow. Conflare, to
blow together, to blow like as one blows the fire. Conflata pecunia, money
coined. Conflare mendacium, to imagine a lie. Conflare inuidiam, inimicitias,
odium, to stire or procure envy, hostility, hate. Conflauit aes alienum, he is
run in debt. Also Conflare, to gather. Conflauit ex his omnibus populum, Of
all those he gathered a great multitude. Also to make. Et cur uae rigidum
falces conflantur in ensem, Vergilius.
And the crooked sith into the hard sword is made. Conflatile, that which is
apt to be wrought like metal. Conflicto, aui, are, to fight often.
Conflictor, aris, ari, to be vexed or troubled, to fight. Confligo, fligi,
gere, to fight as men do in battle. Confluere, to come or run to gether,
or flow. Confluges, places, in to the which many rivers do flow. Conformis,
hoc conform, of a conformity or like in facion, conueniente. Conforto, aui,
are, to comfort. Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other. Confundo, fudi,
dear, to confound, to meddel together. Confuto, aui, are, to reprove or
vaynquyshe by words. Also to steer. Congedus, a River in Spain, nere to a
town called Bilbilis. Congenulo, aui, are, to knele. Congero, gessi, ere, to
gather to gyther, or heap up. Congiatium, An alms, or other lyberalle
gift, given by the prince unto his people, be it in money corn or vitayles.
Congius, a certain measure, wherein Sextarius is six times, and the lycour
therein contained wayeth ten pound. Conglobare, to bring or come round
together. Congratulor, aris, ari, to rejoice with a another man of his good
fortune. Congredior, eris, gredi, to go with an other to fight, or dispute.
Congressus, us, A battle. Congrex, of the same flock. Congruo, grui, ere, to
agree. Congruum, Agreeable. Co^grus, and Co^ger, A fish called a Conger.
Coniectarium, effectual, or parfyte. Coniecto, aui, are, to suppose, to judge.
Coniector, oris, an interpretour of dremis, A Coniectour, that does coniecte
what shall happen. Coniectura, A conjecture. Coniecturale, that which is
coniectid, or gathered by conjecture. Coniectus, us, a certain direction of
rayson unto the truth. Conifera arbor, a tree which bears fruits being
smaller at the one end than at the other, like a pyne appull. Conijcio, ieci,
ijcere, to cast to coniecte. Coniecit se in fugam, He put him to flyghte.
Coniicere in uincula, To cast into prison, or to lay a man in the stocks or
gyues. Coniecit se intro, He went his way in. Coniecit se in pedes, He took him
to flight, he took him to his legs. Coniicere tela, to cast darts, or to
shoot. Coniicere in letitiam, to bring to a gladness. Coniugalis thorus, the
chamber where the busbande and wife do lie. Co^iugo, aui, are, to yoke
together, or mary. Coniugium, marriage. Coniungo, xi, ere, to join together.
Coniunx, iugis, A wife. Coniugus, a, um, that which joins. Coniuro, aui,
are, to co^sure or conspire with other for an ill purpose. Coniuiatio, a
Conspiracye. Conniueo, and Co^niuo, is, iui, uel xi, to wink, and is used to
be spoken, when men wol let things pass, that ought to be looked on.
Connubium, matrimony. Conoides, the female of the Cipresse tree. Conon, nis,
the name of a king of Athenes. Conopoeum, A Canapy, proprely such one as
hangs over beds, and is wroughte like a net, to keep out gnattes, which do
stynge men in their beds. Co^quinisco, co^quexi, co^quiniscere, to ducke with
the heed. Consalutare, to salute one an other. Consanguineus, Coseyne.
Consanguinitas, tatis, Kynred. Conscendo, di, dear, to klyme. Conscientia,
Conscience. Conscisco, sci, scere, to consent, determyne, or grant to a
mattier wyllynglye. Consciscere mortem, To kill wylfully. Conscius, conscia,
that knowith with an other. Conscius sceleris, party or privy to the offense,
accessarye. Conscribo, psi, bear, to write things together. Conscripti, they
whose names be written or registered to supply a number, which do lack: or
such as be new chosen or added unto the other. Consecranei, Tertullianus.
such as be dedycate to one sect or opinyon. Co^secro, craui, are, to
dedicate or consecrate. Consectanei, they which be of one sect. Consector,
aris, to follow all together. Consensio, A Consent or accord of one mind or
purpose. Consentio, tii, tire, to Consent. Consentaneus, a, um, agreeable.
Conseptum, An enclosure or place enclosed, Conseptus, ta, tum, enclosed.
Consequentia, things which do follow or ensue. Consequiae, sequeles.
Consequor, to follow immediately, to optain, or get, to express. Verbis consequi
non possunt, They may not be expressed in words. Conserere manu^, to fight
hand to hand. Consero, seui, serere, to sow or set herbs together.
Consessus, sus, Men sitting together. It may be taken for a sessyons or
sitting of men, which be commissioners. Consido, sidi, dear, to sytte or
abide together. It may be used to sytte at a sessyons. Consiliarius, a
counselor. Consilio, iui, uel, lui, lire, to leap together. Consilior, aris,
to take counsel. Consilium, a counsel. It may be taken for commyssioners or
judges assigned. Cic. pro Ros^.
Consisto, stiti, sistere, to stand fast or sure, to abide boldly by a
thing. Consistorium, a counsel house, specially in a princis palace.
Consobrini, cousyns germains of two brethren or two systers. Consolabundus, he
that comfort a man. Consolida, the name of an herb, called Confery.
Consolor, aris, ari, to give comfort, or take comfort. Consono, nui, are, to
make one sown together. Also to accord or agree. Consors, it is, a fellow or
companyon, some time it sygnifieth like. Consortium, fellowship or company.
Conspicio, spexi, cere, to see or behold. Conspicilium, a lowpe to look out
of a house, or wall. Conspicilia, spectakles. Conspico, spexi, ere, and
Conspicor, aris, ari, to behold. Conspicuus, a, um, circumspect, wytty, or of
a sharp and quycke wit. Also apparent or plain to perceive. Conspi^o, aui,
are, to conspire or consent. Also to blow together. Conspiratio, nis, a
conspiracye. Constantinopolis, Constantinople, a city in Thrace. Consternium,
a place where men, when they were bayned, laid their garments. Consterno,
aui, sternere, to throw down, or overthrow. Consternati, men overthrown,
sometime abashed. Consternatio, tionis, an abashement. Consterno, straui,
sternere, to straw, to paue. Constituo, stirui, stituere, to ordeyne, to
govern, to provide, to covenant, to form. Cicero.
Corpus been constitutum, A body well co^plexioned. Constitutio corporis, the
complexion. Constitutio causae, which our lawyers do call the matter in law.
Constitutus, ta, tum, ordained. Consto, stiri, stare, to persyste or abide in a
thing. Constat animo, He is of a steadfast mind. Constat pedibus, He is sure
of his feet, or hoole. ^is^ania.
Constat, it costeth, it is sold for. Constare, to stand together, to be
manyfeste or known, to agree. Constan^, it is, constant or steadfast.
Constanter, constantly. Constantia, constance, or stedfastenes. Construo,
struxi, struere, to build, to ordain. Consuesco, sueui, suescere, to be
wont. Terentiu^
sometime to use carnallye. Cum eius consueuit matre clanculum, He had company
with his mother priuelye. Also to use for a custom. sometime to live. Columel^.
Nec magis humo quam stagno consueuerunt, They live as well on land, as on
water. Consuetudo, dinis, custom or usage. Also carnal company. Consuefacio,
to accustom. Consul, lis, a chief officer among the Romans. Consularis, He
that had been consulle, or were mete to be consul. Consulatus, tus, the
office of Consul. Consulo, lui, sulere, with a datyue case, to give counsel:
with an accusative case, to ask counsaylle. Also with a dative case, it
sygnifieth to provide, to help to. Grauiter de se consulere, To do sum
hurt to him self. Consulto, taui, tare, to give or ask counsel often, to
delyberate or show mine advise often. Consulto, delyberately, or aduysedly.
Consultor, toris, he that gives counsel, sometime he that asks counsel.
Consultus, ta, tum, a wise man. Consultus, tus, and Consultum, the thing that
is consulted. Sometime an act of counsaylle. Consummo, aui, are, to sum up
in a recknynge, to fynishe or perform, or make up, or make perfect.
Consummatus, ta, tum, perfyte, at a point. Consumo, sumpsi, sumere, to
consume, or distroye. Consuo, ui, ere, to sow together, or join. Consyderate,
with a consyderation. Consyderatus, he that does a thing with consyderation.
Consydero, aui, are, to consider. Contabulari, to bourde, or to lay bourdes on
a roufe or flower. Contagium, and Contagio, Contagionis, and Contages, an
infectiue syckenesse. Contamino, taminaui, taminare, to vyolate, or defyle,
with myxtynge things together, to dishoneste. Contemno, contempsi, contemnere,
to dispyse, or contempne, which is less than despysynge. Contemptus, tus,
despyte. Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, specially in the mind with devotion
to god. Contemplo, aui, and contemplor, aris, to behold intentifely with great
affection. Contemporanei, they which be at one time. Contemptibilis, bile, he
that is to be despised, or not regarded. Contemptor, aris, to set little by.
Contendo, di, dear, to contend, or resyste, or strive, to cast or shote a
darte or arow: to continue, to make haste, to enforce. Contentio, onis,
resystence, strife, or debate. Also a sharp oration apt to confirm or
repreue, a continuance, an inforcement or setting forth with vehemence.
Contentus, ta, tum, that which is contained. also content or satisfied.
Contineo, nui, ere, to contayn, to withhold, to let. Conterraneus, country
man. Contestari, to ask together witness. Conticeo, ticui, ceere, to hold my
peace with other. Conticesco, idem. Conticimum, bed time, or the first part
of night, when men prepare to take their test, and all thing is in silence.
Contigno, aui, are, to raufter a house. Contignatio, onis, the raufterynge.
Continens, it is, firm land, that is none i will. also centynuall. Continenter,
continually, contynentely, or fyrmely. Continentia, continence, a virtue,
refusing things that are pleasant. Also resistance of ylle. Contineo, nui,
ere, to refrain, to keep back, to contain, to keep together. Contingo, tigi,
tingere, to touch. Contigit, It has happened. Continuo, aui, are, to continue.
Continuus, a, um, contynuall. Continue, contynually. Contor, aris, to abide.
Contorie res, things wounden and twysted. Also such matter, as oone part can
not agree with an other. Contra, again a place, a person, or a thing on the
other part. Contracto, aui, are, to attain, or comprehend. Contradico, dixi,
dicere, to contrary in wordis, to say contrary. Contraeo, to goo contrary or
against a thing. Contraho, traxi, trahere, to gather together. Contrahere aes
alienum, To be indetted, to commytte, to make a contracte or bargayne, to draw
together. Contrahere, to shrynke. Nerui contrahuntur, the synewes be shrunken.
Contrahere frontem, to lowre. Bona contracta, goods gotten by conqueste.
Contrarius, a, um, contrary. Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary, come
contrary. Controuersia, a controversy or variance. Controuersiosus,
lytigious, or full of controuersye. Controuersor, aris, to contend or vary.
Controuersus, a, um, contrary, or in contrary wise. Res controuersa, matter in
controuersye. Contubernium, a fellowship or a company. Contubernalis, a fellow
or companyon, or of one company. Contumax, macis, di^^bedient, or froward in
opinyon, he that will not be persuaded. Contumacia, dysobedyence, a self will,
or frowardenes. Contumelia, a reproach, a thing done or spoken to a man's
rebuke. Contumeliosus, he that uses to speak rebukefully. Contundo, tudi,
tundere, to break to pieces, or stryke down. Contuosi oculi, eien loking
narowe. Contus, a long spear or morys pike. also a long pole with iron at
the end, wherewith shypmen do gauge the water. Conuallis, a valey having
hills on both sides. Conuaso, aui, are, to gather by stelthe. Conuenae,
people assembled of diverse countries, dwelling in one country or town.
Conuenientia, a congruence. Also a coming together of people. Conuenire, to
come together, or to assemble in one place. Also to agree, to sewe at the law,
or bring in judgment. Also to determine, to speak with one, to accord.
Conuenit inter me atque hu^c, it is agreed between him and me, De pretio
conuenit, we are agreed of the price, In manu^ conuenit, She is my wife.
Conuentae, couenantes of marriage. Conuenticulum, a congreation, most commonly
for an ill purpose. Conuentio, onis, and conuentu^, a covenant. Conuentus, an
assembly of people, warned by the chief officers commandment. Conuentus
maximus, may be taken for a parlyament. Minores conuentus, sessions of the
peace. Conuersor, aris, to be conuersaunt. Co^uersatio, conversation or
familiarity. Conuerto, uerti, tere, to convert, or turn. Conuexum, the
outward part and rou^denes of a thing that is holowe. Conuicinium, a
neyborhode. Conuicior, aris, ari, to speak in reproach. Conuicium, a reproach
or rebuke. Conuictor, oris, a daily companyon at table, or a daily geste.
Conuiualis, le, pertaining to feasts. Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feast or
bankette, or to take meals with other men. Conuiuator, toris, a feaster or
banketter. Conuiua and conuictor, a beden gest, he that is invited or beden to
dinner or supper. Conuiuium, a feast or bankette. Conuoluolus, a little worm
with many feet and heary, that eats the leaves of vynes. Also an herb
runnynge up by bushes, having a flower like to a lyly, but it has no
sauoure. peradventure that which is called withwynde. Conuoti, sworn
brethren, or men making one auowe or promise. Conus, proprely the pyneapple
tree, by translation it is a figure in facion like to a pyne appull. Also the
crest of an helmet or salet. Coniscare, to bushe or streke heed to heed as
rams do. Conoides, pyneappull trees female. Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum,
the name of an isle nigh to the Rhodes. Plautus
Cous, a, um, of that isle. Copis, plentuouse. Copia, plenty, eloquence, power,
leave, or license, multitude. Copiae cornu, is rehearsed, when we will sygnifie
to be plenty of all things, in that which we speak of. Copiosus, a, um,
plentuouse. Copula, a couplyng or ioynyng together, couples or fetters.
Copulatiuus, ua, uum, that coupleth, or may cowple. Coquina, a kytchyn.
Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a coke Coquinaria, cokery.
Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cokery. Coquo, coxi, coquere, to seethe or
boil, to make ripe, to make ready, to digest. Coquus, a cook. Cor, cordis, the
heart. sometime it is taken for the mind. Eras. in Ci^ilia.
Corn edito, Do not tourment thy mind with care or heaviness. Cora, a city
that Dardanus builded, of which the inhabitants are called Corani. Coracesius,
a part of the hill Taurus. Corallium, a stone called coral. Corallobachates, a
stone with golden rays. Coram, before, openly, in presence. Corambla, an herb
that makes the eyes duske and weak of sight. Corax, acis, a crow. Coraxicus,
a part of the hill Taurus. Coraxis, a mountain in Asia, also a flood. Corbis,
a baskette. Corbita, a great ship, called a foyst. Corbona, the treasure of
the temple among the Jews. Corchorus, a vile herb. Corculum, sweet heart.
also wise men were so called among the Romans. Corcyra, an isle in Greece.
Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great memory. Cordi est, it is to my mind,
it co^tenteth me. Cordolium, sorrow, grefe at the heart. Corduba, a city in
Spain. Cordus, a, um, that thing, which spryngeth or comes late in the
year. Cordum foenum, latewarde hay. Cordi agni, latewarde lambs. Coreaceus,
a, um, of lether. Coriago, aginis, the syckenesse of cattalle, when they are
clunge, that their skynnes do cleave fast to their bodies. Coriarius, a
tanner. Corinthiacus, a, um, of Corinthe. Corinthia uasa, plate made of the
metal of Corinthe, which was myxt metal. Corinthus, a city in Achaia,
which was in that part of Greece, that is now called Morea: whereof came a
proverb, Non est cuiuslibet Corinthum appellere, It is not in every man's power
to ariue at Corinthus, which does signify, It pertayneth not to every man to
attempt thingis dangerous, or hard to acheue. Vide originem in chiliadibus
adagiorum Erasmi, uel in Aulo Gellio. Corium, the skin of a beast, also
lether. the pane of a wall made with lyme and sand. Corna, ae, the name of.ii.
cities. Cornelia, a noble woman of Rome. Cornetum, a grove of hauthorne.
Corneus, a, um, of hawthornes. Cornicen, a blower in a horn. Cornicor, aris,
ari, to make a chattryng like a choughe. Cornicularius, a certain office in
arms, concerning capital sentences. Cornicu^ oculos configere, Eras. in
Chilia.
to prick out the crows eien, is a proverb used, when we would signify, that
one with a new devise, had obscured the doctrine or estimation of them, which
had been before him, and had made them to seem, that they knew or see nothing.
It may be also said, where one man will make all other men blind, that have been before him; and reprove or dissolve that, which has been allowed by wise
men. Corniculum, a garment pertainyng to soldiers. Also sometime a town in
Italy. Cornigenus, a, um, of the kind, which has horns. Corniger, geris, al
thing that bears a horn. Cornupes, pedis, every beast that has horn on his
feet. Cornix, nicis, a bird called a chowgh. Cornu, a borne: by translation,
the corners and wyndinges of ryuers. Also the two ends of a battle be
callid, Dextrum cornu, et sinistrum cornu. Cornucopiae, was a horn that
Hercules plucked from Achelous, which horn the Hymphes or immortal ladies
filled with sweet flowers and fruits. Cornupeta, a beast that stryketh with
his horns. Cornus, nus, a hawthorne tree, Cornutus, a, um, that which has
horns. Corolla, a garlande. Corollarium, that which is above the very
measure. also a little crown. Corona, a crown, a garlande, a chaplette, a
company of people standing round like a cerkle. Also the cerkle about the moon. Coronamentum, a multitude of crounes, or garlandes. Coronarius, ria, a
maker of crowns, or garlandes. Corone, a town in Greece in the parts now
named Morea. Coronea, a city in the parts of Boeotia, in Greece. Coronis,
nidis, the nose of a ship. Also an end, the extreme part, the top, the
borne, or other like. Corono, aui, are, to crown, or set on a crown or
garlande. Corporalis, le, corporal. Corporatio, corporatura, the quantity,
state, or facyon of the body, corporature. Corporcus, ea, um, that which is of
a bodily substance. Ennsus.
Corporo, aui, are, to kill. Corpulentus, corpulente or gross in body, fleshy.
Corpus, corporis, a body. sometime it signifies but flesh only. also
sometime all manner of substance. Corrado, rasi, dear, to shave or scrape, to
take away, spoil, sell, or alienate. Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correct, or
amend. Corrector, toris, a correcter, or amender. Corripio, pui, ^ere, to
rebuke. proprely it is to take a thing quyckely, and with haste. Corripitur
febre, he is taken with a fever. Corripitur somno, He is fast a sleep.
Corriuare, is proprely of beasts, to go together to watrynge. Corrugi,
furrows made in hills, to co^ney water, to wash the owre of metal.
Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupt, to viciate, to distroy, to suborne, to
tempte, or procure by gifts. Corruptela, corruption or defylynge. Corsica, an
I Will in the myddell see between Bean and the I Will of Sardinia. Cortex, corticis,
a rynde or bark. Cortina, a dyers fat. Also it is the table of Apollo, from
the which he gave answer. Cato takes it for a vessel, out of the which
oil is let run. Also that which is called a corteyne of lynnen cloth or
sylke. Also places divided with cortaynes be called Cortinae. Cortinale, the
place where vessels be set, wherein wine and honey is sodden. Cortinon, radyshe
seed. Cortona, a city in Tuscane. Cortyna, or gortyna, a cite i^ the i will of
Ca^dy Corus, the northwesterne wind. Also a measure contaynynge.xlv. bushels.
Corusco, aui, are, to brandyshe or glytter. Coruus, a crow. Corybantes, the
priests of the Idol Cybeles, which as mad men waggyng their heedes and
daunsynge, playinge on cymbales, ran about the streets, prouokyng other to do
the semblable. Coryces, curious persons, crafty inuestigatours or serchers of
mattiers. Also a hylle in Crete, lyenge on the sea side. Corycium, a
gardeuiandes or walet, or other like thing to put in vitayles. Corycum, the
name of a city and mountain in Sycile. Corydalus, a lark. Coryletum, a grove
of hasylles. Corylus, an hasyll and a hasylle nutte, or fylberde. Corymbi,
bearies of an yuy. Corymbites, a kind of spurge. Coriphaeus, the chief in
every order. Corythus, a bow case, or a quyuer for arowes. Corythus, a town in
Tuscan nere to Aretiu^ Coryza, the pose, or distillation out of the heed into
the eyes and nose. Cos, cotis, a whetstone. Cosmera, a chamberer, or woman,
that apparayleth her maistresse. Cosmicus, ca, cum, worldly. Cosmographia, the
description of the world. Cosmographus, he that discribith the world. Cosmus, a
propre name. Cossi, worms bredde in trees, which the people of Phrigia, did
eat for a delycate meat. Also men or women that have their bodies riueled or
full of wryncles. Costa, a rybbe. Costus, uel costum, a tree or her be, which
is very soote in savor. Cosyros, an I Will in Aphrike. Coticula, a touch stone,
whereon they try gold and silver. Cotidie, daily, day by day. Coton, a haven
made with stoone. Also a town in Byria, of the which a certain kind of
small fygges, are called plurally, cotona, uel coctona. Cotoneum, a quynse.
Cothurnus, a slipper, specially high corked. sometime it is taken for a high and
arroga^t form of speaking or writynge. Coturnix, nicis, a bird named a
quayle. Cotyla, a vessel or cup to drink of, such as Diogenes used, before
he learned of a child to drink out of his hand. Cotyle, all the holownes of a
cup: also a measure about the quantytie of half a pynte: also the ioynte of
a man's thygh. also a weight of.ix. ounces. Cotylum, a place in the mountain of
Ida, out of the which rounneth three great ryuers, Scamander, Granicus, and
Aesopus. Couinum, a manner of a chariot. Couinarius eques, horsemen that faughte
leapyng out of a chariot unto horseback. Coxa, ex coxendix, dicis, the thigh
of a man. sometime the hyppe or joint of the thigh. Conuictus, tus, a living
together in house, or at one table. Conuoco, caui, care, to call to gyther.
C, ante R.
CRabro, onis, a great waspe, called a hornette. Cranaus, a king of Athenes.
Craneum, a place of exercise at Corynthe. Cranium, the foremooste part of
the schulle. Crantor, oris, the name of a philosopher. Crapula, an inflammation
and heed ache, which comes of excess of drinking. It is also taken for
drunkenness. Cras, to morrow, in time coming. Crastino, is the same. Eras. in
Chil.
Crassamentum, thyckenesse. Crassa Minerua, a gross wit, which does nothing
exactely. Crascesco, cessi, cessere, to make fat, or full of flesh, or
thycke. Crassiore Musa, with a more plain or intelligible senes. Crassus, a,
um, fat, fleshy, thycke, gross, poysye. Crassities, and crassitudo,
fatness; thicknes, grossenes. Crastino, aui, are, to defer from day to
day. Crastinus, na, number, pertaining to to morrow, or time to come. Cratera,
uel crater, teris, a greatte cup. Also a greatte hoole on the top of the
meruaylouse hylle of Ethna in Sycyle, out of the which issues flames of fire.
Craterus, the propre name of a man, of whom Persius speaks in his.iii.
Saty. Crates, grates of iron or wodde. Also the name of a philosopher, which
to the intent he moughte the more quietely study phylosophye, he being rich,
threw all his goods into the sea, saying, Hens with a myschiefe ye ungracious
appetytes, I had leauer drown you, thanne ye should drown me. Supposing,
that he moughte not have virtue and richesse together. Crathis, the name of two
ryuers, the one in Greece, the other in Calaber. Craticula, a gredyron, whereon
meat is broyled. Cratinas, a river in Affrike. Cratinus, a poet which wrate
comedies. Cratylus, the name of a philosopher, to whom Plato wrate a book.
Cratio, iui, ire, to cover with grates. Cratippus, the name of a philosopher.
Cratos, power, or dominion. Creo, aui, are, to make of nothing. Also to get
children. Creatura, a creature or thing made of nothing. Creber, bra, bru^,
frequent, or accustomed. Crebro, often. Crebresco, crebrui, crebrescere, to be
wont, to be commune. Credibile, that which may be byleued. Creditor, oris, he
unto whom a man owes any thing. Creditum, that thing that is owed. Credo,
didi, dear, to believe, to trust, to committee, or deliver a thing to be
saufelye kept, to publyshe. Credulus, he that believes lightly. Credulitas,
tatis, light believe. Crementum, increase. Cremera, a river. Cremium, fried
meat burned to the pa^ne. Cremor, oris, the juice of barley steapyd in water,
beaten and pressed, Crenae, the dentis about the leaf of an herb or tree like
to a saw. Also it is the scores, which men unlearned do make on styckes for
their remembrance. Also Crena, is the nocke of a bow or arowe. Creontes, the
name of a king, whose daughter Jason married, wha^ he had left Medea.
Creophilus, the name of a poet. Crepetus, a, um, doubtful, ambiguous.
Crepida, and crepis, pidis, a shoe with lachettes, some take it for a corked
shoe or slypper, because of the noise, which it makes when a man goes.
Crepidatius, ^ii, he that makes shows or slyppers. Crepido, inis, a creek on
the waters side, whereon the water beats. Also the mouth of a well, and the
extreme part of any place. Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other instrument, which
being touched with the hand, makes a sownde. Crepito, taui, are, to make a
noise or bounsynge. Crepitulum, an ornament of the beed, which with me^ynge of
the heed yeldethe a sown. Crepitus, a bounse or great dynne or noise. ^
Crepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noise or sown. Crepere, to be broken.
Crepundia, tryfles or small gifts given to little children, as napkyns,
little belles, tymbrelles, and such like toys. Also the first apparayle of
children, as swathels, wastcotes, and such like. And by translation they say, A
crepundijs erat uirtuti deditus. From his chyldhode he was ever given to
virtue. Crepusculum, the break or first spring of the day, called the twie
light. Cresco, creui, crescere, to grow or increase. Craeuit haereditatem, He
is increased in his lyu^l^de, or he has taken possession. Creta, an I Will called
now Candy: also a stone called Chalk. Cretatus, ta tum, laid with chalk.
Cretaeus, and Cretensis, a man of Crete or Candye. Creterra, a buckette to
draw up water. Eras. in Chil.
Cretizare cum Cretensibus, a proverb used where a crafty man will deceive him
that is crafty: a thief steal from a thief, or a liar lie before them, which
use to make leasynges. Creticus, ca, um, of Crete or Candy. Also a foot in
meter, which has the first and third syllable long. Cretosus, a, um, full
of chalk. Cribro, aui, are, to syfte or sarce. Cribrum, a sieue or a sarce.
Crimen, minis, a fault, an offense, blame, matter laid against one by action
or suite. sometime a false suspicion. Criminale, criminalle, wherein is an
offense or fault. Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to lay to ones
charge, to accuse. Criminosus, a, um, rebukeful, worthy blame Crimissus, a
river of Greece. Crines, hear of the heed. Crinire, to lay forth the hear.
Crinitus, he that has much or long hear. Crinita stella, a comete or blasynge
sterre. Crinon, a red lylye. Crisa, the name of a town builded by Crisus,
Phocus son. Criticus, he that judges the acts or warkes that men do write.
Critici dies, the days wherein physytions give judgment of the contynuance of
the syckenesse. Crito, a philosophers name of Athenes. Critabulus, was a
physician, of whom Pliny speaks lib.vii. Crobylon, a cawle to wear on ones
heed. Croco, crocito, to make a noise like a raue^. Crocinum et croceum,
colored like saffron. Crocodilus, a beast in Aegypte, living sometime in
water, sometime on land: and is facioned in the body like a dragon, sauinge
that he lacks wings. Crocotir^um, cakebreade. Crocotulae, garme^tis of the
color of saffron. Crocotularius, a dyar. Crocus, saffron, a spice. Crocuta, a
beast in Ethiope, which with his tethe breaks all things in pieces, and
deuoureth it, be it wodde or metal. Cronia, feasts dedicate to Saturn.
Crotalum, an instrument, which the Egiptians used in sacrifice made of.ii.
plates* which beaten together, made an harmony. Crotalus, he that has a
sownynge voice, and a shyll. Crudaria, a vain of silver. Crudelis, le, cruel.
Crudesco, crudui, crudescere, to be raw. Crudus, da, um, raw, fresh, or new
made, not type. Crudus homo, whose stomach can not digest well. Cruditas,
tatis, rawnes, or lack of digestion. Cruento, aui, are, to make blody.
Cruentus, a, um, blody, cruel. Crumena, a purse. Cruor, bloudde which
commethe out of a wound. Crus, cruris, the part of the leg, which is from
the knee down unto the ancle called the shanke. Crusta, the utter part of
every thing that is not eaten. Also the scurfe of a scabbe or wound, also
plaster of a wall. Crusto, taui, are, to lay plaster, or pargette. Crustata,
whereon is laid plaster, or thyn shardes of stone. Crustarius, a pargettour.
Crustulata, a meat made of crustes of bred. Crustulum, crustum, a crowst of
bread, of a pasty, or of roasted, broyled, or fried meat Crustumina pira,
pears read on the one side. Crustuminum, a town in Italy. Crux, crucis, a
cross, galowhowse, or other like. Cruciatus, tus, tourment. Crypta, a secret
place within the earth. Crypticus, ca, cum, secret or hid under the earth.
Cryptoporticus, a place under ground, with wyndowes like to a parler, where
men do dyne in the summer time for hear. Crystallus et chrystallu^, a stone
called cristal. Cristallina, vessel and cups of cristal stone.
C, Ante T.
CTenes, certain teethe. Cteniatrus, he that heals diseasis of horses and
catell. Ctesiphon, the name of a work man, which builded the temple of Diana,
at Ephesie, a work wonderful, and renoumed through the world: the which was
after bourned of one Herostratus, only because he would for some deed be spoken
of.
C, Ante V.
CVbatus, tus, a sittyng on brood, as a benne does. Cubicularius, a servant
that awayteth in the chamber: a chamberlayne, or grome of the chamber.
Cubicularis, lare, that perteynethe to the Chaumber. Cubiculum, a bed
chamber. Cubile, a bed, sometime it is taken for a closet. Cubito, aui, are,
to lie often with one. Cubitus, et Cubitum, an elbowe, sometime a measure
called a cubite, that is to say, one foot and an half: but a cubite in
geometry contains.vi. of our common cubits. Cubitale, a sorsleue of a
garmente, which keuereth the arm from the elbowe downwarde. Cubo, cubui,
cubare, to lie down, properly it is of sick men. Cubatio, a lyinge. Cubus, is
a figure four square on all parts like a dyce. Cucubo, aui, are, to make a
noise like an oule. Cuculio, onis, a keuerynge of the hedde, which men did
use when they walked in the night. Cuculus, et Cucullus, a byrd called a
cuckoo. Cucullus, a cloak to defend rain and wind. Cucuma, a chafar, wherein
water is het. Cucumer, eris, et Cucumis, a fruit called a cocumber.
Cucumerarius, a garden where cocumbres do grow or be kept. Cucurbita, a fruit
called a gourde. Also cucurbita, and Cucurbitula, is a cup, wherewith Surgyons
do draw out blood with scarysying of the skin, called cuppynge.
Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes be sown. Cucurbitarius, a lover of
gourdes. Cucurio, iui, iri, to make a noise like a cock. Cudo, cusi, cudere, to
strike, as smythes do. Cudere pecunia^, to make or coin money, also cudere,
to break or broyse. Cuias, cuiatis, of whense. Cuius, cuia, cuium, whose.
Cuium paecus, whose catall. Culcitra, a mattresse. Culeus, a sack, also a
measure containing xxx. bushels. Culex, culicis, a gnatte. Culigna, a bolle or
dyshe to drink of. Culina, a kechyn, sometime the meat that is dressed.
Culinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a cook. Culleolum, the utter shale of
a nut, which is grene. Culullus, an erthen cup, such as the galye cups be.
Culmen, culminis, the roufe of a house. Culmus, the reed or straw of corn,
from the rote to the ear. Culpa, is an offense done not weetinge, or not
intending to do hurt. Culter, et Cultrum, a knyfe. Cultellum, a lyttel knife
or a whittill. Cultrarius, was he that killed the beast, and divided him in the
sacrifice to Idolles. It may now be taken for a slaughter man. Cultus,
cultus, apparayle, sometime it is taken for honor done to god. Cum, with, when,
whiles, where, albeit, for asmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, As Well to me as
to him. In cum is some thing less understand, in Tum sum thing more. Quod
cum omnibus confitendum est, tu^ nobis praecipue, which thing ought to be
confessed of all men, and of us most specially. The ancient writers, when it
sygnifyed when, where, and forasmoche, they wrate it Quom. Cum dicto,
forthewith after that he had spoken. Cum imperio est, he bears a rule. Cum
maxim, excedyngly. Cum potestate est, he is in authority, or in an high
office. Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, Very noble. Cum stomacho,
dysdaynfully. Cum tempore, in a certain space. Cum uema tua, with your
license. Cuma, a town in Greece. Cumae, a city in Campania. Cumanus, a man of
that city. Cumatilis, tile, a color called blewe. Cumera, a greatte vesselle,
wherein corn was kept. Cumetum, a vessel used at weddynges. Cuminum, an herb
and sede called co^myn. Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heap, to fill, to add
more. Cumulatim, in an heap, or heaped up. Cumulus, an heap. Cunae, et
Cunabula, cradels, wherein children be rocked. sometime it is taken for the age
of infancy. Cunctator, o^is, a tariar, a differrer. Cuncti, all together.
Cunctor, et Contor, aris, to tarry, to prolo^ge time, to abide, to doubt.
Cunctatio, onis, a tarienge, an abydyng, a prolongynge of time, a doutynge.
Cuneus, an axe to cut wood, which is small and thyn before, and broad and
thycke after, that the wodde may ryue the better. also a wedge to cleave wodde
with. By translation it is a company of foteme^ in battle, that goth in a like
order, small before, and broad behind: there was a like form in the Theater or
place, where men beheld plays, it is sometime taken for a company of people.
Cuneatim, in the form before declared. Cuneatus, ta, tu^, that which appears
to be in the said form of Cuneus. Cuniculus, a beast called a cony.
Cuniculum, an hole in the ground. Cunila, an herb called sauery, whereof be
diverse kinds. Cunire, to dunge as a child does. Cunnus, a woman's wyket.
Cupa, a cup. Cupedinarius, an hucstar that sells meat and drink. Cupes,
Cupedia, et Cupedula, delicate meats, or desire of deynty meats. Cupido,
Cupidinis, the son of Venus, god of love. Cupido in the feminine gender,
vehement desire or appetite. Cupidus, da, dum, desyrouse. sometime it
signifies a lover. Cupiditas, tatis, couaytise. Cupide, desirously. Cuprum,
metal called coper. Cur, wherefore or why. Cura, care, thought, study,
diligence, warke or labor, also love. Curatio, cure. Curator, gardeyn in
socage, or he to whom the custodye of a man mad or folysshe is committed.
Also he to whom any thing is committed to survey, or to provide things
necessary for a weal publyke, or to order such things as he has in charge,
concerning as well private things as they that do belong to a comminaltie:
he may be properly called a suruayour. Curatorius, a, um, belonginge to
surueinge. Curcura, an island in the sea Adriatike. Curculio, onis, a littell
worm in grayn called myte or wyuell. It is also the wesyll of the throat of a
man, whereby he draws wind. Cures, a city of the Sabines. Curetes, a people
of the I Will of Crete or Candy. Curia, a court, that is to say, where the senate
is, or officers exercisynge such things as they have in charge. it is
sometime taken for the persons in the court. Curiales, they which be of that
court. Curio, onis, a bedell or criar. Curionem agnum, Plautus calls a lean
lamb. Curio, also of Varro is taken for a place, where priests consulted of
things concerning divine ceremonies. Curiosus, sa, sum, curiouse, taken
sometime on the ill part, where more dylygence is used, than is necessary or
expedient: sometime on the better part, where we be very careful and busy
about things, concerning either our selfs or other men. Curiositas tatis,
curiosytie, or to much dilygence. Curious, the name of a noble Romayne, unto
whom when the ambassadors of Samnytes had brought a great sum of gold for
a present from their people, desiring him to take it, and use it at his
pleasure, he answered, that Marcus Curious had lever have dominion over rich
men, than to be rich him self, and that he, which could not be vaynquished in
battayl, might not be corrupted with money. Curo, aui, are, to care, to be
doing of a thing. sometime to prepare, to heal one that is sick, to take
refection or comfort. Curriculo, quyckely. Curro, cucurri, currere, to run.
Cursus, us, et cursura, a course. Cursor, oris, he that runs in post.
Cursim, runnynge. Cursito, aui, are, to run often. Curso, aui, are, to run
always or often. Cursorius, a, um, pertainyng to runnyng. Curruca, a little
bird, which hatchethe and brings up cuckowe birds. Currus, a carre.
Curriculus, a little carre. Curriculum, a short space of time. Also a
runnynge place. Curtus, ta, tum, short. Curuamen, minis, a crookedness.
Curuesco, uesci, uescere, to be crooked. Curuipes; he that has a crooked foot.
Curulis and curule, were lyttelle carres, or drayes, having in them chaires of
yuorie, wherein they satte, which were heed officers in Rome. sometime it is
used of poets for the same officers. Curuo, uaui, are, to bow or make crooked.
Curuus, a, um, crooked. Cuspis, idis, some time signifies the point of any
weapon, sometime the stele, sometime a spear heed. Custodia, the custody,
keeping, or ward: sometime he that keeps, sometime he that is kept, sometime
the prison. Custodio, diui, dire, to keep, to observe. Custoditio, the keeping.
Custoditus, ta, tum, kept. Custos, odis, a keeper. Cutis, the inner skin.
C, Ante Y.
CYamea, a stone, which being broken, is like to a bean. Cyaneae, or
Cyanitae, Islands or rather rocks under Thrace Bosphore. Cyaneus, a, um, and
Cianus, a, um, a brighte blewe color, or blunket. Cyathus, a cup. it is also
a measure, contaynynge as much as a reasonable manne may drink at one
draught. Cybele and cybeles, was the wife of Saturn, and was named of painims,
the mother of the gods, which has diverse other names, as it shall appear in
their places. Cyclades, yles in the greek see. Cyclas, cladis, a woman's
kyrtell. Cyclus, a round place in Athenes, where things were sold. Also a
coin or poyse. Cyclops, clopis, an ancient people, inhabitynge the isle of
Sycile, which were like gyauntes, having but oone eye in their foreheed.
Cydnus, a river of Sicile, the water whereof was meruaylous cold. and as Pliny
says, auayleable for the gout in the fete Cydon, one of the notablest towns
of Candy. Cygnus, a swanne. Cylindrus, an instrument, wherewith men do beat
floores, or do ram with. Also every thing that tourneth about quyckly. Also
stones round and long like beade stones, called langattes. Cylindraceus, a,
um, in the form of a langatte. Cyllene, a hylle of Archadie, where they say
Mercurius was nouryshed. Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury. Cylydros, a
serpent that rolleth him self, as he gothe. Cyma, young colewortes. Also the
tender part of the stalk of every herb. Cymatilis, chamlette. Cymba, a
boot. Cymbalum, an instrument of music. Cymbalistae, they that play upon
cymbals. Cymbium, a piece or cup to drink wine in. Cyminum, cummyne. Cyminus, a
laake in Italy. Cynaethium, a city of Archadie. Cynanche, a syckenes called
the squynce, which is in the throat and jaws. Cynegetica, volumes written of
hunting. Cynici, a sect of philosophers, which lived in pouerte without shame,
like doggis. Cyniphes, biting gnattis with long legs. Cynocephalus, a beast
having the body like to an ape, and the heed like a dog. Also people under
the great cane, having heedes like dogs. Cynoglossa, an herb callid hounds
ru^ge. Cynomia, dog flies, which do souke blood from a beast.
Cynorrhodos, the flower of Eglantyne. Cynos, in latyne is canis, a dog. Also
a city in Locris. Cynosbatum, a thorn, the leaf whereof is like the step of
a man's foot, and has black bearies like to grapes. Cynosura, a figure of
sterres in heaven, called Vrsa minor. Cynozoon, a stynkynge herb. Cynthia, one
of the names of the moon. Cyparissus, a cypress tree. Cypirus and cyperis, an
herb, having leaves like sedges, also a rote like to ginger. Cyprium aes,
copper, metal. Cyprus, an isle called cypers. Cyrcerum, a great ship, or
carrike. Cyrene, nes, a famous city in Libia. Also a city in the isle of
cypers. Cyreneus, a man of that city. Cyrnus, the isle which is callid
Corsica, or Corse. Cyrnea, a goblette to drink wine in. Cyrrhea, a city in
the mountain of Helycon. Cyrrus, the name of.ii. ryuers, one in Armenia, the
other in Media. Cyrus, the name of diverse kings in Persi. Cyssus, a kind of
yuye, that grows alone. also the name of a river. Cythera, plural. an isle
against Candy. Cytheron, an hylle in Boeotia. Cytisus, an herb, which is
good to give to cattle against the rotte. Cyzicus, the name of an I Will by
Greece.
D, Ante A.
DACIA, a countreye beyond Hungry, on the north part of the river of Dano,
or Danubius. Daci, and Dani, people of that country. Dacicus, ca, cum,
pertaining to that country. Dacus, ca, cum, idem. Dactylus, a finger, a foot
in meter, having one long syllable, and.ii. short. it is also a date.
Dactylides, grapes being long like a finger. Daedalus, the name of an
excellent carpentar of Athenes, which first found the saw, the twie bylle,
and the awgor: and made the place in Crete callydde Laberynthus. Daemogorgon,
onis, whom paynyms called the god of the earth, first creatoure of the earth.
Demon, nis, a damned spirit. sometime it is taken for the soul, being in
the body of man. Daemonicus, ca, cum, dyuellyshe. Daemonium, a spirit.
sometime it is used for a godheed among the paynyms. Daemoniacus, and
demoniosus, possessed with an ill spirit. Dalmatia, a country on the river of
Dano, called now Slauony. Dalmata, a man of that country. Dalmaticus, ca, um,
of that country. Dalmaticatus, apparailed like a Slauanoise. Dama, a falowe
dear. Damascus, a city in Siria. Damia, one of the names of the goddess
Cybele. Damatris, the priest of her temple. Damnas, condemned. Damnifico,
feci, facere, to do harm. Damno, aui, are, to condemn, to disherite* to
compel, to deliver. Damnum, harm, or hurt. Damnosus, a, um, harmefull, or
hurtful, or having much harm. Damoetas, a shepardes name in Virgill. Damon,
a philosophers name of Pythagoras sect. Dan, a town which is the bounds of
Judea, on the north part. Danaus, the king of Argyues, which had fyfty
daughters, who all, saving one, slew all their husbands in one night.
Danaides, the daughters of Danaus. Dani, a people now called Danes. Danisma,
usury. Danista, he that lends for usury. Danubius, a famous river, now called
Danowe, wherinto do flow.lx. ryuers. Danunt, Plautus does use for dant, they
give. Dapalis caena, a soupper, whereat be many and diverse meats. Dapatice,
feastfully, plentuously. Dapes, delycate and precious dysshes, or bankettes.
Daphne, the propre name of a little maiden, and also of a wodde. Daphnis,
nidis, in latin is a laurel. also the son of Mercury. It was also a
dilectable place without the city of Antioche, Also it was the name of a
portion of Lycia by the sea side. Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo.
Daphnoides, an herb like to Laurel, now called Laureole, as I suppose.
Daphnon, a place, where laurel grows. Dapifer, he that bearith a dishe at a
banquet. Dapino, to give, as it were a delicate dishe. Dapsa, a sacrifice, which
was made in winter, and in spring time. Dapsile, abundantly. Dapsilis,
abundant, liberal, or large. Dardanarii, forstallers of markettes, which do
bye before hand, to selle dear afterward. Dardaniae arts, witchecrafte.
Dardanus, the name of a prince, reigning in that part of Phrigia, where Troy
stood, which was of him called Dardania. Darius, the name of diverse kings of
Persia. Daricus, money of Persia. Darideus, the name of a king of Persia in
the time of Tyberius, Caius, and Claudius themperours. Datarius, a, u^, given.
also an officer in Rome which subscribed the date of letters. Datatim, one
gyuyng to an other, as at the tossynge of a balle. Daunia, a part of Italy,
now called Appulia.
D Ante E.
DE, of, joined with a verb, or nowne, it signifies withdrawinge or taking
away, as, Decorrico, I bark or take away the rynde: Depilo, I pluck away the
hear. sometime it signifies downward, as Deorsum descendo, I go downewarde.
Sometime contrary, as, Dehortor, I give contrary advise: Dedoceo, I teach
contrary, Terentius
sometime it sygnifieth for, as, Qua^tum me amas de fidicina hac? How well
do thou love me for this singing wenche? Deambulatorium, an aley to walk in,
it may be sometime used for a galery. Deambulo, aui, are, to walk up and down.
Deamo, aui, are, to love heartily. Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by
the joints. Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to lay over all with gold.
Debacchor, aris, ari, to rage, as it were in a drunkenness, to be wodde
angry. Debello, aui, are, to vanquyshe, or take one in battle. Debeo, bui,
ere, to owe, or ought. Debilis, wealte or feeble. Debtor, toris, he that owes.
Debitio, onis, the act of owinge. Debtor, toris, a dettour. Debitum, a debt
or duty. Debiti iudicatus, condemned in an action of debt. Debrior, aris,
ari, to be drunk. Decachinnor, aris, ari, to skorne. Decachordum, an
instrument with ten strings. Decacumino, aui, are, to strike of the top.
Decalcatum, laid with lyme. Eras. in Chi^ia.
De calcaria in carbonariam, out of the lyme kill into the cole pit. A
proverb, whereby is sygnifyed from oone myschiefe to an another. Decalogus, the
book of holy scripture, containing the ten commandementes. Decapolis, a
country in Judea, beyond the river of slume Iordane, contaynynge ten
cities. Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pottis or cups. Decedo, decedere, to
depart from a place, to mynyshe or appaire. Decedere uia, to goo out of the
way, or to give the way to an other of courteisye. Decedere de suo iure, to
remytte somewhat of his right. December, the name of one of the twelve
months. Decemiugis, a teeme of ten horses. Decempeda, a perch or poll ten
fotelonge. Decempedator, he that meateth with such a polle. Decendium, the
space of ten days. Decerno, decreui, decernere, to decree, determyne, or
discuss. Decerpo, psi, pere, to pull, or pluck of. Decerto, aui, are, to
contend or fight together. Decet, it besemeth, it is convenient. Decens, it is,
convenient. Dedecet, it is inconvenient, unsitting. Decido, di, dear, to cut
of. also to decide or discuss a matter in variance. Decido, ere, to fall of,
or away. Decidua, are those things that fall away, as leaves of trees. Decima,
a tenthe part. Decimanus, sieve decumanus, na, number, great, as Decumana porta,
The great yate or entry into a camp of an army. Decumanus, a general
receyuer or collectour of taxes or subsydies, or other like exactions. Decimo,
aui, are, to take away the tenthe part from the resydue. Decimari legiones,
was when the tenthe person of every legion was put to death. Decimus, ma, mum,
the tenthe, the chief or principalle, as, Decimum quodque ouum, Every tenthe
egg. Decimus quisque fluctus, Every tenth river. Decipio, decepi, decipere, to
deceive. Decipula, a grynne or trap to take birds. Decircino, aui, are, to
vnbowe, or to bring out of compass, or roundenesse. Decius, the name of a
noble house of the Romans. Declamo, aui, are, to declame, or to exercise in
feyned orations. Declamatorius, a, um, pertaining to such exercise.
Declamatio, onis, an exercise in sained orations. Declaro, aui, are, to
declare, to open a thing which is dark. Declino, aui, are, to eschew, to
leave, to turn away, to lead away, to alienate. Decollo, aui, are, to stryke
of a heed by the neck, also to deceive, or disapoynte. Plautus
Vna est, quae decollauit, One womanne there is, which has deceived him.
Decolor, oris, ylle colored. Decoloro, aui, are, to stayne, to spylle the
color. Decoquo, decoxi, decoquere, to boil, or to sethe very much. sometime
to change, or digest perfitely. Also to consume or wast a man's substance, or
to bring detrymente or loss. Decoctor, toris, he that has wasted all his
substance, and is brought to extreme poverty, specially by lecherye and dyse
playenge. Decor, decoris, a beautye. Decoro, aui, are, to beautify or make
fair, or pleasant to the eyes or the ears, to honor. Decorum, a
semelynesse, or that which becomes the person, having respect to his
nature, degree, study, office, or professyon, be it in doing or speaking, a
grace. sometime it sygnifyeth honesty. Decorus, ra, rum, honest, semely,
fair. Dedecus, dishonestie in act, reproach. Decoruco, aui, are, to bark.
Decores, a bare or thredebare garment. Decrepitus, a very old man. Decrepita
senectus, extreme age. Decresco, feere, to wax less. Decretorius, a, um,
iudiciali, Also decreed, stablyshed. Decretorium tempus, decretorium sydus,
whereby judgment is given of the increase that shall succeed of any thing.
Decretum, a decree, a thing determined. Decubo, aui, are, to lie down.
Deculto, aui, are, to hyde under. Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lie down, also to
dye. Decuplatus, ta, tum, ten times dowbled, or ten fold. Decuplo, aui,
are, to double ten times. If it be an aduerbe, it sygnifyeth ten times, or
ten fold. Decuplum, like wise. Decuppa, he or she that sellethe wine by the
port. Cicero in Pisonem.
Decurio, onis, an office or dignity, having authorite orther over ten men
of arms, or the tenthe part of a company. Also it was taken for the lord
Chamberlayne to the Emperor. Suetonius in Domit. Cicero.
Also they were in other cities the same that Senators were at Rome Decuria,
was the order, office, or company, which was under the office of Decurio. Also
the company of iuges, as we have of the kings Benche, Commune place, and
Escheker. And Decurio, he that is chief of them. Decurro, decucurri, rere, to
run down, by translation it sygnifieth to run from the one end to the
other. Decursio, Iustes, as at the tylte or randon. Decursionem indicere, to
proclaim iustes. Suetonius in Nero^.
Decurtatus, ta, tum, shortened, abbreuiated. Decus, decoris, honor. Dedecoro,
aui, are, to disshonour, reprove, or defyle. Decusso, aui, are, to cut or
draw out in length, or to cut or deuyde in ten parts. Decussatim, in ten
partis. Decussis, the perfyte number of ten. Decutio, cussi, tere, to stryke
of. Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a message. Dedignor, aris, ari, to
disdain. Dedisco, dedidici, dedicere, to vnlerne, or forgette. Dediditio, a
renderynge up of a place besyeged. Dedititius, a, um, given or subject to an
other man's commandment. Dedo, dedidi, dedere, to give utterly, or for ever: or
to become subject, to render up, or yield. Dediditionem facere, sygnifieth the
same. Dedoceo, cui, cere, to teach a man other wise, than he has before
learned. Dedoleo, lui, lere, to cease from sorrow, or pain. Dedolo, aui, are,
to hew or cut, like a Carpenter. Deduco, xi, cere, to bring down, or to
lead, or draw, or bring from one place, or one thing to an other. sometime
to move from his purpose. sometime to bring home honorably from any place.
Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right way, or reason. Defalco, aui, are, to
cut of, take away, defalcate. Defamo, aui, are, to defame. Defaeco, aui, are,
to draw from the dregs, to cleanse or fine. Defectio, onis, rebellyon,
decreasynge, defaulte, lack. Defectus, ta, tum, that which saylethe, or
decays. Defectus, tus, lack. Defectus solis and lunae, the Eclyps of the
son and the moon. Defectus animi, sownynge or lyenge in a trance. Defecta
corpora, bodies consumed with syckenesse. Defendo, di, dear, to defend, to
put of, to prohybyte. Defensito, taui, tare, to defend often. Defero,
detull, defer, to bring to, to disclose, to accuse, or appeal, to bestow,
to give office or dignity, to attribute. Defer nomen, to complain.
Deferueo, ferui, ere, to be cold, or pacyent. Deferuesco, sci, scere, to wax
pacyente or cold, to appease him self, or withdraw his furye. Deficio feci,
ficere, to fail, not to suffyse, to lack, to leave, to disagree, to rebelle,
or depart from him, with whom he is retained, or goes from one Capytayne to
an another. Defectus, tus, lack, rebellion, or departing against covenant or
promise. Defector, oris, be that so departs or rebelleth, or goth from one to
an other. Defigo, fixi, figere, to set or fyxe on, or to perce or thrust
through. Definio, iui, re, to define, determi^e, or discuss. Definitio,
definitionis, a definition, which expresses in few words, what it is that
is spoken of, as, Homo est animal, rationale, mortale, A man is a thing lively,
reasonable, and mortalle. Defioculus, he that lacks sight in one eye. Defit,
there lacks. Deficio, defeci, deficere, to lack, or to be insufficient.
Cicero.
Also to forsake or fail. Prude^tia nunquam deficit oratorem, Prudence never
fails an oratoure. Caesar.
Quem sanguis uiresque deficiunt, whom blood and strength faylleth. Also to
forsake his captain, and go to his adversary. Ab eo defecerat, He went from
him to his enemy. Deflacco, aui, are, to wear out. Deflagro, aui, are, to
bourne excedyngly. Deflecto, xi, tere, to bow down. Defloreo, and defloresco,
ere, to fade, or to fall away as flowers do: or to lose beaultie. sometime it
signifies to burgen or flower. Defluo, xi, ere, to flow downward, to fall of
or away, or come to nothing. Deflulis, a, um, that which flows or falls
away from any thing. Defluuiu^, defluxus, the falling of the hear. Defodio,
di, dear, to burye or hyde a thing in the ground, to dygge down or into the
earth. Defoetus, ta, tum, destytute. Deformis, me, foul, deformed. Deformo,
aui, are, to destroy, or waste, to make in picture the form of a thing.
Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to minisshe or take away the profit from an
other. Defrico, caul, are, to rub much, or to rub of. Defrigo, xi, gere, to
fric much. Defringo, xi, re, to break town, or cut down. Defrugo, aui, are, to
consume or wear out the profit, specially of ground, whereof should come
corn or fruit. Defrutare, to boil new wine. Defrutum, sodden wine. Defugeo,
gi, ere, to refuse. Defundo, fudi, dear, to pour down. Defungor, geris, to
use no longer, to leave or resygne, to perform. Degener, is, he that in his
manners is unlike to his auncetours, or base of lynage. Degenero, aui, are, to
be unlike to his auncetours in manners. It may be said of fruits, which wax
wild. Deglabro, aui, are, to pluck of hears, Dego, degi, degere, to lead,
to live, Plautus.
to expelle, to pulle of. Degitur corium de tergo meo, The skin is pulled of
my back. Degulo, aui, are, to consume in glotony. Dehinc, from hensforth,
moreover. Dehisco, sci, scere, to gape wide open. Dehonestamentum, a
disfyguringe, or dyshonestye. Dehonesto, aui, are, to dishoneste. Dehonestus,
ta, tum, very honest. Deianira, the wife of Hercules. Deidamia, the concubyne
of Achilles, on whom he begatte Pirrhus. Deiero, aui, are, to take an oath, to
swear deeply. Deiicio, ieci, iicere, to throw down, to cast down, to
turn away, to put out of office. Dein, moreover, furthermore. Deinceps, one
after an other in order, from hensforth, or thensforth, afterward. Deinsuper,
upward. Deintegro, from the beginning to the end. Deiphile, the mother of
Diomedes. Deiphobus, the name of a son of Priamus and Hecuba. Deiugo, aui,
are, to unyoke, to vnioyne, to disseuer. Deiurium, a great and solemn oath.
Deiurus, he that swears solemnly. Delabor, delabi, to be let down, or fall
down to be consumed or wasted. Delachrimor, aris, ari, to weep or send out
drops like tears. Delanio, aui, are, to cut in pieces. Delapidata,
pauementes. Delasso, aui, are, to make weary. Delator, toris, a secret accuser,
a co^plainer Delatio, an accusation secretly made, or a secret complaynt.
Delebile, that which may be put out, or put away. Delectatio, delectation
in the se^ces of heryng, saying, taste, and smellyng. Delecto, aui, are, to
delight, to lead, to allure to a thing. Delector, aris, ari, to take
delectation or pleasure. Delectus rerum, choice or election of things. Also of
men. Delectum habere, sommetyme signifies to take musters for the wars.
Delego, aui, are, to assign to some office message, or other necessary and
great busynes, to commytte a cause or matter to be determined, to send in
ambassade or message. Deleo, leui, ere, to distroy, to put out any thing
that is written, to remove or put away. Deleretion, venom. Deletile, that
distroyeth or puts out. Deliacus, ca, cum, of the isle of Delus. Delibero,
aui, are, to be advised, to take advise, to determyne, to doubt, to consult.
Deliberatiua oration, wherein any thing is consulted. Delibo, aui, are, to taste
a thing, sometime to vyolate, to distroy, to sacrifice, to drain water by
forowes. Delibro, aui, are, to pull of the bark or rind of a tree. Delibutus,
ta, tum, oynted. Delicatus, cata, catum, delycate, wantonlye brought up.
Delicias facere, to be wanton, to be squaymyshe, to play the cockeney.
Delitium, and delitiae, a wanton word, which uneath may be expressed in
english, used between a man and a woman in wanton pastyme. Meum delitium,
meae delitiae, my sweet heart, my darlynge, my joy, and such other like,
expressed best by them that be Venus secretaries. Delico, aui, are, to
explane. Delictum, an offense when a thing is undone, omission. Deligo, legi,
ligere, to chose or pyke out. Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or shave of from any
metal. Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or swetenes in feelynge.
Delinio, iui, ire, to anoynte, to rub pleasantly, to towche. Delinitus,
touched swetely, anointed, pacified, appeased. Deliniate, to draw, as a
paynter does, er he do lay on colors. Delitum, blotted. Delinquo, deliqui,
delinquere, to omytte to do well, to offend. Deliquium, lack. Deliquium
animi, when a man is in a swowne. Deliquium solis, the eclyps of the son.
Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the right way, proprely to go out of the forow,
and make a balke, as ploughmen do. Also to dote. Delirus, he that swaruethe
from reason, a dotarde or dotynge fool. Deliteo, tui, ere, to hyde me.
Deliresco, I go to hyde me. Delos, an isle nygh to Greece. Delphi, a city and
people in Greece. Delphicus, ca, cum, of that city. Delphin, inos, a greatte
fysshe, called a Dolphyn. Delphis, a temple of Apollo in Greece. Delubrum, a
place, wherein be diverse images of god and saints. Deludo, si, ere, to mock.
Delumbis, be, weak, sometime wanton. Deluo, lui, ere, to wash clean, or wash
out. Deluto, aui, are, to lay klaye on any thing. Demagis, much more. Demando,
aui, are, to commit holy. Demarathus, a king of Spartan. Demarchus, a ruler
of the people. Demeanculum, a place to descend into a Cellar. Demeare, to go
down, or go away. Demens, it is, mad. Dementia, madness. Demensus, sa, sum,
measured. Demensum, wages given every month. Dementio, tiui, ire, to be mad.
Demento, taui, tare, to be mad, to make mad, to make foolyshe. Demereo,
rui, ere, to win or get. Demereor, eris, reri, to bind by friendship, to win ones favor, to make a friend, to deserve much. Demetior, to met
diligently, to esteem. Demeto, tij, tere, to met. Demetrias, a town of
Thessalie. Demetrius, a man's name. Demiror, aris, ari, to marvel much. some
time it signifies to know not. Demitto, misi, tere, to send down, to humble
my self, to lay down. Demissitia tunica, a long cote. Demissus, a, um,
humble. Demo, mere, to take away, or abate. De capite demptum, appayred in
substance or valewe. Democratia, a form of a commonwealth, Ti. Liuius
where the people have authority. Democraticus, he that favors the common
wealth, where the people has authority. Democritus, the name of a philosopher.
Demodocus, the name of a harper i^ Homer. Demolior, iris, to throw down any
thing that is builded. Demonstro, aui, are, to show openly. Demonstratiuus, a,
uum, that shows, or is showed, or mete to be showed. Demonstratio, onis, a
showing. Demonstratiuum genus, a form of speaking, wherein orators did
either commend or dispraise any man openly. Demophon, the son of Theseus and
Phedra king of Athenes. Demorior, eris, to dye utterly. Demoror, aris, to tarry
long, to keep back, or cause to tarry. Demonsthenes, the name of a famous
orator. Demulceo, cere, to stryke gentilly and softly with the hand, as we do
to children or hounds, when we make much of them. Demum, at the last.
sometime it signifies only, or always. Demussata contumelia, displeasure done
by dissimulation. Denarius, a certain coin, after the diversities of
countries, diverse in weight. it is taken now for a penny. Denarius, a, um, that
which contains the number of ten. Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order.
Denaso, to cut or pull of the nose. Denato, aui, are, to swymme down.
Denego, aui, are, not to give, or to deny to give. Denigro, aui, are, to make
black. Deni, ten together. Caesar lib. 5. Vxores habent deni duodenique
inter se communes, They have wives ten and twelve men together, commune
among them. Denique, in conclusyon. Denomino, aui, are, to name. Denoto, aui,
are, to blame. Dens, dentis, a toothe. Denso, aui, are, to thycken or make
thycke. Densus, a, um, thycke, hard, closed together, compacte. Densitas,
tatis, and densitudo, dinis, thicknes. Dentale, the share of a plough.
Dentatim, in order like tethe. Denticulus, dentatus, ta, tum, de^tosus, sa,
sum, toothed. Denticulare, to thruste in his teethe. Dentifricium, a medycyne,
wherewith the tethe be rubbed, to make them white. Dentiloquus, he that
speaks between the tethe, or lyspeth. Dentio, ire, to put forth tethe, or
breed teethe. Dentiscalpium, an instrumente, wherewith teethe be scraped.
Dentitio, onis, a puttyng forth or growinge of tethe. Denubo, psi, bear, to
mary or wedde. Denudo, aui, are, to dispoile or make naked. Denuncio, aui, are,
to show or tell a thing to an other man, or denounce. Also Denunciare
testimonium, to bring witness into the court of judgment, is they do in the
Chauncerie, where witnesses are compelled to come. Denuo, again. Deorsum,
downewarde. Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette. Depango, xi, gere, to plant or
set. Depeciscor, cisceris, to covenant or promise or agree, or patise.
Depectus, a, um, couenanted or patised. Depectus est cum hostibus, he patised
with the ennemies. Depecto, xui, uel, xi, tere, to keme diligently. Depexus, a,
um, kempte, trymmed. Depeculor, aris, ari, to rob a commune weal a prince,
or a place hallowed. Depelli portenta, wha^ monstrous or strange things do
happen, betokenynge some ill aue^ture to happen, to repele it by prayers,
auowes, or other goood deeds. Depello, puli, pellere, to put down, put
away, or remove. Depulsus, put down. Dependeo, ere, to hang down of a
thing. to depend. Dependo, di, dear, to pay. Dependere penas, to be
punysshed, to suffer peynes. Deperdo, ere, to lose. Depereo, ii, ire, to
perysshe, to dye, to love inordynately. Depesco, scui, ere, to drive cattle.
Depessus, rent, torn. Depilis, without hear. Depilo, aui, are, to pull of
hear. Deplano, to make plain. Deplanto, to set. Depleo, pleui, plere, to
fylle. Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewail. Deploratus, ta, tum, without
hope of recovery or remedy. Depono, posui, nere, to lay down, to deprive or
take away, to leave a thing in an other man's custody. Depositus, ta, tum,
laid down, left in an other man's keeping, also desperate. Depopulor, ari, to
distroye or waste a countreye. Deporto, aui, are, to carry or bring away. to
banyshe. Deportatus, banysshed. Deposco, poposci, deposcere, to desire much,
or require. Depositorius, he that leaves a thing with an other man. Depositum,
that which is left in an another man's keeping: or that is laid to pledge.
Depraedor, ari, to rob a country or town. Deprauo, aui, are, to make ylle,
to deprave. Deprecor, cari, to beseech. Deprecari uenia^, to ask forgyuenes.
Also Deprecari, to refuse, to desire the contrary, to put away, or deny that
which we would not have, to have in detestation, to resyste, to deliver a man
by prayer. Deprehendo, di, ere, to take a man unawares. Deprehensus est in
sermon, He was taken in his words. Deprehensus est in scelere, He was taken
with the fault. Also deprehendere to know, to perceive. Deprimo, re, to keep
down, to thrust down. Depromo, to draw out, to declare. Depso, psi, psere, to
warke a thing with the hands, to the intent to make it soft. Depuber,
depuberis, a child or young beast, which are not come to ripe years. Depudet,
he has laid aside shame. Depudico, caui, are, to dishoneste or vyolate a
womanne. Depugno, aui, are, to fight valyantly. Depurgo, aui, are, to cleanse
any thing under foot. Depuno, to make clean or pure. Deputo, aui, are, to
cut of, to esteem, to judge, to repute. Depuuio, ere, to beat. De^^^, the
name of a people in Asia. De^ce, a well most cold in summer. Dereli^quo,
dereliqui, derelinquere, to forsake utterly. Derepente, suddenly. Derideo,
risi, dear, to laugh, to scorn, to mock Deripeo, ripui, pere, to take away, to
dispoil. Deriuo, aui, are, to derive from one to an other, to lay to one, as to
lay to a man's default, or charge, to take from one, and give to an other.
Derogo, aui, are, to mynysshe, to derogate, to take away. Der^aei, a people of
Greece in the costs of Thrace. Deruncinare, to cut or pull of that which is
superfluous. Deruo, ui, ere, to fall down. Desaeuio, saeui, uire, to be wodde
angry. sometime to cease to be angry. Descendo, di, ere, to go down, to
descend. Descio, iui, ire, to know not. Descisco, iui, sciscere, to disagree,
to leave one and go to an other, to rebel. Discobinatus, wounded or cut.
Describo, psi, ere, to write out of a copy, to order or appoint, to paynte or
write aduysedly, to declare or describe. Deseco, aui, are, to cut in sonder.
Desido, sedi, ere, to sytte still, or contynually, to sit on a thing, to sit on
a chamber stole. it is also proprely when the earth does gape or chinke. Terra
desedit, the ground opens or gapeth. Desero, ui, ere, to leave or forsake.
Deserto, taui, are, to forsake. Desertus, forsaken, not inhabitable, where no
man dwells, a desert or wilderness. Deseruio, uiui, ire, to obey or serve
humbly, sometime to do ill service. Deses, desidis, unoccupied. Desiderium, a
desire. Desidero, aui, are, to desire. Desiderati, deed or slain. Desidia,
slouthfulnes. Desidiosus, a man full of idelnes, slothful. Designo, aui, are,
to assign, to note or signinifie, to do a thing newely. Designator, toris, a
marshall, which sets or appoints every man to his place, convenient to his
degree or office. Designatus, assigned, ordained. Desilio, lui, ere, to leap
or light down. Desino, sii, nere, to leave, to cease. Desinere artem, to
leave the craft. Desipio, pui, ere, to do folishly, to wax folish. Desisto,
desuti, desistere, to leave of. Desolo, aui, are, to make desolate. Desolatus,
a, u^, that is made desolate or distroyed. Desolor, ari, to comfort.
Despectio, onis, a despysynge. Despecto, aui, are, to look behind. Despectus,
ta, tum, despised. Desperatio, onis, despair. Despero, aui, are, to despair.
Desperatus, a, um, desperate. Despicabilis, to be despised. Despicientia,
despectus, despectio, dispite. Despiceo, spexi, cere, to look or behold
down, to despise. Despicor, caris, to despise. Despicus, a watcheman, to se
who comes, as it is in Calyce. Despolio, aui, are, to dispoyle or to rob.
Despondeo, di, ere, to affyance or betrouth. also to promise. Despondere
animum, to be in desperation, or weary of life, to despair of any thing, that
a man seeks for. Despondere sapientiam, to despair, to com to great wysedom.
Despumo, aui, are, to skymme or claryfye any lycour. Despuo, ui, ere, to spet
down, or spette on a thing. Desquammo, aui, are, to skale a fyshe. Destino,
aui, are, to purpose, to appoynte, to depute, to prepare, to chese, to tie to
a thing, to set a price. Destituo, ui, ere, to forsake, to leave, to deprive
or take fro, to lowse, or unbind, to set down a man. Cecilius.
Destituit omnes seruos ad mensam ante se, He did set down all his servants
at the table before him. Destringo, xi, ere, to bind hard or cut.
Destructile, that which shall be destroyed. Destruo, xi, ere, to distroy or
throw down that which is builded. Desubulo, aui, are, to perce, proprely with
an awle or bodkyn. Desudasco, to sweat. Desudo, aui, are, to sweatte much or
labor. Desuesco, ueui, scere, to discuss or bring out of custom. Desuerudo,
dinis, a disuse. Desultor, toris, he that can vaunte a horse, and leap from
one horsbacke unto an other. Also those men of war, that in time of battaylle
would leap down of their horses quyckely, and fight on foot, and leap up
again as quyckely, were Desultores. Desultorii equi, horses which served for
that purpose. Desum, defui, deesse, to lack. Desuper, from above. Desursum,
the same. Detego, tegi, tegere, to disclose or discover Deter, lacking
somewhat. Detergeo, tersi, gere, to wype of, to make clean. Determino, aui,
are, to determine, to discuss. Detero, teri, terere, to bruise, to beat out,
as grain is beaten out of the ear with threshyng or treading. Deterreo, ui,
ere, to put in fear, to let by fear. Detestabile, abhomynable. Detestor,
ari, to abhore. Among Ciuilyons, detestari is to summon a man with witness.
Detestatio, abhorryng, execration, summonyng with witness, Also Apuleius
takith it for geldynge. Detexo, xi, xere, to weaue, or to wind. Detineo, nui,
ere, to withholde, to restrain from liberty. Detondeo, detondi, dear, to
sheare or clyp. Detono, aui, are, to make a great sound. Detorqueo, si, quere,
to bow, to turn out of the right way. Detracto, aui, are, to eschew, to
forbear, to hinder by report or act. Detractores, detracters, backbyters.
Detraho, xi, here, to draw of, to report ill. Detrimentum, detriment or damage.
Detrime^tosum, that which is cause of much damage or hurt. Detrudo, si, ere,
to thruste down. sometime to constrayne or enforce. Detrullo, aui, are, to put
from one vessel into an other. Detrunco, aui, are, to cut of short. Deturbo,
aui, are, to beat down. Deturpo, aui, are, to make foul, or defyle.
Deucalion, onis, the name of a king, who in fables is said did restore
mankind distroyed with a floode. Deueho, xi, ere, to carry from a place.
Deuenio, ueni, nire, to comme down from high to low, from richesse to
poverty, from prosperity to adversity. Deuenusto, aui, are, to make foul.
Deuerbero, aui, are, to beat much. Deuerro, ri, ere, to swepe clean.
Deuestio, uestii, ire, to unclothe. Deuexo, aui, are, to vex much. Deuexus,
a, um, holowe or like to a valaye. Deuincio, xi, cire, to bind fast. Deuinco,
uici, uincere, to vanquyshe. Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the way. Deuirgino,
aui, are, to defloure a maiden. Deuito, aui, are, to eschew. Deuius, a, um,
out of the right way. Deunx, cis, a poyse, which is a pound, lacking an
ounce. Deuoco, aui, are, to call aside, or away. Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or
rounne from a higher place to a lower. Deuoluo, ni, uere, to tumble or roll
down. by translation it signifies, it is fallen, or com from one to an other,
or happened. Deuoluta est haereditas, The i^herita^ce is fallen or com. Deuoro,
aui, are, to devour. sommetyme to bear. Hoc taedium mihi deuorandum est, This
labor I must sustain. Deuotio, onis, a curse, a vow to dye, or to make a man
dye. Deuoto, aui, are, to bind by a vow. Deuotorius, a, u^, concerning a vow
or curse. Deuotus, ta, tum, vowed or cursed. Deuoueo, ere, to vow or curse, to
consent to dye. DEVS, god. Dexter, dextri, of the right hand. sometime it
signifies apt, convenient, quick and dyligent, prosperous, favorable.
Dexteritas, tatis, aptnes and redynes in the thing that a man goth about.
Dexter, tra, trum, right, or apt. Dextero, aui, are, to couple horses in a
teme, Dextrale, a bracelet to wear on the right arm. Dextrocherium the same.
Dextrarii, horses joined in a teeme. Dextrorsum, toward the right hand.
Dextimi, horsemenne being on the right wynge in battle.
D Ante I.
DIA, an addicion to women's names, when their folyshe lovers will make them
equal to goddesses. Diabolus, the dyuelle. how be it in greek it sygnifieth
proprely a falls accuser. Diaconus, a deacon. Diadema, a cappe, which an
emperor or king wears under his crown. Diaeta, a parler to suppe in. Also
dyete in eating and drinkyng. Also a place where iugementes were given.
Diaetarii, servants that do awayte on the table. Sometime such as do haunt
dyners and suppers, to the intent to steal somewhat. Dialectus, a manner of
speech, as we would say diversities in english, as Northern speech,
Southern, Kentyshe, Deuenishe, and other like. Dialexis, dysputation.
Dialectica, logyke. Dialis, Iupyter. Also it sygnifyeth of one day, as Consul
Dialis, a Consul of one day. Dialogus, a disputation between two. Diameter, a
line, which diuydeth any figure into two equal parts. Diana, the daughter of
Iupyter, which fleinge the company of men, to the intent that she would not
be meuyd with carnalle iustes, she contynually exercysed her self in hunting
wild beasts: and for her chaste life, she was honored of the paynyms for a
goddess. She is also taken for the Moon. Diapasma, a sprynkelynge of water,
or other like. Diapason, a concord in musyke of five tunes, and two half
tunes. Diapente, of five. Diaphanum, clear throughout, as crystal. Diaphonia,
a discord. Diaphora, a difference. Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that which does
dissolve and send forth humors or vapors. Diaphragma, is a thynne skin or
caulle in the body, which separateth the heart and lunges from the spleen and
liver, and is called the Myddrefe. Diarium, prouysion for oone day. Also a
book declarynge what is done day by day. Diastole, a distinction or point,
whereby one word or sentence is distinct from an another. Diatessaron, of
eyghte. Diatretum, a cup imboced, and cunningly wrought. Dibapha, purple
twyse dyed. Also a garment thereof. Dica, a cause, an accusation, a judgment.
Dicacitas, tatis, scoffing or bourdynge. Dicaculus, and dicacula, merry in
talkyng. Dicaearchus, a just Prince. Also the name of a philosopher. Dicax,
cacis, a rayler, or reprocher. Dico, caui, to vow, to offer, to dedicate.
Dico, xi, cere, to say, to tell, to bydde, to promise, to affirm, to
defend: as Cicero dixit causam Milonis, Cicero defended Miloes cause. Dicere
sententiam, to give sentence or iudgemente^ Dicere leges, to appoynte laws, or
condycions of peace, as by the vanquysher to him that is vanquyshed. Dicere
diem, to sewe a man, or call him up, (as we use to say) by action, writ, or
commandment, proprely to cause a man to be bounden to appear and make
answer. Dicere causam, to make answer to action or playnte. Dicere mulctam,
to set or assesse a fine or sum of money to be paid by him, which has
committed a trespace. Dicere ius, to give commandment or sentence on a pain.
Sometime it sygnifyeth to govern by laws a town or country. Dicere
sacramento, to take an oath. proprely as they do, which be retained in wars.
Dictannus, an herb called dittayne. Dictator, the highest office in the
publyke weal of the Romans, which was also called Magister populi, the
master of the people: which for the space of six months, had the
authority of a king. And therefore that dignity was never given but only
when the state of the city was in any ieoperdie. Dictatura, the office or
dignity of dictator. Dicte, a city in the isle of Crete or Candy. Dicteria,
tauntes, or quippies, or short and sharp reasons. Dictio, onis, a word, a
form of speaking. Dictito, aui, are, to speak often or in diverse places.
Dicto, aui, are, to speak or declare that an other writes, or bears in
remembrance. Also to inuestigate or expound the sense of any author. Also to
bring to remembrance. Dictata, Interpretations, exposytions, or declarations,
made by masters unto their scholars. Dictum, spoken, or said. Dicta,
sygnified merry sentences. Dicturio, iui, ire, to goo about, or prepare to
speak. Dictynna, one of the names of Diana. Dictynnus, a hylle, wherein the
temple of Diana was sytuate. Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an hystographier
of Candy. Didascalus, a schole master. Dido, the name of a lady that builded
Carthage. Diduco, xi, cere, to bring into sundry parts, or to divide or pulle
aparte. Didymae, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that bound^ on Aegypte. Didynnis,
the name of a man, and in latin it signifies Geminus, in english, a twinne
or double. Diecula, a little while. Plautus.
Dierecta, in an ill time. Dies, diei, a day. Sometime it sygnyfyeth time or
season. Dies critici, the days in which physicians do give a certain
judgment in syckenes. Diescit, it is day, it waxes day. Dies legittimi,
among lawyers be called ordinary days, or days in court. Diem dicere, an^,
dicere diem. Diespiter, one of the names of Jupiter. Dieteris, the space of two
years. Diffamo, aui, are, to sprede by fame. Differo, distuli, differ, to
spare or defer. sometime to bring from one place to an another. sometime to
report abroad, sometime to divide or cut asonder, sometime to set in order.
sometime differ or be in difference. Cic. At uide quid differat inter meam
opinionem and tuam, But se now what difference is between thine opinion and
mine. Diffibulare, to unbuckle, to open, to vngird. Difficilis, difficile,
hard, uneasy. Diffido, dear, to mystruste. Diffindo, di, ere, to cleave in
sunder. Diffinio, niui, ire, to diffine or declare in few words plainly, the
sygnyfycation of a thing. Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition, or declaration of
the nature quality or propre sygnification of a thing by generaltie,
specialtie, and difference. Diffiteor, fisus sum, diffiteri, to deny. Diffluo,
xi, ere, to flow abroad. Diffugio, gi, gere, to fly asonder, or on diverse
parts. Diffundo, di, dear, to power out, or scatter. Diffundere diem, among
lawyers, to continue the matter until an other day. Digamma, among latynes
is the letter F. Digamus, he that has had two wives, commonly called Bigamus.
Digama, a womanne that has had two husbands. Digeries, a disposition or
order. Digero, gessi, gerere, to dispose, to order, to interpret or make
plain, to deuyde, to dygeste. Digitalis, le, pertaining to the finger.
Digitali crassitudine, The thyckenesse of a finger. Digitalia, things worn on
the fyngers. Digitus, a finger. Digitum transuersum, sygnifyeth in a sentence,
a little or small distaunce. Digitum transuersum ab eo non discedebat, He
went not from him a finger bredde. Digladiari, to fight together with swords.
by translation to contend or strive. Dignatio, favor or familiarity. Liuius.
Dignitas, tatis, honor given or dew to a man for his merits. sommetyme
astate of nobility, or great authorytie. sommetyme beauty, proprely of a man,
specially in gesture and communication. Digno, aui, are, and dignor, ari, to
judge one to be worthy, or to be esteemed worthy. Dignosco, noui, scere, to
discern or know by diverse means. Dignoro, aui are, to mark, as men mark
beasts to know them. Dignus, na, number, worthy. Digne, worthyly. Digredior,
dieris, gredi, to depart or goo away. Digressio, and digressus, a departing.
Diiouis, Iupyter. Diiudico, caui, care, to judge betwyxte two things. Dilabor,
eris, labi, to slyppe or go away, to fall down, as ^ house does. sometime
it signyfieth to fail. Dilacero, aui, are, to tear or rent in pieces.
Dilapido, daui, are, to consume goods, or spend ryotrously or wastefully.
Dilato, aui, are, to stretche out in breadth. Dile^ma, it is, an argument, which
on every part taunteth him, to whom it is spoken. Diligens, it is, diligent, or
loving. Diligentia, dilygence or love. Diligo, lexi, ligere, Plautus.
to favor or love meanly sometime to diuyde. Dilorico, aui, are, to undo, or
cut a cote, or other thing being sowed. Dilucescit, the day appears.
Dilucidus, clear, bryghte. Diluculo, an aduerbe, which signifies betyme in
the morning. Diluculo, laui, lare, to wax day, to appear to be day.
Diluculum, that portion of day, which is before that the son ryseth.
Diludium, the leauyng of play, or the space between recreations or plays.
Diluo, ui, ere, to wasshe, to make clean, to put away, to release, to alaye,
as wine is alayde with water: or to tempre, to purge, or discharge a crime.
Dilutus, ta, tum, alayed or tempred. Dilutus color, a faint color, or
imperfect color. Dilutum, is wine or other lycour, wherein any herb or other
thing is depid by a certain space, which some phisytions call infused.
Diluuium, is when the earth is surrounded or drowned with much rain. Dimauo,
aui, are, to flow abroad, as diverse streams out of one spring. Dimembro,
aui, are, to deuyde. Dimensum, and demensum, measured. Dimico, aui, are, to
sight or contend with some thing. Dimidius, a, um, the half deal of that
which is divided. Dimidium plus toto, is spoken where a man intends to show
that that the mean is best. Dimidiatus, a, um, the half deal of that which
is not severed or divided. Diminuo, ui, ere, to minyshe, to cut of.
Dimissoriae literae, letters sent from oone to an another. Dimitto, si, tere, to
send diverse persons into diverse places. Sometime it sygnifieth to let to
depart, to give leave, to cease, to leave, to let pass, to suffer, to
humble. Deiecit uultu^ and dimissa uoce locuta est, She did cast down her
look, and with an humble voice said. Also to give, to let down. Dim^ssus, a,
um, is sommetyme taken for abiecte. Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abroad.
Dynas^ae, potestates. Dindymene, and Dindyme, one of the names of Cybele,
called the mother of the gods Dindymus, the rydge of the hylle of Ida in
Phrigia. Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, which be hired for little money.
Diolares, harlottes, which keep abroad in the feldes and woddes. Dioecesis,
sios, a jurisdiction, a governance. Also the diocese of a bishop. Diminutus
capite, and diminutio capitis, Vide ante, capitis diminutio. Diodorus, a
philosopher of Socrates sect, and Diodorus Siculus, a story writer. and an
other Diodorus, Ci. in Br^to. and Tus. lib. 5.
a stoike philosopher, of whom Cicero writes. Diogenes, a famous philosphers
name. Dione, a goddess of the sea, mother of Venus. Dioptra, a geometrical
instrument, to discern altitudes and distaunce. Victrunius uses it for
wayinge or pluckynge up of water. Dioscoron, an isle in the borders of Italy.
Diospolis, a city of Aegypte. There be four other of the same name in
Aegypte, but very small cities in comparyson of this. Diotae, vessels of earth
with handels, wherein wine was kept. Diphthera, a shepeherdes cote made with
sheep skynnes. Diphthongus, two vowels joined together called a dipthonge, as
ae, oe, au, ei. Diploma, it is, a Charter of a prince or city, or a writ.
Diplois, idis, any garmente lyned, but it is taken for a doublette. Dipondium,
a weight of two pound. Dipsacon, white brere. Dipsas, a serpent, of whom if a
man be bitten, he dies for thyrste. Dyrrachiu^, a city in the realm of
Naples. Dirae, cursings. Dirce, a woman's name, the wife of Lycus king of
Thebans. Diribitores, distrybuters of money, or pay masters. Dirigeo, gui,
gere, to shrynke for cold, or for fear. Dirigo, exi, gere, to make straight,
or right. Directus, a, um, right or straight. Direct, straight, or in a right
form. Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to break or leave of. Ears consilium
diremit, That thing brake or dissolved the counsel. also to put of, or
defer. Diripio. Vide in deripio. Diris, an high hylle of Maurytayne now
called Atlas. Dirus, ra, rum, vengeable. Diritas, tatis, cruelty, vengeance.
Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braste or break a sonder. Diruncio, iui, ire, to
wede out, or purge that which is naught. Dis, ditis, called the god of
richesse, sometime it signifies rich. Discapidino, aui, are, to unclose or
open. Discedo, scessi, dear, to depart. sometime it signifies an exception
as, Quum discesserim a fratre, nemo est mihi te charior, Except my brother, no man is to me more dear than thou art. Also it sygnifieth dyuysion or
opening. as, Ci. 1. (...)
Quum terra discessisset, magnis quibusdam imbribus, discendit in illum
^^^atum, when the earth by thoccasyon of much rain opened, he went down
into the cleft or swalowe. Discepto, aui, are, to dspute or contend.
Disceptatio, disputation or contencion. Discerniculum, diuersytie. Discerno,
decreui, cernere, to depart or sundre one thing from an other. Also to strive
or vary, to know distinctly. Discerpo, psi, ere, to pluck or tear in piecis.
Discinctus, dissolute, or neglygent, or unable for the wars, cowarde. Seruius.
Discindo, scidi, scindere, to cut of. Disciplina, lerning as it is perceived
of the scholar. It is also a good form of living. Disciplinosus, apt to
learn. Discipulus, a scholar or disciple. Discludo, si, dear, to shut out.
Disco, didici, discere, to learn. Dedisco, ere, to forgette that which was
ones learned. Discobolus, he that throws a dyshe. Disconuenio, ni, nire, to
disagree or discord. Discordia, discord. Discors, dis, he that agrees not
with an another. Discrepo, aui, are, to disagree or discord. Discretio, onis, a
separation. sometime election of good from ill, discretion. Discretus, severed
or parted. Valla says, that it is he that discerns the qualyties of men,
and value of things. Discrimen, minis, diversity or difference. also the
shedynge or partynge of the hear. Also it sygnifieth peril. Discriminale, an
instrument, wherewith the hear is parted or shadde. Discriminatim, a sunder
here and there. Discrimino, aui, are, to deuyde. Discrutior, ari, to be much
vexed or troubled in mind. Discumbo, cubui, cumbere, to sit at meals.
Discuneatus, opened wih a wedge or other like thing. Discurro, rere, to run
hither and thither, or wander. Discus, a dyshe. Also a round thing of wodde
or mettalle, which in playinge is thrown from one man to an another. It is
sometime taken for the hole figure of the son or the moon. Discutio, ssi,
tere, to cast or shake down, to remove, to examyne, or discuss. Disertus,
eloquent in words. Disiicio, disieci, disiicere, to cast a sonder. Disiungo,
xi, ere, to vnioyne, to separate. Dispalescere, to publyshe abroad. Dispalo,
aui, are, to wander. Dispalati, scattered. Dispello, dispuli, dispellere, to
expelle or put from many places or many ways. Dispendiosus, sa, sum, harmful,
unprofitable. Dispendium, loss by neclygence, or superfluous expenses. Also it
signifies harm. Dispe^do, di, ere, to spe^de, also to stretch out. Dispenno,
ere, to stretche. Dispensator, toris, a steward, or other offycer, layinge out
money for howseholde: a disposer of things. Dispenso, aui, are, to lay out
money. Dispereo, rii, tire, to be lost utterly. Disperdo, di, ere, to lose.
Dispergo, spersi, gere, to sow abroad, or to scatter. Dispertio, tiui, ire, to
give part to one, part to an another. Dispesco, cui, ere, to drive beasts
from their pasture. Dispesso, ssi, ere, to sprede abroad. Dispicio, xi, cere,
to discern, to espy, to consider. Dispicientia, circumspection, aduysement,
diligent consyderation. Displodo, si, dear, to sprede. Dispondaeus, a foot in
meter, that has four syllables long, as Oratores. Dispono, sui, ere, to
dispose, to order. Dspungo, xi, gere, to take account, or examyne any manner of
thing written. Dispunctio, an examination. Disputo, taui, tare, to dispute, to
make plain to be understand. Disquiro, siui, rere, to inserche diligently, to
inquyre. Disquisitio, where every man's opinyon is asked in a matter, which
requires judgment. Disraro, raui, rare, to make thynne that which is thycke.
Dissuauior, ari, to kiss swetely, and with much delectation. Dissecatus, ta,
tum, cut as a body is in an anotomye. Dissectio, onis, an Anotomie. Disseco,
caui, care, to cut in pieces. Dissentaneus, a, um, not according. Dissentio,
tire, and dissentior, tiri, to think contrary, or to disagree. Dissero, rui,
rere, to sow seeds, sometime to dispute or declare. Disserto idem. Dissertio,
a particion of lands. Dissideo, ere, to be at variance or discord. Dissidium,
variance or discord. Dissilio, liui, ire, to lepe down from a place, sometime
to braste. Dissimulo, aui, are, to dissemble or feign a thing, which is not
as it seems to be. Dissipo, aui, are, to scatter or sprede abroad or
dispatche, also to bring unto naught. Dissitus, ta, tum, set far of,
distant. Dissoluo, ui, uere, to lose or vnbynd, to speed to pay several
dettes. Dissolui, to be paid or discharged. Dissoluere religionem, to do
against the relygion, to break the relygion. Dissonus, na, number, that which
does not accord. Dissulto, taui, tare, to leap hither and thither. Disto,
aui, are, to differ, to be distant. Distantia, distaunce. Distendo, di, dear,
to stratche out, or retche, to fill, as a bottell is filled. Distentus, fulle.
Distero, terete, to break small, to pound or to braye syne. Distichon, two
versis. Distillo, aui, are, to distylle, or drop down. Distillatio, onis, a
distyllyng, specially from the heed, callid a reume or catarf, the pose.
Distineo, nui, ere, to let or withholde with business, or vrgente causes, to
hold or put back. Distinguo, xi, ere, to dyuide. Also to make dystinction.
Distito, aui, are, to stand aparte, or be dystant one from an other. Distraho,
xi, here, to pluck away, or to dyuide, or to withdraw a thing. sometime by
translation it is taken for to sell. Also to fynisshe or conclude matters in
variaunce. Controuersias distrahere, to end controversies or suites.
Distribuo, ui, ere, to dystrybute, or give in sundry parts to diverse persons.
Distringo, xi, gere, to bynd fast, or to strain hard, to rub of or cleanse
the fylthe or soil of the body, to thretten to stryke, or to draw out a
sword. Gladium distrinxit, He drew out his sword. Sommetyme to gather,
Columel.
as, Sereno caelo manibus distringi oliuam opertet, In a fair clear day the
olyues must be gathered by hand. Districtus negotiis, let with business.
Distorqueo, distorsi, quere, to draw awrye, or aside. Disturbo, aui, are, to
cast down. Disulcus, an hog, which has the bristils of his neck divided.
Diteo, and ditesco, sci, scere, to make rich, or be rich. Dithyrambus, a
verse made in the honor of Bacchus. Ditio, onis, a domynion. Dito, aui, are,
to make rich. Dittochaeus, a foot of four sillables in verse, having one
long, an other short, an another long, the fourth short. Diu, long time.
also the day time. whereof comes Interdiu, in the day time. Diutius, lengar.
diutissime, lengest. Diuagor, ari, to wa^der from place to place. Diuarico,
aui, are, to stryde, or to spread wide one from an other, as bowghes of a tree.
Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence. Diuendo, didi, dear, to selle to
diverse persons, or in diverse parcelles. Diuerbia, the parts of a comedy or
interlude, where many persons speak together. Diuersito, aui, are, to turn
often to a thing, or to resort. Diuersor, ari, to resort, or repair to a
place. Diuersorium, an inn, whereto men in journey do resort to bayte or be
lodged: a lodging. Diuersorius, a, um, pertaining to an inn, or lodging.
Diuersus, a, um, diverse or separate. Diuerticulum, a by way, or side way, out
of the high way. Diuerto, ti, tere, to turn from one thing to an other, to
take lodging, or to bayte. Diuerto ad te and apud te, I come to lodge with
the, or to tarry for a time with the. Dives, diuitis, rich. ditior, rycher,
ditissimus, rychest. Diuexo, aui, are, to vex or trouble. Diuidia, tediousnes.
sometime it betokens discord. Diuidiculum, an heed of a cundyte. Diuidium, a
particion or diuident. Diuido, si, dear, to divide or part in sonder.
Diuiduum, that which may be severed or diuyded. Diuinipotens, he that has
power in divine things. Diuinitus, godly, or of god. Diuino, aui, are, to
tell truth, as well of things present, as of things passed. for the more
part it signifies to coniecte of things present, what shall happen.
Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or conjecture. Also where a matter comes in
judgment, without writing or witness on any of the parts, that judgment may
be called Diuinatio, a divination. Diuinus, na, number, that which pertayneth to
god, divine. Diuisio, onis, whereby we declare what is in variance, or whereby
we do express of what things we will treat. Also a diuysyon into sundry
parts. Divisor, oris, among the old Romans was he, which at the election
of greatte officers, diuidid or gave money to the people, in the names of them
which sued for the office, to the intent for to attain it. Diuitiae,
diuitiarum, diuitiis, diuitias, riches. Diuito, aui, are, to make rich. Dium,
the day light under the fyrmament. when we say, Sub dio aliquid fieri, it
sygnifieth some thing to be done abroode, or out of the house. Diunt, old
writers used for dant, they give. Diuortium, a dyuorse, or separation of a man
and his wife. sometime a departing from any other thing. Diurno, aui, are, to
live long. Diurnus, na, number, pertayninge to day, as Diurni libri, books
containing the actis done every day. sometime a days hyre. Dius, dia, come of
a gentle stock. Diutule, a little while. Diutinus, tina, number, long
contynuynge. Diutissime, very long, or to long. Diuturnus, na, number, long
continuynge. Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a divine remembrance, Now they take Diuum,
and diuam, for a man or woman saynct.
D Ante O.
Terentius
DO, dedi, dare, to give. Also to offer, or proffre. Vt tes dant sese, As
things offer them selfs. Vergilius.
Also to bring. Magnam dabit ille ruina^ arboribus, He shall bring a great
fall unto trees. Also to say, Quamobrem has parts didicerim paucis da bo, For
what cause I learned that part, I will tell the in few words. Also to obey,
Terentius
to conform. Da te mihi, Conform the to my will. Also to commit or do. O
Aeschine, pol haud paternum istue dedisti, O Eschines, in good faith in this
thou have not done like a father. Dare operam, to apply, to give or take heed,
or to help. Do manus, I render me, or I am vanquished. Dare poenas, to suffer
punyshement. Dare ueniam, to forgive. Dare potestatem, to commytte authority
or power, or remyt a thing to an other man's pleasure or liberty. Suarum
ominum reru^ illi potestare^ dederat, He gave him the rule of all that he had.
Dare fidem, to promise faithfully. Dare facultatem, to give liberty or power
to do a thing. Dare manum, to put into his hand pryuily, as they do to men
of law, or privy solyciters, or corrupt officers. Dare damnas, to pay damages,
or to make satisfaction. Dare auribus, to flatter, or speak to please.
Salustius.
Dare negotium, to assign or appoynte business, or a thing to be done. Ci.
Teren. Plaut. Eras. in Chilia. Vergilius.
Dare in uiam, to take a journey. Dare in pedes, to flee or run away. Dare
uerba, to deceive by fair promyses, or pleasant demonstration. Datum est, It
is predestinate. Doceo, cui, cere, to teach or give knowelege, or to inform,
to advise. Docibilis, apt to be taught. Docilis, lightly taught or instructed.
Docilitas, aptenes to learn. Doctrina, ae, doctrine, which proceeds of the
teacher. Disciplina, learning taken of the scholar. Documentum, a lesson.
Doctus, ta, tum, learned, that is to say, knowing a thing without experience.
Vide peritus. Dodona, a city in Greece, whereby was a wood, in the which men
thought that trees spoke. Dodone, the daughter of Jupiter and Europa. Dodra,
was a drink made of nine things, herbs, iuyse, water, wine, salt, oil,
bread, honey, and pepper. Dodrans, antis, a poyse waying.ix. ounces. Dogma,
atis, a certain determination, which in sects of philosophers every oone had,
without the which the sect failed. sometime they be called placita. Dolabra,
a carpentars axe. Dolabro, aui, are, to hew as a carpentar. Dolentia, grief.
Doleo, ui, ere, to feel pain or grefe. Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the heed,
fete, or eyes to ache. Doleo tuis rebus aduersis, I am sorry for thy mysfortune
or trouble. Doleo tuam uicem, I am sorye on thy behalf. Dolium, any great
vessel of wine, as a tu^ne, pipe, butre, or hoggisheed. Doliaris, great as a
tun. Doliaris heluo, a gorbelyed glutton. Doliarium, a wine sellar. Dolichus,
a space of ground contaynyng xii. furlonges. Dolo, aui, are, to cut or hew
with an axe or sithe. Dolio, iui, ire, to grave in metal. Dolobella, an
hatchette. Dolon, the propre name of a man of Troy, Varro.
that was very swifte of foot. Dolones, a scourge, having a dagger, or other
like thing closed within it. Seruius. Liuius.
It is also a certain taklynge of ships. Also a little sail called a
trynkette. Dolopes, a people of Thessaly. Dolor, is, grief or pain of body or
mind, also sorrow. Dolorificus, ca, cum, that which makethe grief or sorrow.
Dolus, deceypte. Dolus malus, every crafty deceit to compass a man, whereby he
receives damage. Dolosus, deceytefull, or crafty. Doma, it is, a solar or flat
keuerynge of a house. it is sometime taken for the house. Suetonius
Domesticatim, by householdes. Domesticus, ca, cum, pertainynge to household.
sometime it sygnifieth tame. Domestici, householde servants. Domicilium, a
mansyon place. Domicoenium, an home suppar. Dominor, ari, to rule or have
souerayntie. Domiporta, a pylar or other like thing, that bears up an house.
Dominus, a lord or master, to whom other do service. Dominium, a lordeshyp or
rule over other. Lucretius.
Domis, was taken of old writers for dominus. Domitalis, apt to be tamed or
broken. Domitura, the act of tamynge or brekyng of any wild beast. Domo,
aui, are, to make tame, sommetyme to vaynquyshe, as Domare hosts, to
vaynquyshe enemies. Domitor, oris, a tamer or breaker of that, which is
wild. Domitio, onis, a retournynge home. Domus, mus, mui, a house generally.
Domus, domi, mo, a dwelling house. Domun^ula, a little or poor house. Donum,
a gift or reward. Donarium, a house, where such things were kept, that
were given to the gods. It is sometime taken for a gift or reward.
Donatiuum, a gift in money or grayn, given by emperors unto the people. also
to sowldiours above their wages. Donatiuus, he that is able to give. Donatus,
he to whom any thing is given. rewarded. Donax, cis, a reed or cane, whereof
they made arowes. Donec, vatyll. sometime as long. Donec uiuo, as long as I
live. Dono, aui, are, to give lyberally and freely. Donysa, an isle in the sea
Aegeum. Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a do. Doria, and Dorica, names of countries
ioynynge to Athenes. Dorion, a town of Achaie. Doors, people in Greece nygh to
Aetolia. Doris, a Nymph of the sea, and is interpretate bytternesse. Dormio,
miui, ire, to sleep. Dormito, aui, are, to sleep soundely. Dorsualia, panels,
which horses do wear on their backs, when they carry or draw. Dorsuarius,
ia, um, that which bears or carries any thing on the back. Dorsum, a back
of man or beast. Dorilaus, the name of a river in Phrigia. Doryphorus, a yoman
of the guard, or other like, which for gardyng of his masters person, bears
always a iauelyn or byll. Dos, dotis, dowery, land given in marriage, to the
husband or wife, for cause of the marriage only. Dotes animi, indowmentes of
the soul, that is to say, virtues and good manners. Dotes corporis, indowmentes
of the body, that is to say, beauty, strength, health. etc. Dotalis, le, that
pertayneth to dowerie, as bona dotalia. Doto, aui, are, to indowe.
D ante R.
Dram, ae, a poise or weight, ponderynge.lx. where corns, taken out of the
mids of the ear. Also a coin of Athenes, signed with a bullock. Draco, nis
a dragon. Draconarius, a standerde bearer. Dracones, of Pliny be taken for old
branches of vynes. also it is an herb, which is otherwise called Pyretum, it
bourneth and byteth the tongue, as well the lease as the root. Draconites, a
precious stone, taken out of the heed of a dragon, while he lives. Dracontium,
an herb called dragons. Dracunculus, a little dragon. Dragma, a grype or
hand full. Dracontia, an herb called dragons. Drama, matis, where in a comedy
or interlude, diverse personages be brought in, some abydyng, some departing.
Drangiana, a province in Asia the more. Drepanum, the name of a city.
Dromedarius, a beast like to a camel, but of a wonderful swiftenes. Dromus,
the place where men do rounne horses. Drupae, a kind of olyues. Drusus, the
name of a Romayne, of right noble lynage, and eloquence: but he was proud and
ambicious. Dryas, the propre name of a man of Thessaly, friend of Nestor.
Dryades, were fairies of woddes. Dryidae, sieve Druidae, were in the old time
religious, or rather superstitious persons in France, which used art
magike. Drylon, a river of Dalmacie. Drymodis, afterward Pelasgus, is now
called Archadie. Dryos, slyme growing in oaks. Drypetae, a kind of olyues.
D, ante V.
DVbio, aui, are, to be in doubt. Plaut.
Dubiat quid agat. He is in doubt, what he should do. Dubito, aui, are, to be
in doubt, or to tracte time. Dubitatio, and dubietas, doubt. Dubitanter,
dubitatim, doubtfully. Dubious, a, um, doubtful, Dubious is he that has two
ways, and woteth not which to take. Ducatus, tus, the act of a capteyn, or
guide. Also a duchy. also Ducatus, ti, a coin callid a ducat. Ducenarius, a
captain of.CC. men. Duco, xi, cere, to lead them that be willing, to have
respect to a thing. some time it signifies to allecte or stir with some
pleasant mean. also to reuolue: also to draw, as a man draws a sword,
also to get. sometime it signifies doing, as Ducere somnos, to sleep. Also
to build or make up. sometime to turn away. as Ducere uultus, to turn away
the visage. to delay or prolonge. to go down. Ego me duco ab arbore, I went
down of the tree. Also to wedde, or do the act of marriage. Varro.
Duco, aui, are, to govern. Ductarius funis, a cord that is drawn. Ductilis,
and ductile, easy to be drawn. Ductim, with leysour. Ductiro, aui, are, to
lead about often. Ducto, aui, are, to lead about. Dudum, but late. Duella,
a poyse, contaynynge.ii. drammes and.ii scruples. Duello, aui, are, to fight
within lystes, or in battle. Duellator, he that does battle. Duellona, men
in old time called Bellona. Duillus, a citesens name of Rome, which Duelium,
battle. first tryumphed for victory on the sea. Duis, of the ancient
writers was used for dederis. Dulcadium, every sweet meat. Dulcis, and dulce,
sweet. Dulcedo, Dulcitas, Dulcitudo, and Dulcor, sweetness. Dulcesco, sci,
scere, to become sweet. Dulciarius panis, a marchepayn made with almondes and
sugar. Dulciarius, a pastlar. Dulcifluus, flowynge swetely. Dulciloquus, he
that speaks swetely. Dulcisonus, sownynge swetely. Dulco, caui, dulcare, to
make sweet. Dulia, the service of a bondeman or slave. Dulichium, an i will in the sea Maliake, or as some say, Ionio. Dum, sometime signifies when, or whiles,
as, Dum dormis, fures domu^ intram, whiles thou slepest, thieves enter in to the
house. sometime until, sometime as long. Also it signifies wherefore: also, so
that. sometime it does but make up a word: as, Adesdu^, paucis te uolo, Come
hither, I would a few things with the. Dummodo, so that. Dumtaxat, only.
Dumetum, a thorny or busshy ground. Dumus, all kinds of thorns or breres.
Duo, two. Duo, dui, ere, to give. Plautus.
Duodeni, twelve together. Vide deni. Duplaris numerus, a nombre doubled.
Duplares, knights, or such soldiers as had double alowaunce. Duplex,
duplicis, double, or two. Cato de re rustie.
Duplico, aui, are, to make double. Dupli, double so much. Duplus, a, um,
double. Durabile, durable. Dutacinae vuae, grapes with thick skynnes. Duram,
some think to be the name of a river, nere to which the gyantes made the
tower Babel: Some woll it to be a field, Daniel. 3.
as in Daniel. Duramen, and duramentu^, the arm of a vine. Durateus, ea, um,
wodden, or of wodde. Dure, and duriter, hardly, or cruelly. Dureo, rui, ere, to
be hard or cruel. Duresco, sci, scere, to wax hard. Dureta, the Spayniardes
call a vessel, that they use to wasshe and bayne them in. Duria, or Turia, the
name of a river nere to Valentia. Duricia, and duricies, hardness. Duro, aui,
are, to endure, to sustain or suffer. Durus, ra, rum, hard, paynfull, or
cruel. Dux, ducis, a captain or leader.
D ante Y.
DYnastes, a lord, a prince, a ruler. Dynastia, might, power. Dyrrachium, a
city in Cicile, which first was called Epida^nus. Dys, in composition,
signifies yuell, difficile, or impossible. Dyscolia, difficulty. Dyscolus,
intractable. Dysenteria, frearynge of the guts. Dysonoea, difficulty in
fetching breath. Dysuria, a syckenes, which lets a man that he can not
pysse, called the strangurie.
ERE TVA, pertainyng to thy profit. E Republica, concerning the common weal.
E ante A.
EAntes, the name of a story writer, which was in that age, that Pygmalion
reigned in the east part. Eatenus, unto that, in that manner of wise. Ebenus,
uel ebenum, a tree, which is black in color, and is odoriferous, when it is
bourned, it has virtue to cleanse the eyes. This tree grows in India, which
being cut, wareth as hard as stone. Sola India nigrum fert ebenum, India
alone brings forth black Ebenus. Virg. 2. Geor. Eboratus, a, um, of yuorie
without. Eboreus, ea, um, of yuorie. Ebosus, an isle, between the Isles Ophiusa
and Pythiusa, the earth of which isle serpents can not abide. Ebrio, aui, are,
ebriulo, to make drunk. Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. sometime abu^dant. Ebrietas,
tatis, drunkenness. Ebriosus, a, um, often drunk. Ebron, a mountain in
Palestina. Ebudes, yles in the sea about England, where the people do live by
white meat and fysshe. Ebuleus, the son of Iupyter and Pros^^pine. Ebullo,
aui, are to braste out, or bubble up, as water does when it rayneth. Ebulum,
an herb, of some called walwort. Ebur, and ebor, oris, yuorie. Eburneus, ea,
um, eburnus, of yuorie. Eburones, people of the countreye called Liege, or
Luke, beyond Brabant.
E Ante C.
ECbasis, a figure in speaking, called digression, where a man leaves for
the time the principal matter. Ecbatana, the chief city of the royalme of
Mede. There is a city in Syria of the same name, sommetyme called Ephiphania,
and may be written Egbatana. Ecce, an aduerbe demonstratiue, which sygnyfyeth,
Lo, see, proprely where a thing suddenly happens. Ecce tibi, wylt thou see,
take heed. Ecclesia, an assembly, a counsel. Among christen authors, it
signifies the congregation of people in the faith of Christ. Ecclesiastes, a
preacher. Eccubi, lo where. Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here: lo she
is here, lo these men be here, loo these women be here. Echemythia,
taciturnitie, or stylnesse. Echeneis, a little fysshe, which retayneth a
ship under saylle, that he can not move. Echidna, a water serpent.
Echinades, been Islands in the sea Malyake. Echinus, the vttermooste shaale of
a cheston nutte. It is also an Hedgehogge. Also a fyshe like to the same beast,
also a vessel of tynne, wherein cups be washed. Also the name of a city.
Echion, a certain medicyne. Echioni, Thebans, so called of Echyon, oone of
the five, that help Cadruus to build Thebes. Echites, a stone specked like a
Serpent. Echo, a sound, which reboundeth to the noise or voice, that is made
in a valay, or in great woddes. Eclegma, atis, a medycyne, which must not be
eaten or chewed: but being in the mouth, suffered to still down into the
stomach by little and little. Eclipsis, a wanynge or faylynge. Econa, an
image. Econcula, a little image. Econtrario, contrary wise. Ecphrasis, a
plain interpretation of the letter. Ecquando, at what time, or lo when.
Ecquis, but who, see who. Ecquid, but what, lo what. Ecstasis, a stonye, a
dampe, a traunse, when a man forgets him self. Ectasis, a figure, whereby a
syllable naturally short, is produced. Ecthlipsis, where, in, joined with a
vowell, is not sowned. Ectropium, when the nether lydde of the eye falls,
and can not join with the over lydde. Hecyra, a mother in law.
E Ante D.
EDax, edacis, a greatte eater or consumer. Edo, edonis, the same. Edentatus,
tootheles. Edento, aui, are, to make tootheles. Edentulus, toothelesse. Edera,
Iuye. Edessa, a City beyond the river of Euphrates. Edico, xi, cere, to
command, to ordeyne, to declare. Edict^, ordinances or commandments of
them, which be in great authority. Edo, es, edi, esum, uel ^^tum, to eat or
feed. Ede nasturtium, is applied to a cull and gross person: and for as much
as Nasturtium, called Cressis, being eaten, does make the nose tynkell, and
thereby causes the dulle spirits to wake, therefore by this proves is meant,
Pluck up thy spirits: or, awake dullarde or luske. Edituus, a sextan of a
church. Edilia, all things that appertain to be eaten. Pac.
Edissero, edisseris, to explane, to declare. Edissere fabulam hanc, Declare
this fable. Edolo, aui, are, to hew or cut clean and smothe. Edom, Esau was
so called, and the country where he reigned. Edomus, a hylle nere to Pangcum
in the borders of Thessalye. Edones, people of Thrace, nere to the sea cooste.
Edonides, were women which slutred with a divine furoure, did celebrate the
mysteryes of Bacchus. Edonii, people of Thrace. Edonus, a hill, where the same
people inhabyteth. Cicero in Phil.
Edormite crapulam, to sleep out a surfette. Educo, xi, cere, to bring forth,
also to draw out, Virgilius.
as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore telum, That saying, he drew the weapon out
of his body. Sometime to reyse up. Educo, aui, are, to nouryshe or bring up
from chyldehoode. Educatio, nourishyng or bryngyng up of children. Edulco,
aui, are, to make very sweet. Edulis, le, that may be eaten. Edulium, is what
so ever is set on the table at diner and supper to be eaten, save the breed.
Edurum, not hard.
E ante E and F.
EEton, Andromaches father, that reigned at Thebes in Cilicie. Effartio,
effarsi, ire, to stuff or fill a thing. Effari, to speak. Effaxillo, aui, are,
to cut of by the arm pit. Effero, extuli, efferre, to carry out or put out.
sometime to overcome or subdue. also to commend: sometime to hold up, to set
forth: sometime to mynisshe or appayre. Effero, aui, are, to make images of
wild beasts. Efficax, acis, effectuell. Efficaua, effect or virtue. Efficio,
eci, icere, to bring to effect. Effectus, effect. Effigles, a sign made to
the l^^ely similitude of man or beast. Plaut.
Effigia, the same. Effiugo, xi, gere, to make like. Efflagito, aui, are, to
desire or ask a thing impo^^^nately. Efflictim, excedyngly. Efflo, aui, are,
to blow away, or blow forth. Effloreo, and effloresco, to blo, as a flour does
at the first coming out. Effl^o, ^xi, ere, to flow or rounne out, as water
does out of a fountain. Effodio, ssi, and di, ere, to dygge out. Effoemino,
aui, are, to effeminate or make delycate. Effoeminati, m^nne wanton and
delicate, or tender, enduryng no hardness. Effoeta, she that has lately
brought forth a child. Also a womanne paste teemynge. Terra effoeta, land:
spent or worn with bearing of much grain. Effoetus, ta, tum, barayne,
consumed, feeble. Effrenus, na, number, without a beydell. Effugio, gi, ere, to
escape. Effundo, fudi, ere, to power out. sometime it signifies to consume, to
put out. Effusus, sa, um, discomfited, scattered, put out, or powered out.
Effugium, discomfiture, or flight. Effutio, iui, ire, to speak unadvisedly, or
folyshely, or hastily.
E ante G.
EGelaste, a town in the hither Spayn. Egelidor, aris, to relent or dissolve,
as yse that thawith. Egenus, nedy, or lacking somewhat. Egeo, egui, ere, to
need or lack. Egens, lacking. Egesta, a city in Sicile, which Aeneas
builded. Egestas, tatis, necessity or lack of things necessary, poverty.
Egero, ssi, rere, to bear out. Egestosus, a, um, very poor. Egredior, eris,
gredi, to go forth, or go out. Egregius, a, um, excellent. Egregie,
excellently. Egurgito, aui, are, to draw out, as lycoure out of a place.
E ante H, and E ante I.
EHo, an Interiection of calling. it signifies how. Eho dum ad me, How come
hither to me. Eia, sommetyme it exhorts, sommetyme it blames. Eiiceo, eieci,
eiicere, to cast out, or put out. Eiectitius, a, um, being cast out. Eiulo,
aui, are, to cry out, to wayle. Eiurare, to do beside the law. Eiusmodi, and
eiuscemodi, the same. Eiusdem farinae, of the same sort or co^dicio^. Eiusde^
notae, of the same estimation or state.
E Ante L.
ELabor, eris, elabi, elapsum, to slyppe or slide. sometime to escape. Elaboro,
aui, are, to labor. Elacateria, a sauce used in the old time. Elamitae, be
called the princes of Porsyanes, of Elam the son of Sem, as Josephus says.
Elatus, proud, high. Elea, a city in the country of Lucania. Eleates, a man
of that city. Electio, onis, an election, an approbation. Electo, aui, are, to
chose. Electrum, that which is in english called ambre, whereof beads be
made, It is also taken for a mettalle, part gold, part silver. Plin.
Eleemosina, alms. Elegans, it is, elegaunte, fresshe, gorgyous, clean,
polyte. Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiousnes, clennes, beauty in words. Elegia, a
lamentable song or verse. Elegus, the same. Elegiacus, ca, cum, pertaining
thereto. Elegiographus, a writer of lamentable versis, or balades. Elego, elegi,
eligere, to chose. Elei, people in Greece in the country some time called
Peloponessus, now Morea. Elementa, the first or pryncipall mattier, whereof al
things do take their beginning: which be four in number, fire, air, water,
and earth. Also the letters, whereof sillables be made, are called elementa.
Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge subtly an other argument. It is also a
table in a book, to show the places by letter or other wise. It is moreover a
great perle, or other precious stone, which women were wont to hang at their
cares. Eleo, eui, ere, to spotte, or soil. Elephas, antis, uel elephantus, ti,
a beast, called an olyphaunt. It is sometime taken for yuory. sometime a
syckenes called lepry. Elephantezographi, be called these peynters, which
peynt with yuorie. Elephantia, seu elephantiasis, a kind of leprie, wherein the
flesh does swelle, and is full of spots. Elephantiacus, a lepre.
Elephantini libri, among the old Romans were books, wherein their laws were
written, which concerned the nobility. Elephantinus, pertaining to an
olyphant. Eleus, a river, which waters a greatte part of Media. Eleules, a
purgation. Eleuo, aui, are, to lift up. sometime to take away, to mynyshe, to
extenuate. Elusa, an isle against Cypers. Elusis, and elusin, a City in the
prouynce of Africa, not far from Athenes. Eleusina sacra, ceremonies of Ceres
the goddess. Elutherius, the name of a man, and is interpretate, free,
gentle. Elutheria, freedom, gentylnesse. Elices, sorrows in the fields, to
conueye water. Elicio, cui, cere, to bring out, to draw out, to provoke.
Elicito, to draw often. Elico, aui, are, to turn up so down. Elico, onis,
he that tourneth things out of order. Elido, si, dear, to hytte against a
thing, to break, to press out, to exclude, to strangle, to kylle. Eligo,
legi, eligere, to chose. Elimino, aui, are, to put or cast forth from a place
far of. Elimo, aui, are, to put out. Elinguis, without a tunge, specheles.
Elinguo, aui, are, to pluck out ones tunge. Eliquo, aui, are, to melte. Elis,
a city of Archadie. Elissa, one of the names of Dido. Elixo, aui, are, to
sethe or boil. Elixus, a, um, sodden or boiled. Elychnium, the match, which
is in a la^pe, and stands in oil. Elogium, a testification or witness in
words, of praise or dispraise, of honor or reproach. Elocutio, onis, a
propre form of words and sentences. Elongo, aui, are, to remove fer of, to
make long, to defer. Eloquentia, eloquence. Eloquium, speech in a pleasant
manner. Eloquor, eris, qui, to speak, proprely it is, wha^ I set a thing forth
in speking, that the herers may understand it, as I conceive it. Elotae, among
the Lacedaemonians was as much to say, as commune mynysters or servants, as
sergeauntes, or such as in London they do call yomen. Elpenor, a companion of
Ulysses, which with other, Circe turned into an bogge. Elucesco, sci,
cescere, to be very bright. Elucisico, caui, care, to deprive of light. Elucus,
he that is sick of the drink of yesterday. Also a lover of trifles. Elugeo,
gi, gere, to leave mourning. Elucido, aui, are, to shine or make bryghte
outewarde. Eludo, si, ere, to mock or deceive, Also to leave playenge. Elumbus
and elumbis, he that has feeble loins, and can not stand upright. Eluo, lui,
luere, to wash out. Eluo, aui, are, to live in glotony, or to spend
superfluousely. Elusco, aui, are, to make one purblynde. Eluto, aui, are, to
soke out water. Elutrio, aui, are, to power out of one vessel into an other.
Eluuies, ordure or fyithe caused of abundance of water, or other lycour.
Elysium, a place where poets did suppose the sowles of good men to dwell.
Elysii campi, the same place.
E ante M.
EMacio, aui, are, to make lean. Emancipo, aui, are, to infraunchyse or make
free, or set at liberty. sum time it is used in the contrary sense, to
bynd or make bond. It is most commonly where a man dispossesseth him self,
and does alienate his land to an other. Emancipator, a feffour, or alienour.
Emaneo, emansi, emanere, to dwell out of a place. Emano, aui, are, to issue or
flow out. Emansor, oris, he that wandreth long, and at the last retourneth
home: a lurker. Emargino, aui, are, to take away scurfe about the brymmes of
wounds or soores. Emasculo, aui, are, to gelde, or to take away the courage of
a man, or to abuse a man child in lechery. Emath, a city that is now
called Antioch. Emathia, a part of the realm of Macedonia. Emaus, a notable
city of Palestine, which now is called Nicopolis. Emax, cis, he or she that
is redye to bye any thing. Emacitas, tatis, redynes or custom to bye.
Embamma, matis, sauce. Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wod, stone, or
metal, of one color, set in wodde stone or metal of an other color: as we
see in chesse bourdes or tables, callid cou^ters: it is much used in Italy.
Embrio, onis, signifies the child conceived before it receives perfect
shappe of a man or woman. Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marowe. Emendico,
caui, care, to ask in form of beggynge. Emendo, aui, are, to amend. Emergo,
emersi, gere, to issue or come out of the place where a thing is drowned.
Emereor, emereri, to deserve to the vttermooste. Emeriti milites, old worn
soldiers, which were pardoned of wars, and not withstanding had pencyons,
which were called Emerita stipendia. Emineo, eminul, eminere, to show or excel
above all other, to be higher than other. Eminulus, a, um, a little rysynge in
height. Eminus, far of. Emissarium, a sluse, or place to let water out of a
ponde or river. Emissarius, sommetyme it signyfieth him, which is sent before
in battle to epsy, or to skyrmyshe. sometime a servant, which is always at,
hand, ready to be sent forth. Also it signifies such a person, which is
ordained of him that is in any great office or authority, to advance his
bribery. Also it sygnifyeth a horse stalyon, which serves to get coltes.
Emississius, a spyall. Emitto, misi, mittere, to send forth, to publyshe, to
manumise. Emo, emi, emere, to bye. Emodus, a hill, which about the border of
Indie, is divided into two bowghtes. Emolumentum, profit gotten of labor.
Emortualis dies, the day of death. Emorior, emori, to die utterly. Empedocles,
the name of a Philosopher, which supposed all things to have their being of
amity, and variance. Emphasis, an express signification of that, which is
intended. Emphyteosis, the making of a thing better than it was, when it was
received or letten, as land. Emphyteota, he that takes a thing, and
promyseth or couenaunteth to make it better than he received it. Emphracta,
ships or barges kouered. Empiricus, a physician that practices.
Emplastratio, is graffyng between the bark and the wodde. Emplastrum, a
plaster. Emporetica charta, paper, wherein marchantes or grossers do put
their wares. Emporium, a place wherein is kept a mart or fair. Emporeuma,
shepmanshyppe. Emptitius, a, um, that which is or may be boughte. Emptito,
aui, are, to use to bye. Emunctorium, an instrument, wherewith the shuffe of a
candell is taken away, a shuffer. Emungo, xi, gere, to snuff a candelle. Also
to make clean a man's nose. sometime it signifies to dispoyle a man of money,
proprely by craft. Terentius Horatius.
Emunctus auro, spoiled of his treasure. Emunctae naris, of a clean and sure
judgment. Emussicata, made or wrought by rule.
E ante N.
EN, loo, see. Energia, a demo^stration, when a thing is so discryued, that it
seems to the reder or herer, that he beholds it, as it were in doing.
En^aema, an innovation or renewynge. It was among Jews the feast of
dedication of their temple. Encanthis, a disease in the eyes. Encans^u^,
vernyshe, enamyll, or other pycture, wrought with fire. Enchaldion, a handell
of a thing. sometime a dagger, sometime that part of an ore, that the water man
holds. It is usurped for a book in so little a volume, that a man may always
carye it with him. Enduros, a beast bredde in the orient, as great as a bull.
Enchinia, thynne oyntementes. Encumbomata, maidens kyrtelles, or pety ^^etes.
Encychos, and Encyclia, the cyrkle or course of all doctrines. Encyclopaedia,
that learning which comprehends all lyberall sciences and studies.
Endelechia, a consuminate perfection, which Aristotle did put besides the
four elements. Endeploro, aui, are, to make intercessyon with tears.
Endoprocinctum, when men went out of the camp unto battle. Endromis,
midis, a mantell such as Irishe men and women do now wear. Endymion, the
name of a man, which found the course of the moon. wherefore the poets
feigned, that the moon loved him, and descended down to kiss him, whiles he
slepte. Energia, an efficacy or operacion. Energificus, effectual. Eneruo,
aui, are, to debilitate or make feeble. Eneruis, and Eneruus, without synewes.
Engaddi, a city in Judea, from whens the precious balm comes. Enim,
forsothe. sometime it is expletine, and does but fylle up a sentence, to make
it sound well. sometime it is a copulative: Sed enim, but forasmoche. Enipeus,
a river of Thessaly, nere to which the battle was fought between Caesar and
Pompey. Eniteo, tui, tere, to endeavor, to enforce to do a thing. Enitor,
teris, enixus sum, eniti, idem quod eniteo. Enixe, and Enixum, dilygently with
all force. Enna, a city of Sycile, sytuate in a high place. Ennius, the name
of an ancient poet. Enoch, a man's name in holy scripture. Enodis, enode,
without a knotte. Enodo, aui, are, to cut away the knottes, or to vnknytte.
Enormis, enorme, great out of measure. Enos, is interpretate a very man. Ens,
entis, the being of every thing. Ensis, a sword. Enthymema, enthymematis, a
short or imperfect syllogism. Enucleo, aui, are, to take out the kernel of a
nutte. It is also to declare or make plain a sentence. Enascor, sceris, sci,
to grow or spring of a thing. Enarro, tare, to tell out at length.
Enarratio, a plain declaration or exposition. Enyalius, the son of Bellona.
E ante O.
EO, is, iui, ire, to goo. Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be sold. Eon, the compass of
the eye. Eo, therefore, forasmoche, unto that. Eous, the cast. Eo usque, in so
much.
E ante P.
EPaminondas, the name of a valiant captain of the Thebans. Epanalepsis, a
replication or repetitio^. Ephabus, the son of Jupiter that builded Memphis
in Aegipte. Eparcus, the presydent of a province. Epauxis, an increase.
Ephebia, the age wherein oone enters into the state of a man.xv. or.xvi. years.
Ephebus, he that is of that age. Ephemeris, a book, wherein is written that,
which is done daily, or a book of reckning. Ephemerinos, a fever contynuyng one
day. Ephi, a measure containing.iii. bushels. Ephippium, the harneis of a
horse or mule. Ephori, great officers among the Lacedaemonians, by whom the
kings power was restrained. Ephira, re, or Ephire, res, a town of Achaie,
which now is called Corinthus. Epialos, a fever caused of fleume. Epibata, a
soldier on the sea. Epibatra, the ladder that gothe up to the top castle.
Epicharmus, the name of an excellent philosopher of Syracuse. Epicheremata,
arguments made in reasonynge. Epicedium, versis in co^me^dacion of a deed man,
a gay laud. Epicterus, the name of a stoik philosopher. Epicurus, the name of
him, which did put the principal goodness in voluptuositie. Epidamnus, a city
in Sycile, but the Romans after they had subdued it, would have it called
Dyrrachium. Epidaurus, a city in Greece. Epidicticon, demonstratiue. Epidromes,
the armynge of a net. Epiglossis, a small thing in the innermost part of
the tunge, like a littell tunge. Epigramma, a superscription. Epigrammatarius,
he that writes verses, called Epigrammata. Epigriphus, he that has a crooked
nose. Epilepsia, the falling syckenes. Epilepticus, he that has that disease.
Epilogus, a conclusion in writing or speking. Epimenides, the name of a
philosopher. Epinicia, verses contaynyng praises. Epinyctides, a wheale or
pushe, which ryseth on the skin by night. Epiphanes, notable, or famous.
Epiphania, a manyfestation. It is also a solemn feast in the church.
Epiphonema, an exclamation. Epirrhedium, a waggen, or carte. Epirus, a country
in Greece. Episcopatus, a byshopryche. Episcopium, a bishops palace or house,
or a place to epsy out of. Episcopius, a, um, pertaining to espiall.
Episcopus, a bishop, sometime an epsy. sometime a clerk of the markette.
Epistola, a letter sent from one to an other. Epistolium, a little epistle.
Epistomium, a spowte sendynge forth water from a cundite. Epistylium, the
chapter of a pylar. Epitaphium, a scripture written on a grave or sepulcher.
Epithalamium, a song being song at a wedding, or verses made in the
praise of them that are married. Epithema, a medicine laid to the regyon of the
heart or liver, to cool it. Epithetes, a disceyuer. Epitheton, an addition,
proprelye applied to a thing for some notable quality, which it sygnifieth, as
Seuu^ mare, The rough see. Garrula pica, The chatterynge pie. Crudelis Nero,
The cruel Nero. Campi florigeri, The flouryshynge fields. Epithymia, miae,
concupiscence, desire. Epitogu^, i, a garment worn upon a gown. Epitome, mes,
a brigement, or breuiate. Epitritus, a foot of four sillables, of which one
differs ever from the other three. Epitrope, procuration, wardshyp. Epityrum,
a chese cake. Epithyrum, a mean to conserve olyues. Epos, epodos, a kind of
verse, or song, which contains things concerning as well god as manne. Also
which has the first verse lengar than the second, as, Beatus ille, qui
procul negoriis Vt prisca gens mortalium. Epulae, meats. Epulum, a great
feast, whereunto all the people assembled, which among the old Romans was
made either to the honor of some of their gods, or at the burieng of some
notable personage. It may be now taken for a church feast, or feast of a
brotherheed, Cicero and L. Planco^
or dinner made at a burial or interment. It has been sometime used for a uate
bankette. Epularis, are, bilongynge to a feast or banquet, as Epularis sermo,
communication mete for a feast or bankette. Epulor, ari, to eat at feasts or
bankettes. Epulatorius, ia, ium, apt to be eaten at a feast or bankette.
Epulis, flesh that grows on the gu^mes about a man's tethe. Epulo, nis,
plurali epulones, men boden to a great feast, or they which come vnboden, to
eat the reuercion. Among the gentiles they were called by the pristes, to eat
that which was left of the sacrifice.
E ante Q.
EQuarius, ia, ium, pertainyng to horses. Vale. Max.
Equarius medicus, a horse leche Eques, a horseman, contrary to a foot man.
sometime it is taken for a knight. But I suppose, that among the Romans,
Equites, were taken for them, whom we call gentylmen. Equester, equestris,
equestre, pertaining to eques, as, Equestris ordo, the state or degree of
gentylmen. Equestres copiae, the number or company of horsemen. Equestria, the
places assigned to gentilmen, where they satte to behold any solemn syghtes
or plays. Equidem, verily. Plinius. Varro.
Equiserus, a wild horse. Equila, a little mare. Equile, a stable for horses.
Equimentum, the hyre of a stallyon to season a mare. Equinus, na, number, of a
horse. Equio, iui, ire, when a mare desires to be seasoned. Equiria, runnynge
with horses: a play dedicate to Mars. Equisessor, a man on horsbacke.
Equisetum, an herb called horsetayle. Equiso, onis, a horsebreaker.
Equitabilis, bile, able to be ride^, also a place in which horses might easily
walk. Equitatus, an host of horsemen. also the act of ridynge. sometime the
state or order of gentylmen. Equitium, the esquirie or company of the stable.
Equitius, the propre name of a man, and surname of a familye in Rome. Equito,
aui, are, to ride. Equitatio, a riding. Equuleus, a horsecolt. Also a manner of
turment made of bournynge plates, like to a horse, wherein men were tourmented.
Equulus, a nagge or little horse. Equus, a horse. Equa, a mare. Equus citatus,
a horse taken up: Equus carpentarius, a carte horse.
E ante R.
ERado, asi, ere, to scrape of, or out of a thing. Erasinus, the name of a
river. Erasisiratus, the name of a famous physytion. Erato, the name of one of
the Musts. Eratosthenes, the name of a philosopher. Erciscere, to divide,
proprely lands. Erciscundae familiae, of householde to be divided or parted
among diverse heirs. Ercinia, a wonderful greatte wodde in Germany. Ercius,
one of the names of Jupiter. Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell. Eregione, on
the other side. Erenata, by occasion whereof. Erembi, people in Arabia, which go
naked. Eremea, uel tua, for my profit or thine. Eremodicium, a discontynuance
of action, done through absence or negligence of the parties. Eremus, a
deserte or solytary place. Erepublica, for the profit of the publyke weal.
Eretum, a streate of the Sabynes. Erga, toward. Erga festum natalis Christi,
Again Christmasse. Ergasterium, a warkehouse. Ergastes, sieve ergasticus, a
workman. Ergastulum, a house, where men were compelled to work on stone or
metal. Now is it taken for a prysone, and sometime for the prisoners.
Ergastularius, the gayler or keeper of the prysone. Ergastulus, a gayler.
sometime it signifies a labourer. Ergasylus, the propre name of a man.
Erginus, was a tyranne, which Hercules subdued and slew. Ergo, therefore.
sometime it is spoken dysdaynously. Fac ergo quod libet, Than do as the list.
sometime exhorting. Ergo age, go to. sometime it signifies because, Illius
ergo, for his sake. Virtutis ergo, because of virtue. Ergatum, an engyne to
draw up things of great poise or weight, callid a crane. Erguminus, a man
possessed with an ill spirit Eriboea, the stepmother of Mercury. Erica, an
herb growing in woddes, and is like to maioram. Ericthonius, the first king
of Athenes, which invented a chariotte. Eridanus, a river in Italy, now called
Po. Erimantus, a diuinour. Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn. Erinnys, the
name of oone of the furyes of hell. Eriphyle, the wife of Amphiaraus, and
systar of Adrastus, which betrayed her husband for a bracelette at the siege
of Thebes. Eripio, pui, pere, to take away, to deliver. Eripuisti mihi
pecuniam, Thou haste taken my money from me. Eripuisti me a periculo, Thou
haste delivered me from peril. Eripuisti a me librum, Thou haste taken my
book from me. sommetyme to make haste. Eripe fugam, Flee away in haste. Eris,
an herb growing in Aegypte, and may be interpretate contention. Erodius, a
foul, the greattest that fleeth^, and ouercometh and eats the Egle. Erogo,
aui, are, to distribute. Errabundus, much wandering, or vacabunde. Erraticus,
ca, cu^, that crepeth here and there, as, Vitis erratica, a crepyng vine, that
shoteth out in diverse places. Erratus, tus, erratum, ti, an error or sin.
Errone^, start^rs aside, vagobundes. Error, error, properly where falsehode
(...) affirmed or taken for troth* or troth for falsehode. Erro, aui, are, to
err, to wander. Erubeseo, but, bescere, to be ashamed, or to blusshe. Eruca,
an herb called Rokat. also a worm called the canker worm, which commonly is
upon ^olewortes. Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or broake wind out of the
stomach. Erudero, aui, are, to throw out, or carry away rubbell, as mortar,
stones, and other like things of old building decayed, or pulled down.
Erudio, iui, ire, to teach any art or science. Eruditio, doctrine or
teaching. Eruditus, learned or taught. Eruila, a grain called tares. Erunco,
caui, care, to wede out. Eruo, ui, ere, to draw out with force. Eruum, a kind
of pulse. Erugo, an unkindly moisture, whereby corn growing is putrified.
Plin. lib. 4
Erymathus, a mountayn in Archady, where Hercules overcame a bore, that
destroyed the fields. There are also a wodde and a river of the same name.
Erythace, bees meat, while they labor. Erythacus, a bird called Robyn
redbrest. Erythea, an I Will, the countraye of Gerion, where the air is so
benign, that men well nere are there immortal. Erytheus, was a king of
Athenes. Erythios, an herb called read betes, as I do suppose. Erythraeum, is
called the red see, this see is between the Indie and Aethiope occean. Eryx,
the name of a mountayn in Cicile, and of a city thereon builded, wherein was
edified a temple to Venus, whereof of Venus is called Erycina. Ouidius.
Quid geminas Erycina meos sine sine dolores? O Venus, why do thou
continually double my sorrows?
E Ante S.
ESca, all manner of meat, as well for men, as beasts. Escarius, a, um
pertaining to meat. Escaria mensa, a table, whereat men do eat meat.
Esculentus, ta, tum, any thing to be eaten. Esculus, an oak bearing acornes.
Esito, aui, are, to eat. Essei, certain religious men of the Jews. Esseda, a
wayne. Essedone^, a people, which ^oo eat their frende^; when they be deed,
and drink in the sculles of their heedes. Esto, be it. Esuriales feriae, wake
days. Esuries, hanger. Esurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungered.
E Ante T.
ET, and, as well, Te admirantur and ciues and hospites, As well thy country
men as strangers do wonder at the. sometime it signifies but, by an
interrogation, sometime, That is to say, Annos natus (...) sexaginta, and
senex, Now three score years old, that is to say an old man. Etsi, all be it.
Etenim, for. Etesiae, wyndes which do commonly blow in summer, about the
canicular days. Ethalia, the name of an isle in the sea called mare ligusticum,
which is by Ieane. Ethanion, the name of a certain vessel. Et^ocles, the
sun of Oedipus and Iocasia his mother. Ethicus, moral. Ethmus, the myddell
bridge of the nose. Ethnicus, a gentyle. Ethologos, he which with voice,
gesture, and countenance expresses the manners of men. Etiam, also, moreover,
ye, ye forsothe. Etiamnum, also. Etymologia, true saying, or true exposition,
or reason. Ethopeia, an imytation of other men's manners. Ethici pictores,
paynters, which in pyctures do lively set out the manners and affections of
men.
E Ante V.
EVado, si, uadere, to escape, to pass with danger, to appear, to clymme, to
deliver, to be, to come to. Euadne, Mars daughter, of Thebes, the wife of
Aesopu^: and the wife of Capanei was so called, which louyd her husband so
ferue^tly, that when she hard he was take at Thebes, she fell nere deed in a
swowne, and after when his funeral was celebrate, she l^pte into the fire.
Euaenerus, a king of the Lacedemonia^s. Eualeo, iui, ere, to wax hole or
strong. Eualesco, scere, to wax very strong. Eualuo, aui, are, to put or
set out of the doors. Euan, an exclamation to the praise of Bacchus, and is
as much to say, as Bone puer, O good child. Euander, the propre name of
Carmentis son, and is interpretate a good man: he left his country
Archadia, and came into Italy, and entryng into the mouth of Cyber, and
expulsyng the inhabitants, rested in the hylle Palatine, where he began to
build the town Palanteum. Euaneo, et euanesco, scere, to vanishe away.
Euangelium, good tidings. Euanidus, a, um, unfruitful. Euapelus, a fool or
ideote. Plautus.
Euax, an interiection of reioycynge. Euax iurgio uxorem tandem abegi, Heida, I
have yet at the last driven my wife away with chiding. Euboea, an isle in the
greek see, and the name of a city situate in the same. Eubulus, the name of a
story writer, and is interpretate prudente. Euca^pia, a city of Phrigia,
where grow great plenty of very fair grapes. Eucharistia, good grace, a
renderynge of thank. It is now taken for the sacrament of the altar.
Euchila, meats of good juice. Euclides, the name of a famous Geometrycian.
Eueho, euexi, euehere, to carry out. sometime it sygnifyeth to extol or lift
up. (...).
Euemerus, the name of an old story writer Euenne, to happen by chance.
Euenus, a river descendyng from Thrace, and deuydynge Calydonie. Euentus, tus,
hap. sometime it is taken for the end* or conclusion of a thing. Euenta,
things which happen in conclusyon. Euentum praestare, to waraunt all that,
which shall happen. Euerriator, he that has goods of the testatour with
condition, that if he perform not his last will, or do distourbe it, he shall
lose all that he has. Euerro, rri, rere, to swepe clean. Euerto, ti, tere, to
turn up so down. Euestigio, by and by, at an instant. Euganei, people of
Venece. Euganei montes, mountains in Italy by Padowe. Euge, well done.
Euidens, entis, evident, apparent. Euilla, a country in the orient, about the
which the river Phison, which we call Ganges, that comes out of Paradyse,
does rounne. Euiratus, of womanly or chyldyshe conditions. also he that
lacks his genitours. Euiro, aui, are, to take away a man's members of
generation. Euiscero, aui, are, to bowel or draw out the guts of any thing.
Euito, aui, are, to flee, to eschew, or beware. Eulogium, a word well spoken,
a praise, a benediction. Eumelus, the son of Admetus, king of Thessaly,
gotten on Alcesta his wife. Eumenides, furies of hell. Eumolpus, a ma^s name
of Athenes, whom Suidas writes to be the son of Museus the poet. Eumonides,
a man's name of Thebes. Eunucho, and eunuchiso, to gelde men. Eunuchus, a man
gelded. Eunomia, a just constitution or ordynance of laws. Euoco, aui, are,
to call out, to call forth, or call away. Euocare testes, to bring forth
witness. Euocati, souldyours, which for some necessity be sodaynely called
out of the fields unto battle. Eupalia, a town in Locris, which sum call
Eupalion, and some Eupolyon. Euphonia, a good sound. Euphorbium, an herb.
Euphorion, a poetis name of Calcidonye, whom Gallus did translate. Euphrasinu^,
an herb called Buglosse, Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that comme out of
Paradyse, which passes through the city of Babylon. Euphrosyna the propre
name of a woman. Eupilis, a laake in France Cisalpine. Euryale, the daughter of
king Minois, which brought forth to Neptune, Orion. there was an other of that
name, the daughter of Proetus, king of Argiue. Euryalus, the name of one of the
princis of Peloponnese. Virgil feineth a Troyane to be so called. Euripides,
the name of an excellent poet among the Greeks. Euripus, a small cundyte
rysynge of a great height. Also a diche made to enclose places to play in, in
the stead of hedges. some do take it for a small ponde or stewe. Euripus, an
arm of the sea, or a narrow passage between two places. Euronotus, a
northeaste wind. Europa, that part of the world, which we do inhabyte, so
named and called of Europa, the daughter of Agenor, king of Phenice. Eurotas,
a river that rounneth before the town of Lacedemona. Eurus, the east wind.
Euricion, the name of a goldesmythe. Euricratidas, a man of Lacedemonye. Virgi.
Plut. Ovid. Herod.
Euridamas, a man of Troy. Euridame, was the wife of Leutichis, king of
Spartans. Eurydice, the wife of Orpheus. Eurylochus, the king of Phlegia,
which distroyd Thebes, before Cadmus buildid it. Eurypylus, one of the sons
of Hercules that reigned in the isle Cous. Eurerpe, one of the Musis. Eutheca, a
storehouse. Euthymia, quietenesse, suertie of mind, or hartis ease.
E Ante X.
EX, sygnifyeth of, or fro. Ex fide, fama. Cic. ad Atticum, Summa erit haec,
statues, ut ex fide fama, reque mea uidebitur, This shall be the hoole effect,
that thou do, as it shall seem to be for mine honesty, according to the
trust that I put in the, and for my profit. Ex dignitate tua, et ex repub.
facis, Thou do according to thine authority, and for the weal of thy
country. Exactio, a pyllynge of the people. Exactor, a demaunder of money.
some english it a Comtroller. Exactus, ta, tum, passed, very dylygente,
exact. Exacerbesco, ere, to wax sharp. Plautus.
Exaedifico, aui, are, to build perfectely. also to drive out of the house.
Exaggeratio, a heapynge together. Exagito, aui, are, to vex, to anger. Exalto,
aui, are, to mount or lift up, some time to praise very much. Examen, minis,
a swarm of bees, Also the nedyll or tongue in balaunces and beams. Sommetyme
it sygnyfyeth a just examynacyon. Examino, aui, are, to examyne. Examurco,
aui, are, to draw oil clean from the mother. Examussim, justly by rule.
Exanclo, aui, are, to draw out clean, to emptye, sommetyme to suffer, to
make. Non potest hic sine tu^ opera exa^clari clauus, Pac.
This nail can not be made without thy help. Exanguis, exangue, without
blood, tymorous, or fearful. Exanimalis, without soul or life. Ex animo
est, It is as nature requires. Ex animo facio, I do it with my good will, or
as my mind gives me. Ex animi sententia, according to mine appetyte, or as I
would desire it. Ex animo illi faueo, I favor him with all my heart. Ex animo,
aui, are, to kill, Plaut.
sometime to make aferde. Priusquam intus redii exauimatus fui, Or ever I came
in again, I was made aferde. Q. Cut^ius.
Multos exanimauii rigor insolitus niuis, The unaccustomed chyllyng of the
snow deprived many of their lives. Exanimus, ma, mum, and exanimis, exanime,
deed, put in fear. Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or troubled in mind:
sometime it signifies deed. Exanio, aui, are, to put clean away. Colum^^.
Exanthema, a wheale or a pusshe in a man's skin. Exarefio, exarefieri, to
be dried up. Exaresco, sci, scere, to dry. Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame,
proprelye to break the tethe of wild beasts. Exarmare, to unarm, or to take
harneysse from a man. Exarmare nauem, to take away the taklyng from a ship.
Exarmare actionem, to make the accyon faynte or feeble. Exaro, aui, are, to ear
well, also to write. Exasceare, to polyshe, or make plain, as carpentars do
after that they have hewed. Exaspero, aui, are, to make sharp, Also to make
very angrye. Ex ass, of the hole. Haeredem fecit ex ass, He made him heir of
all the hole. Exauctoro, aui, are, to put out of wages, sometime to disgrade a
knight, or other like. Exauctorati, soldiers or servants put out of wages,
or dismissed of their service. Exauctoratus, deposed, or put out of office.
Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentelye or perfectely. Exbalisto, aui, are,
to trumpe or deceive. Ego hunc communem meum, atque nostrum omnium hostem
exbalistabo lepide, I wolie feately deceive this min enmy, and al ours in
commune. Excandescentia, vehement anger or wrath. Plaut*
Excanto, aui, are, to charm. sommetyme to shut out. Excandesco, sci, ere,
to be very angry. Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe, or make angry, or to
make very hot. Excarnificatus, torn or rent with tourmentes. Excarnifico,
caui, care, to rent or cut in pieces. Excedo, cessi, dear, to depart or go
forth, to pass or excede. Excello, li, ere, to excelle. Excelsus, a, um,
high or great. Exceptio, an exception. Excepto, aui, are, to take or draw to.
Exceptor, oris, he that writes fast that which other men do speak.
Excerebro, aui, are, to beat out the brains of any thing. Excetra, a
serpent, of whom the heed being cut of, three came up for it. It was also
called Hydra. Excerno, excreui, excernere, to shite. proprely it is to try out
the ill from the good. Excerpo, psi, pere, to gather here and there the chief
of any thing. Excidium, the sackynge of a town or city, or the utter
destruction thereof. Excido, excidi, dear, to fall out of a thing. excidere, to
cut out of a thing. Excidere animo, to be forgoten. Excidere formula, to
lose his action. Excieo, exciui, ire, to move or shake out. Excio, ciui, ire,
to move vehemently, or to call out, to waken. Excipio, excepi, excipere, to
except, to take or receive, to try or inserche, to separate, to take by
craft, to gather, to hyde, to succeed, to resyst without any business.
Excipere notis, to write in cyfer, or other compendiouse form. Excipula, a
we will to take fysshe. Excipuus, a, u^, wherewith any thing is taken. Exciso,
aui, are, to crop, to tear, or to beat. Excisus, a, um, gelded. Excito, aui,
are, to stire, procure, or incorage. Exclamo, aui, are, to cry out, to call
for al^wde. Excludo, to shytte out, to deliver, to hatche eggs, to make to
appiere. Excolo, excolere, to garnyshe or deck. Excompo^i^o, in order
appointed. Exco^^o, aui, are, to pluck of the skin or hyde of a beast.
Excors, excordis, a fool, or a man hartles. Excreo, aui, are, to spytte out.
Excrementum, things of dygestion expulsed moist or dry, urine, or siege.
Excresco, excreui, excrescere, to grow out, or to grow much. Excretum, the
refuse or of fall of any thing. Excubiae, biarum, watch, as well by day as by
night. Excubitor, he that watches. Erasmus in Chiliad.
Excubitus, watch. Ex diame^ro opposita, so contrary the one to the other,
that they may never agree. Excubo, aui, are, to watch, as they which in
battaylle, or in the guard of a pryncis person do. Excudo, excusi, excudere,
to beat or stryke out, sometime to find out with study. V^ primum silicis,
scintillam excudit Achates, Verg^
As soon as Achales had stryken fire of the flynte. Also to hatche. Excutio,
aui, are, to put out of court* Apollonium ideo excuriauit, quia nihil habebat,
Ve^^^*
Therefore did he put Apolonius out of the court, because he had nothing.
Exaehite, to be pacified, C^s^^*
to be assuagid of ire Excursio, a digression in speaking, a skyrmyshe in
wars. Excuso, aui, are, to excuse. Excusatoria epistola, a letter of excuse.
Excussorium cribrum, a rengyng syue. also a bulter. Excutio, ssi, tere, to
shake, to choose. Excussus, a, um, shaken. Excussores equi, gambaldynge horses.
Exdecimo, aui, are, to tithe out. Exdisposito, by an order, of a purpose.
Exdorsuo, aui, are, to break the backbone. Execo, aui, are, to cut without.
Exectus, gelded. Execro, aui, are, to abhor, to curse. Execratio, cursynge.
Exedo, di, dear, to eat, as a worm or soore does, to eat up. Exedra, a
parlour, or other like place. Exegematicus, a form of spekyng, where the poet
only speaks. Exemplum, an example to follow, eschew, or beware. Exemplar, a
sample, whereby we attempt to make a thing like to it. sometime the one is used
for the other. oftentimes they both do signifye an example, where one thing is
compared with an other. Exemptus, exempt or priuileged. Exemptus est rebus
humanis, he is deed. Exemptilis, exemptile; that which may be taken away, or
taken out. Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to exchewe, to braste out. In
memoriam exire, to be in remembrance. Exit in fabellam, It is made a fable.
Exit de potestate, He is not able to govern him self: he is in ward, or
under a gardayne. Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thing. Exequiae,
funeralles, the which are done in the burial of any person. Exequior, aris,
ari, to execute the funerals. Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. sometime to
declare or express. Exerceo, cui, cere, to exercise. sometime to drive out of
the house, to set on warke, to use. Exercere discordias, et simultates, To
have variance or contencion. also to get or win. Exercere sumptus, To get
their expenses. Exercere tellurem, to tylle well the ground. Exer^^o, (...),
to amend or repair. Exer^m, exercise or use. Exerc^^^, taui, ture, to
exercise. Exercita^^o, exercise, use, or custom. Exercit^^s, ta* tum,
exercised, (...) labor, weried, hardened. Exercitus, tus, an host of (...) of
wa^te. Statius.
Exero, ^rui, erere, to go forth, to draw out, as a man will draw out a
sword. Fulgente^que exerit ensem, And he drew out his bright sword. Also to
lift up. Exertus, ta, tum, showed forth. Exerto, aui, are, to show forth
abroad. Exfio, I pourge or cleanse. Exhaeredo, aui, are, to disherite. Exhalo,
aui, are, to puff out. Exhaur^o, lui, rire, to draw out clean, to make
empty. Exherbare, to pluck up herbs or wedes. Columel.
Exherbandus est locus, The place must be weeded. Exherbatio, weedynge.
Exhibeo, bui, bear, to pros^re, to set abroad, for all men to behold. Exhibere
negotium, to put to business, or trouble. Exhomologesis, confession.
Exhorreo, rui, rere, to fear horryblye, or with trembling. Exibilo, aui, are,
to whistyll or hiss a man out of the place. Exifilare, idem. Exigo, exegi,
exigere, to expel or shutt out. also to require, to inquyre, to do. Exigere
pecuniam, to demand money. Exactus, ta, tum, expelled, demanded, perfectly
done, or performed. Exilium, exyle. Exilio, lii, iui, ire, to goo out
hastilye, or to leap out. Eximium, excellent, very great. Eximo, exemi, mere,
to take away, to except Eximor ex reis, Eximor noxae, I am acquit or
discharged of the offense or trespass. Eximor ex aerariis, I am clearly
discharged of all paymentes. Eximere actionem, to bar the action. Exin, from
thensforthe. Exinanio, niui, ire, to emptye, to bring to nowghte. Exinsperato,
unlooked for, which no man hooped. Existimo, aui, are, to trow or suppose,
to decerne or judge. Existimatio, sup^osel. sometime reputation. Existo, extiti,
existere, to be, to appear, to be set up, or advanced. Exitiabilis, bile,
deedly. Exitialis, le, deadely, or that causes death, or myschiefe. Exitium,
death, or mischief. Ex iure manum conserere, to detayne battle in the trial
of right. Exlex, he that lives without love, or out of love. Exodium, a song
at the end of a comedy or interlude. also the end of a matter. Exoles^o,
exoleui, exolescere, to leave growing. sometime to grow mightily. Exolerus,
he that is passed growing. also old, or out of use, it signifies also a man child abused against nature. Exoluo, ui, uere, to vnbynd, to pay al
clearly, to recompense or give in reward, to deliver. Suspitione exoluere, to
deliver from suspicion. Exoluere religione, to discharge from vow or
conscience. Exocularus, he that has his eien put out. Exomida, a garmente
without sleues, a taberde or chymere, or such as hermytes do wear, or mu^kes
when they do ride. Exopolis, he that dwells in the subbarbes of a town or
city. Exorabulum, a crafty form of desyryng or asking a thing. Exorbito,
aui, are, to go out of the track or carte lose, or to go out of the right way.
Exorcismus, an a diuration of comuryng. Exorcista, an adiurour or coniur our.
Exorciso, aui, are, to adjure or conjure. Exordine, without ceassynge.
Exordior, iris, iri, to begin. Exordium, a beginning. Exorior, iris, riri,
to be borne, to appear out, to rise, as the sun does, to invade. Exorno,
aui, are, to garnyshe or make fair, to apparayle rychely, to ordeyne. Sum
time to make foul, or out of apparayle. Exoro, aui, are, to induce or obtain
by desire, to desire heartily. Exors, exortis, out of felowshyppe. Exos, without
bones. Exosso, aui, are, to bone, or pluck out boones. Also to pulle out the
string of a lamprey. Exoricus, a, um, a stranger, that is come out of another
country, and dwells here. Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out. Expando, di, ere,
to sprede out. Expapillo, aui, are, to make nakyd to the pappes. Expato, aui,
are, to come abroad, or into an open place. Expecto, aui, are, to tarry or
abide, to observe or take heed. Expecto quid uelis, I mark what thou wylt
say: or else I desire to know what thou would. Also to hope. Expectate
uenis, Thou come even as I would have the. Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of
the breast or stomach. Expeculiatus, he that has nothing of his own.
Expedio, iui, ire, to deliver, to speed, to carye out. Expedire manus, to hold
up the hands. Expedit, signifies also, It is expedient or necessary. it is
come to pass. Expeditus, ta, tum, delivered. Expediti milites, soldiers in
light harneis. Expeditio, a setting forth toward battle. Expello, expuli,
pellere, to expel or put out. Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or weye, to examyne
straytely, to pay truly, to spend money. Expensae, expenses, or dispenses.
Expensum far, to spend or lay out money. Expergiscere, Expergefacere,
Expergificare, to wake a man out of his sleep. Expergiscor, eris, Expergifio, I
am wakyd, or wake. Experrectus, Expergefactus, ta, tum, wakened. Expergitus,
slepte enough. Expergo, experrexi, expergere, to waken. Experientia,
experience. Experior, iris, iri, to attempt, or assaye, or prove. Expertus,
ta, tum, attempted, taught. Expertus, a man of experience. Expers, it is, without
any part, lackyng experience. Expers doloris, without pain. Expers mortis,
never dyenge. Expers lucis, without light. Expersus, persa, persum, spronge
with licour or wette. Expes, without hope. Expeto, iui, tii, ere, to desire
much, or coueyte, to happen, to will. sommetyme to take, to pass over.
Expilo, aui, are, to rob, polle, or take by extorcion, or deceyte, to spoil.
Expio, aui, are, to pacyfie god with satisfaction or prayer, when we think
that he is displeased. Expiro, aui, are, to dye. Expiscor, aris, ari, to seek
for fysshe, to fish out, or search priuilye, to get or win. Tandem nescio
quid ab eo expiscatur, Finally I can not tell what he wynneth or gets by
him. Explano, aui, are, to make plain. Ter. Heau.
Expleo, eui, ere, to fylle, fulfylle. also to sacyate, to comfort. Explico,
plicaui, plicare, to extend. Also so to unfold, Ouidius,
to declare. Explicat ensem, He draws out his sword. Explicat and caenas
unica mensa duas, Martialis.
He makes two suppers at one table. Explodo, osi, dear, to drive out with
noise or rebukes, or clappynge of hands. Explosus, sa, sum, convicted, or
rejected. Exploro, aui, are, to bewail with exclamation, to search out
diligently, to prove with searching, to be aduysed, to dry or exhauste.
Explorator, an epsy, or priuye serchour. Exploratus, a, um, well known.
Expono, sui, nere, to expowne or declare, to set or bring a thing out of that,
wherein it is. sometime to cast out a thing, to the intent that it may perish.
Also to spend, to set forth. Expositio, an exposition or declaration, of
any thing diffyculte or hard to be understand. Expositi, chyldern cast out,
to be perished. Exposititij, the same. Exposco, exposcere, to ask or desire
instauntely. Expostulo, aui, are, to complain, to make a quarrel. also to will.
Expostulare iniuriam, To complain of wrong or displeasure, to him that does
wrong. Expostulatio, a quarrel or complaynt. Expostulator, he that co^playneth
of wrong done by his friend. Exprimo, to press or wring out, to express or
declare plainly. Exprobro, aui, are, to imbraide or twyte. also to lay in
reproach. Expromito, misi, mittere, to promise or undertake for an other.
Expromissor, he that promises, or is surety for an other. Expromo, prompsi,
mere, to show forth, or open. Expugno, pugnaui, are, to win by assault or
force. Expulso, aui, are, to meue a thing with much thrustynge, or to put
away. Expulsor, and expultrix, a putter away, man or womanne. Expungor,
geris, expungi, to be cancelled or put out, or rased. it is also spoken of
iuges, when they be put out of commission. It is also to quyte, as, Munus
munere expungitur, One good turn is quyte with an other. Expungo, punxi,
pungere, to put away, or remove. Expuncti, were soldiers discharged, or
put out of wages. Expuo, pui, puere, to spytte out. Exputo, aui, are, to shrede
or loppe a tree, to understand perfytely. Exquiliae, a mountain in Rome,
where watch was kept. Exquilinus mons, the same mountain. Exquiro,
exquisiui, exquirere, to search out. Ex syngrapha agere, to do things extremly
or rigorously: as it were that one sued another upon an oblygation sealyd.
Exta, the inward: as the heart, the liver, the lunges or lights, and the
spleen. Extemplo, forthwith. Extemporaneus, ea, eum, sudden. Ex tempore,
suddenly, without study, or for the time. Extemporalis, and extemporanea
oration, an oration or matter spoken or written without study. Extendo, di,
dear, to extend. Extenuo, aui, are, to mynyshe or make little. Exter, tera,
terum, strange, comen far of. Exterus, tera, terum, idem. Exterebro, aui,
are, to perce through. Also to enserche curiously. Extermino, aui, are, to
drive out, or pulle down. Pacuuius.
Exterminatus, banysshed. Externo, aui, are, to make mad. Externus, na, number,
which is not of that country, a stranger. Extero, teri, terere, to beat
out. also to whette or grynde. Exterreo, ui, rere, to put in fear. Extilio,
aui, are, to drop out. Extimesco, extimui, extimescere, to dread much.
Extimus, a, um, the outwardemost, or last. Extinguo, xi, guere, to put out,
proprely as fire, which may be efteloones kendlyd: sometime it signifies to
flee, or destroy: sometime to make a distynction or dyuersitie between
things. Extispices, sothesayers by lookynge in the inwardes of beasts.
Extispicium, and extispicina, the craft of soth saying. Exto, extiti, extare,
to be, to remain, to be apparent. Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or
praise. Extorqueo, torsi, que^re, to find out the truth by tourmentes, to
take away by force, or pluck away. Extorris, is he that is made to void, or
is driven out of his country: also a vagabu^d. Extra, without. Ex tripode,
when we speak of things, which are very true, and not to be douted, as it
were spoken of goddis own mouth. Extrarius, he that is not of the same house
or kynredde. Extrema linea, is spoken, where a man would signify a thing to be
last, and after all other. Extremis digitis attingere, to towche with the
finger tops, is spoken, where is sygnified, that a man has uneath touched
or felt a thing. Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe shot, out of gunne
shot, signifies out of danger, or in safegarde. Extremus, a, um, sometime
it signifies the beginning, sommetyme the end, sum time the warste.
Extrico, aui, are, to deliver, to shake of any thing that lets.
Extrinsecus, outward. Extro, aui, are, to goo out. Extrorsum, from without.
Extrudo, si, dear, to thraste out. Extruo, si, truere, to ordeyne, to build
or set up. Extubero, aui, are, to swelle much. Extundo, tudi, tundere, to
find out with much labor. Exturbo, aui, are, to put away, or to put out or
from a thing by vyolence. Exubero, aui, are, to abound. Exuccum, without
juice. Exudo, aui, are, to send forth lycour. Exugo, exugi, gere, and exugeo,
to suck out. Exul, exulis, a banyshed man. Exulo, aui, are, to be banysshed,
to live in exyle. Exultabundus, reioysynge very much. Exulto, aui, are, to
rejoice excedyngely, to brag, to leap out. Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe.
Exuo, ui, uere, to put of, to dispoyle, or unclothe. Exupero, aui, are, to
excede. Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe. Exuuiae, clothing. Also hydes or
skynnes of beasts. Exuuiae serpentis, an Adders skin. Exybaphon, a salate of
herbs
F Ante A.
FABA, a bean. Faba cudetur in me, The bean shall be knockyd on me,
sygnyfyeth the peine or blame shall light on me. Fabacia, a bean cake. Fabalia,
the refuse or offall of beans. Fabariae Calendae, the Calendes of June.
Fabarius, fabaria, fabarium, pertaining to beans. Fabella, a short tale.
Faber, fabri, almoost every crafts manne that warkethe with the hand. Faber
lignarius, a carpenter: Faber ferrarius, a smith. Auri faber, a goldesmythe.
Faber, fabra, fabrum, pertaining to a smith. Fabre, workemanly. Faber^ime,
kunningly, very craftily, or well. Fabranus, the propre name of a man. Fabiro^,
in the ancient time was taken for a maynteyner. Fabius, the name of a noble
Romayne. Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke cunnyngly, to build.
Fabrica, a warkehouse, or forge, sometime the frame or warke. Fabr^^us, a noble
Romayne, who being wonderful pore, not withstandyng refused a great some of
money, sent to him by king Pirrhus, towchynge with his hands all his members,
and saying unto the kings messangers: As long as he might rule all that,
which he touched, he could lack nothing. Fabrico, caui, are, and Fabricor,
cari, to make, to inuente. Fabrilis, fabrile, bilonging to handy craftis.
Fabula, a fable or tale. Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greek. Fabula togata, a
comedy of latyne. Fabulator, a teller of fables. Fabulor, aris, ari, to talk.
Fabulosus, much talked of. Facerso, cessi, cessere, to go about to do a
thing* sum time to go away. Facesse hinc, Get the hens. Facessit ubi
negotium, he puts the to business. Fa^etiae, merry words or deeds without
dishonestie. Facetus, ta, tum, merry, pleasant. Facete, meryly, pleasantly.
Facies, a face, sometime the proporcion of all the body. Facile, lightly, or
easily, without let or doubt. Facilis, facile, light, easy, good to be
entreated. Facilitas, easynesse, gentylnesse. Facinorosus, full of myschief,
ungracious, harmefull. Facinus, an act or deed. sommetyme an ylle deed. Facio,
feci, facere, to do, to be occupied, to make. Facio plurimi, I make much of.
Floccifacio, I set not a straw by it. Facere uerba, to speak. Facere
lucrum, to win. Facere sumptum, to bestow cost. Facere iter, to go or ride.
Facere terrorem, to put in fear. Facere copiam, to give leave. Facere
iacturam, damnum, naufragium, to lose, to take harm, to go to wrecke. Facere,
is also to sacrifyce, to profit. Faciam ut te plarimum amem, I woll love the
much. Fac te esse qui sum, ymagin that thou were as I am. Facere conuicium, to
rebuke, or put to rebuke. Facere nomina, to get dettours, as by lendyng: as
they do now by exchange, and in shyftes, proprely called usury: and in
bargaynes of corn, cattle, and other like, or in letting of lands. Factio, a
diuisyon of people in sundry opynions. also an act. Factitius, a, um, made or
counterfayte. Factito, aui, are, to do often times. Factor, oris, a maker, a
factour. Factum, a deed. Factum atque transactum, done and brought to good
pass. Factura, the warke. Facturio, iui, ii, ire, to desire to do. Factus,
tus, the deed. Facula, a lynke, or lyttel torche. Facularii, torche bearers.
Facultas, tatis, power to do or speak. some time richesse. also faculty.
Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well spoken. Facundia, eloquence, or sweet and
pleasant speech. Faecatum uinum, wine that drynketh of the lies. Faeciniae
uuae, grapes, whereof commethe wine, having much lies. Faeculentum, full of
lies or dregs. Faecutinus, na, number, pertaining to dregs. Faex, faecis,
lies, dregs, or grounds of any kind of lycour. Fagus, gi, a beche tree.
Fala, a tower made of timber. Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll.
Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a bylle. Falcatus, ta, tum, hooked, also any
thing, whereon be hooks or other like thing. Falcicula, a little hoke or
byll. Falcidia lex, whereby legacies were defalcate or cut of, where the
fourth part of the goodis were not assignid to the heirs. Falcifer, he that
bears a byll or book. Falcito, aui, are, to cut with a byll or hook. Falco,
aui, are, to cut of or mow. Falco, conis, a hawke. Falernus, a country in
Campania, now in the royalme of Naples, wherein grew the best wynes of Italy,
called falernum. Falisci, people in Italye. Also a kind of puddynges.
Fallaciae, deceytefull words. Fallaciter, deceytefully. Fallax, acis, a person
deceytefull. Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceive, also to be hid. Falsarius,
a forger of wrytynges. Falcidicus, and falsiloquus, a liar, or false reporter.
Falsifico, aui, are, to forge deeds, writings, or seals. Falsitas, tatis,
falsehode. Falso, aui, are, to forge. Falsum habere, to deceive. Falx, falcis,
a hook or bylle. Fama, fame or renome. sometime opinion. Famelicosus, often
hungrye. Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye. Famen, faminis, speech. Fameo, famui,
ere, to be hungry. Fames, hungre. Famiger, geris, a spreder of fame.
Famigerabilis, famous. Famigerator, a tellar of news or tidings, or a spreder
of fame. Famigerulus, the same. Familia, a householde, a family, or kynred.
Familiaria, were places of buryall for men and their servants. Familiaris,
are, pertaynyng to householde, also familyar. Familiariter, famylyarly.
Famosus, a, um, famous, as well in good, as in ylle. Famulanter, humbly,
seruysably. Famularius, a, um, seruisable. Famulatio, householde, or meyny.
Famulatus, and famulitium, service. Famulus, and famula, a household servant.
Famulor, ari, to serve. Fanaticus, mad. In the old time before that Christ
expelled the dyuel, when that dyuelles were honored in ydols, certain
persons, as well men as women, were possessed with dyuels, which lad them,
where they lysted, against their propre wylles, and caused them to speak
wonderful things, some also sodaynely, and often times tell what should
happen: wherefore they were thought to be inspired with goddis: those persons
were called Fanatici. Some time Fanaticus, is taken for the keeper of the Temple
or chapel, where the devil gave answers. Fanesii, people in the north
parts of the world, whose ears be so great, that with them they keuer all
their bodies. Fanum, a Temple, where the dyuell gave answers out of an ydoll.
Far, farris, sometime sygnyfyeth all manner of corn. All be it among ancient
phisytions it is taken for wheat meal. Caellu^ lib. 15.
Farratia, among the old Romans were the ceremonies of matrimony.
Farcimen, minis, a puddynge. Farcio, ciui, cire, to stuff. Also to frank or
feed, to be far, to cramme. Farfarus, or Farfar, a river of Syrie. Faris,
fatus sum, fari, to speak. Farraca, meats made of meal. Farrago, ginis, a
myxture of sondrye kinds of grain and corn. Sometime it is taken for a
myxture of things good and badde. Farreatio, a sacrifyce made with cakes.
Farreum, a wheaton cake. Farrinus, na, number, and farrinaceus, a, um, pertaining
to wheat. Farrinariu^, a place where wheat or meal is kept. Farcilis, le,
any thing stuffed. Fartile, stuffynge, or that wherewith any foul is crammed
or franked. Fartim, full stuffed or crammed. Fartores, and fartrices, puddynge
makers. Fartum, a puddynge. Fartura, the craft or manner of stuffynge or
crammynge. Fas, lefull before god. Fascelis, a name of Diana. Fascia, a
swathell or swathynge band, or other like thing. sometime any gyrdell.
Fascior, fasciari, to swathe a child. Fasciculus, a grype, or thing bounden
together. It is also a nosegay, or any thing knytte together, which may be
borne in a man's hand. Fascino, aui, are, to transform by inchauntment, or
to bewytche. Fascinus, and fascinum, and fascinatio, an inchauntmente to
transfourme or disfygure any thing. which so enchanted, is of the common
people called, taken, or forspoken, or forlooked. Fasciola, a little band.
Fascis, is a burdeyn or knytche of wodde, or any other thing. Also Fascis
sagittarum is taken for a sheffe of arrows. Fasces, rods bounden together,
and an axe in the myddell, which were borne before the chief officers of
Rome, in declarynge their authority, whereof some had six, and some mo.
Fasellus, a boot. Fasti dies, were certain days, wherein the offycer of Rome,
called Praetor, mowghte speak only these three words, Do, dico, addico. It
may be now used for holy days. Fasti, were certain books, wherein were
contained certain ceremonies and causes of sondrye things among the
Romans, concerning their feasts and solemnities, which were long kept
from the knowledge of the common people, until they at the last were deuulgate
by one Caius Flauius. Fastidio, iui, ire, to contemn with disdain, to abhor
or have in abomination. Fastidiosus, a, um, full of disdain. Fastiditus, ta,
tum, hatred, abhorred, abhomyned. Fastidium, hated, proprely where one
abhors the sight or presence of any thing. Fastigio, aui, are, to make or
raise up in heyght. Fastigium, an altitude, or the top or height of any thing.
Sometime it signifies the state of a person in any dignity, sometime the end
of a thing. Fastigium imponere, is spoken when a man will signifye a matter or
thing to be fynysshed and brought to a point. Fastus, tus, hautenes of mind,
pride. Fatalis, le, pertaining to destenye, fatal. sometime mortal. Fateor,
fassus sum, fateri, to affirm, to confess. Fathisco, scere, to gape wide, as
the earth does in a great drythe. Fatidicus, fatidica, a reder or teller of
destenyes, or a southsayer. Fatifer, fatifera, a brynger of death or pestylence.
Fatiloqua, a witch. Fatigo, aui, are, to make weary, to trouble much, to
stryke, to stere or provoke, to restrain or let. Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a
sothsayer. Fatisco, fatiscere, to be weary. Fator, aris, ari, to speak much.
Fatuitas, atis, folyshnes. Fatum, the ordinance and disposition of almighty
god. Desteny, goddis providence. sometime death. Fatiuis, an ydiote, that lacks
natural knowledge. Fauentia, a city in Italye. Faueo, ui, fauere, to favor.
Fauere linguis, to keep silence. Fauilla, a sperke of fire. Fauni, goddis of
the woods. Fauonius, one of the wyndes, called the southwest wind. Gel.
Fauorabilis, favored of many. Fauorinus, the name of a philosopher.
Faustulus, a shepeherde, which was the nourisher of Romulus and Remus.
Faustus, a, um, prosperous. Plaut.
Fauste, prosperousely. Fauulus, a little honey comb. Fauus, a honey comb.
Faux, faucis, a cheke. Fauces, straight passages. Fax, facis, a torche, a
candell, or other like thing, which brennynge gives light. Faxim, let me do.
Faxint, let them do. Faxo, I will or shall do.
F Ante E.
FEbricito, aui, are, to be sick in a fever. Febricula, a little fever.
Febriculosus, he that has often the Fever. Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a
fever. Febrio, iui, ire, to have a fever. Febris, a fever. Februarius, the
monthe of February. Februo, aui, are, to pourge sowles by sacrifyce or prayer.
Februa, sacrifices and ceremonies for purgynge of sowles. Februatus, ta, tu^,
that which was so purged. Februum, in the Sabines tongue is called purgynge or
clensynge. Faecialis, was a certain offycer of arms, which denounced war
or peace, where as was hostility or cause of battle: which may now be
taken for an ambassador, sent for such a purpose, or for an Heralde. Fell,
fellis, the gaulle. sometime it is taken for grief of the mind. Felis, a
Catte: sommetyme it sygnifyeth a weasyll. Fello, aui, are, to soucke. Femen,
minis, plurali femina, the inner and back part of the thygh. Feminalia, the
keuerynge of the thighs. Femur, femoris, the thygh. some english it the
hamme. Femoralia, breeches. Fenestella, the propre name of a story writer,
which flourished in the later days of Tyberius Caesar. Fenestra, a wyndowe,
sometime an entry into a thing. Fenestratus, ta, tum, open. Plaut.
Nulla est fenestratior domus, No house is more open. Fenestrenula, a little
wyndowe. Ferabites, wild. Ferae, ferarum, feras, wild beasts. Feralis, le,
deedly or mortal, lamentable. Feralia, and feralis dies, a day dedicate to the
infernal goddis, to pacify them toward the souls departed. Feralia, were
also the sacryfyces done for sowles. Feralia amicula, wyndynge shetes, and
such like things, wherein dead bodies were lappyd. Feralia officia,
sole^nities about deed bodie^ Feralis cultus, mourning apparayle. Feralis
dies, the day of buryenge. Ferax, acis, fruiteful, or that brings forth
much fruit. Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boil or sethe. Ferculum, a dysshe with
meat. Also a pagent, carried or borne to be looked on. sometime it signifies
the stage or place, wherein the pagent is. Fere, almost, nygh, welnygh.
Ferentarii, men armed in lygyt harnes, ready to come quickly to socours: which
sought with darts, swords, or slings. Ferentinum, a city, which after
Plini. stands in the first region of Italye. Ferentum, a town of the Sabius,
or Samnites. Ferettius, a name of Jupiter, given by Romulus, the first king of
Romans. Feretrum, a beer, whereon deed bodies are borne. sometime a thing,
whereon images, relikes, or iewelles are borne. Feretrus, a mountain, of which
the house of Pheretre was named, of which the duke of Vrbyne is descended.
Feriae, feriarum, ferias, holy days. Ferinus, na, number, wild as a beast.
Ferio, percussi, ferire, to stryke, to stablyshe, to knock. Ferire foedus, to
make a league or truse. Ferire iugulum, to slay, to hit the mark. Ferior,
aris, ari, to cesse from labor. Feriatus, unoccupied or ydell. Feritas, tatis,
a natural wyldnes. Ferme, almost, welnygh. Fermentescere, to increase or
wax. Fermento, taui, are, to meddel or myxt well together, as leven with dow.
also to leven. Fero, fers, tuli, far, to bear, to suffer, to lead or
bring, to say, to name, to desire, to bring forth, to have, to boste. Far
ad populu^, to ask the people advise. To take away, to receive, to obtain, to
accustom. Far fortunam, to use fortune: Far in oculis, to favor much.
Far acceptum, to receive, to write that which is received, to knowledge to
have received a benefyte or profit. Far expensum, to spend or lay out, to
write expenses, to bestow. Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierce. Ferocitas,
tatis, fiersnes. Ferociter, fiercely. Feronia, the goddess of woods. also a
city under the hill Soractes. Ferox, ferocis, fierce, hardy. Ferramentarij,
they which warke in iron. Ferramentum, an instrument or tole of iron.
Ferraria, an iron Mine. Ferrarius, a, u^, pertaynyng to iron, or of iron. Far
iudicem, to agree to the sentence or judgment. Ferreus, ea, cum, of iron.
Ferro, aui, are, to set iron on. Ferratus, ta, tum, having iron on it, or
closyd in iron. Ferrugineus, a, um, grene color. Ferrugo, ginis, ruite of
iron, a murray color, some calls it a sad blewe. Ferrum, iron, sometime
weapon. Ferrumen, minis, glewe, syse, sowder, or such other byndynge or
cleauynge matter. Ferrumino aui, are, to join or myxe together, proprely
mettalles, to sowlder. Fertilis, le, fertile, or fruitful. Fertum, a Cake
made of sundry graynes and spyces. Ferueo, es, is, iui, ere, to be chauffed or
hette. Feruefacio, to cause to boil. Feruidus, a, um, fervent, dilygent.
Ferula, a rod or stycke, wherewith chyldrens hands be stricken in schools.
also a cane or read. also a pot stycke. Ferulatius, a, um, like a cane or
read. Feruor, oris, heat. Ferus, a, um, wild, cruel, terrible. Feritas,
tatis, wyldenes, cruelty. Fescenini, versis sunge at weddinges. Fessus, a, um,
werye. Festinanter, hastily, quyckely, or swyftly. Festinato, spedily, in
haste. Festino, aui, are, to make have, to be troublid. Festinus, a, um, hasty,
quycke. Festina lent, speed the slowely, is spoken, where a man will sygnifye
a thing to be done, neither to hastyly nor to slowely, but in a convenient
temperance. See my book of the Governor, in the chapter of Maturytie.
Festinatio, haste or speed. Festiuitas, tatis, myrthe. Festiuo, aui, are, to
keep holy day. Festiuus, a, um, merry, provoking myrthe, joyous. also
pertaynyng to holy days. Festuca, the young tender spring of a tree, or herb.
Also a moote. Festus, ta, tum, feastfull or solemn.
F Ante I.
FIber, a beast called a beuer, which is also called Castor, whose stoones
are used in medicine, and are called Castoreum. It is also a kind of waspes.
Fibrae, are the extreme parts of the liver, the heart, or the lunges, or of
other things wherein is any diuysyon, they may be called lappes, brymmes. Also
the spires of herbs or trees new sprongen. Fibula, a buckle of a girdell, or
other thing like thereto. Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to join together timber,
or bordes, or other like things. Ficaria, a fygge tree. Ficarius, an eater of
fygges. Ficedula, a bird. Ficetu^, a place where fig trees do grow. Ficetor,
oris, he that loves or gadereth fygges. Ficolea, a staff or stake of a fygge
tree. Ficosus, full of sores in the heed or berde. Fictilis, fictile, erthen,
or made of earth. Fictinus, tia, um, feigned, or dissembled, or counterfayte.
Fictor, oris, a counterfayter, a fayner. Ficulnea, a fygge tree. Ficulneus, a,
um, and ficulnus, a, um, of a fygge tree. Ficus, in the masculyne gender is a
fygge: in the feminine gender, is a fig tree. it is also a soore or scabbe,
growyng in the places of a man's body, where that hear is. Fidei co^missarius,
a feoffe of trust. Fide bona, without fraud or couyne. Fideicommissum, a
feoffement of trust. Fidei co^mitto, misi, tere, to infeffe. Fidesussor, oris,
a surety, or borowe. Fidelia, a vesselle serving to diverse pourposes.
Fidelis, faithful, loyal, trusly, or sure. Fidelitas, tatis, faythefulnesse,
loyalty, or surety. Fidem astringere, to promise faithfully. Fidem fallere,
to break promise. Fidem labefactare, to lose credence. Fides labefactata,
credence lost. Fide sua, mea, tua, iubere, to undertake. Fidena, a town in
Italy. Fidentia, confidence. Fides, fidei, belefe, trust, promise. It is a
stablenes and truth in promyses and couenauntes. It is also a faithful
execution of things committed or promised. Fidem habere, to believe. Fidem
accipere, to be believed. Fidem liberare, to keep promise. Fides, fidis, the
string of any instrument. sometime a harp or lute. Fides publica, the
credence or promise of all the people and rulers. Fidicen, cinis, a harp: it
may be called a fyddell. it is also he that plays on the instrument.
Fidicina, a woman harper or luter. Fidicula, a rebecke, or gytterne. Fidiculae
plurali, a tourment made with cords or strings, wherewith men be tourmented,
to make them to confess treason or felonye. Fido, fisus, sum, fidere, to
trust. Fidutia, trust, confidence: sometime hope: it is proprely that trust,
wherein any thing is deliueryd by one man to an other, to the intent that he
shall redelyuer it, when he is required. Fiduciaria possessio, a possession to
an other man's use, or upon condition. Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a
state in lands made upon confidence of trust, or a morgage. Fidus, a, um,
trusty. Figmentum, the warke or warkemanshyp: sometime a lie, or a thing
feigned. Figo, xi, figere, to thruste in. Columel. Virg. Ge. lib. 4.
sommetyme it sygnifyeth to drive or fasten in the earth. Palum humi fixit, He
drove the stake into the ground. also to plant or set. Ipse feraces Figat
humo plantas, He wolle set in the ground the fruitful plants. Iunenal.
Sometime to stryke. Figlina, ae, a potters warkehowse, or potters craft.
Figlina, plurali, vessel of earth. Figulus, a potter. Figura, a figure.
Figuro, aui, are, to make or form. Filiaster, a son in law by an other
wife, or an other husband. Filius terre, a new begun gentylman, or a
gentylman of the first heed. Filicula, fern growing on trees, callid in a
greek name polypodion. Filius, a son, filia, a daughter. Filii, sometime does
conteyne both sons and daughters. Filistim, a countreye, that is now called
Ascalon. Filix, licis, fern. Filum, a threde. sometime the proporcion of a
thing. Filo, aui, are, to spynne or make a threde. Fimbria, the skyrtes or
hemme of a garmente. Fimetum, a dunge hylle. Fimum, a box, out of the which
men do cast dyse. Fimus, dunge of cattle. Finalis, le, fynall, or last.
Findo, fidi, findere, to cut, to cleue. Fissilis, le, that which may be
cut. Fissura, a cut or clefte. Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to form, to fayn.
Finio, iui, ire, to fynyshe or end. Finis, the end, the conclusyon. also
intent or purpose, whereunto any other thing has relation, or is made or done
for. Fines plurali, the borders or marches of a country, bounds. Finitimus,
ma, um, nygh ioynynge. Finirio, a definition. Finitor, oris, a setter of
bounds. Fio, fieri, to be, to be esteemed. Firmamentum, a suertie or
stabylitie. also that, which is called the ground of a cause or matter. Also
the firmament or heaven vysyble. Firmo, aui, are, to make stable or sure.
Firmus, stable, constant, well fortified. Firmitas, and firmitudo, stablenes,
consta^ce, surenesse. Fiscalis, le, pertaining to the kings treasure.
Fiscella, a chief fate. Also it is a thing made with withes and halters,
wherewith cattle were so moselled, that they might not byte any young
sprynges or buddes of trees. Fiscellus, a little hill in Italye, not far
from Tyber. Fisci, fiscinae, fiscellae, great sachels, wherein were put great
sommes of money. Fiscus, the private treasure of princis. Fiscum, the kings
escheker. Fiscina, a greatte baskette. Fiscibilis, le, that may be cut or
slytte. fiscilis, the same. Fistula, a pype, as well to convey water, as an
instrument of musyke. Also the we sell or throat bolle. also a tappe or
faucette. also a disease or soore, which comes of a putrified humor, and
contynually runs. Fistulosus, full of holes like a sponge* Fistuca, an
instrumente, wherewith pi^^s of wodde be driven into the ground. and stones in
pauynge, called a rammer. Fistucatio, pylinge, or pauynge. Fitiges, be beastis
of Aethiope, of a brown color, having two pappes in the breast, as man has:
nor they be not so wild, but they may be tamed, nor so tame, but they woll
hurt those, that grieve them. Fixus, a, um, fyrme, fast.
F Ante L.
FLabellum, an instrument, wherewith in the heat of summer wind is fanned
blown into men's visages, to koole the^. Flabrum, a blowynge or puff of wind.
Flacceo, and flaccesco, ere, to wydder, or wax feeble. Flaccidus, a, um,
wythered, feeble, weak, hanging downewarde, lollynge, or flaggynge. Flaccum,
bruysed. Flaces, the ortes of olyues. Flagella, the small branches or twigges
of trees or vynes. sometime scourges or flayles, wherewith corn is threshed.
Flagello, aui, are, to scourge, to the thresshe, to blame or rebuke.
Flagitiosus, an ungracious person, full of myschiefe. Flagitium, an ill or
myscheuous deed, worthy rebuke and punyshement. Flagito, aui, are, to ask
importunately and with clamoure. Flagratores, they which for money do suffer
them selfs to be beaten. Flagrio, onis, a slave. Flagro, aui, are, to bourne
with a flame of fire. Sommetyme to love or desire inordynately. Flamea, clothe
or sylke of vyolette color. Flaminica, the priests wife, or a wedding gown
of vyolet color. Flameum, a typpet of vyolet sylke, which the new wedded
wife did wear. Flamen, hoc, the blaste in an instrument. Flamen, the great
priest among the gentyles. Flaminia, the house of the archeprieste.
Flamineum, a kerchiefe or typpette. Flamma, a flame. sometime peril.
Flamescere, to be inflamed. Flammeus, ea, eum, burning or flamynge.
Flammiuomus, sendyng out flames. Flandria, a country called Flaunders. Flaueo,
and flauesco, aui, ere, to be like gold, or of yelowe color. Flauus, a, um,
yelowe, or of the color of gold. Flebilis, le, lamentable. Flecto, and
flexo, xi, tere, to bow, to bend, to lead. Flegma, fleume. Fleo, eui, ere,
to weep. Fletus, weeping. Flexanima oration, an oration or spech, whereby a man's
mind is stirred to pity, reioysynge, or other like affection. Flexilis, le,
any thing that may be easylye bowed or bente. Flexura, the bowynge. Fligo, xi,
ctum, to tourment or vex. Flo, aui, are, to blow. also to make coin of
metal. Floces, lies or drastes of wine. Flocci, flocks of the shearynge of
woollen clothes. Flocculi, fine flocks. Floccifacio, and floccipendo, I set
naught by. Floralia, florales ludi, plays made in the honor of Flora, an
harlotte, which gave a great treasure unto the people of Rome. Floreo, rui,
ere, and florido, aui, are, to flourish or to have flowers. Also to excel.
sometime to prosper. Flos, floris, a flower. Floresco, sci, scere, to bourgen or
to bring forth flowers. Floreus, a, um, made of flowers. Floridus, da, dum,
garnyshed with flowers. sometime fresh or lusty. Floriger, eris, bearing
flowers. Florulentus, ta, tum, full of flowers. Fluctio, onis, the reume or
pose. Fluctiuagus, wandering in rivers or waters. Fluctuo, aui, are, to be
tossed as a ship is in the sea. also to doubt. Fluctuatim, troublously,
doubtfully. Fluctuosus, a, u^, troublous, unquiet, stormy. Fluctus, a floudde,
a wave of water styred by tempeste. Fluentum, a river, or stream. Fluescere,
to be resolved or relented. Fluidus, da, dum, flowynge, relentyd, resolved.
Fluito, aui, are, to flow contynually, sometime to flytte or swymme. Flamen,
inis, a great river. sometime the course of the water. Flumineus, a, um, of the
river. Fluminosus, a, um, full of ryuers. Fluo, xi, ere, to rounne, as water
does, to proceed or come of a thing, or to grow. Fluor, fluxus, and fluxio,
a flyxe. Fluta, a fyshe, like to an eele, called a Lampreye. Fluuialis, le, of
the river. Fluuiatilis, le, that which is in the river. Fluuius, a floudde or
river. Fluxu^a, lecherye. Fluxus, a, um, unstable, or that which dureth but a
while, large, or wide, relented, lecherous, and wanton.
F, Ante O.
FOcale, a kerchiefe, which men and womenne did wear about their
cheeks. Focaneus, a branch of a vine, which grows out of a twyste or
forked bough. Focaria, a fire pan. Focatius, bread baken on the hot coals.
Focillo, aui, are, to nouryshe. Focula, nourishynge meats. Foculo, aui, are,
to nouryshe or sustain. Foculus, a little pan, wherein fire is borne. Focus,
a pan or herthe, wherein fire is. sometime it sygnifieth fire. sometime
private houses or tenementes. Fodico, aui, are, to dygge. Fodina, a place where
a thing is dygged. Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue. Foecundo, daui, are, to make
fruitefulle, (...) plentuouse. Foecundus, a, um, plentuous, or fruitful.
Foecunditas, plenty. Foedo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to destroy, to
rent or tear, to consume. Foedero, aui, are, to confederate. Foederatus, a
confederate. Foedifragus, a breaker of leage or truse, or intercourse. Foedus,
da, dum, foul, defourmed, cursed, or cruelle. Foedus, deris, a leage between
princis, an intercourse, a truse after battle: sometime it signifies a law
made in the time of wars. Foelicitas, tatis, felycitie, prosperity,
abundaunce of all things. Foelicito, aui, are, to make prosperous. Foelix,
licis, having abundance of al things, prosperous, commodious, or profitable.
Foemina, a womanne. Also in beasts the female. Foenatius, ia, um, pertaining
to hay, as Falces foenariae, hooks or sythes for to cut hay. Foenebris,
bre, pertaynyng to vsurye, or unreasonable gain. Foeneratitius, a, um, the
same. Foenerator, oris, an usurer or lender for unreasonable gain. Foenero,
aui, are, and foeneror, rari, cum datino, to lend for usury. Foeneror cum
ablatiuo, To borowe, or make a shyfte, or to lay to morgage. Foeniculum,
fenell. Foenile, an hey house. Foenisecium, hay harvest. Foenisex, secis, a
mower of hay. Foenograecum, fenegreke. Foenum, hay. Foenus, noris, vsurye,
unreasonable, or unlawful gain, coming of that thing, which is lent.
Foeteo, tere, to stynke. Foetidus, a, um, stynkynge. Foetifico, aui, are, to
bring forth, most commonly as a beast or a bird does. Foeto, taui, are, the
same. Foetor, oris, stynche, or ill savor. Varro
Foetuosus, a, um, full of bredynge. Foetura, the time from the conception unto
the birth. Also the increase of cattle. sometime it signifies the increase
or coming forth of other things. Foetus, tus, all thing that is brought
forth by generation, sometime the fruit of trees. Foetus, ta, tum, full, or
great with young, as a woman with child or a beast. Foliacius, a, um, full of
leaves. Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or having leaves. Folium, a leaf. Follico,
caui, care, to snuff or fetch back wind with the nosethrylles. Folliculus,
the husk, wherein the ear of wheat or other corn is enclosed, when it is
grene, called the hose. Also for a sack, wherein corn is put. Follis, a
below, wherewith fire is blown. also a ball blown full of wind: semblably a
bed stuffed only with wind. it is also a bag, wherein money is. Fomentum,
a nourishment of natural heat. It is also any thing laid to the body in the
form of a plaster, to mytygate the pain or grief of any disease, called
fomentation. Fotus, the same. Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherewith fire is
kendlyd and kept burning. sometime it sygnifieth that, which fervently
styreth us to do any thing. Fons, fontis, a fountain or well. Fontanus, a,
um, of a fountain: as Aqua fontana, well water. Fonticulus, a little well or
spring. Foramen, minis, a hole. For As, without. Foratia, a market woman,
which sells eggs, chykens, and other like things at the markette. Foratus,
tus, a hole. Forbea, a kind of hot meat. Forcipes, a pair of tongues or
other like instrument. Forcus, a propre name of a man. Forda, a mylche cow
that brings forth caulfes. Forem, res, ret, I should or had be, thou should
or had be, he should or had been. Fore, to be hereafter. Forensia, habytes or
robes, worn only in places of judgment. Forensis, se, pertaynyng to places of
judgment or courts, where laws be exercysed: also a iurrour. Fores, doors.
Forfices, sheares. Forficuli, little sheares. Fori, the hatches of a ship, or
place where men being in the ship, do walk up and down. Also stages or
galeries, from whe^s the noble men of Rome beheld the plays called Circenses.
Foruli, huches, wherein books were kept: now be they taken for keuerynges of
books. Foria, dunge that is lyquide or thynne. Forica, commune draughtes or
Iakes. Foriculae, little doors. Forinsecus, without. Forio, iui, ire, to
discharge the bealy of ordure. Foriolus, lose bealy, or he that has a laske.
Forma, form or shappe. sometime beaultie. Formiae, a town in Campania.
Formica, an Emote, or Ant, or Pismere. Formicatio, that which is commonly
called a ring worm. Formidabilis, le, that which is to be drad. Formido,
dinis, dread or fear. Formido, aui, are, to have great fear. Formidolosus, he
that fears other: also he that is feared of other. Formo, aui, are, to form,
to make in facion. Formosus, a, um, fair. Formucales, a peyre of tongues.
Formula, an instrument or deed in writing. a style in writing, and a form in
pleadynge. Formula iniuriarum, an action of trespass. Formulam intendere, to
bring an action. Fornacalia, days when the women did naught else but bake
breadde. Fornax, a chymney, or oven. Fornax calcaria, a lyme kylle. Fornax
lateraria, a brycke kill. Fornicarii, they which have stalles or bouthes under
the vaultes or arches of churches or palayces, where they sell their wares to
them that pass by, as they do in west mynster halle. Fornicarius, ia, um,
pertaynyng to lechery. Fornico, aui, are, to make an arch or a vault. Fornicor,
ari, to commytte fornication. Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vaulte. Foro, aui,
are, to perce or boore a hole. Forpices, cyssars to clyppe hear. Forte,
peradventure, perchance. Fortasse, fortassis, forsan, forsitan, the same.
Fortesco, sci, scere, to wax strong. Forticulus, a little strong.
Fortifico, aui, are, to fortify or make strong. Fortis, strong, puissant,
valyant of courage. also fair, sometime rich. Fortitudo, dinis, strength,
valyant courage. Fortuitus, ta, tum, that happens by chance. Fortuna, fortune.
Fors fortuna, good fortune or chance. Fortunatae insulae, the fortunate
islands, be so called of the abundaunce of fruits, of which Strabo
writes.li.i. Fortunatim, fortunately. Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate. Fortuno,
naui, are, to make prosperous, to augment with good fortune. Forum, a market,
where things be sold. Also a place where judgments are practiced, and
matters in law pleaded. Forum when it is taken for a market, has commonly an
other word joined therewith, as Forum boatium, the markette where cattle to
sold. Forum holitorium, the markette where herbs be sold. Forum piscarium,
the fyshe markette. Forum Iulium, a region or country of Italy which sometime
was called Iapidia. Forum Cornehi, a city of Italye, which now is called
Imola. Fossa, a dyche, or dyke, or a mote. Fossilis, le, that which is dygged,
or may be dygged. Fossio, dyggynge. Fossitius, a, um, that is dygged. Fossor,
oris, a digger or dycher. Fossula, a little dyche. Fossura, a dyggynge, Fotus,
ta, tum, nourished. Fouea, a den. Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryshe, to sustain,
to maynteyne, to weate or wash a thing, to ordeyne or set, to defend.
F Ante R.
FRacesco, sci, scere, to putrify for age. Fracidus, da, dum, more than ripe,
rotten as fruit is. Fraeno, aui, are, to brydell, to restrain. Fraenum, a
brydell. Fraenum mordere, to take the bytte in the teethe, sygnifieth to set
naught by. Plautus in Amp.
Fraetus, ta, tum, truslynge, aided. Fraeti uittute and uiribus, aided with
strength and puissance. Fraga, strawberies. Fragesco, sci, scere, to braste.
Fragilis, le, brokell, soon broken. Fragilitas, brotylnes, inconstancy.
Fragiliter, weakly, inconstantly. Fragitides, the two great veins, which do
appear on either side of the neck. Fragmen and fragmentum, a piece or gobette
of a thing broken. Fragor, oris, the noise, which is made at the falling of
any great thing, rushyng. Fragosus, a, um, uneasy to clymme. Fragro, aui, are,
to render a great savor. Fragrans, it is, having great or sote savor. Framea, a
spear, or iauelyn. Frango, fregi, frangere, to break. Franosus, a deceyuer.
Frater, tris, a brother. Fraterculus, a little or young brother. Fraterne,
brotherly. Fraternus, na, um, of a brother. Frater patruelis, a brothers son.
Fratilli, the fringe of tapesry, that hangs next the ground. Fratrare,
proprely is said of chyldernes breasts, when they do grow, to wax imbocyd.
Fratria, a brothers wife. Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to disappoynte. Fraudare
genium, not to satisfy the necessity of nature, or carnal appetite.
Fraudulenter, deceytefully. Fraudulentus, full of deceyte. Fraudulosus, a
begyler. Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Also peril, danger. Fraxinus, an ash. Fraxo,
aui, are, to go in watch. Fregella, a little town in Italy. Fremitus, a
rorynge, proprelye of waters. sometime a murmuryng, rumble, or noise of people
assemblyd together. Fremo,, mi, mere, to rore or make a noise like great
waters. Frendeo, dui, dear, to grynde the tethe together for anger or pain.
Also to grunte or groan for pain. Frequens, eutis, acustomed, much hanted,
also assembled together, abundant. Frequens Senatus, all the Senators assemblyd
together. Frequentia, greatte haunte, and company of folk. Frequento, taui,
tare, to haunte, to goo together. Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an assembly.
Fretum, a narowe part of the sea, where it is mouynge and troublous. Sometime
it is taken generally for the sea. Friabilis, le, soon broken in small
pieces. Fribolus, almost worth an halfepeny. Frico, caui, cui, care, to
rub. Frictus, fricatio, and frictio, rubbyng. Frigefacio, feci, facere, to
cool. Frigefio, frigefieri, to be cold. Frigeo, gui, and frixi, to be cold
or slow. Frigero, aui, are, to cool. Frigesco, scere, to wax cold.
Frigidulus, a, um, somewhat cold. Frigidus, da, dum, cold, daungerouse, or
noyfull. Frigilla, a bird, which syngeth in the cold wether, a ruddocke.
Frigo, xi, and frigui, gere, to frye. Frictus, and frixus, a, um, fried.
Frigorificus, ca, cum, made cold. Frigus, goris, cold. sometime fear.
Frigutio, tiui, tiri, to leap up, or hoppe. Frio, aui, are, to break small,
specially betwyxte the fyngers. Frisii, people by Holande. Frit, the grain in
the top of the ear, which is less than a corn. Fritilla, a froyse or
pancake. Fritillus, a box, out of the which dise were cast on the tables.
Friuolarius, he that sells stuff of little valewe. Friuolus, a, um, vain,
light, of none estymation or value. Frixorium, a fryenge pan. Frondarius, ia,
ium, of leaves. Frondatio, a slyppynge of of leaves. Also brousynge. Frondator,
oris, a brouser, a wodlopper. Frondeo, and frondesco, descere, to bear or have
leaves. Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaves. Frondo, daui, are, to bring
forth leaves. Frondosus, a, um, full of leaves. Frons, it is, the foreheed, the
frunt. Also it signifies shamefastnes. also countenance. ^rasmus in Chiliad.
Frontem ferire, is spoken where a man sygnyfyeth, that one disdayneth
extremely an another. Frons, frondis, the leaf of a tree, with the branches.
Frondifer, bearing leaves. Frontale, the hedstall of an horse. Fronto, tonis,
he that has a broad forhed. Frontosus, having a greatte forehed, or not
abashed. Fructifer, bearing fruit. Fructificus, and fructuosus, fruitful.
Fructuarius, he that takes the fruit or profit of a thing. Pernour of
profytes. Fructuarius, ria, rium, that which bears fruit, or does pertayne
to fruit. Fructus, tus, and ti, fruit. also al profit or revenues that
comes of the ground. Fruges, aut frux, frugis, increase of all those things,
which the earth brings forth, most proprely of grain or corn. sometime it
signifies rent or revenues. Frugi, moderate, profitable, necessary. Frugi
homo, a good man, a thryfty man, an honest man, temperate in expenses.
Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in living, specially in apparaylle and dyete,
sobre rule, also suffyciencye. Frugalior, frugalissimus, more temperate, most
temperate. Fruiscor, sci, to use at liberty. Frumen, the uppermost part of the
throat, the gargyll. Frumentaceus, of corn. Frumentarius, ia, ium, pertaining
to corn. Frumentario, taking of corn. Frumentator, toris, a taker or
pourueyour of corn. Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corn. Frumentum, all
corn, that has berdes or eyles. it is most used for wheat or rye. Frunitus,
wise in using of a thing. Fruor, fretus sum, frui, to use with dilectation
and profit. Frustatim, in piecis or gobettes. Frustillatim, piece meal.
Frustra, in vain. Frustro, aui, are, and frustror, aris, ari, to deceive. also
to do a thing in vain, or vainly to employe. Frustum, a piece or gobette.
Frustulum, and frustillum, a little gobette. Frusus, a kind of brembyls,
whose pryckes be not hooked. Frutex, that which has a great stalk, and yet it
is no tree, as fenelle, caules, certain malowes, and other like herbs.
sometime it is taken for the stem or stalk. Frutetosus, a, um, having
abundaunce of such great herbs. Frutetum, seu fruticetu^, a place where
grows herbs with great ste^mes or stalks. Fruticescere, to be a stalk.
Frutico, aui, are, and fruticor, fruticaris, ari, to spring in stalk.
F Ante V.
FVcilis, le, false, colouryd. Fucinus, a lake in Italy. Fuco, caui, care, to
lay on a color. Fucatus, ta, tum, colored or painted, as some women be.
Fucus, a dorre or be without stynge, which enters into hyues, and eats up
honey. Also payntynge, where oone color is laid on an another. It is also used
for desceyte or falsehode. Fuga, flight. Fugax, gacis, he that flies lightly.
Also it signifies swyfte. Fugio, gi, gere, to fly, to run away, to escape,
to forgette. Fugiens laboris, abhorring labor or peyn. Fugitiuarius, a, um,
startyng away, flyttyng. Fugitiuae aquae, waters, which be taken out of a
commune river by stelthe. Fugitiuus seruus, he that runs from his master,
wyllyng never to return, or goth to a place, from whens he supposes that his
master can never recover him. Fugito, taui, tare, to use to runue away. Fugo,
aui, are, to drive away. Fulcio, si, cire, to supporte, to fortyfie. Fulcra,
beddestedes. Fulgeo, si, gere, and fulgo, gi, ere, to shine. Fulgetrum, a leame
of lyghtnynge. Fulgidus, da, dum, bryghte. Fulgor, bryghtnesse. Fulgur, uris,
uel oris, lyghtnynge. Fulguratio, the lyghtnynge whenne it is in the clouds.
Fulgurator, the sender of lyghtnynge. Fulgutio, riui, rire, to cast
lyghtnynge. Fulgutitas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes. Fulguto, aui, are, to send
forth lyghtning. Fulica, a se byrd, more tha^ a culuer, and black. Fuligo,
ginis, the soote of a chymney. Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe. Fulmen, minis,
lyghtnynge. Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten. Fultura, a shore. Fuluus, ua, um, a
color mixte of grene and read, a dark yelowe. Fumatium, a smoky place, where
wine was laid, to the intent that it moughte the sooner ware old. also the
shanke or tonell of a chymneye. Fumifico, aui, are, to make smoke, to ince^se.
Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume. Fumo, aui, are, to smoke. Fumus, smoke. Funale, a
torche. Funales equi, horses, which coupled with an halter, did go before the
charyot. Funambulus, he that walks on a rope. Funda, a slynge. Also a
castinge net, a sach^ll or purse like a net. Also a cerkle of gold, or
other mettalle, wherein stones he set. Fundamen, and fundamentum, a
fundacion. Fundibula^^, slyngers of stones. Funditores, the same. Fundito, aui,
are, to pour out often. Fund^^^s, from the foundation utterly. Fundo, aui,
are, to found, to make stable. Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or cast metal,
to power out, to sheede, to throw down, to scatter, to give aboundantlye, to
speak much, to lay down. Fundum, the bottom of a thing. Fundus, that
which is used to be called land or soil. Funebris, bre, funeralle. Funepeus,
a goer on a cord. Funerale, pertaining to funeralles. Funereus, rea, reum,
pertaining to the deed body. Funero, aui, are, to burye. Funesto, aui, are,
to vyolate a place with a deed body. Funestus, ta, tum, vyolated with dead
bodies. Also mortalle, blouddy. also pertaining to deed bodies or death.
Funetum, bowed or howped, as sum vynes be. Fungor, functus sum, fungi, to
exercise an office. Fungi uita, to live. Functus uita, He that has fynished
his life. Fungus, a tadde stole, a mousherom. Fungosus, like a musherom.
Funiculus, a small rope. Funis, a rope. Funus, funeris, funeral exequies, or
solemnity of burienge. Sometime it sygnyfieth the deed corpse. Fuo, fui, futum,
to be. Fur, furis, a thief. Furax, acis, theuyshe, a great picker. Furca,
furcula, an hey forke. Furcifer, ciferis, a servant, which for some light
offense, was compelled to bear a forke on his neck, having both his hands
bounden fast thereto, and so to goo through the town, confessing his defaut,
and exhorting other, that they should not in like case offend, which was a
great reproach. Furcilis, a dungeforke. Furcilla, an heyforke, also a galowes.
Furfur, uris, branne. Furfureus, and furfuraceus, a, um, of branne. Furiae, the
furyes of Hell, which were three, Alecto, Tisiphone, Megera. Furiatus, a, um,
furyous. Furibundus, a, um, wood or very mad. Furio, aui, are, to make mad
or wood. Furiosus, a, um, mad, or wodde, frantyke. Furnaceus, a, um, baken
in an oven. Furnaria, bakers craft. Also a womanne baker. Furnus, an oven.
Furo, furi, furere, to be wood for anger. Furor, aris, ari, to steal. Furor,
roris, madness: Also furye, which is a vehement concytation or styrrynge of
the mind. Furtim, by stelthe, priuilye. Furtificus, a pycker or priuye
stealer. Furtiuus, a, um, that which is done by stelth, or very pryuyly.
Furtum, theft. it is defyned to be a deceitful handlynge or using of any
thing, or the possession thereof, to have thereby gain or advantage, which is
by the law of nature prohibited to be suffered. It is sometime any act that is
done privily, or to the intent it should be secret. Furti teneri, aut
obstringi, to be answerable to felonye. Furuae hostiae, sacrifice done to
Pluto and Proserpine. Furunculus, a little thief, also a be called a Stote,
that kills rabettis. It is also a sore callid a felon. also a sore callid a
cattisheer. Fuscina, a spear with many teethe, wherewith fyshers do take
troutes, or yeles, by throwynge of it, a troute spear, an yele spear.
Fuscinula, a flesh hook. Fuscus, ca, cum, brown of color, not fully black.
Fusile, that which may be molten. Fusim, abroad, as it were molten. Fuse, in
length, long. Fusores, melters, Fusorius, a, um, pertaining to meltynge, As
Ars fusoria, the craft of meltyng. Vas fusorium, a meltynge pot. Fusus, a,
um, molten. Fusus, si, a spyndell. Fustigo, are, to beat with a staff.
Futilis, le, that which will be soon powered out. Futilis, he that speaks all
that he knows shortly or unadvisedly.
G Ante A.
GABALVS, a galowe tree or gybet, whereon men be hanged. Gabata, a potagedyshe.
Gabinus, a garment with two lappes, whereof the one cast backward, did gyrde
him that did were it. which garment the consule ware, when he denounced wars.
Gades, two yles by the further parts of Spain, beyond Granade. Gaetuli,
people in Affrike. Gaetulia, a country in Affrike. Gagates, a stone called
Ieate. Galactophagus, an eater of milk. Galactopota, a drynker of milk.
Galatae, people that inhabyte Galatia. Galbanus, a gum of a certain tree,
which is much used in playsters. Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton. Galbuli,
things which do hang on cypress trees, like small hears. Galea, an helmet
or salette. Galenus, the name of a noble physician. Galerita, a lark. Galerus,
and Galerum, a hat. also a pirwike. Galla, a fruit called Gaulles. Gallicanus,
a, um, of France. Gallia, France. Gallicia, a royalme in Spain, callydde
Galyce. Gallicinium, the time when the Cock croweth. Gallicus, ca, cum,
French. Gallina, a hen. Gallinaceus pullus, a chyke. Gallinaceus, a house
cock. Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept. Gallinarius, and gallinaria,
he or she that keeps pultrye. Gallus, a, um, french. Gallo, are, to be mad.
Gallograetia, a countreye in Asia, called also Galatia. Gallus, a cock, a
Frencheman, a priest of Cybeles, called the mother of the gods, Gamale, a
town in Judea. Gammarus, a fyshe called a lopstar. Salustius.
Ganea, and ganeum, a brothell house, a house of baudry and ryotte. Also Ganea,
is taken for gluttonye. Ganeo, onis, a Ruffyan, a haunter of bandy houses, a
ryotter. Also a rauyner of delycates, a frauncher. Ganges, a greatte river,
which enuyronneth India, wherein is found both gold and precious stones.
Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that river. Gangraena, a sore called a cankre.
Ganymedes, a Troyane child, which was feigned to be rauyshed of Iupyter, and
made his butlar. Gannio, nire, to bark or houle like a dog. Gannitus, tus,
barkynge, or howlynge. Garamantes, people in Affrike. Garganus, a hylle in
Apulia. Gargara, a mountayn, and also a city in Asia. Gargarisso, are, to
gargaryshe or wash the mouth and throat of a man. Garrio, ire, to babble.
Gariophylum, a spyce called cloves. Garrulus, a babblar. Garum, sauce mude with
fyshe. Garumna, a river in France. Gaudeo, gauisus sum, gaudere, to rejoice,
to be glad. Gaudere in sinu, to rejoice by him self. Gaudium, joy, myrthe,
an affection of the mind, conceived of an opinion of a thing good or
pleasant. Gaulus, a little round bote. Gausape, a mantell to cast on a
bed: also a carpette to lay on a table, some call it a daggeswayne.
Gausapina, a certain garment. Gaza, the treasure of a king. Curtius.
Gazophilaciu^, a place where tresure is kept
G, Ante E.
GEbenna, a hill and town in Sauoy, now called Geneura. Gedeon, the name of a
judge in Israel. Geenna, is taken in holy scripture for hell. Gela, a river in
Syetle. Gelabilis, le, that may be frosen. Gelasco, scere, to be frosen.
Gelasini, the Fooreteethe, which be showed in laughing. Gelasinus, he that
laugheth to make other men laughe. Gelicidium, a froste. Gelidus, a, um, cold
as yse. Gelo, aui, are, to freese. Geloi, fyeldes in Sycile. Geloni, a people
now called Tartariens. Gel^, use, sommetyme cold. Gemellas, little or small
twynnes. Gemibundus, full of waylynge. Geminus, a, um, the noumbre of two. Also
geminus, is a twynne, where many children are borne at one burdeyne, although
they be three or mo. Also it is the name of a man, which in hebrewe is Thomas.
Gemino, aui, are, to double. Gemma, the young budde of a vine. Also a precious
stone. Gemmo, aui, are, to budde or spring, as a young graffe or vine does.
Gemmascere, to begin to budde. Gemmatus, a, um, budded. Gemo, mui, ere, to
groan, or to wayle, or to make a lamentable noise. Gemoniae scalae, a place
from whense the bodies of persons condemned were thrown down. Gemo^^^^,
women great with child. Gemmsa, a corn, or like grief under the ^yttell too.
Gena, the eye lydde. It is sommetyme taken for the chekes. Genauius, a, um,
glouttonous. Gene^logia, a pedegrewe. Gener, he that maryeth my daughter.
Generalis, le, general. Generatim, generally. Genero, aui, are, to engender.
Generosus, a, um, of a gentyl or noble kind. Genesis, generation. Genethliacus,
an astronomer, or other like, which by the sterres set at a man's nativity,
tells his fortune. Genialis homo, a man in his house very lyberall and
fresh. Geniculatim, ioynted, as a wheat straw is. Geniculum, the joint of a
straw, or stalk of an herb. Genista, broom. Genitalis, le, pertaining to
the birth of a man. genitale solum, the natural country or place, where a man is borne. genitalis dies, the day of nativity. genitale semen, the sede
of generation, genitalia, the members of generation. Genimen, generation.
Genitor, a father. Genitrix, a mother. Genitura, sometime generation, sometime
the sede of generation. Genitiuus, a, um, that has power to engender, or that
which proceeds with generation. genitiuae notae, marks, wherewith a man is
borne. Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, engendered. Genius, an angel. Among the
Paynims some supposed it to be the spirit of a man. Some did put two
governors of the soul, a good and an evil, Bonus genius, and malus genius,
which never departed from us. sometime it is taken for nature it self, or
dilectation meued by nature. Genii, men, which do give all their study to
eating and drinking. Geniae, old veckes full of unhappiness. Genio dare
operam, to live voluptuousely. Genium defraudare, to absteyne from all things
pleasant. Genocha, a beast less than a fox, of color between black and
yelow, medlid with black spots, which will soon be made tame. Gens, gentis,
a people, sometime a kindred. Gentiana, an herb called Gencyan. Gentilis, a
kynseman of the same name and stock. sometime it signyfyeth a gentyle or
paynyme. sometime a country man. Gentilis, le, propre, or familyar to that
people, or kynrede. Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of the people
or famyly. Gentilitium nomen, the surname or ancyent name of a man's auncetours.
Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation, gentilitia sacra, ceremonies of
that country or people. Genu, a knee. Genua, a great cite callid Geane.
Genuini, the innermoste cheke teethe. Genuinus sermo, the natural speech or
mother tunge. Genus, generis, is the beginning of every thing, either of the
person that engendered it, or of the place, where it was engendered. Orestes a
Tantalo ducit genus, Orestes has his beginning of Tantalus, or is of the
bloudde of Tantalus. Plato genere Atheniensis est, Plato is of his bloudde or
auncetrye an Athenyens. Also it sygnifieth kind. genus uitae, a kind of life.
genus mortis, a kind of death. genus animalium, a kind of beasts. Also it
signifies that, which contains many sundry kinds, as Animal comprehends
a man, a bird, a fyshe, and every of them is genus to that, which in them is
comprehended. As a brute beast is genus to a horse, a lion, a bulle, a dog,
etc. A bird is genus to an egle, a crow, a lark, a sparowe. etc. A fish is
genus to a whale, a porpese, a haddocke, a playce. etc. Geographia, the
description of the earth. Geomancia, superstitious warkinge in sorcerye, by
cerkles and pricks in the earth. Geometer, a geometritian. Geometria,
geometry, measuring and proporcionyng of fygures in the earth. Georgica,
pertaining to husbandry. Germani, Germaynes, or Almayns, They be also
brethren of one father and oone mother. Germania, the country named Germany,
or Almayne. Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herb. Germino, aui, are, to
branche out. Gero, gessi, gerere, to bear. sometime it signifies to have.
Gerere magistratum, to exercise an office. Gesta, and gestaetes, acts, things
practiced or done. Gerrae siculae, tryfles. Gerres, fyshe of the kind of
herrynges, it may be called pylchardes. Gerrones, talkers of tryfelyng things,
or light matters. Gerulus, a porter, or a man hired to carye bourdeynes.
Gerula, a maid that keeps a child. Gerusia, a place where the Senate did
assemble, a parlyament house. Geryon, onis, the name of a king of Spain, which
was slain by Hercules. Gesa, a haulberde. Gessoriacum, as some men do suppose,
was the town, which is now named Caleys. Gestamen, minis, what so ever is
borne, a burdeyn or caryage. Gestatorium, that wherein any thing is carried or
borne, a flagon, a horse lytter. Gestatio, the exercise, where a man is borne
or carried on any thing. Gesticularius, a, um, pertaynyng to signs or tokens
of myrthe, with meuyng the body or hands. Gesticulator, he that playith with
puppettes. Gesticulor, aris, to make such signs or tokens of myrthe, as in
daunsynge. Gestio, iui, ire, to show the affections of the mind by meuyng of
the body, or any part thereof* sometime it signifies to delight. Gestito, taui,
are, to bear or were oftentimes Gesto, aui, are, to bear long. Gestat
ventre^, she to with child. Gestuosus, full of tokens of myrthe. Gestus, ta,
tum, borne, or done. Gestus, ^u^, gesture, or countenance with menynge of the
body. Getuli, a people in Affrike.
G, ante I.
GIarus, a littell i will in the sea called Ionium, where unto men condemned
were exyled. Gibber, and gibbosus, and gibberosus, he which has a crooked
back, or a great bunche on any part of the body. Gibbus, and gibba, a great
bunche. Gigantomachia, a battle of geantes. Gigas, gigantis, a gyaunt. Gigno,
genui, gignere, to engender or get. Giluus, ua, um, yelowe color. Gingeria,
uel gigeria, a mete made of sundry kinds of flesh, or of garbage of foul.
Gingiuae, the jaws, wherein the teth be set. Gingiuerim, sieve gingiberim,
gynger. Gingrio, gingrii, ire, to cry like a goose. Gion, a great river in
Egypt, otherwise called Nylus. Girgillus, a rele, whereon threde is wou^den
Gith, a sede, which is now called Nigella Romana: it is black like to oynyon
sede, and is very soote, and the sauoure thereof exhausteth reumes of the heed.
G ante L.
GLaber, bra, bru^, smothe, without hear. Glabella, the space between ye brows.
Glabresco, scere, to be without here, or smothe. Glabreta, a place, having
nothing growing in it. Glabriones, they which lack hear. Glacialis, le,
where yse is. Glacior, aris, ari, to be frosen. Glacies, yse. Glacitare, to
make a noise like a gander. Gladiatores, were men, which faught unarmed with
swords. Gladiatorius, ria, rium, pertainynge to that manner of fighting.
Gladiatura, the art or feate to fight with a sword. Gladiolus, a little
sword or wodknyfe. also the name of an herb like to sedge. Gladius, a sword,
also a kind of fish, which has a bone in his forheed like to a sword.
Glandatio, fedynge of swyne with maste, called paunage. Glandium, glandionica,
the part of a bore next the neck, the shield or gammonde. Glans, gla^dis,
mast growing on oaks, bech, chestons, and other like, it is also a pellette of
lead. Also a kernel growyng between the skin and the flesh, it is more
over the foreparte or nutte of a man's yerde. Glandifer, fera, diferum, that
which bears maste. Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, pleasant, ingraued, polyte,
holow, famous, subtle. Glarea, sand, proprely sandy grauel. Glareosus, a, um,
sandy. Glasium, an herb like to plantayne, which makes a blewe color,
Caesar.
wherewith the ancient Butons dyed their vysages. some men english it woadde.
Glaucinum, oil, which does come from the olyues before they be pressed.
Glauciolus, a horse with a wall eye. Glaucium, an herb, which crepeth on the
earth nygh to salt waters. Glaucoma, matis, and glaucomatum, ti, and glaucoma,
mae, an humor in the eien, like crystal, which lets the sight. Glaucopis,
pidis, a man or womanne with graye eyes. Glaucus, ca, cum, gray color. Glaucus
substantinum, a god of the sea. also many men were called by that name. also
the name of a fysshe. Gleba, a turfe or piece of earth. Glessum, crystal, or
beryll. Glycyrrhiza, lykoresse. Glis, itis, a field mous, which slepeth all
the winter. Glis, glissis, potters claye. Glis, glitis, a thystell. Glisco,
sci, scere, to grow, to wax fat, to couerte or desire fervently. Globo,
aui, are, to gather round. Globus, and globum, a boule, or other thing very
round. Also a multitude of men or beasts gathered round together.
Globosus, a, um, round as a boule. Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a hen
does. Glocio, cire, idem. Glomero, aui, are, to wind in round. also to gather
together in an heap. Quint.
Gloria, the consent of good me^ in the praise of a man or woman, callid
renome, glory. Glorior, aris, to auaunt, to the intent to have praises, to
extolle with bostynge. Gloriosus, a, um, renomed, sometime in the ill part,
vaynglorious, or bosting him self. Glos, glotis, the systers husband, or
brothers wife. Glossa, a gloss, or exposition of dark spech. Glossemata, words
not much used. Glossematicus, he that makes a commente on a book. Glubo, by,
bear, to pulle of the bark or rynde of a tree. Gluma, the husk of wheat.
Gluo, glui, ere, to streyne or wringe hard. Gluten, and glutinum, glewe.
Glutinamentum, al glewyshe matter. Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or join.
Glutio, tiui, tire, to swalowe. Gluto, tonis, a glutton. Glyciamerides, a kind
of meat.
G, ante N.
GNafalon, a certain floxe. Gnarus, a, um, skylfull. Gnare, skylfully.
Gnaritas, tatis, skylfulnes. Gnomones, the teethe, whereby the age of an horse
is known. They be sommetyme taken for that, which shows the hours in a
clock or dial.
G, ante O.
GObius, a fyshe, called a gogeon. Goaetia, a spice of wytchecrafte. Gomor, a
measure among the jews. Gomorrha and gomorrhum, a city in Judea which was
consumed for horrible sin against nature. Gonorrha, a disease, whereby a man's
seed gothe from him vnwyttyngly. Gorgia, the name of a great rhetorician.
Gorgones, monstrous womenne, which were vanquyshed by Perseus. Gortys, a
city of Candy. Gossampinus, a tree, which bears cotton. Gossipium, cotton.
G, ante R.
GRabatus, a cowche. Graculus, a bird called a Iaye. Graculo cum fidibus
nihil, The Iaye has naught to do with the harp. which is spoken of them,
which lacking eloquence or good letters, do scorn them that have it.
Gracus, and graculus, a chough or cadese. Gracchus, the name of a noble famylye
or house in Rome. Gracilis, le, gracilentus, ta, tu^, lean, or sclender,
sometime soft. Gracile, sclenderly. Gracilitas, cilitatis, leanness,
sclendernes, or softness. Gradus, a greese or step, a degree in
consanguinitie. De gradit delici, to be cast down from his place: whereby is
sygnifyed to be abashed or moved from constancy of mind. Deturbari gradu,
has the same signification. Gradior, to go by steps, or step. Gradator, a
great goer. Gradatii equi, amblynge horses. Gradatio, a form of speaking,
when of the first sentence springs the second, of the second the third,
and so forth. Gradatim, in order, or by course. Gradiuus, one of the names of
Mars. Gradior, eris, gressus sum, to go. Graecus, a man borne in Greece, a
Greek. Graecus, a, um, of Greece. Graecia, Greece. Graecanicus, ca, cum, come
out of Greece. Graecostasis, a place where Ambassadors adode, until they were
sent for into the Senate. Graiugenae, Greeks. Graecor, caris, ari, to ryotte
in bankettynge and rybaudrye. Gralae, crouches, or styltes. Grallatores, they
which do go on styltes. Grammatica, grammar. Grammaticus, he that teaches
grammar, or expoundethe authors, a profounde grammaryan. Grammatista, a
smatterer in grammar, a mean grammarian. Gra^maticus, ca, cu^, pertaining to
gra^mer. Grammatice loqui, to speak congruely. Grammatocyphon, he that
wrytethe on his knee. Grammatophylatium, the place where the records, or
commune writings be kept. Grammataeus, a chancellor. Gramme, a length
without breadth. Grammia, the fleume in the eyes. Gramen, grass: sometime all
herbs together, the swarthe. Graminosus, a, um, grown with grass or herbs.
Grando, dinis, hayle. Also a pushe like to a boil in the flesh, which
greueth a man when it is touched. Grandinosus, a, um, full of hayle.
Grandiuatus, ta, tum, hurt or wounded with haylle. Grandebalae, hears in the
arm holes. Grandis, grande, ancient, or great. Grandiusculus, la, lum,
somewhat great, or of good age, well stryken in years. Granditas, tatis, the
abundance of years, auncientie. Grandeuus, very old. Grandiloquus,
eloquente, he that speaks as it were with a greatte magnyfycence in words.
Grandiloquentia, a stately eloquence. Grandio, diui, ire, to make great. Grande
s^o, ere, to wax great. Granum, grain or corn. Granarium, a gray^arde,
wherein corn is kept. Graphis, phidis, the art of portraiture. Graphium, a
pensyll, wherewith men do write in tables. Graphicus, ca, cum, kunnyngly, or
perfectly wrought. Graphicus homo, a propre man. Graphice, proprely well, and
kunnyngly. Graphiarium, a case, wherein pensiles were kept, it may be called a
pennar. Grassator, he that by high ways, lies in awayt to rob or slay men,
an extorcioner. Grassor, aris, ari, to rob or slay men passing by the high
ways. Also to goo or come on one with a violent rage. Therefore in a sodayn and
violent pestilence, it is said, morbus grassatur, The sycknes kylleth me^
sodaynely. Gratia, grace, sometime it signifies thank, sometime a benefyte,
sometime reward* also peace or love, sometime cause or respect, also praise.
Gratus, ta, tum, thankful, pleasant, acceptable. Gratiosus, very thankful.
Also in favor, with the people, or well esteemed. Gratis, an aduerbe,
betokenynge without reward: sometime without deserte. Gratuitus, ta, tum,
without reward or vnhyred. Gratuito, an aduerbe sygnifienge, of good will,
without benefit. Grates, thanks. Gratificor, ari, to gratify, or do a
thing thankful, or to confer a benefit, or do a good turn. Grator, ari,
to give thanks to god with offrynges, also to rejoice of good fortune.
Gratulor, ari, with a dative case, to be joyous for him self or an other for
any good thing that has happened. Liuius.
Tibi de hac tua fcelicitate gratulor, I am joyous with the, or as glad as
thou art, of this prosperity that thou art in. Sometime it sygnifyeth to
give thanks unto god: but with an accusative case it signifies to take
thankfully any act. Grauis, grave, heavy, greuouse, sommetyme substancial,
grave, or having gravity, contrary to lyghtnes or wantonness, also great or
puissant, sometime old or aged, sometime sure or constent, sommetyme plentuous
or full. Terra grauts, land laded with corn. Grauiter, et grave, greuousely,
heuily, substancially, much, wisely, sadly. Grauatus, grieved. Grauedo, dinis,
heaviness, grief, disease. Sometime the mutre or reume of the heed.
Grauedinosus, he that has a heuye heed. Grauedinosus, a, um, that which
makes a heavy heed. Graueolentia, stenche or stynke. Grauo, aui, are, to grieve,
to burden, or lade. Grauor, ari, to be grieved, or to take grieuouselye.
Grauate, and grauatim, grievously, or displesantly, or paynfully. Grauesco,
scere, to be laded. Grauida mulier, a woman great with child. Grauido, are, to
get a woman with child. Grauastellus, aged. Grex, gregis, a flock, as well
of men, as of cattelle. Gregarius miles, a soldier taken at adventure, not
chosen. Gregarius pastor, the chief shepard, which has the charge of the
hole flock. Gregarius canis, a curre dog. Gregalis, le, cattle, which is
in the flock. Gregatim, in sundry flocks. Gremtale, an apron. Gressus, a
step, or goinge. Gressibile, apt to goo. Gressutus, ta, tum, idem. Grossus,
a, um, greatte. Grossi, green fygges. Grossuli, young fygges. Grossipion, seu
grossapinus, a tree, whereof comes cotton. Grossapina, cotton. Grus, gruis, a
Crane. Gruo, gruere, to cry like a Crane. Grumus, a barowe, or hyllocke.
Grumma, a thing, wherewith ground is measured. Grumia, a mydde place, from
whense goth four ways. Grunnio, ire, to grunt like a swyne. Grundio, idem.
Gryllus, a beast, more than a grassehoppe, which destroys corn. Gryphus, a
grype or gryffon. also a captious, an insoluble, or diffuse argument, a
ryddyll. Grypus, a nose rysynge in the myddell.
G, ante V.
GVla, the throat, sometime glottony. Gulosus, a glutton. Guliocae, the grene
shale of the wall nutte. Gummi, gu^me, which droppeth from trees. Gummatus,
ta, tum, dressed with gum or rased. Gummarae arbores, Trees that bryngethe
forth gum. Gumminum, oil made of gum. Gurges, gurgitis, a swallowe or
deep pyll in a water, or a goulfe. Gurgito, aui, are, to swolowe or devour.
Gurgulio, gulionis, the gully or gargylle of the throote, or throote bolle. It
is also a worm that bredeth in barnes, and eats up corn. Gurgustium, a
dark and vile habitation, a cabban or cotage. Gustus, tus, taste. Gustatus,
tus, idem. Gusto, aui, are, to taste. Guttus, a cruet, or other like thing,
out of the which lycour is poured dropping. Gutta, a drop. Guttatim, by
drops. Gutturnium, a lauer, or yewer. Guttur, gutturis, the thro^e.
Gutturosus, he that has a swollen throat.
G, ante Y.
GYgaeus, a laake of Lydie, Gygemorus, a little hylle, not far from
Thessalye. Gyges, the name of a king of Lydia, also a river of Lydia was
callydde by the same name. Gymnastes, he that teaches chylderne to exercise
them in wrastlynge, or other like. Gymnasium, a place, where is commune
exercise of the body. Sommetyme a schoolehouse. Gymnasticum, the art of
exercise. Gymnasiarches, the chief master of the schole or place of exercise.
Gymnosophistae, philosophers of Inde, which went always naked. Gymnici iudi,
plays exercysed naked. Gymnus, a beast, which commethe of a horse and an
ass mare. Gynoecium, a nourcerye. Gyneconitus, that part of the house, which
serves only for women. Gynephilus, a great lover of women. Gypsus, plaster.
Gypso, aui, are, to plaster. Gyrus, a cyrcute or compass. Gyro, gyraui,
gyrare, to compass or goo in cyrcuite. Gyttheum, a town, which Hercules and
Apollo, layenge there aside their strife and debate, builded together, and the
inhabytauntes of the same town are called Gyttlietes.
HABEO, MABVI, HAbere, to have, to hold, to possede or occupy, to esteem or
suppose, to call, to dwell, Pensi habere, to take heed. Frustra habere, to
deceive. Habere been seu male, to do or prosper well or ill. Been haber, it is
well. Res ita se habet, the thing is at this point. In custodiis haberi, to be
kept in prysone. Fortunas suas uenales habuit, he has sold all his goods.
Habeo tibi fidem, I put my trust in the. Habeo rationem, I have busynes, or I
have to do. Habere rem, to meddle with a woman. Habere rem cum aduersario, to
contend. Habere gratiam, to thank. Habeo audire, I can here. Habeo polliceri,
I can promise. Habet frustra, He is dysappoynted. Habitus, habitus, the
form or state of the body, sometime of other things, Also apparayle. Also it
sygnyfyethe a qualytie or propretie, which a man has conceived by
education, long exercise, or custom, habyte. Habitudo, dinis, the same.
Habitior, oris, more corporate. Habilis, le, hable. Habena, the rain of a
brydell. Habito, taui, are, to dwell. Habitaculum and habitatio, a dwelling
place or habitation. Hactenus, hitherto, so much. Hadrianopolis, a city in
Thracia. Hadrobalum, a kind of sweet smelling gum, that grows in Media.
H, ante Ae.
HAedui, people in France, which be now callid Burgonyons, and Burbonoyses.
Haedus, a kydde. Haedina caro, kyddes flesh. Haedile, a stable, wherein kyddes
be kept. Haedera, Iuye tree. Haederatius, ia, ium, of Iuye. Haematices, the
sanguinarie or blood stone. Haemonia, the country callid Thessaly.
Haemorrhois, a disease in the fundeme^t like teates or wartes, out of the
which issues bloudde, called emorrodes or pyles. Also a serpent, of whom if a
man be stryken, he bledeth to death. Haereo, haesi, haerere, to cleave or
stycke to a thing. sometime to doubt. Haeret in te omnis culpa, In the is
put all the blame. Haeresco, scere, to stick fast, or be thruste in.
Haesito, aui, are, idem quod haereo. Haeres, haeredis, an heir, or he, which
succedeth an other in his lands or goods. Haereditas, tatis, inheritance or
succession. Haereditarius, ia, ium, pertaining to inheritance. Bona
haereditaria, goods which do come by inheritance. Haeredipeta, crauers of
goods, flatteryng men to be their heirs. Haeredium, land, wherein a man has
a state of inheritance. Haeredidum, a lyttel inheritance. Haeresis, haeresios,
a sect, an heresy, an obstynate opynion. Haeresiarches, an arche heretic.
Haereticus, an heretic. Hagnus, a lamb. Hagnellus, a little lamb. Hagninus,
a, um, of a lamb. Halec, lecis, a fysshe called herryng. Also a sauce made of
fyshe. Halesius, a river not far from Aetna. Halialmon, a river of Macidon.
Halietus, an Egle, that haunteth about the sea. Halieutica, books contayninge
the properties of fyshes. Halimon, a thorn like to a white thorn, growing by
the sea side, and has leaves like to an olyue tree, but they be brother. Halo,
aui, are, to send forth savor. Halitus, breathe or vapor. Halo, the cirkle
or garlande about the Moon. Halicarnasus, a city in the less Asia.
Halophanta, a great liar. Halosis, the captivity. Halito, aui, are, to vapor
out. Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, so called because they are inuironned
about with the Sea. Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dream, to be deceived, to
err, or to take a matter wrong. Hamadriades, Nymphs or fayries of the woddes.
Hamus, a book. sometime a chain. Hamo, aui, are, to crook. Hamatus, mata,
tum, to be furnysshed with hooks. Hamiota, uel hamota, an angler or fyssher
with an angle or hoke. Hamatilis, le, pertaining to a hoke. piscatus
hamatilis, fysshynge with a hook, or anglynge. Hamonus, a, um, a color
somewhat read. Haphe, a color on the body, like to them that be leperous.
Hammon, onis, Jupiter in the egiptian tu^ge Harena, uide ante in arena.
Hariolus, a sothesayer. Harmonia, harmony or melody. Harpasa, a town of Asia.
Harp, a sword like to a sithe. Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence.
Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a ship. also a coupers instrument, wherewith he
dryueth on howpes, an addysse. Harpa, and harpax, acis, a grapelyng iron, for
to close ships together: also a poll with a hoke on the end, that shypmen
use. Harpocrates, the god of silence. Harpocratem reddere, to put one to
silence. Harpalice, a woman's name, the daughter of Harpalus king of Thrace.
Harpyiae, monstrous birds, having maidens vysages, and talons of a meruaylous
rapacitie. wherefore men that be ravenous, and great gatherers of goods, be
named sometime Harpy^ae. Haruspex, spicis, a dyuynatour, or tellar of things
to come by the lokynge in the bowelles of beasts. Also he, which observes
times in doing of things. Haruspicina, the art of him, which is a
dyuinatour. Haruspicium, the diuynation or telling of things to comme, by the
lokynge in beasts bowelles. H^^pis, pidis, the bowyng made like a cer^^^^ ^n
roufes of houses, or of a whele. H^^a, a spear. H^^^^pu^ae, were without iron:
and in the old time were given for a price to them that vanquished first in
battle. H^^ati, spear men. Ha^^le, a spear staff. H^^^a^ium, seliynge
under the standerde. Haitam abiicere, sygnifieth to leave suit, to despair of
the matter in variance. Hauicus ludus, reunnynge at the tylte with spears.
Haud, in no wise. Vergil^us.
Haurio, siui, iui, rii, ire, to draw or take out, to here, to see, to take a
thing gredylye, to wound, to fatigate or make weary, to make empty, to consume.
Haurire supplicia, to suffer punyshement or peynes. Haustus, tus, a draught in
drinking. Haustum facere, to drink. Haustrum, a bucket to draw water.
H, Ante E.
HEautontimorumenon, the name of one of the comedyes of Terentius, which is as
much to say, as tourmentynge him self. Hebdomas, madis, and hebdomada, ae, a
wike. Also the number of seven in days, years, or other time. Hebenus, a tree,
whereof the wod is black like geate, and it bears neither leaves, nor fruit.
Hebes, hebetis, dulle. Hebeo, and hebesco, ere, to be dull. Hebeto, aui, are,
to be dustre or made dark. Hebetudo, dinis, dullness, or duskyshenes.
Hebiones, of men in old time were callid poor folks. Hebraicus, Hebrician or
of Hebrewe. Hebron, a vyllage by Jerusalem. Hebrus, a river in Thracia.
Hecameda, the daughter of Arsinoi, which was given to Nestor for a gift.
Hecatombe, a sacrifice, wherein were killed a hundred beasts. Hecatompolis, a
country having an hundred cities therein. Hecatompus, he that has an hundred
fete. Hecate, a name of the moon. Hecta, the yexinge of a man. also a lyttelle
puff, which rises in breadde when it is baken. Hectica febris, the fever
that consumes. Hector, the son of Priamus. Hecyra, a mother in law.
Hedonius, expenses in voluptuous thingis. Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, crienge
out. Heliocaminus, a place which is hette with the son. Helcium, the harneys
of carthorses, whereby they draw. Helenium, an herb commonly called Enula
campana, in english Helycampane. Heliopolis, a city in Grecia called also
Corinthus. Heliochrisos, an herb having a yelowe flower. A marygolde.
Helioscopium, a little tree like to a fygge tree, and has leaves like a
plane, but greatter and blacker. Helioselinum, an herb like to Smallage,
which grows in watery grounds, and has but one lease. Heliotropium, a
flower which in the son rysynge does open, and at the son set closes.
Some supposes it to be Marygoldes or ruddes. Helix, icis, of some men is taken
for a kind of wyllowe tree, of some men for yuie. Hellas, ladis, the country
of Greece. Helleborus, an herb, the rote whereof purges melancoly. Hellenes,
the son of Deucalion, of whom the Greeks were named Hellenes. Hellespontus,
an arm of the sea. which deuideth Greece and As^e. Heloi, in hebrewe
signifies god almighty. Helorus, a river in Sycile. Heluatia, a garment which
was used in Lidia, and was of the color of a cowes hyde. Heluela, small wortes.
Heluetii, people called Suycers, or Suyches, by desire of wars, enemies to
all mankind: subjects neither to god not to Prince. Heluo, onis, he which in
eating and drinkyng spends al his substance, a reueller. sometime a glutton
only. Heluo libroru^, an insaciable reder of books. Heluatio, revel, or
spending in riot. Heluor, aris, ari, to spend in riot. Heluolum, a color
between read and white like the color of clothe, called french tawnye.
Helxine, an herb, which has stalks somewhat read, and small burres on the
top, which do cleave fast unto clothes. Hem, an interiection of blaming,
disdaynynge, meruaylynge, or showing. Hemeridion, which dureth but one day.
Hemerodromus, a currour, which runs many miles in one day. Hemicranea, a
pain in half the heed, called the mygrim. Hemicyclum, a compass chair.
Hemicyclus, an half cerkle. Hemina, a measure of licour or corn, which may
now be taken for a pottell. Hemiola, gain of all, and half as much, as
of.iiii. s. be gotten.vi. s. Hemiolus, a proportion in Arithmetike, co^taynynge
the hole noumbre, and half that nombre: as one to three.xv to ten. Hemiomu^, an
herb good against all yexis. Hemis, half. Hemispherium, half the compass of
the visyble heaven or firmament. Hemistichium, half a verse. Hemitogium, half
a gown. Hemitritaeus, an half tercian fever, whose course is in every.xxxvi.
hours, or which has the course of a tercyan. Hemodes, certain isles in the
douche see. Hemerobius, one days sustynaunce. also a worm, which lives but
one day. Hemichorium, half a dance. Hemus, a mountain in Greece in the realm
of Thrace, which is six miles in height. Hendecasyllabus, a verse of a.xi.
syllables. Henula, a little chapel. Hepiolus, a fly like a butterflye,
which flies at night into the leame of a candell. Hepsema, must boiled to
the third part. Heptapolis, was sommetyme the name of Egypt, by reason of
seven cities, which first were in it. Hepthemimeris, where a syllable
naturally short, is made long in a verse, which does hap in the beginning
of the first foot. Hera, the name of Juno. Heraclea, a town in the co^fines of
Europa. Heraclee, a town very nere to Naples. Heracleon, an herb like to
Organum, it grows in watery places, and has a flower like a lylle: and when
the flower is fallen, it has a heed like popie. It is also an another herb
growing in plashes, having a little stalk, which excedeth not four
fyngers high, having a red flower, and leaves like Coriander: this herb
heals all wounds, if it be laid unto them. It is called Heraclion syderion.
Heracleotica nux, a wall nurte. Heraclides, the name of a philosopher.
Heraclitus, a philosopher, which always wept, when he beheld the people:
his warkes of a purpose were obscure ^ hard to be understand. Heraclius, the
name of an Emperor, it is also a touch stone. Herba, an herb. Also generally
all thing that grows on the earth, not being wod. sometime a wede. Herbam
dare aut porrigere, where a man yeldeth him, or confesses him self to be
vanquyshed. Herbula, a little herb. Herbosus, a, um, full of herbs or
grass. Herbaceus, a, um, of herbs or grass. Herbidus, a, um, idem.
Herbarius, he which knows the propreties of herbs, and makes medycynes of
them. Herbarius, ia, ium, pertaining to herbs. Herbare, to bring forth
herbs. Herbesco, ere, to make herbs or wedes. Herceus, one of the surnames of
Jupiter. Hercinia, a great wodde in Get many, which is in breadth.ix. days
journey. Herculanus, na, number, of Hercules. Hercules, the son of Jupiter and
Alcumena. Hercle and Hercule, an affirmative oath. Herculeius, a Romayne,
which favored the part of Marius. Herculeus, ea, eum, puissant or mighty.
Herebus, the depest place in hell. Heri, yesterday. Hericius, an yrchin or
hedgehogge. Herillus, a philosopher of Calcidonie. Herma, an image of
Mercurius. It is also an image, the heed whereof may be cha^gid. Hermae, be also
Images ferte or laid on Sepulchers. Hermathena, an image contaynyng the
figures of Mercury and Pallas. Hermaphroditus, the son of Mercurye and Venus.
Also he that is both man and woman. Hermerotes, small images, proprely of
little children with whynges. Hermes, is, and hermetis, Mercurye. Hermodo^cus,
a philosopher of Ephesie. Hermogenes, a propre name. Hermoglyphus, a grauer of
images. Hermon, a lyttelle hylle that standethe on Iordane. Hermopolis, the
name of a city that Hermes builded. Hermupoa, an herb called Mercury. Hermus,
a river, which in the mids, parts the fyldes of Smyrnee: and falling from
the hylle Dorylao, dyuideth Phrigia from Car^a. Hernia, the disease, whereof men
be called brosten: for that their bowels, or other matter, is fallen into their
coddes. Hernici, people in Campania. Hermosus, he that is brosten. Herodius, a
bird named a faucon. Herodes, the son of Antipater, which in the.x. year of
Augustus, was of the Romans declared king of Jews, and he reigned.xxxvii.
years. Heroida, a noble woman. Heroicus, ca, cum, noble, or pertaining to
nobleness. Herpeta, a terter. Hersilia, the name of Romulus wife. Herus, a
lord or master. Hesperia, Italy. Hesperia ultima, Spain. Hesperus, the weste
sterre. Hesperides, the three daughters of Atlas, which kept the gardens,
wherein grew the golden appuls, that were taken away by Hercules. Hesperidum
horti, the gardeynes, wherein were the golden appulies, now called Orenges.
Hesternus, na, number, of yesterdayes. Hestiaea, is a part of Thessaly says
Strabo, and Ptol. and in Homerus, it is a town in Euboea. Stephanus says, it
is a City in Acarnania. Heterogenus, na, um, of an other kind. Hetruria, the
country of Thuscan wherein the city of Florence is. Heu, alas. Heus, how.
Hexaclinum, a parlour, wherein six persons may soupe. Hexagonum, six
cornerde. Hexameron, of six days. Hexametrum, a verse of six fete.
H ante I.
HIarbas, the son of Jupiter, which was king of the Getulians. Hiacynthus,
an herb with a pourple flower, and has a round root. Hiacynthinae uestes,
garments of pourple color. Hiato, aui, are, to gape often. Hiatus, tus, a
gapynge. Hibiscus, an herb like to malowes, having a gretter lefe, and a heary
stalk, holyhok. Hic, this man. also here or in this place. Hiera, an isle
between Sicile and Liparis. Also the name of a way, of a womanne, the wife of
Thelaphus king of Misie. Hieranthemis, the flower of the herb Camamele.
Hierapicra, a medycyne to pourge flewme and cholere. Herapolis, a city in
Asia. Hierarchia, the holy governance, or principalytie. Hieri, people beyond
Sauromatas. Hierobotane, an herb called holy herb. Hieroceps, an isle in
Cyprus, nere to Paphus. Hierocomion, a laserhouse. Hieroduli, ministers in
temples and churches. Hierogliplicae, mystical letters or ciphers. Hieron, uel
hiereon, a chapel. Hierophanta, the declarer of mysteries or holy scripture.
Hierosolyma, Jerusalem. Hierotheus, the propre name of a man. Hila, a small
gutte or ars gutte. Hilaresco, scere, to be merry. Hilaria plurali, the.viii.
calendes of Aprile, when the day and night have equal hours. Hilaris, re, and
hilarus, merry, or joyous. Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe. Hilarious, the propre name
of a man. Hilaro, aui, are, to make one merry or joyous. Hilarodus, a synger of
a wanton and delycate song. Hilum, the little black, which is in the end
of a bean. It is sometime taken for nothing or naught. Himera, a river in
Sycile, divided into two parts, the oone fresshe water, the other salt. Hin,
a measure of the Jews, which contained of wine or water, the weyghte of
xviii. pound. Hinnio, iui, ire, to neygh like a horse. Hinnulus, a fawn or
hynde calfe. Hio, aui, are, to gape. Hippacen, chese made of mares milk.
Hippaco, aui, are, to fetch breath quyckely. Hippagium, carriage on horseback.
Hippago, ginis, a ferybote. Hipparclius, the master of the horses. Hippeas, a
kind of crabbe fyshe. Hippiades, images of womenne on horseback. Hippias, a
philosopher, which was expert in all sciences and crafts. Hippiatrus, an
horse leche. Hippo, mascul, genesis the name of.ii. cities. Hippocampae, fyshes
like horses. Hippocentaurus, a beast being half a man, half an horse.
Hippocomus, an horseskorcer. Hippocrates, the name of a phisytion most
excellent. Hippocrene, a fountain in Boeotia. Hippodame, mes, and hippodamia,
miae, the name of a woman. Hippodamus, a breaker of horses. Hippodromus, a
broad way, wherein many horses may run together. Hippoglotios, an herb called
Alexander. Hyppolytus, the son of Theseus, who at the complaynte of Phedra
his stepmother, was pursewed by his father, and he in a charyot fleing, was
overthrown among the sharp stones, and rent all to pieces. Afterward
Aesculapius reuyued him, and restored him to health. wherefore he would be
called Vi^bius, that is to say, twyse a man, forasmoche as he had twice
lived. Hippomachia, tournayenge on horseback and iustynge. Hippomanes, an
herb, whereof if horses bone eat, they forthewith rounne mad. It is also a
venomous humor, rounnynge out of the shappe of a mare, which if a man hap
to receive inward, he shall be mad. Plinius says, that it is a lyttelle
flesh in the forheed of a colte, when he is new foled, black, and as much
as a date, which the mare plucketh away with hyrrethe, as soon as she has
foled: and if any man do take it away before her, she never after will love her
fool. Hippomarathron, an herb like fenell, but having greatter leaves.
Hipponomus, a herd or keeper of horses. Hippopera, a maale or bougette.
Hippopodes, people in the Scythik occean which have fete like horses.
Hippopotamus, a beast living in the river of Nyle, having fere like an ox, his
back and mane like a horse, and neyeth like a horse, a wynding tail, and tusked
like a boore. Hipposelinum, an herb like parcely, and grows in dry
grounds, whereof horses do gladly eat. Hippotela, a fool of an ass.
Hippotoxata, an archer on horseback. Hippuris, an herb called in latin
Equisetu^, or cauda equina, in english, horsetayle. Her, Hiris, the palm of
the hand. Hira, the gutte, which is called Ieiunum. Hircipilus, a man that is
hear^e. Hircosus, a, um, that stynketh like a got. Hirquitalus, a child,
which passethe the age of.xiiii. years, and begins to be styrred with
lecherye. Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or aptnes to lecherye.
Hircquus, the corner of the eye, also he that is gog^e eyed. Hirculus, a kind
of spikenarde. Hircus, a got bucke. it is also the rank savor, which issues
out of the arm holes. Hircinus, a, um, gotyshe. Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre
like a mad dog. Hirsutus, ta, tum, rough. Hirtus, ta, tum, idem. Hirudo,
inis, a horseleche, or blood sucker. Hirundo, inis, a swalowe. Hisciacus, he
that gapeth much. Hisco, sci, scere, to gape as one does for sluggishenes,
after sleep, or for lack of sleep. Also it is to proffre to speak, or open
the mouth to speak. Hismaelita, a farasyn. Hispalis, a city in Spain, now
callydde Sibyle. Hispania, a countreye in the weste part of Europa called
Spain, and was sometime callid Iberia, and Hesperia, and is inuyronned on the
southe part with the sea, callid Mare mediterraneum, which dyuydeth Europa
from Africa: on the north part with the sea called Mare Cantabricum, on the
weste with the great occian see with the mountains called Pyrenei, and the
royalme of France. And this country is divided by Pthelome into three regio^s,
Bethica^, wherein is Granado, Siuyle, Corduba. etc. Lusytania^, wherein is
Portugal, Galicia. etc. Tarraconenicin, wherein is Castyl, Lions, and Arragon.
At this time it conteyneth five relmes, Granado on the south part toward
Affrike, Portugal on the west, Galicia and Biscay on the north, Arragon on the
cast part, Castyl and Lions in the myddell. Hispidus, a, um, bristled or rough
heared. Historia, a storye. Historicus, a writer of stories. Histrio, onis, a
player in enterludes and stage players. Histrionicus, ca, cum, pertaining to
players. Histrix, icis, ^ beast having sharp pricks on his back, called a
porkpine. Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chinke. Hiulcus, ca, cum,
gapynge, or chynked, as the ground to in a great drythe.
H Ante O.
HOc, this or that. Hodie, to day. Hododocus, a robber by the high way.
Hodoeporicum, a book to carry in journey, which may be called a iournall.
Hodoeporus, a trauayler by the way. Holocausium, proprely the beast, which
having his bowelles taken out, is laid hole on the altar and bourned.
Holographum, a testament all written with the hand of the testatour. Holor,
oris, a swanne. Holoserica uestis, a garment all of sylke. Holus, alias
Homolus, a hylle of Thessaly. Homeromasux, ticis, the reprocher of Homere,
generally Homeromastices, be taken for all reprochers, and false correctours of
learned men. Homerus, the poet of all other most famous and excellent, who
wrate the battle between the Greeks and Troyanes wonderful eloquently: but
how truly, wise me may coniect. Also he wrote the travail of the prudent
Ulysses. Finally both wor^^^ are worthy to be radde, for the marvelous
invention, and profitable sentences in them contained. Homicida, a murderer, a
mankyller. Homicidium, mourder, or manslaughter. Homilia, a Sermon. Homo, a
living creature, having capacity of reason, subject to death, a man,
woman, or child. Homocapnus, a man, which sits always in the smoke, or by
the fire. Homoeosis, a simylitude. Homogalactos, a foster brother. Homogenes,
of one kind. Homoglossus, of the same tongue or la^gage. Homoleum, a cappe of
the old facion. Homologia, a confession, consent or covenant Homomeria,
lykenes in partis or members Homonoea, the propre name of a woman, whereby is
signified concord. Homonymon, of like name. Homo triu^ literaru^, signified
sometime in mokage a man of a noble lineage, because noble men wrate their
forenames, Erasmus in Chiliad.
their names and surnames with three letters, as. P. Cor. Scipio, C.I. Caes. It
is sommetyme taken for a thief, because in Fur are but three letters. Homousios,
of like substance. Homosipyi, they which sleep together under one ruff.
Honestas, tatis, honesty. Honesto, aui, are, to reward with honor. Honestus,
ta, tum, honest. Honor, oris, honos, noris, honor, dignity, sometime
beauty, also reverence, honesty. Honorarium, a present given to ambassadors,
great officers, and justices at their first coming, or executing of their
autorities. Honorem praefari, to speak with reverence, as when a thing shall
be spoken, which is vile or dishoneste. Honoraria, plays made at Rome, to the
honor of Bacchus. Honorarius, ia, um, pertaining to honor. Honorificens,
honorificentior, honorificentissimus, a, um, using or doing things
honorably. Honorifico, aui, are, to do honor, or to honor Honorificus, ca,
cum, that brings honor. Honoro, aui, are, to honor. Honorus, a, um, that is
with honor. Hopistographi, rolls written on both sides. Hora, an hour.
Horaeum, summer honye. It is also a sauce made of fyshe. Horarium, the space of
an hour. Horda, a cow great with calfe. Hordearius, ia, um, pertaynyng to
barley. Hordeum, barley. Horestes, the son of king Agamemnon, which slew
his mother, because she conspired with Aegisthus her aduouterer, to slay his
father. Horia, a fyshers bote. Horizon, it is, a cerkle dyuidynge the half
sphere, or over part of the firmament, from the other half, where, to our
sight, it seems that the heaven touches the earth. Hormesion, a precious
stone of the color of fire. Horminode, a grene stone, compassed with a cerkle
of the color of gold. Hornus, na, um, of this years, Hagnus hornus, this
years lamb. Homae fruges, This years grain. Hornotinus, a, um, of one years
growing. Horologium, a dyall or a clock. Horomasdes, among the Caldees was
named the good god. Horoscopos, the diligent markynge of the time of the birth
of a child. Horoscopo, are, to mark the hour. Horoscopus, that part of the
firmament, which every hour rises from the cast, astronomers do call it the
ascendent. Horoscopus, pa, um, every, thing, wherein hours be marked.
Horrearius, the keeper of the barn. Horreo, rui, ere, when a man thinks that
his hear does rise, also to quake for cold or fear. sometime to fear much.
Horresco, scere, when a man feleth within him great cold or trembling to
begin, as in a fever, or in a greatte fear: Sum time to quake. Horreum, a
barn, wherein corn is laid. Sometime a store house, wherein any other thing
is kept. Horribilis, le, horrible or terrible. Horrificus, idem. Horridulus,
tymorous. Horridus, da, um, rough, also terrible. Horrifico, aui, are, to make
aferde. Horripilo, aui, are, to be rough. Horrisonus, na, sonum, having a
terryble sown or voice. Horror, oris, tremblyng for cold or fear, also
horryblenes. Hortatus, tus, exhortacyon. Hortensia, the daughter of Hortensius,
a woman most eloquent. Hortensius, an excellent orator of Rome, of a
wonderful memory. Hortor, aris, ari, to exhort. Hortus, a knotte gardeyne,
or a gardeyne for pleasure, or an orcharde. Horula, a little hour.
Hostomaticus, syckely. Hospes, hospitis, a geste, or mutual friends dwelling in
sundry countrays. also a stranger or a man, inhabiting out of the country.
Hospita terra, a country, whereby a man may peasibly pass. Hospitalis, le,
using a gentle entertaynement, or gladly receyuynge a stranger. Hospitor,
aris, ari, to receive frendely into his house. Hossimi, they that be borne
without nosethrylles. Hostia, an hooste or sacrifice offered to attain
vyctorie of ennemies. Hosticus, ca, um, hostyle, or enemy. Hostilis, le,
pertaining to an ennemy. Hostimentum, recompense, one for an other. Hostio,
iui, ire, to recompense, to assuage, or abate, to offend. Hostis, an enemy.
Hostium, a measure of a hundred and forty bushels. Also a door. Hostorium, the
staff, wherewith all measures be made even, a stryke.
H Ante V.
HVber, bera, berum, fruitful, or plentuouse. Huber, eris, a pappe or vdder.
Hubertas, tatis, plentye. Hubertim, plentuousely. Huberrime, very plentuousely.
Hubero, raui, rare, to make plentuouse or fruitefulle. Hubertus, ta, tum,
abundant or plentuous. Huc, hither. Huic, to that place. Also to him or her.
Hui, an interiection of scornynge. Huiusmodi, and huiuscemodi, such. Hulula, a
shriche owl. Hululo, aui, are, to howl. Humanitas, humanity or nature of
man. also doctrine, pertainynge to man. Humanitus, of men. Humaniter, gentylly.
Humanus, na, um, gentle, tractable, courteyse, merciful and frendely.
Humecto, aui, are, to make moist. Humeo, mui, ere, to be moist or wette.
Humesco, scere, idem. Humerus, the shoulder. Humidus, moist. Humigatus, wette.
Hum^^is, le, base, low. also simple or pore, abiecte, vile. Humilio, aui, are,
to make low, poor, or abiecte. Humilitas, tatis, baseness, or lowenesse,
humility, which as Speusippus defyneth, is a gentylnesse of the mind,
lackyng wrath or anger. Humo, aui, are, to burye, or hyde. Humor, oris, humor
or moisture. Humus, earth being moist. Humi, a low on the ground. Hunni,
people which came out of Scithia, and inhabyted Hungarye.
H Ante Y.
HYacynthus, is a precious stone, of the color of fine gold, which being
worn in such wise, that it touches the flesh against the heart, or the vain,
which comith from the heart into the left hand, preserves one from the
pestilence. It is also a purple flower, which has a round root, some do
suppose it to be called in english, flower gentle. Hyacinthina, were solemn
ceremonies done in the night. Hieronimus co^tra Iouinianu^
Hyapes, seven sterres, in whose rysynge and goinge down it always rayneth.
Hybrides, half wild. Hyalargus, a glasyer. Hyalus, glass. Hyalinus, glasye.
Hyberia, a region in Asia, joining to Armenie, enuyronned with the mountayns,
callid Cauca^^. It is also the old name of Spayn. Hyberna, places where men of
war do rest them in winter. Hybernacula, places prepared to winter in.
Hybernia, Irelande. Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in winter. Hybernus, na,
um, pertayninge to winter. Hyberus, a greatte river in Spain, nigh to
Tarrhacon. Hyble, uel hybles, a city in Sycile, and a mountain nygh to it,
which does grow full of time: And therefore the honey, which is there, is of
all other most pleasant. Hybrida, is a dog, engendered betwyxte a hounde and
a mastyue, called a lymmar, or mongrell. Hybris, idis, a kind of hawks,
which seldom is seen in the day, but seeks his pray in the night.
Hydaspes, a great river in Indie. Hyderon, a disease, when the skin is filled
with water. Hydraulis, an organ player. Hydra, a water serpent. It was also a
monster, with whom Hercules faught: and as soon as he had stryken of one heed
of the monster, immediately sprange up an other. Hydram secare, to meddle with
an endelesse matter, or where after one myschiefe happens an another. Hydria, a
water pot. Hydrolapathon, water dockes. Hydromantia, divination in calling of
spirit (...) to appear in water. Hydromel, water and honey sodden together.
Hydropota, he that drinks always water. Hydrops, hydropis, the droppesy.
Hydrus, a water serpent. Hydruntes, a city in Calabria. Hyemo, aui, are, to
rest in the winter time. Hyems, winter. (...) de Animal.
Hyena, a beast like a wolf, which has a mane over all his back and neck,
but the hears be longer and harder. Hymber, a shower of rain or hayle. Hymen,
a skin in the secret place of a maiden, which when she is defloured, is
broken. Hymenaeus, was called the God of marriage. Hymera, the name of a river.
Hymettus, a hill by Athenes, where was honey of all other most precious.
Hymnus, a praise in a song. Hyoscyamos, an herb called henbane. Hypoepa, a
city, where were meruayllous fair women. Hypaetra, an aley in a gardayne, or
galerye without any covering. Hypagogeus, an Instrumente, wherewith stones are
polyshed. Hypanis, a river in Scythia. Hypata, a city of Thessaly.
Hyperaspistes, a protector, a great shield. Hyperbaton, a long dependynge, or
superfluous sentence. Hyperbole, excess in aduauncynge, or depressynge: As
higher than heaven, whyter than snow, swyfter than lyghtnynge, slower than a
snayle, warse than the dyuell. Hyperbolicus, ca, um, excedyng credence.
Hyperborei, people in the northeaste part of the world. Hyperthyrum, that
which is next over the browe of a man. Also sum say Hyperthyron, is a
transumpte or haunce. Hypercatalecticum metrum, where abounds one syllable or
two. Hyperion, the son. Hyphen, where diverse words be pronounced under one
accent, as qua^doquidem, utcunque* etc. Hypnales, adders, which styngyng a man,
he dies slepynge. Hypocaustum, a hot house or stewe. Hypocrisis, false
dissimulation, feigned holiness. Hypocrita, an hypocrite. Hypocondrium, the
inward part of the body above the nauil, and under the stomach.
Hypodidascalus, an vssher or substytute in teaching. Hypogeum, a place under
ground. Hypomnema, matis, an exposition or comment. Hypopodion, a foot
stool. Hypostasis, substance. it is also that, which does rise in vryne,
where there is good digestion, if the resydence be white, light, and rysynge in
facion like a pear, the small end upward. Hypothicos, a lynnen rochette.
Hypothyron, a groundsyll or thresholde. Hypothyra, seu hypothyrides, the door,
or rather the place open, where the door is. Hypozigia, all drawing cattle.
Hypsicratea, the wife of king Mythridates, which followed him in all his
wars, being armed like a knight. Hypsipile, a lady, which loved Jason, and
when he returned not at the time, which he promised, she threw her self
into the sea. Hypethra, an alaye to walk in. Hyrcania, a country in Asie.
Hysginum, a color like scarlette. Hysopus, and hysopum, an herb callydde
Hysope. Hysterologia, and hysteron proteron, a manner of speaking, where the
last is set before the first, and as it is said, the cart before the
horses.
IACCHVS, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes. Iaceo, cui, cere,
to ly. sometime to be. In medio ca^pus iacet, Salustius.
In the middel is a feld. also to be deed. Ille iacet, Lucanus. Cic. de sinibus.
he is deed. sometime to be conte^ned or naught set by, Maximas uero uirtutes
iacere necesse est, uoluptate domina^te, Carnal dilectation ruling, needs must
excellent virtues be nothing set by. Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throw, cast, or
shoot, sometime to set or lay. Iacere fundamenta, to lay the foundation.
Iacobus, a propre name. Iactanter, bostyngely. Iactantia, booste. Iactatio,
idem. Iactito, taui, tare, to boste often. Iacto, aui, are, to throw, to
reuolue, or toss in the mind, to vex, to throw down and beat, to auaunt
or glory, to speak vaynly, to set forth, to toss, to cast out. Iactuose,
braggyngly. Iactura, damage or loss, proprely as when a man has much goods
in a ship, and by force of tempest, is constrained to throw it into the sea,
lest the ship should perish. Iaculatio, iaculamen, and iaculame^tum, a shot,
or cast with a darte, or iauelyn. Iaculo, aui, are, to shoot or cast far.
Iaculor, aris, idem. Iaculum, any thing that may be shot or cast far,
most commonly a dart or light iauelyn. Iaculus, a serpent, that lies under
trees, and suddenly with a meruaylous vyolence perceth any beast, which
happens to pass by him. Iam, now. Iambus, a foot in meter, which has the
first syllable short, the other long. Iam diu, long agone. Iamdudum, now
late, but a while sens. Iamiam, even now. Iam olim, now late. Iampridem, a
little while paste, but late. sometime forthewith. Iam tum, fro that time.
Ianiculum, a town not far from Rome. Ianira, the daughter of Ocean and
Tethis. Ianitor, toris, a porter. Ianthina, violet color, or purple. Ianua, a
door or yate. Ianuarius, the month of Ianyuer. Ianus, some suppose to be
Saturn, some to be Iaphet, one of the sons of Noe. Cicero calls him the
superior world, or heaven, he was made having two visages, either because the
heaven tournynge, the year retourneth, where it began: orels because it
knows what is passed, and aforeseeth what shall happen. This god, or rather
ydoll, had a temple in Rome, which in the time of wars was always open, and in
the time of peace was shut. And therefore when in stories mention is made,
that the temple of Ianus was shut, than is it to be understand, that the
Romans had peace universally. Iapetus, the father of Prometheus. Iapigia, a
country in the realm of Naples. Iapix, gis, a wind, which comes out of the
parts of Apulia, and is a western wind. Jason, onis, he which first
conquered the Fleece of gold. Iaspis, pidis, a stone called Jasper.
Iatraleptes, a physician or surgion, which cures with oyntmentes.
Iatraleptice, curing by oyntmentes.
I Ante B.
IBerus, a river in Spain. Iberia, the ancient name of Spayn, also an other
country nigh to Armeny. Iberi, and Iberes, Spanyardes. Ibi, there. Ibis, a
foul or bird of Egypt, which is high, and has stiff legs, and a long
byl. They profytte much to the countreye in kyllyng and eating serpents,
which out of Libia be carried into Egypt, with a sowtherne wind. Also it is
taken for an enuyous person.
I Ante C.
ICaria, an isle in the sea Icario, which is also called Icaros. Icarus, the
father of the chaste Penelope. There was also an other Icarus, which was the
son of Dedalus, who having wings, with his father flewe out of the isle of
Crete: but when he flewe higher than his father commanded him, the wax,
wherewith the feathers of his wings were glued, being molten with the heat of
the sun, and the feathers falling of, Icarus was constrained to fall into the sea, which was afterward callid Mare Icariu^. Also Icarus is a mountain in the
regio^ of Athenes. Ichneumon, a beast in Egipte, of the greatness of a catte,
and is facioned like a mous, who crepeth into the body of a Cocodryl, when he
gapeth, and eatinge his bowels, sleeth him. It is also a kind of waspes.
Ichnographia, an instrumente like a compass, wherewith are made the
descripcyons of the son. Ichnusa, the isle now called Sardinia. Ichthiocolla,
fyshe glewe. Icthybolus, a fysher. Icthyophagi, people which do live by
eating of fyshe. Icthyopola, a fishmonger, or seller of fish. Icthyopolion, a
fyshe markette. Icthyotrophia, a ponde or stewe, wherein fyshes be fed. Ico,
ici, icete, ictum, to stryke. Icona, uel Icon, an image. Iconicus, ca, cu^, so
painted or fourmed, that in every membre the very similitude is expressed.
Iconismus, a description. Iconium, a town in the countreye of Capadocia, an
other in Asie the less. it is also a man's own image like him self. Icteros,
a sycknes called the Iaundise. Icterus, a bird called a yelowe hamer.
Ictericus, he that is disesed with the Ia^dis. Ictis, idis, a white wesyll,
which destroys be stalles, and eats the honey.
I Ante D.
ID, that, Id quod res est, which is troth. Id aetatis, of that age. Ida, a
mountayn, which lies nigh Troy. Ide^ dactili, people called also Corybantes.
Ideus, a, um, of the mountain of Ida. Id^^ium, a city in the isle of Cypres.
Idalus, a mountain and a wodde in Cypres. Idaspes, a famous river, which
passes by Parthia and Inde, wherein is golden gravel, and precious stones.
Idcirco, therefore. Idea, a figure conceived in ymagynation, as it were a
substance perpetual: and like as of one seal proceeds many pryntes, so of
one Idea of a man proceeds many thousands of men, and semblably of other
Ideas proceeds things innumerable. So that Ideae, be as it were eternal
examples, whereby all other things be created: and this is Idea, whereof Plato
speaks. Idiopathia, the propre passion of a disease. Idem, the same thing,
or the same man. Identidem, eftesones, in the same wise. Ideo, for that cause.
Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountain of Ida. Idiographum, a private writing.
Idiographae literae, a private letter. Idioma, matis, a propre form of speech.
Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman unlearned. Idolatra, a worshypper of idolles.
Idololatria, ydolatrie. Idolium, a little ydoll. Idolothysia, offrynges to
ydols. Idolothytum, that which is offered to idols. Idolum, an ydoll. Idoneus,
ca, eum, apt. Idula, a sheep that was offered every Idus to Iupyter. Idumaea, a
regyon in Syria, ioynynge to Egypt, and bordereth upon Palestina. Idus, Ides
of months, which do divide Honas from Calendes.
I Ante E.
IEcur, coris, and iecinoris, the liver of a man, or other thing living.
Iecusculum, a little liver. Ie iunium, fasting. Ieiuno, aui, are, to fast or
absteyne. Ieiunum, the gutte, which goth down to the fundement. Ieiunus, he
that is fasting. Ientaculum, a breakefaste. Iento, aui, are, to eat meat
before dinner.
I Ante G.
IGitur, therefore, from hensforth, afterward. Ignauia, cowardenesse. Ignauus,
a, um, cowarde. Ignifacio, eci, facere, to set on fire. Ignesco, scere, to be
set on fire, or to be made fire. Ignarium, any thing, out of the which
fire may be beaten. Ignia, certain fautes, which erthen pottes have in the
inealynge. Igniculi, are certain prouocations, naturally given to embrace
virtue. Igniculus, a sperke of fire. Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame. Ignipotens,
one of the surnames of Vulcanus. Ignis, the fire. Sometime it is taken for an
harlotte. Ignis sacer, a sore, wherein is an exceeding inflammation and burninge.
Ignitabulum, a fire pan. Igniuomus, he that spytteth fire: the son is
sometime so called. Ignobilis, le, unnoble, unknown, foolyshe, of none
estimation. Ignominis, without renoume. Ignominia, reproach, infamye.
Ignorabilis, le, unknown. Ignoro, aui, are, to know not. Ignarus, ignorant,
without knowledge. Ignorantia, ignorance, lack of knowledge, and is referred to
the wit of the perso^ne. Ignoratio, lack to be known, and pertains to the
thing or act. Ignosco, noui, noscere, to learn and know perfectly. Also to
forgive, to have excused to know not, or be ignorant. Ignotus, unknown, also
ignorant.
I Ante L.
ILa, the leeste porcyon of a thing, that may be imagined. Also the stuffynge
of a puddynge, or other like thing. Ila, or Ilua, an ylande in the Tuscayne
see. I Will, is that which is set in the highest part of a man. Ileosus, the
colycke, and he that has the colycke. Ileos, the colycke. Ilex, licis, a tree
called holy, or holme. Ilia, the guts. Iliacus dolor, the frettynge of the
guts. Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the syege of Troy. Iliberis, a
city in the province of Narbone. Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme. Iligneus,
a, um, idem. Ilione, the propre name of a daughter of Priamus. Ilioneus, the
propre name of a Troyane. Ilissus, the name of a river in the prouynce of
Athenes. Ilium, the palais of Priamus. Illaetabilis, le, without myrthe, or
lacking myrthe or pleasure. Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners.
Illaudatus, not worthy to be named. Ille, he. Illecebrae, things dilectable,
which draws and allurethe the mind to embrace them, flyckerynge
intycementes. Illecto, aui, are, to draw pleasantly. Illex, illegis, lawless,
also wanton. Illex oculus, a wanton eye. Illibatus, ta, tum, untouched,
untasted. Illiberaliter, vngentillye, excedyngely ylle, myscheuously. Illicet,
now go to, incontinent. Illiceo, illicui, cere, to provoke or styre
pleasauntlye. Illectus, ta, tu^, plesantly stired or provoked. Illicium, a
provocation. Illico, anon, in the same place. Illido, lisi, dear, to drive or
beat to a thing. Illisus, a, um, driven or beaten to. Illineo, iui, ire, to
anoynte on. Illino, iui, ire, to annoynte hard, to spotte or soil. Illix,
licis, a provocation or styringe. Illuceo, xi, cere, and illucesco, scere, to
be light or clear. Illudo, si, ere, to mock, to hurt in iapyng, or playenge.
Illuminus, a, um, without light. Illunis, dark, when the moon does not shine
Illustris, famous, clear, noble in renoume. Illustro, aui, are, to make light
or clear, to make famous or well known. Illuuies, uncleanness, fylthynesse
in manne or garment. Illiria, a country now called Slauonye, which has on
one part Italy, on an another part Germany, on the east side Greece, on the
weste the Venyce see. Illiricus, ca, cum, of Illiria. Ilus, the king of
Troyanes son, that builded Ilium.
I Ante M.
IMaginarii, baner bearers, wherein be images painted. Imaginatus, ta, tum,
fygured or fourmed into an image. Imagino, naui, nare, to make images, or to
counterfayte. Imaginor, aris, ari, to imagyne. Imago, imaginis, an image, a
symylitude, Vergilsus.
a shethe, or case. Imaguncula, a little image. Imaus, a mountain in Judea.
Imbecillis, le, and imbecillus, a, um, feeble. Imbecillitas, tatis, feblenesse.
Imbellia, cowardyse. Imbellis, le, unapt to wars, cowarde, or weak. Imber,
a shower. Imberbis, be, beardelesse. Imbibo, by, bear, to drink in. Imbrex,
bricis, a spowte or gutter, out of the which rain is conuayed from the
house. It is sometime taken for the tyle or slatte, that lies on the house.
Imbricium, the covering or eueisynge of the house. Imbrico, to cover with
tyle, or other like thing. Imbricosus, a, um, full of gutters. Imbrus, an
Island of Thrace, and a town in the same is so called. Imbrifer, bryngyng
showers. Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menstruous flyxe. Imbulbito, taui,
tare, to defyle with chyldes dyrte. Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye clothe or sylke,
to teach. Imitor, aris, ari, to follow the exaumple of an another. Immanis, ne,
cruel, great, horrible. Immanitas, tatis, cruelty, greattenes. Immineo, nui,
nere, to procure, to endeavor Imminuo, nuere, to cut of. Salustius in c^.
Catil.
Imminuere ius, to defalcate or mynyshe the authority or state of a person.
Immissum, laid in to abide, as a beam of a house, or other like thing.
Immitto, misi, immittere, to send in. sometime it sygnifieth to let grow in
length. Neque barbam immiseris istam, Lucilius lib 3 V^^g ^^ne. lib. ^.
Neither let this berde grow in length. Respicimus dita illuuies, immissaque
barba, we beheld, O what an horrible fylthynesse and a bearde grown in
length. Also to bring or send on the contrary part. Lact. li. 4.
Hoc futurum esse dixerunt, ut post breue tempus immitteret deus regem, qui
expugnater Iudaeos, It should come to pass said they, that god should send
to the contrary part a king, which should vanquyshe the Jews. ^
Alij Tarquinium a Cicerone immissum aiebant, ne C^a^ius, suscepto malorum
patrocynio rempub. turbater, Some said, that Tarquine was brought in craftily
by Cicero, lest that Crasius, in taking on him the defense of mysdoers, should
thereby bring sedicyon into the weal publyke. Immo, but rather, ye rather.
Immolo, aui, are, to offer in sacrifyce. Immutus, exempt, without office or
charge Imminutas, tatis, fraunches or liberty. Immunitus, ta, tum, not
defended. Impago, ginis, a tenon, which is put into the mortals, also a pynne,
which is driven into timber, to make it join and abide. Impeccabilis, he that
never offends. Impedimentum, let, impediment in wars. Impedimenta, is the
caryage and trasyke, that goth with the hooste. ^
Impedio, diui, dire, to let, to stay, or supporte, to defyle. Impeditus, is
proprelye he, that has his fere so bound, that he can not goo. Impedo, aui,
are, to vndersette. Impello, puli, pellere, to persuade instantly, to enforce,
to pluck down, or infeble. Impulso, aui, are, to persuade often. Impulsus,
persuaded, provoked, enforced. Impendeo, di, dear, to hang over. Impendio,
very much, or more. Impendium, expense, or cost. Impendo, di, dear, to spend
or lay out money, to bestow, to lay out. Impensa, benefytes. Impensa, ae,
expenses. Impense, pro ualde. Est impense improbus, he is a very ill man.
Impensius, exceeding, more greuouse, or displeasunt. Impensibilis, without
consyderation. Imperator, the chief captain in wars, now, the emperor.
Imperiosus, a maisterly manne, rigorous, or cruel in governance. Imperiose,
stately, rigorousely. Imperitabundus, full of rule, or ruling much. Imperitia,
lack of knowledge. Imperitus, not expert, easy to be deceived. Imperito, aui,
are, to rule or govern. Imperium, a solemn commandment, a preeminence in
gouerna^ce, authority royal. Impero, aui, are, to command. Imperatum,
commanded. Impetus, tus, and impes, petis, violence. Impetigo, ginis, a ring
worm. Impeto, tiui, tere, to invade. Impetrabilis, le, that may be gote^ by
desire. Impetrasso, petrassi, ere, to get by desire or instaunce. Impetritus,
infyxed, mortaysed, as it were in a stone. Impetro, traui, trare, to obtain by
desire, or request. Impiatus, not purged of sin. Impiger, diligent, not
slow, valyant. Plautus (...) capt. Terent. i^ Phor.
Impingo, pegi, impingere, to hytte oone in throwynge some thing at him.
Impingere compedes, to put on gyues. Dicam tibi, impingam grandem, I will
lay a weighty matter unto the. Impinguo, aui, are, to make fat. Impius,
cruel, hatynge god and good men. Impietas, pietatis, hatrede of god, cruelty,
wickedness. Impie, wyckedly, cruelly. Implano, aui, are, to deceive. Impleo,
eui, ere, to fylle. Implexus, wound in. Implico, caui, are, to wrappe in, to
tie fast, Plautus.
to detayne. Implicat ad speculum caput, she bound up her heed at a glass.
Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied fast together. Implicitus morbo, attached
or detained with syckenes. Imploro, aui, are, to desire lamentably. Impluuia, a
cloak to wear in the rain. Impluuiu^, a place in the house, where they used
to receive rain water. It may be englyshed a lowuer. Impolitia, negligence
about the well public Impono, sui, nere, to put one thing on an other. also to
give, to inioyne, to lay to ones charge. Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in
earing of land. Importunus, na, u^, out of seson, importunate. Importunitas,
tatis, which has no commodity of time nor of place. Impos, poris, unable,
without power. Impostor, oris, he that deceyueth with promises, or sells
false ware for good. Imposturam facere, to deceive in manner aforesaid.
Impotens, tentis, he that can not resyste his appetite or affections. sometime
it is usurped for puissaunt. Impotentia, debilitie, sometime immoderate power*
also inability to resyste. Impraesentia, and impraesentiatum, at this time, or
for this present time. Imprecor, aris, ari, to desire, to wyshe. Impressio,
ionis, a violent assault. Imprimo, impressi, imprimere, to prynte, to seal.
Improbus, an ill man, dishonest, obstinate, wanton, malaperte, wyly,
insatiable. Improbitas, bitatis, dishonesty, unthriftiness, wantonness,
obstynacy, malapertenes, raueny, wylynesse. Improperium, imbraydynge of a
defaulte. Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a man with some defaute.
Imprudens, imprudentis, unware. Also not circumspecte. Vergilius.
sometime very circumspect. Impubes, and impuber, a man child before the age
of.xiiii. years, a maiden before.xii. Impudens, shameless. Impudenter,
shamefully, dishonestly, unadvisedly, wantonly. Impudicus, unchaste, unclean
in living. Impudicitia, uncleanness of living. Impune, without damage, without
punishment or grief, in vain. Impunitas, tatis, lack of punyshement,
liberty without punysshemente, pardon of punyshement. Impurus, impura, purum,
dishonest, vile, reprocheable. Impuro, taui, tare, to repute or ascribe, to lay
the blame or defaute. Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or never cut. Imus, ma,
mum, the lowest or most low.
I Ante N.
IN, sygnifieth in. Also In rempub. toward the publyke weal. In meam partem,
on or for my part. In particidam, against a murderer. In nauem ingreditur, he
went into the ship. also it sygnifieth space of time. In noctem, unto night. In
lucem, until day* also for. Vergilius.
In magno munere, for a great reward. In diem addicere, to fell upon condicon,
that a thing be done by a day. In dies singulos, day by day. In horam, for
oone hour. In horas, from hour to hour. In manu uel manibus est, It is in
his power, at hand, or easy, or in hand. In manum dari, to be given a part
or severally. In medium afferre, to bring forth to a common use or commodity.
In mentem uenire, to come to mind, or remembrance, to be considered. In
numerum, in order. In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to bring down from
authority, to mynysshe estymation or power. In posterum, finally, in
conclusyon. In re tua, for thy profit. In rem praesentem uenire, Budeus.
where the lands in debate comes in view, by the assignement of Iuges, unto
them which be called viewers, which shall see the bounds and quantity of
the land in variance. In spem uenire, to begin to hope. In rem praesentem
producere, Plinius in epist.
to bring the matter to light, to express the thing perfectelye. In re
praesenti, in a plain and evident matter. Quintii.
In tempore, in season, oportunately. Inaccessa, an ylande of Egypt, to the
which is no coming. Inachus, the first king of Argiues. Inanescere, to be
vain, and of none estymation. Inaniloquus, a bablar. Inanimus, ma, um, without
soul. Inanio, iui, ire, to make emptye. Inanis, inane, empty, vacaunt, ydell,
light in estimation. Inanitas, and inanitio, emptynes, voydenes. Inaresco,
scere, to dry up. Inarime, an isle in the Tuscayne see. Also a mountain.
Inaudio, diui, dire, to here. Inauditus, ta, tum, never hard of, strange to
here. Inauris, a ring, or other like thing, hanging at the ear. Inauro,
aui, are, to make rich. Inauspicaid, vnluckyly. Inceduus, a, um, unused to be
cut. Incero, aui, are, to keuer with wax. Incalesco, ^ui, scere; to be or
wax very hot. Incallidus, simple, without craft or subtyltie. Incandesco,
dui, descere, to be very hot angrye. Incanto, taui, tare, to charm.
Incantatio, and incantamentum, a charm. Incapistro, aui, strare, to halter, or
to bind with a halter. Incassum, in vain. Incautus, unware. Incedo, cessi,
cedere, to go or walk, to goo stately, to enter. Incendo, di, dear, to
inflame, to set fire on a thing. Incentio, onis, the sowning of
instruments. Incepto, aui, are, to begin often. Incerniculum, a rayinge
syue, wherein corn to cleansed, or it be ground. also a sarcer. Incerno, ni,
nere, to syfte in. Incerto, taui, tare, to make doubtefulle, or uncertain.
Incertus, ta, tum, uncertain or doubtful. Incesso, ssi, siere, to make angry,
to do displesure to one, to accuse. Incesto, aui, are, to pollute. Incestuosus,
he that does often pollute. Incestus, ta, tum, polluted. Incestus, tus, is
lechery committed with one, which is nygh of kynne or aliance to him that
commytteth it. Seruius.
Also it sygnifyeth all manner of pollucion. Inchoo, am, are, to begin, also to
perform. Incido, di, ere, to cut, to grave. Liuiu^.
Incisa, lost. Spe incisa prius quam praedicta dies adesset, Hope being lost,
er ever the said day was commen. Incido, di, ere, to happen, to fall sodaynely,
to come by chance. Incile, a gappe or trenche. Inciles, trenches, to convey
water from a river, into a meadow, or other low ground. Inc^io, aui, are, to
blame or reprove. Inc^tio, ni, nere, to sing, proprely to feign a small
breast. Incipio, coepi, cipere, to begin. Incuim, piece meal, gobet meal.
Incino, onis, incision, or cuttynge. Incisura, a cut or garse. Also
Incisurae, be the lines in the palm of the hand. Incitabulum, incitamen, and
incitamentum, a provocation. Incitas, poverty, necessity. Incitega, a thing
whereon great vessels of wine are couched. Incito, taui, tare, to provoke.
Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to cry out on one, rebukefully to call in.
Inclementer, without mercy, cruellye, sharply. Inclementia, cruelty, lack
of mercy. Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bow down. Includo, si, ere, to
include or shut in. Inclytus, ta, tum, glorious, famous. Incoctile, a pot,
wherein meat is sodden. Plautus in Pseud.
Incoenatus, not having souped. It incoenatus cubitum, He goth to bed
supperlesse. Incoenis, without supper. Incogitabilis, forgetful, not
considering what he does. Incogitans, unadvised. Incognitus, ta, tum,
unknown. Incolatus, dwelling in a strange country. Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell
in a plate. Incola, he that dwells in an other country, than where he was
borne. Incolumis, hole without syckenes. Incolumitas, tatis, helthynes.
Incomitatus, being without company alone Incommodo, aui, are, to hurt. In
commune, equally. Incompactum, vnioyned, or ill joined. Incomprehensus, not
comprehended. Inconsiliari, to be called before the counsel. Inconcinnus, a,
um, unmeet, il proporcionid. Inconcussus, stable, that can not be shaken.
Inconditus, ta, tum, out of order or facyonrude. Also weryshe. Inconditus, ta,
tum, unmade, vnbuylded. Incongelabilis, le, that can not be frosen.
Inconsultus, lacking advise, or consyderation, he that will not ask
counsel. Inconsultu meo, without my counsel. Inconsutilis, without any
seame. Inconsutus, ta, tum, unsown. Inconsyderatus, he that nothing
co^siderith. Inconsyderate, unadvisedly. Incoxo, aui, are, to sytte as women or
taylours done without a stool. Increatus, never created. Incredibilis, le,
incredible, not to be believed, meruaylous. Incrementum, increase. Increpito,
aui, are, to blame or rebuke often. Increpo, pui, pere, to sound or make
noise. also to rebuke, to provoke. Incresco, eui, scere, to grow much or more.
Incubus, a spyrite, which assumynge the form of a man, medleth with womenne.
Also that which is called the mare, wherewith men be oppressed in their sleep.
Incubo, aui, are, to lie in or upon, to cleave to, to sytte over a thing, to
sit on eggs, as a hen does, to occupy, to possede, to embrace, to
nouryshe, to dwell in, to care. Incubatio, and incubitus, lyenge in, sitting
to hatche eggs. Incudo, donis, he that warketh on an anuil. Inculco, aui, are,
to porre in. Incultus, a place unhusbanded or untilled. Incumbo, bear, to
endeavor, to take in hand, to hap, to lean upon, or fall on a thing.
Incumbo ad studia, I give my mind to a thing, I apply me. Incunabulum, a
cradell. Incuria, negligence, ill husbandrye. Incurro, rere, to rounne against
oone, to rounne in. Incursus, and incursio, invasion of enemies. Incuruesco,
scere to bow down, or be crokid Incuruo, aui, are, to make crooked. Incuruus, a,
um, crooked. Incus, udis, an andeuyle. Incuso, aui, are, to accuse. Incutio,
cussi, cutere, to throw in. Indago, aui, are, to seek or search. Indago,
ginis, search. Inde, from thens, there, from thensforthe. Indecor, coris, not
regarded. Indecorum, unhonest. Indefensus, without defense. Indefinitus, ta,
tum, not determined or discussed. Salustius in Iugurth.
Indemnatus, he that is condemned without making answer. Indemnis, without
hurt or harm, defendid. Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be intreatid or will
not forgive. Paena indeprecabilis, punyshement without remission. Index, dicis,
he that accuses or appeacheth an other man. Also he that for to escape
punyshement, or for some reward, disclosith the conspiracy, whereunto he was
made privy. It is also the forefinger, and a touch stone to try gold, also
the table of a book, whereby certain chapyters or notes be founden. India, the
country called Indie. Indicatio, estimation or valuation. Indicatura, idem.
Indicatus, idem. Indicium, and indicina, a detection or accusation. Indico,
caui, care, to disclose, to manyfeste, and make openly known, to demonstrate,
to accuse, to set or tell the price, to deliver in possession that which is
bought. Indico, indixi, indicere, to denounce or declare solemnly, and for a
great cause. As battle, fastings, funeralles, counsayls, triumphs, and
other great things. Also to set a tribute or tax, and to appoynte.
Indictio, the space of.xv. years. Indictiuus, ua, um, that which is declared
or appointed. Indictus, dicta, tum, declared or denounced solempnely. Indicta
causa, the cause or matter not known, declared or defended. Indidem, from
thens, forthwith, the same. Ti. Liuius
Indies, daily, from day to day. Crescente indies multitudine, The multitude
or noumbre daily increasynge. Indigena, of the same countreye or town borne
and bredde. Indigeo, gui, gere, to lack. Indigentia, need or necessity.
Indigeste, inordinately. Indigestio, ill digestion. Indigetes, goddis made of
mortal men, some take them for private goddis, pertainyng to particular
places. Indigitamenta, books contaynyng the names of goddis, and the mistycal
sygnification of them. Indigito, taui, tare, to name, or call by name. Indignor,
aris, ari, to disdain. Indignus, unworthy, miserable. Indigus, nedy, or
lacking. Indipisco, sci, scere, and indipistor, sceris, sci, to obtain, to
usurp. Indiscriminatim, indifferently, without diuersytie. Indisertus,
without eloquence. Indiuidium, that may not be dyuyded or separate. Indo,
indidi, indere, to set, or name. Also to prynte. Indocilis, a dullarde, that
can not be taught. Indoctus, unlearned. Indolentia, lack of pain. Indoloria,
idem. Indoles, towardenes, and disposition to virtue, in chylderne, In men,
token of virtue. Also very nobility, or honor, aptenesse to good or evil.
Indomabilis, le, that may not be made tame. Indomitus, wild, unbroken.
Indubitatus, ta, tum, undoubted. Indutiae, truce, or peace for a certain time.
Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to bring in, to persuade, to illure, to incline,
to deceive, to cancelle, to defete, to put on, proprely hosen or shoen, to
infix or stablish. Ita induxi in animu^, I have infyxed or stablyshed in my
mind. Inductio, a form of argument, proceeding from the particulars unto the
vniuersalles. Also an argument, which by gettyng the assent in things not
doubtful, proves the thing, which is intended. Indulco, caui, care, and
indulcoro, aui, are, to make sweet. Indulgeo, dulsi, gere, to grant lightly,
to consent to a request, to pardon. Ci. Tyr. Ter. Heau.
Indulge ualetudini tuae, Take heed to thy health. Nimiu^ illi indulges, Thou
carist to much for him. Also it is to give respite, to be gentle and
merciful. Indulgentia, and indulgitas, gentylnes in sufferance, also mercy.
Indumentum, a garment. Induo, dui, ere, to put on a garment, or other like
thing, to transfourme, or translate, to cast in, to annoynte. Induperator,
oris, an emperor. Indus, a great river in Inde. Indusium, a petycote.
Indusiarius, a maker of petycotes. Indusiatus, cladde in a petycote. Industria,
a virtue comprehendynge both study and diligence, industry. Indusitius, he
that is wytty and actyue. Induurae, apparayle. Ineb^ior, briar^s, ari, to make
drunk, or be dronk^n. Inedia, hunger. Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfacyoned,
without good proporcyon. Ineo, iui, ire, to begin, to go in, to deserve, to
get, to win, to obtain, to treat. Inire foedus, to make a leage or
treaty of peace. Inire pacem, to make peace. Inire bellum, to make war.
Inire uiam, to find the way. Also Inire, is to leap, as a horse does on a
mare. Inire fugam, to flee, as men do in battle, to consider, to understand.
Iniror, oris, a s^alyon. Ineptio, iui, ire, to tryfle. Ineptus, ta, tum,
unapt. Ineptus, a tryflar, vsyng nothing in order, (...) to the purpose.
Ine^^mis, unarmed, a man yolden. Ine^^^^erus, without any science or craft, an
(...) person, also unprofitable. Inertia lack of craft, ydelnes. (...), a
vine, whereof the wine is so good, that none evil proceeds thereof. (...),
scere, to cramme or feed. Also (...). (...), le, that can not be eschewed.
I^^^cr^itus, ta, tum, not exercise, unoccupied. Inexplorato, without search.
Inexputabilis, le, that may not be numbered. Inextucabilis, le, that can not be
shaken of, or dissolved. In^^bre, vnku^ningly, vncraftily, ill favored. Intarma,
insamye. Intamis, me, infamed. Infamis digitus, the myddel finger. Intamo, aui,
are, to infame, or ill report. Intandum, that may not be spoken. Intans, a
child that can not yet speak. it is also every thing that is very young. Also
it signifies not eloquent, sometime an idiot that can not speak. Infantia,
chyldehode, also folyshenes. Infantilis, le, pertaining to chyldehode.
Infarcio, cii, and ciui, cire, to infarce or stuff, or ^ylle. Infatuo, aui,
are, to make foolyshe. Infector, ctoris, a dyar, that dies clothe, wolle, or
sylke. Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, stained, poisoned. Also undone, or
not done, not made. Infectus, tus, dyenge, or staynynge. Infensus, displeased,
moved with anger or hate toward an other. Also he that bears malice.
Inferiae, sacrifice done to infernal goddis. Infernalis, le, infernal.
Infernus, hell. Infernus, na, number, low. Infernas, atis, the low. Inferne,
allow, or benethe. Infero, intuli, infer, to bring in, to throw in, to add
to, to cast in, to conclude. Infer arma, to make war. Stupru^ infer, to
committee aduoutry or fornication with a kynswomanne. Inferus, ra, rum, where
nothing is lower. Infesta signa, standerdes or baners displayed in battle on
both parts. Infestiuus, ua, um, unmeet for disporte. Infesto, aui, are, to do
displeasure with sundry incursions or rodes. Infestum mare, the sea occupied
with pirates and robbers. Infestus, a mortal enemy. Infestus, ta, tum, that
standethe against a man, to the intent to indamage him. Infibulo, aui, are, to
claspe to gyther. Inficias ire, to doubt or deny. Inficiator, oris, he that
denies. Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to stayne o^ infecte. Inficior,
aris, ari, to deny, or disafferme. Infidus, da, dum, vnfaythefulle. Infimates,
the base people. Infimo, aui, are, to bring low. Infimus, a, um, the lowest
or most base. Infirmo, aui, are, to make weak. Infirmus, ^^a, um, unstable,
sick, feeble. Infirmitas, tatis, unstableness, weakness, syckenes. Inflammo,
aui, are, to inflame or set on fire. Infligo, xi, gere, poenam aut opprobrium,
to punyshe or rebuke. Informo, aui, are, to shape or form, to inform or
teach good manners. Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the bar in a place of
judgment, to plead, also to perforate or make a hole. Infortunium, ill
chance. Infra, within, bynethe: In number it signifies less or fewer.
Infractio, slowthfulnesse. Infractus, ta, tum, unbroken, sure, Infractus animi,
styffe of courage. sometime it signifies discouraged. Infrendo, di, dear, to
crasshe the teethe for anger. Infrendes, chylderne lacking teethe. Infringo,
infregi, gere, to break to pieces. Infrunitus, a fool, that knows not how
to use a thing. Infulae, be the labelles, which do hang on every side of a
mytar. It was in the old time the attire that priests did wear on their
heedes. They were also tapettes of linen, wherewith temples were hanged.
Infumibulu^, the shank or tonel of a chimney. Infumo, aui, are, to dry in the
smoke. Infundibulum, a tounnell, whereinto licour is poured, when vessels are
filled. Infundo, infudi, infundere, to pour in. Infurnibulum, a piele,
wherewith breadde is put into the oven. Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lament or bewail
much. Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bow the knee, or make courtesye. Ingenium,
the propre nature of a thing. Also wit. Ingeniosirs, wyttye. Ingens, it is,
wonderful great. Ingenuatus, comme of an honest stock or kynrede. Ingenuus,
a free man borne, or a gentylma^. Ingenuitas, tatis, freedom. Ingenuus, a, um,
natural. Ingenu^, freely, frankely. Ingero, gessi, gerere, to bring in, to
myxt. Ingitas, ratis, poverty. Inglorius, tia, um, of no renome or fame.
Ingluuies, gluttony. Also the cray or gorge in birds. Ingrandesco, sci,
scere, to wax great. Ingratis, against my will, or our will. Ingrauesco,
sci, scere, to ouercharge. Ingredior, eris, gredi, to enter. Ingruo, ui, ere,
to invade, to be immine^t, proprely spoken of battle or tempest. Inguina, the
pryuie members of men and womenne. Inguinaria, an herb which cures the
diseases in pryuie members. Ingurgito, aui, are, to devour gluttonously.
Inhaereo, to cleave or stycke to. Inhaeresco, sci, scere, to stycke fast.
Inhalo, aui, are, to prawe in brethe. Inhibeo, bui, bear, to forbydde. Inhio,
aui, are, to gape. also to couere much. Inhonor, without honor. Inhorreo,
tui, rere, Inhorresco, scere, to abhor, to quake for fear. Inhumaruis,
cruel, vncourteyse. Inibi, even there, anon, among them. Iniicia, inieci,
iniicere, to cast or throw in, to cast at some thing, to throw with
violence, to put on. Iniicere manum, to sease or take possessyon of a thing.
Manus iniectio, a sease^ of land. Inimicitia, hostility, contrary to amytie.
Inimico, caui, care, to make enemies. Inimcor, catis, cari, to practice
hostility. Inimicus, an enemy. Ininde, from thens. Iniquus, a, um, not even
or plain. Also not indifferent or just, sometime great, strait, or narrow.
Iniquitas, tatis, parcialite, contrary to justice. Initio, aui, are, to
instruct in things concerning relygion. Initiatus, instructed or entered in
rules concerning religion. also to begin to do a thing. Initior, aris, ari, to
begin: also to be weaned, as chylderne be. Initium, a beginning, a sacrifice
to Ceres. Inito, aui, are, to walk in. Iniuges, catell never yoked or broken,
which were sometime sacrificed. Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoint, to
lay on, as a man will add to a great burdein. Iniuria, wrong, injury,
reproach, damage. Taken like an aduerbe, it signifies, without cause, without
deserte. Iniuriosus, a wrong doer. Iniurius, a, um, wrongful, he that does
any thing against the law. Innitor, teris, inniti, to assaye, to endeavor.
Innato, aui, are, to swymme in a place. Innocuus, a, um, vnharmefull, he that
does none harm. Innotesco, sci, scere, to be known. Innoxius, a, um, wherein
is no damage, that which can do none harm. Innumerato, in a redynesse. Innuo,
nui, ere, to grant or assent with noddynge of the heed. Ino, the name of
Cadmus daughter, the wife of Athamas king of Thebans. Inocco, aui, are, to
harowe in. Inoculo, aui, are, to greffe. Inodorus, without sauoure. Inolesco,
sci, scere, to wax great. Inopiosus, a, um, needye. Inops, pis, poor,
lacking help. Also unburied. Inora, beasts without mouths. In posterum, at
the last, in conclusyon. Inprimis, specially, principally, chiefly. Inquies,
quietis, and inquietus, ta, tum, vnrestefull, vnquyete. Inquieto, aui, are, to
vnquyete or trouble. Inquilino, inquilinaui, quilinare, to dwell in a strange
place. Inquilinus, he that dwells in a place, where neither he, nor his
auncetoures were borne. Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute. Inquio, I say.
Inquiro, siui, quirere, to inquyre. Inquisitius, more intentifely, more
inwardly Insanio, iui, ire, to be mad or peuysshe, to dote, to do
unadvisedly. Insanus, mad, peuyshe, doting, regarding no counsel, froward,
intractable. Insania, madness, peuyshenes, dotage, frowardenesse. Inscitia,
ignorance. Inscius, a, um, ignorant. Inscienter, ignorauntly. Inscribo,
scripsi, scribere, to write in or upon, to name or entitle. Inscriptus, a, um,
unwritten, written upon, named, or entitled. Insecta, be all flies and worms,
that be divided in their bodies, the heed and breaste from the bealy and tail,
as bees, waspes, emotes, or pismeres, and such like. Insequor, eris, sequi, to
follow or pursue. Insero, serui, rere, insertum, to set in, to ioyn. when it
has inseui, insitu^, it sygnyfyeth to greffe. Inserto, aui, are, to set to.
Insertorium, the bond or thonge, wherewith a tergat or buckeler is hanged on a
man's arm. Inseruio, uiui, ire, to serve. Insideo, es, sedi, sidere, to sytte
on, to sytte in, or be in, to besiege, to abide in a place. Insidiae, wiles to
entrap a man, er he be ware. Insidior, aris, ari, to practyse wyles, to
intrappe or betray a man. Insidiosus, a, um, full of wyles. Insidiose, wylyly,
craftily. Insido, is, sidi, ^e, to enter to thinte^t to abide. Insignia, signs
or tokens of honor, whereby every astate or great authority is known, as
robes, maces, swords borne upright, cappes of mayntenaunce, and other like
things. Also sometime tokens of doctrine and virtue: as staves typped with
silver, which bedels bear before doctors, hodes furred, crowns of laurel.
etc. Insignio, iui, ire, to note with sum sign. Also to doubbe knights.
Insignis, ne, notable, excellent, marked with some special token to be known.
Insigne, a notable sign or token. Insignite, and insigniter, notably. Insilio,
liui, ire, to leap in or up. Insimul, together. Insimulo, aui, are, to accuse
or appeal, also to feign or dissemble. Insimulatio, an accusation or appeal.
Insinuatus, a, um, wound together. Insinuo, aui, are, to bring into, to
conioyne, to put in a man's mind covertly and craftily. Insinuatio, a colorable
and crafty beginning of an oration, dissembling some thing. where the matter may
not be favorably herd. Insipidus, a, um, unsavory. Insipiens, entis, without
discretion. Insisto, institi, insistere, to set fast and fyrmely, to endeavor,
to provoke or solicit. sometime to assyst. Insitio, onis, greffyng. Insititium,
the stock. Insitium, the greffe. Also a iegot or other like meat stuffed with
flesh and eggs chopped or mynced. Insitiuus, ua, uum, infarcyd or stuffed.
Insolens, not wont or accustomed, haut, arrogant, presumptuous. Insolentia,
seldomnes of use in any thing. vnhauntynge of a place. Also presumption wanton
pride. Insolitus, not wont. Insolo, aui, are, to dry in the son, to blech.
Insolatus, a, um, sunned. Insolatio, a sonnyng. Insomnia, ae, lack of powar to
sleep. Insomnium, a vain dream. Insomnes noctes, nyghtes without sleep.
Insomniosus, slepy, or he that slepith much. Insons, insontis, innocent, or not
gyltie. Insonus, a, um, without noise. Inspectius, more aduysedly. Inspecto,
taui, tare, to behold attentively* to wait on. Inspicio, spexi, cere, to
behold, to ouersee, to control, to consider a thing thoroughly. Inspectio, a
beholdynge, an ouersyghte, Cicero. Ti. Liuius
a controllemente. Inspector, an ouerseer, a controller. Inspico, aui, are, to
make a thing small, like to a wheat reed. Inspiro, aui, are, to inspire, to
blow in. Instans, it is, an instant, the least part of time. Instantia, things
that be present. Instanter, instantly. Instantia, diligence. Instar, as it were
or like. Instatio, the instant time. Instauro, aui, are, to new make, or begin
any thing. sometime to renew or reform, to reedify Instat, it is nigh, it is
com, it is at hand. Caesar ubi se diutius duci intellexit, et die^ instare, qua
die frumentum militibus metiri oportebat, wha^ Caesar perceived that he was
delayed, and the day. was nigh come, when he must needs deliver corn to his
men of war. Insterno, straui, sternere, to cover, to sprede. Instrata,
trappers of horses. Instratu^, a cou^terpoynt. also it signifies all tapisry,
which serves to cover any thing. Instigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardely.
Instinctus, inwardly meued. Instigo, aui, are, to stere or prick forward.
Instita, a purfyll. Instito, aui, are, to repugne, or withstand. Institor,
oris, a chapman, a mercer, also he that sells apparayle and fine stuff,
goinge about therewith. Institorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to chapman. Instituo,
tui, tuere, to institute, to begin, to instruct or teach, to ordain.
Institutiones, instructions in doctrine. Institura, ancient manners and customs,
also ordinances. Pro meo instituto, for my purpose. Insto, as, instiri,
instare, to require instantely, to solicit, to stycke to, to resist, to
persist, to prease on, to come on, or immediately follow. Instat, it is now.
Instratum, the trappier or apparayle of an horse, a horseclothe. Instrumentum,
an instrument or tool. Also ordinance of war, vessel and all necessaries of
household and husbandry. sometime it signifies a deed or charter, concerning
land dettes or couenantes. Instruo, xi, struere, to set in order or array, to
instruct, to fournyshe, to prepare. Insubres, lumbardes, proprely men of the
duchy of Melayne. Insucco, aui, are, to soke in lycour. Insuesco, sueui, scere,
to be wont. Insuetus, ta, tum, not used. Insula, an i will inuiro^ned with water.
It is also a house in a town, having none other house joined to it, but streets
on every side of it. Insularis, re, belongyng to an isle. Insularius, a, um,
most vile, proprely men banyshed into Isles to dygge metal. Insulatus, ta,
tum, made an isle. Insulto, taui, tare, to leap up, to scorn or speak in
the reproach of a man. Insultura, a leaping up or into a thing. Insum, inesse,
to be in some thing. In summa, universally, always, finally. Augustinus
Insummo, are, to fynyshe. Insumo, psi, ere, to spend or lay out money.
Insuper, furthermore, moreover. Insusurro, aui, are, to whisper in ones care.
Integer, gra, grum, if it be spoken of age, it signifies young and lusty: if it
be spoken of a man it signifies honest in all points and qualites, in a thing
it sygnyfyeth entier or hoole. Integer aeui, lustye of age. Integrasco, sci,
scere, to be renewed. Integro, aui, are, to begin again, to renew. Integrum
mihi est. It is in my power, or at my pleasure, at mine arbiterment.
Intellectus, understanding. Intellectualis, of understanding. Intelligibile,
that may be understand. Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to understand.
Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the mind. Intemerara, perfect sacryfyces,
all things observed. Intemperiae, goddesses, having power to do harm.
Intemperies, and inte^pera^tia, vntemperatnes. Intempesta nox, mydnyght, when
all thing is in silence. Intempestas, taris, the caulme of the water, Salustius
in Iugurth.
when there is no tempeste. Intempestiuus, ua, um, thing out of time or
season. Intempestiue, untimely. Intendo, di, dear, to bend or stretche. Also
to look diligently on a thing, to knytte or tie, to enforce with might.
Intendere animu^, to set or fix the mind. In tenebris saltare, signifies to
do a thing unadvisedly, and without any judgment. Intentatus, not assayed.
Intentio, signifies not intent or purpose, but for the act that is appointed
or executid. Intento, aui, are, to menace. Intentus, ta, tum, set or fyxed.
Inter, between, among. Inter sacrum et saxum, in the point to peryshe and be
utterly lost. Interamna, a city in Italye. Interaneus, a, um, that which is
within. Interanea, the inwardes of man or beast. Interaresco, sci, scere, to be
dried up. Interbibo, by, bear, to drink all out. Intercalaris, re, and inter
calarius, a, um, put or set between. Intercalaris dies, the day of the leap
year. Intercalo, aui, are, to set or put between. Intercalaris mensis, the
month, in the which certain days were set, that lacked to make the year
complete, which month is Februarye. Intercalaris uersus, a syngular verse,
often repeted among other verses. Some do call it, in english balades and
songs, the foot or refrette of a ditie. Intercapedo, dinis, a space or pawse.
Intercedo, cessi, cedere, to make intercession. also to go between, or be
between. Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is amite between the and me.
Tribuni intercesserunt, The tribunes did let or prohibit. Intercessio
Tribunorum, a let or prohibition of the Tribunes against the authority of
other officers. Intercido, cidi, re, to cut aso^der in ye middis. Vide Cale
pinum.
Intercisa and porrecta, cut of and made longer. Intercido, cidi, ere, to
decay or perisshe between this and that. Intercino, nere, to sing between or
in the myddell of a thing. Intercipio, caepi, ere, to prevent or apprehe^d one
unware, to take in the mids, or in the mean while, sometime to take all.
Intercisi dies, were days divided, part holy day, part warkedaye. Intercludo,
si, ere, to shut in, to stop, to let. Intercolumnium, the space between
pilars. Intercus, cutis, a disease between the skin and the flesh: when it
is an adjective it signifies inward. Intercutibus uitiis madentes, ouerwette
with inward vices. Intercutaneus, ea, eu^, that is within the skin. Interdico,
xi, cere, to prohibit greuousely: also to resyste or let. Interdictum, a
prohibition. Interdiu, in the day time. Interdum, sometime. Interea, in the
mean while, also never the less. Interea loci, in the mean space. Intereo,
ru, ire, to dye utterly. Interitus, death. Interequito, aui, are, to ride
between. Interest mea, tua, sua, nostra, uestra, it behooves me, the, him, us,
you, or it pertains to me, the, him, etc. also it makes matter, or is a
diversity. Nihil interest tui, It is no matter to the. Si nihil interest
regis, peto ut dum dico, uinculis liberer, If it be no matter to the king. I
pray you, whiles I do speak, let me be without gyues. Sometime it signifies
to be in the mids. Inter^oemineu^, a woman's privy toke^, whereby she is known
from a man. Interfici, feci, to slay. Interfluo, xi, ere, to flow between.
Intertundo, fudi, fundere, to pour between. Intergerimus, a wall added to an
old foundation or wall, to sustain it. Interthae^, in this mean time.
Interi, they that be within. Interiaceo, cui, cere, to put between, to cast
between. Interibi, in the myddell of that place. Intersectum tempus, the mean
time. Interiicio, ieci, ticere, to lay or put between. Interi, in the mean
space or time, in the mean reason also sometime, suddenly, otherwhile.
Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle. Interior, and interius, the inner. Interiungo,
ere, to tarry. Interlino, inere, to enterline. Interloquor, eris, qui, to speak
in a ma^s tale. Interluceo, lucere, to shine between, or in the mids.
Interluco, care, to make a glade in the myddell of a wodde. Interluniu^, the
space of time, in the which neither the old moan does appear, nor the new
moon is seen. Interluo, ere, to flow between, to wasshe between meals, or
other acts. Ci. de ora.
Intermedius, a, um, in the myddell. Intermestris luna, the new moan at the
very change. Intermestrum, the time when the moon is at the point to change.
Intermico, to shine in the mids. Interminor, aris, ari, to threten sore.
Intermitto, tere, to leave or put of for a time. Intermorior, to dye utterly.
Intermortuus, a, um, deed for a season. Interneco, are, to slay all at ones.
Internectiuum bellu^, war to utter destruction or death. Internecio, a
universal slaughter. Internicinu^ bellum, war to the utterance. Internodium,
a joint in a man's finger. also a joint in a straw or read. Internosco,
noscere, to know a thing among other things. Internuncius, a messager, or
mean between two persons being at variance. Internus, a, nu^, that which is
within, or inward. Inter opus, even in the doing. Interordiniu^, a space
between that which is in order. Interordo, dinis, idem. Interpello, are, to
interrupt or let one that speaks or does any thing, also to require, to
ask or demand. Interpensiua, certain pieces of timber, which are set
from the corners of the wall, to the ends of the rafters, to conuaye rain
water into the spoutes. Interpensiui parietes, walls, which rise upon an
other wall, and have no fundacion in the ground. Interpola, new inventions,
or deuyses, Interpolo, are, to put or set between, to renew or refreshe
any thing. Interpolator, oris, and interpolatrix, tricis, he or she that
refreshes old things, and do make them seem new. Interpolis, le,
interpolus, la, um, renewed, refreshed. Interpono, sui, nere, to put between.
Interponere fidem publica^, Salust^* in Iugurth.
to promise upon the credence and consent of all the people. Interpremo, to
stop or close in. Interpres, pretis, an interpretour or translatour. Also a
styckler between two, which are at varyaunce. Interpretamentum, and
interpretatio, an interpretation or translation. Interpretor, aris, ari, to
interpret, expoune, or translate. Interputo, are, to cut between.
Interrasile, that which is plain betwyxte two parts graven or imbosed.
Interrex, regis, He that rules in the mean time, between the cessynge of the
authority of one principal governor, by death or otherwise, until an other
be elected into the same office. Interregnum, the said mean time of
governance or rule. Interrogo, are, to demand a question. Salustius (...)
Catalinar. Cic. in Prae. (...) urb^.
Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examination, that they had offended
against the lawis. Interru^po, rupi, pere, to break in the mids.
Interscalmia, the spaces between the oores in a bore or galey. Interscapilium,
the space between the shulders under the neck. Interscindo, di, scindere, to
cut in the middis. Intersepio, sepsi, pire, to divide in the middel with some
enclosure. Intersepta, the gristell, which makes particion between the
nosethrilles. Intersero, seui, serere, to sow or set between or in the mids.
Intersono, are, to make noise in the mids or between. Interspiro, are, to
spring up in the mids. Intersterno, to straw between, or throw things
between. Interstitium, a distance or space between. Intersum, interesse, to be
present. also to differ, to be diverse. Stulto intellige^s quid interest? What
diversity is there between a fool and a wise man? Intertextus, a, u^, woue^ or
wrought between. or ^inselde, as cloth of tinsyl, or bawdekyn. Intertrigo,
ginis, gallynge, which happens by the occasion of sweat between the legs,
the toes, or fyngers. Intertrimentum, and intertritura, the loss of both
parts, or on both sides. Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly. Interuaco,
are, to be vacant or void between Interuallum, a space between. Interuello,
ere, to pluck up here and there. Interuenio, ire, to come in the mean while,
to be present among other. Interuenium, the space between the veins.
Interuerro, re, to take away craftily or falsely. Interuiso, ere, to visit
among, or now and tha^. Interula, a shyrte or smock. Intestabilis, he which
by the law can make no testament. sometime it signifies detestable. Intestatus,
he that dies without making any testament, intestate. Also he that dies
making none heir by testament. also a man out of credence, whom no man
will take for a witness. Intestina, the bowelles, or inward part of man, or
other thing living. Intestinum bellum, where people do war within their
own realm. Intestinum odium, hate with heart and mind, mortal hatrede.
Intestinum opus, the inward building of timber and pargette. Intingo, xi,
gere, to deep, as one does his finger into lycour. Intorqueo, si, quere, to
thrust in by throwing of a darte, or other like thing. Also to turn or wind
in. Intra, within. Intra modum, less thanne a mean, short of a mean. Intra
fama^, les tha^ the opinion that me^ have. Interius, more inward. Intimus,
most inward, most secret. Intrarius, idem. Internus, na, number, which is
within. Intrico, are, to wrappe. Intrimentum, damage either to the gyuer, or to
the receyuour. Intrinsecus, within. Intritus, brayed in a mortar. Intro, into a
place. Intro, are, to enter or goo in. Introcludo, si, dear, to shut in.
Introduco, xi, cere, to bring or lead in. Introeo, iui, ire, to goo in.
Introgredior, eris, gredi, to comme in. Intromitto, misi, mittere, to let in.
Introrsus, into, within. Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break in. Introspicio,
spexi, spicere, to look in. Introuoco, are, to call in. Intueor, eris, eri, to
behold in. Intus, in a place. Intusium, a shyrte or smock. Intutus, ta, tum,
unsure. Intybum erraticum, cicorie or white endive. Galenus. Plinius. Columel.
Inuado, si, re, to invade, to enter, to app^he^d. Inualesco, lui, scere, to
wax strong, to be confyrmed or stablyshed. Inualidus, da, dum, feeble, weak.
Inualetudo, dinis, feblenesse. Inuectiue orationes, orations made against one
in reprouyng his manners and living. Inueho, uexi, uehere, to carye in a
thing, to carye a thing into a place. Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one
vehemently, and with violent and soore words. Inuenio, ire, to find a thing,
which a man seeks for. In uerba iurare, to be sworn as princis cou^saylours
and servants be sworn unto the^. Also to do feaultie. In uersum, in number
and order. Inuerto, tere, to turn in, to turn up so down, to turn in
and out after the vulgar speech, proprely to turn every thing contrary to the
right form or facion. Inuestes, young children without hear on their bodies.
Inuestigo, are, to seek out, to find in seking. Inuestigabilis, le, that may
not be found with seeking. Inuestio, iui, ire, to adorn or garnishe a thing.
Inueterati, old shrewes or unthrifts, me^ in living unthriftily waxed old.
Inueteresco, raui, scere, to were out for age, to be out of use, to be aged or
old. Also worn out, almost consumed. Inuicem, together, one the other.
Inuicem d^^gunt, they do love one an other. also it signifies for thy part.
Habes res urbanas, inuicem rusticas scribe, Now thou know the affairs of
the city, for thy part write what is done in the country. Inuidentia, envy,
grief to behold or here that an other man prospers. Inuideo, uidi, dear, to
have envy at an others prosperity. Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I have envy at thy
learning. Also to see inwardly or through a thing. Inuisus, uisa, uisum,
hated. Inuidia, envy, hatred, ill will. Salustius in Iugarth.
Inuidia facti sui, the displeasure of his act, or attemptate, or the deed
wherefore he was envied and hated. Inuidiosa res, a thing, which bredeth envy
or hatred. Inuidiose, enuyousely. Inuidiosus, an enuyous person. sometime he,
which is envied. Inuidus, he that has envy. Inuigilo, are, to have watch of
a thing, or to lay watch, to care. Inuinius, he that never drynketh wine.
Inuisus, a, u^, never seen. also hatid or odious. Inuitatus, boden, as to a
feast or bankette. Inuito, are, to bydde. also to delight, to fylle the bealy.
Inuitus, ta, tum, vnwyllynge, or against a man's will. In^^^^uersam,
universally. Inuius, a, um, lacking a way, or where nothing can pass.
Inumbro, are, to make shadow: sometime it signifies to defend. Inunco,
uncare, to catch, as it were with an hook. Inundo, to ouerflowe, or
surrounde. Inundario, a floudde. In unguem, to the point, perfectly. Inuoco,
care, to call in, to call for help, also not to call. Inuolo, are, to
steal, to lay violent hands on one, to flee out. Inuolucris, a bird not ready
to flee. Inuolucrum, that which is wrapped. Inuolucre, as a thing which is
wrappped together. Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe. Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped.
Inuoluolus, and inuoluola, a worm like a canker. which is on vynes, and when
he is taken of, he wrappeth him self round together.
I Ante O.
IO, an interiection, signifieng sometime grefe, as in Tibullo. Vrorio, O I
burn. Sometime excessive gladness. as in Ouidio. Dicite io paean. Iochabella,
the name of Moses mother. Ioseph^^
Iocus, plurali ioca, a merry word, disporte. Iocor, aris, ari, to speak
merrily, or in disport. Iocosus, a, um, and iocularis, lare, merry, sportfull,
provoking myrthe. Ioculus, a little sport or myrthe. Iolaus, the son of
Iphiclus, of whom the people of Sardinia, were named Iolenses. Iole, the
daughter of Euritus, king of Aetolia, whom Herculus loved. Ionia, a region of
the less Asia, wherein were the city of Ephesus, Milerum, and Clazomenae.
Ion, a stone of a vyolet color. Ionia, a city of the Athenienses. Ionicus,
ca, cum, and Ionius, a, um, of Ionia. Ioppe, a city of the country of
Palestina, not far from Jerusalem, standing by the sea, which some men do
suppose to be the hauyn, called Port Iaffe. Iordanis, a river of Judea,
commonly called flume Iordane. Ios, an isle where Homerus was buried. Iotapata,
a city in Syria. Iouin^ani, were men of arms, so called of Maximian the
emperor, which did valyantly in the country of Illiria. Iouis, the
genitive case of Jupiter.
I Ante P.
IPhianassa, the wife of Mela^pos, whom for her beauty Juno turned into furye
or madness. Iphigenia, the daughter of king Agamemnon, with whom he did
sacrifice going to Troy. Ips, ipos, a little worm, bredynge in horns and
vynes. Ipse, ipsa, ipsum, he, she, that same, by demonstratynge or showing the
person or thing spoken of. Ipsemet, he him self. Ipsippe, to him and none
other. Ipsulces, plates embosed like to fygures or images of men or women.
Iphitus, the son of Praxonidis, which first ordained the solemn plays
called Olympiada.
I Ante R.
IR, the holownesse of the hand. sommetyme it sygnifieth the hole hand. Ira,
wrath, an appetite to punyshe him, of whom we be offended. Iracundia, anger,
displeasure against one, a desire to be revenged. Iracundus, shortly or soon
angry, hasty. Irascor, etis, irasci, to be angrye. Irate, angrely. Iratus,
angrye. Irceus, a kind of pud dynges. Ircipes, an harowe. Ire inficias, to
deny. Ire pedibus in sententiam, to consent to the sentence or raison of an
other, which has spoken, or to be of the same opinyon. Irenarches, and
irenarcha, he which is in authority to see peace kept in a countreye or
city, which among us may be called a Justice of the peace. Iris, iris, uel
iridis, the rain bow. it is also a flower deluce, the root whereof is very
soote, and is commonly called Yreos. Irnium, oil of Ireos. Ironia, is a figure
in speaking, when a man dissemblyth in speech that which he thinks not:
as in scoffyng or bourdyng, calling that fair, which is foul in deed, that
good, which is ill, that eloque^t, which is barbarous. Semblably reasoning
contrary to that I think, to the intent to mock him, with whom I do
dyspute or reason. Ironice, mockyshly, scoffyngly. Ironicus, he that uses
that fasshyon in speaking. Irrasus, vnshauen. Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be
hoorse. Irrenumerabile, that may not be rewarded or recompensed. Irreparabile,
that may not be repaired or restored to the first astate. Irrepo, psi, pere,
to crepe in. Irreprehensus, a, u^, that can not be reprouid. Irretio, iui, ire,
to be taken or holden in, as it were in a net. Irretitus, taken, lapt in with
craft, or fair promyses. Irrigo, to water ground, to bring water into the
fields out of a river. Irriguus, gua, guum, the ground or field that may be
easyly watered. sometime the water, which may be easyly diryuied into the
fields. Irripio, pere, to pluck in. Irrito, are, to make void and of none
effect. Irritus, ta, tum, void, of none effect or force. Irrito, having the
last syllable saving one, long, to provoke, to kendyl wrath, to stir
up. Irrogare mulctam, to set a pain. Irructo, are, to blow in by
belkynge. Irrugio, gere, to braye out. Irrumo, are, to suck in. Irrumpo,
rupi, irrumpere, to break in, or enter with force. sometime to break asonder.
Irruo, to rounne hastilye or furiousely into battle, or upon any thing.
sometime to fall in, or cast in.
I Ante S.
IS, a pronowne, which signifies he. Isaeus, a famous rhetorician, which
inue^tid to make every matter co^pendious. Isagoge, an introduction.
Isagogicon, a way to introduce, or begin to teach. Isapis, a river nygh to
Caecenna. Isara, a river coming out of the Rone, where the hylle called
Cemenus is joined to the Rone: and so runs by Druentia into the goulfe of
Venyse. Isacia, an isle ageynste Velia, callydde also Oenotris. Isauria, a
region of the less Asia. Isaurum, a cite in the country of Pa^philia. Ischia,
the houckle bone. it is sometime taken for the ache in the said bone, which
vulgar phisicions do call Sciatica. Ischiadicus, uel Ischiacus, he that has
the ache in the hyppe, commonly callid Sciatica. Isiaci, the priests of the
goddess Isis. Isis, called also Io, one of the harlottes of Jupiter, whom he
turned into a cow for fear of Juno his wife. Isitium, a certain puddynge.
some call it an Isynge. Ismarus, a mountain in Thracia. Ismenias, the name of
an excellent minstrel, which played on the shalmes. Ismenus, a river in the
country of Boeotia. Isocolon, where two sentences are in like length.
Isocrates, the name of a famous oratoure, of wonderfulle eloquence, out of
whose schole proceeded the most excellent orators of Greece. Isodomon, a
form of building, where every thing is equally straight. Isonomia, equalite
of laws, as where they be indifferent and like to al manner of persons.
Isopleurus, three edged. Israel, sygnifieth a man saying god. Issa, an isle in
the Venician see ioynynge to Slauonie. Issus, a city in Sicile, and a river of
Siria. Ister, istri, the great river called Danubius, in ^uche Danowe. Ister,
the greattest river of Europa, called also Danubius, Danowe. Istic, there,
where thou art. Isthmus, a narowe part of the countreye, where two sees are
but a small distaunce asonder. There be diverse such places in Grecia, and of
them were certain plays called Isthmia. Istria, a part of Italye, marchynge
on Illiria, called now Slauonye.
I ANTE T.
ITA, so, so much, therefore. Ita sane, ye truly. Italia, Italye. Italus, an
Italyan. Italica, a city in Italia, which by an another name is called
Confiniu^, There is an other in Spayn, where Silius Italicus was borne.
Italicus, ca, cum, of Italye. Italicensis, a citesen of Italica. Item, in like
wise. Ite^, eris, itiner, itineris, a iourneye. also a way. Iter habeo ad
Caesarem, I take my journey to the emperor. Itero, are, to do a thing
eftesoones, to goo back again. Iterum, eftesoones, or again. Ithaca, the
country of Ulysses. Ithome, a town in Peloponeso, an another in Thessaly.
Ithonia, a country in Greece. Ithyra, a town on the mountain of Taurus.
Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the most dishonest and abominable ydoll. Also
the secret membre being in prosperity. Itidem, semblably, also. Itinerarium, a
commentarye or book of remembrance, contaynynge things committed in
iourneyes. Also it is a calendar of miles in the distance of places, with the
time of abode in every place, like to iestes of princis. Iteneror, aris, ari,
to goo in iourneye. Ito, taui, tare, to go much. Cicero.
Ituria, a region in Arabia, or Siria, of which the people are called Ituraei.
Itus, and itio, a goinge. Quid noster itus and reditus, what our goinge and
coming. Itys, the son of Tereus and Prognes, who, as poets do feign, was
turned into a fesaunt.
I, Ante V.
IVBA, the mane of a beast. Also the name of a king of Barbarye. Iubar, a
sterre, which is also callid Lucyfer and Hesperus. it is sometime taken for
bryghtenesse. Iubeo, iussi, iubere, to command, to desire, to wyshe, to
exhort, to decree. Iubilo, are, to declare in the voice, the joy and
gladness of the heart, which may not be expressed with words. Iubilum, joy
and gladness in voice, not expressed in words. Iucundor, aris, ari, to be
joyous and merry. Iucundus, a, um, he or that, which is the cause that an
another reioyseth, dylectable, pleasant to see or here. Iudaea, Iewry, or the
country of Jews. Iudaeus, a Jew. Iudex, iudicis, a judge. Iudex ordinarius,
he that has authority of his propre iurysdiction, to sytte in judgment
without commission. As the chief Justice of England, the Mayre of a city
incorporate, and a Coroner. Iudex delegatus, he that sytteth by commission, as
all other judges and justices. Iudicialis, le, of a Judge. Iudiciarius, a, um,
pertaining to a judge, or that which is to be iuged. Iuditium, judgment.
Iuditium habere, to give judgment. Iudico, are, to judge or deem, to suppose,
Lau. Vall^ in Barpt, i^ ciu^. lib. ^.
to give sentence, to condemn. Iugale uinculum, the bond of matrimonye.
Iugalis, he that is yoked. Iugantinus deus, was among paynyms the god, whom
they supposed to have authority over the rydges of hills. Iugarius, a street
in Rome, where was an altar of Juno, which men supposed did join matrimony
surely. Iugeratim, by sundry furlonges. Iugere, to cry like a kyte. Iugerum,
and iugus, geris, as much ground as one yoke of oxen will ear in a day. some
suppose it to contain in length 240. feet, in breadth half so much. some
say, that it is more. Leonardus Portius says, by the authority of
Columella, that Iugerum contains.xxviii. thousand and.viii. hundred fete.
Iuges, oxen like in greatness, callid yokes, or payres. Iugis, contynuynge in
one thing. Iugiter, contynually. Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte. Iugo, are, to
yoke or couple together. Iugosus, rydged. Iugula, a celestyalle Sign,
contaynynge three sterres. Iugulo, are, to slay, not only with weapon, but also
with syckenes. Quartana neminem ingulat, The fever quartayn sleeth no man.
Iugulus, the foreparte of the neck, which is dyuided in two great synewes.
Cells. Is. 4.
Dexter, and sinister. Iugulum ferire, to slay proprely in the neck. Iugulum
petere, when an orator or man of law, touches vehemently the point of the
matter, and with manifest and sore arguments and reasons, seems to assault
and oppress the contrary part, as it were with sharp weapons. Iugum, a
yoke. also the rydge of an hill or bank, also the beam, whereon weauers do
turn their web. Also a thing like to a galowes, under the which in sign
of reproach, they which were vanquisshed, were constrained to creep, which
was made with two spears standing, and one spear ouerthwarte. Also a frame,
whereon vynes are joined. Also a beam, whereon bala^ces do hang. Also the side
beams in a ship, in the which the traunsomes are fastened. Iulis, a city
in the isle of Caea, the country of Simonides the poet. Iulia, a kynred,
which proceeded from Ascanius, son of Aeneas, called Iulus. also a town in
Cales, in the country of Spain. Julius, the month of July, which took his
name of Julius Caesar. Iulus, otherwise namid Ascanius, the son of Aeneas.
Iulus, is also a little worm with many fete, bredynge in vynes and oaks, which
is also called Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus, and Voluola. It is also the mosynesse
of the outward part of fruits. Also the young fruit immediately after that
the flowers be fallen. Iuli, be also the mosynesse or soft hears, which do
grow on the beardes and visages of young men, before that they be shaue^: and
sometime it signifies the same young men. Iulus, is also a fyshe, which is
guide unto whales: which also is called Hegeter. it is moreover a song
dedicate to Diana. Iumentum, every beast that drawethe or bears burdeyns.
also a lyttel carre. Iunctim, ioyntely. Iunculi, meat callid iunkettes: also a
fresh chese made on rushes, callid a iackeman. Iuncus, a bulle rushe. Iuncus
odoratus, a spyce that is medicinable, specially to make the brethe sweet.
Iungami, people in the country of Liguria. Iungo, xi, gere, to join. Iunix,
icis, a young cow or hefar. Iuniculi, small vynes joined together. Iuniperus,
a sweet bushe, called Ieoneper. Iunis, n^, young, whereof comes Junior,
younger. Iunius, the monethe called June. also a man's name. Juno, the wife of
Iupyter, it is sometime taken for the air. Iunonia mayor, and minor, be two of
the fortunate Isles. Jupiter, iouis, the name of a great prince, which for his
wysedom and prowes was honored of the gentyles for chief of all gods, It is
also the name of a planette, which is always beneuolent in his influence and
course. Iuramentum, an oath. Iuratus, sworn. Iurgiosus, a, um, braulyng, full
of conte^tion. Iurgium, a braulynge, or a small contention. Iurgo, are, to
braule or chyde. Iuridicus, ca, cum, according to the law, or belonging to
the law. Iurisdictio, jurisdiction, power, or authority to ministre and
execute laws. Iuro, iutare, to swear. Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of juice, or
lycoure. Ius, iuris, law, authority, liberty, power, right. sometime the
place, where the law is ministered. Also lycour or juice. De iure meo, tuo, suo
decedere, to omytte some part of the rygour or extremity of the law. Pro suo
iure agere, and summo: iure agere, to take the extremite of the law. Summu^
ius, the rygour of the law. Iuscum, and iusculum, brothe, wherein meat has
den sodden. Iusiurandum, a solemn oath or promise made to GOD. Iussa,
commandments. Iussus, a, um, commanded. Iusta, sacrifices done for deed
men: now it may be used for funeral exequies. Iusta soluere, Cicer pro Roscio.
is proprely in funeralle obsequies, to do and perform al things thereunto
necessary. Iustitia, justice, rygtuousnesse. Iustitium, a cessynge for a time
from minystration of laws in places judicial. Iustus, a just or rightuous
man, an upright and true meaning manne. It is taken often times in holy
scripture for a virtuous man or good man. Iustus, ta, tum, equal. mean
between two extremities. Iusta magnitudo, neither more nor less, the just
quantity. sometime it sygnifyeth greatness. Iusta pars, the greatte part.
Iusto labor, with great labor. Iustas inimicitias, great hostility. sometime
it signifies among lawyers, true or very. Iustus filius, his very son.
Iuturna, the sister of Turnus. Iuuamen, iuuatio, and iuuamentum, help.
Iuuenalia, plays vowed for the health of young men. Iuuenalis, le,
pertaynyng to youth. Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youth. Iuuenalis, is
also the name of a poet, which wrate Satyrs. Iuuencus, and iuuenca, young,
not only men but also beasts. Iuuenculus, idem. Iuuenesco, scere, to wax, or
be young. Iuuenilis, le, young. Iuueniliter, yongely. Iuuenis, a young man.
Junior, oris, younger. Iuuentus, tutis, youth. sometime a multitude of young
men. Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to help, to delight. Iuxta, nighe, jointly or
together, even like, according. Salustius in Catalinar.
Nunc uero quo in loco res nostrae sint, iuxta mecum oe^s intelligitis, Now
how the matter stands, ye all know as well as I: or else, in what case our
busynes is, ye understand all as much as I do. Iuxtim, nygh to. Ixon, a
great white bird, of the kind of Ravens.
L ANTE A.
LABASCO, labascere, and labascor, sceris, to fail or decay. Labefacio,
labefacere, to break or destroy. Labefacto, ctare, to make feeble, to appaire.
Labellum, a lyppe. Labeo, onis, a man or womanne having greatte lyppes.
Labes, a spotte, which sodeynely happens to things that are smothe, a
blemyshe. Labecula, a little spotte. Labia, and labra, lyppes. Also Labrum is
the brymme or brynke of a river or fountain. Also a fat or like vessel
necessary to be bayned in. sometime a fat for wine after that it is pressed.
It may be used for a keele vate, wherinto ale or beer is put. Labicanum, a
town in Italy. Labici, the inhabitants of that town. Labicus, was the name
of the son of Minos, who was named also Glaucus. Labilis, bile, unstable,
which will soon fall, slypper. Labina, slyppernesse. Labo, are, to fall
down suddenly. Labor, eris, lapsus sum, labi, to slide, to dye, to fail, to
fall down by little and little. Labor, labor, travail. Laboriae the name
of a country in Italye, vulgarly called Terra laboris, the land of labor.
Laborinus, a field in Campania, where the stubbyll of corn is so great, that
the people do burn it instead of wodde. Laboriosus homo, a paynefull man.
Laboro, rare, to labor, to be in heaviness or grief. Labrusca, wild vine.
Labyrinthus, a maase, or any buildyng made like a maase, out of the which it
were hard to get forth. Lac, lactis, milk. Lacaena, a kind of apparayle.
also a woman of Lacedemonia. Lacedaemon, uel Lacedaemonia, a city in the part
of Greece, which is now called Moraea, whereof Menelaus was king. Lacer, and
lacerus, a, um, torn or rent. Lacerna, a short cloak, which men of war
be wont to wear. Lacernatus, cloked, or cladde in a cloak. Lacero, are, to
tear in pieces, or to give many wounds. Lacertus, and lacerta, a Lyzerde, an
Euet: also the part of a man's arm, from the elbowe to the wreste of the
hand, proprely the brawne and synewes of the arm. Lacertosus, having greatte
brawnes and synewes. Lacesso, siui, and cessi, ssere, to rent, or goo about to
rent the good renoume of a man. Also to provoke a man to wrath or displesure,
with words, writynge, or act: to rail on a man, to prycke a man with some
ill language or act. Lachana, all kind of herbs. Lachanopoles, a syller of
herbs. Lachanopolium, the herb markette. Lachesis, one of the three ladies
called Parcae, which poets did feign, to have the rule and contynuance of
man's life. Lachrima, a tear in weepynge. Lachrimo, are, to weep. Laciniae,
gardinges of a garment, proprely where the skirtes be cut in sundry facion.
In lacinias, in pieces. Lacinia, is also a red musheron, which springs at
the rote of a chesten tree. Laciniosus, a, um, cut in sondrye facions,
wyndyng and tournynge diverse ways. Lacinium, an elbowe of land, lyenge
between the sea, called Hadriaticum, and the sea called Ionium. Lacon, onis, a
man of Lacedemonia. Laconia, the countreye, where Lacedemonia stands.
Laconicus, nica, nicum, of the countraye of Laconia. Laconicum, a hotehowse or
dry bayne. Laconismus, a short form of speakinge. Lactarius, ia, um, meat
made of milk, all herbs, which have juice like milk. Lactarius, rij, he
that makes sundry meats of milk. Lacteo, ere, to suck milk. Lactes, places
within the rybbes of a man, benethe the nauyll, so tender, that it may not
suffer any wound or stroke, as Probus says. Some say that they be caules,
wherein the small bowelles do lie. Lactesco, scere, to be turned into milk, or
to be filled with milk. Lacteus, a, um, of milk or like milk, also that
which is nourished with milk. Lacticinia, white meats made of milk.
Lactidiaci, stryken about the nauyll. Lacto, are, to feed with milk, also to
deceive with fair words. Lactuca, an herb called letuse. Lacuna, a dyche,
wherein water stands. also a trenche, whereby fields are drayned, Some
english it, a synke. Lacunar, a beam of timber. Also such a thing as does
yet hang in merchants houses, overthwart their halles, whereon be set a
great number of candelles. Lacus, cus, a deep place always full of water which
is deriuied into brokes and rivers, also the vesselle, which receives wine,
when the grapes are pressed. Also the pryncipalle beam that gothe
ouerthwarte the house. Lacuturres, greatte cabages. Ladanum, a sweet gum,
which goth into the making of pommanders. Ladon, a river in Arcadia.
L ANTE AE.
LAedere maiestatem, to derogate any thing of the kings auctorytie or
prerogative. Laedo, laesi, dear, to hurt or do displeasure. Ci. in Ver.
Laesae religionis culpa, heresye, or lollardy, contempt of religion or
ceremonies. Laemargia, gluttonye. Laemargus, a glutton. Laemuschaton, the
reward given to him that vanquyshed at playenge or fighting with weapons.
Laena, a garment lyned, which the dyuynours called augures, did wear. Laerte,
a city in Cilicia. Laertes, the father of Ulysses. Laertius, the name of one,
which wrate the lives of Philosophers. Laetabilis, glad, or reioycefull.
Laetamen, compass or mucke laid in the fields, to make corn and grass to
grow plentuousely. Laetifico, are, to make glad. Laetisco, scere, to be
glad. Laetitia, gladness, reioycynge of the mind, which does also appear
outwardly. Laetitudo, inis, idem. Laeto, are, to make glad. Laetor, aris,
ari, to be glad, or to rejoice with outward signs. Laetus homo, a glad
man. Laeta ouis, a good sheep. Laeta seges, and letu^ legumen, plentyfull corn
and grain. All other things, not having life, being called Laeta, do
sygnifye dilectable to behold, or that do please the eye of the beholder.
Laeuigo, are, to plane, or make plain, or to polyshe. Laeuis, laeue, smothe or
plain. Laeuitas, tatis, playnnesse or smothenesse. Laeuo, are, to make smothe.
Laeuor, oris, smothenesse. Lagari uersus, verses, which do halt in the mids
of the foot. Lageos, a kind of grapes. Lagana, be thynne cakes made with
flower and water, whereto was put fat brothe, pepper, saffron, and cynnamom.
Lagonon, the frettynge of the guts. Lagoena, a pytchar pot. Lagia, one of
the names of the i will of Delos. Lagois, a kind of fyshe, which may be called
the hare fyshe. Lagoplithalmos, he that has eien like a hare, or in whom the
ouerlyds of the eien do not meue downewarde. Lagotrophia, a warren or park of
hares. Laguncula, a little pytchar. Lagygies, people in Sarmacia. Laicus, a
lay man. Lais, the name of a famous harlotte, unto whom for her beauty
repaired the richest men of Greece. Laletania, a country in Spain. Lalisiones,
coltes of wild asses. Lallare, to speak like a baby: in the which word the
greek does approach nerer to the english than to the latin, as babazin,
which made a latin word, (...)
is babare, it may be transferred to the mother or norice, that babeleth with
her child when she gives to it the dugge. Lamae, the raggydnesse of rocks.
Lambo, bear, to lycke with the tongue. also to touch, to flow, or run
softly. Lambrus, a river in Italy, which meteth with the river of Po, called
Padus. Lambrani, people dwelling about the said river of Lambrus. Lamentabilis,
le, lamentable. Lamentarius, a, um, that causes lame^tation. Lamentor, aris,
ari, to lament or bewail. Lamentatio, onis, lamenting or wailyng. Lamiae, be
women, which beholdynge, children, or gyuyng to them gifts, do alter the
form of them, which children be afterward called elfes, or taken with the
fayrye. And some such women will suck the bloudde from chyldern. They be
also those, which be called ladies of the fayry, which do allure young men to
company carnally with them, and after that they be consumed in the act of
lecherye, they coueyte to devour them. Lamia, is also a beast, which has a
woman's face, and the fete of a horse. It was also the surname of a noble
Romayne, and also of a famous harlot. Lamina, a plate of metal. Lamirus, one
of the sons of Hercules. Lampas, a leame of fire, or brightenes of the son,
most used for a lamp. Lampetra, a fyshe called a lamprey. Lampsacus, a city
on the border of Asia, upon the river called Hellespontus. Lampsacenus, a, um,
of that city. Lampytis, a gloo worm, or a worm callid a globerde. Lana,
woulle. Lanaris, re, that bears or has wolle. Laneus, a, um, woullen.
Laneus, a fyshe. Lanitium, the occupienge of woll. Lanitius, a, um, woollen or
of wolle. Lanate paecus, beasts having woll. Lanarius, a wulle man, or he that
occupies or sells wolle. Lanatus, a, um, cladde or wrapped in wolle. Lanatus
lupus, a fish so called for his whitenes and softenes. Lancia, a spanish
iauelin with a broad heed. Lancearius, he that bears a Iauelyn. Lanceatus,
armed with a iauelyn. also wounded with a iauelyn. Lanx, cis, a dyshe, which
of some is callid a potenger. also a balance. Lancino, are, to strike, to rent
with the teth. Lanerum, a garment made of vndied woll. Langa, a beast, which
is found about the river of Po. Langueo, and languesco, ere, to languyshe, to
be sick, to be faint, to be aferd, to be idell. Languidus, da, dum, faint,
sick, aferde, idell. Langurium, langettes of aumbre, like to long beadestones.
Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of strength and natural all moisture.
Laniena, the flesh shambles, or shop where flesh is sold. Sommetyme it
sygnyfyethe dismembrynge. Lanificium, cardinge and spinning of woll. Lanificus,
he that does work woulle, to make it mete for the clothyar. It may be called
also a woll wynder. Lanio, are, to cut like a boucher. Lanifex, ficis, idem
qui lanificus. Lanionius, a, u^, pertaynyng to bouchers craft. Lanista, he that
had the reule over sword players, and caused them to be taught, and after
sold them. Also that ordained birds to fight. Lanium carnarium, a slaughter
house. Lanius, and lanio, onis, a boucher. Lano, are, to put in woll, or to
dress with woll. Lanugo, the soft hears or mosynes in the vysages of chylderne
and women. Also on fruits called peaches, and some herbs as long wort,
clary, and such other. Laodicea, a city in Asia. Laodomia, the wife of
Prothesildus. Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus. Lapa, and lapathes, an
herb called Clote* which bears bourres, that cleauen to clothes and
cattle. Lapathos, seu lapathiu^, an herb called sorel. Lapicida, a mason.
Lapidarius, a, um, pertainyng to stones. Lapidesco, ere, to be made or turned
into a stoone. Lapidicina, a quarre of stones. Lapido, are, to strike with
stoones. also to strike sometime without stones. Lapillus, a little stone, also a
precious stone. Lapio, iui, ire, to make hard as a stone. Lapis, pi^^s, a
stone but less than that, which is called Saxum. Lapis, is sommetyme taken
for a mile. Ad tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the third or the fourth mile.
De lapide empti, were slaves or bondmen sold. Lapithe, people of Thessalie, of
whom Perithous was king. Lapsana, wild colewortes. Lapsio, a fall. Lapso,
are, to fall often. Lapsus, us, a fall. Also a small offense done by
negligence, an oversight. Lapythos, a city in the isle of Cypres. Laqueare,
laquear, and laquearium, the roufe of a chaumber, which is imbowed or fretted.
also a plain beam in a rouffe. Laqueatus, a, um, haltered, snarled, tied or
bound fast. sommetyme it sygnyfieth holowe or bowynge. Laqueus, an halter.
Lares, gods, which the paynyms did suppose every person had belongyng unto
him* which were also called Penates, both the which words be also taken for
pryuate dwellynges or houses. Mei lares, mei penares, my house or dwelling
place. Laranda, a city of Lycaonia. Lararium, a private chapel or closette
in a man's house. Lardum, larde, or the fat of an hog. sometime swynes
flesh salted. Larentia, a famous harlotte, which because she made the people
of Rome her heir, they named her a goddess, and callydde her Flora. Largior,
iris, iri, to give lyberally. Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie.
Largitio, lyberalle expenses, to win a man's purpose. Largus, a, um, large,
or free of expenses. Large, abundauntly. Larine, a fountain in Attica.
Larissa, the name of one city in Thessalia, an other in Asia, the third in
Italy. Larius, a brook by the city of Comum. Larix, icis, a tree of the kind
of fur, out of the which issues a soote gum. Larodij, people in Scithia.
Larua, a spyrite, which apperethe in the night time. Some do call it a hegge,
some a goblyn. Also a masker, or he that wears a visour. it is sometime taken
for the same visour. Laruatus, he that is feared with a spirit, and is becomme
mad. It sommetime signyfieth a masker. Laruale, an image defourmed, pale,
lean, and horrible to behold. Larum, a little black waterfowle. Lasanum, a
chaumber pot, or vrynall. Lasciuio, ire, to be wanton. Lasciuus, a, um,
wanton. Lasciuia, wantonness. Laser, the juice of an herb called Laserpitium,
commendable in sundry medicines. Lasibus, old writers used for Laribus.
Lasseo, and lassesco, lassus sum, sere, to be weary. Lascea, an isle in the sea
called Egeu^. It was also called Andros. Lasso, are, to be weery. Lassus, a,
um, weery. Lassitudo, werynesse. Lastaurus, a greatte lechour. Latebra, and
latebrae, brarum, a priuye place, where men do hyde them. Sommetyme it
sygnifieth an excuse. Latebro, are, to hyde. Latebrosus locus, where as be many
priuye places. Lateo, tui, tere, to be hid. Later, a tyle. Laterani, yeman of
the guard. Lateranus, the name of a co^sul of Rome, of whose house was made a
church of saint John^, which is now callid Lateranensis. Laterculus, a
little tyle. Laterem lauas, thou losest thy labor. Lateritius, a, um, made of
tyles. Laterna, a lantern. Lato, latescere, to be broad. Latex, ticis, all
manner of lycour: but it is most commonly taken for water. Latomia, a dungeon
in the prison at Rome. Latomus, a mason. Latialis, le, and latiaris, re, of
latin, of that part of Italy, which was called Latium. Latibulo, are, to be
hid. Latibulum, a den or bury, where beastis do hyde them. sometime it is
used for a secret place or cave, wherein men be hid. Laticlauius, a Senator.
Latifolium, that which has broad leaves. Latifundium, a greatte or large
field, great and large possessions. Latinae, narum, sacrifyces to Jupiter named
of the latins, who first did ordain them. Latin, in the form of latyne.
Latinitas, tatis, latyne speech. Latinus, na, um, latin, or of the people
called latins. Latinus, the propre name of Aeneas father in law. Latico, are,
to lurk. Latium, a part of Italy. Latius, a, um, of that country. Latinius,
a mountain in Ionia, where poets say the moon kyssed Endymion. Latomiae, was
a strayte prison in the city of Syracusis in Sicilia, an other in Spartha. It
is also a quarry, out of the which stones are dygged. Latona, was mother of
Apollo and Diana. Latonia, called also Diana, and is also taken for the moon.
Latria, the honor and service, wherewith god only is worshypped. Latres, a
servant. Latrina, a syege or iakes. Latro, are, to bark as a dog does.
Latrocinium, thefre, robbery. Latrocinor, trocinari, to robe, also to serve in
wars. Latrones, robbers by the high way. Also souldyours retained. Among
the Romans it were those, which were always about the kings or Emperoures
person, as the guard is about the king. Also Latrones, seu Latrunculi, be
chessemenne, with which men do play at the chesse. Latrunculator, a
justice of gayle delyuery, or any Justice, which does give sentence on
thieves. Latus, lata, latum, broad. Late, abroad, in many places. Latitudo,
dinis, bredthe. Latuniae, quarres where stones are dug. Latus, lateris, a
side. Latus clauus, a senators robe or garment. it is put sometime for the
dignity of a Senator. semblably Laticlauium. Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne.
Lauatrina, a synke, wherinto foul water is cast or swepte, whereby pauementes
are made clean. Lauce, an isle in the sea called Pontus. Laudabilis, le,
laudable, commendable. Laudatio, a praise or commendation. Laudo, are, to
praise. Laudo testem, I take to witness. Lauerna, a goddess, under whose
protection thieves were in Rome. Lauinium, a city in Italye, called also
Lautentum. Lauo, uaui, are, and lauo, ui, ere, to wash. Lautus, and lotus, ta,
tum, washed. Laurea, a leaf of a laurel or bay tree, sometime a garlande made
of Laurel. Lamens, it is, a man of the town called Laurentum. Lamentu^, a
city in Italy callid also Lauiniu^. Lameo, are, to put on a garlande of
laurel. Lameola, a crown or garlande that vyctours ware in their triumph.
Lameus, a, um, of laurel. Lametum, a place, wherein do grow laurelles or baye
trees. Lautiser, and lauriger, is, he that wearethe a garlande of laurel.
Laurinum, oil of laurel or bays. Laurion, a place in Attica, where silver
was dygged. Lautus, a laurelle or baye tree. Laus, laudis, praise. Lautia, were
presents, which the Romans did send to ambassadors of other realms. Lautitia,
magnifycence and netenesse in dyners and bankettes. Lautrices, the wyfes of two
brethren. Lautulae, weate baynes. Lautus, ta, tum, washed. also nete or
clean, or elegant, rich. Laxitas, tatis, and laxamentum, release, pardon,
lowsenes, liberty. Laxo, are, to lowse or set at liberty, to release.
Laxus, a, um, lowse, large, wide, soft, weke. Laxum, an aduerbe, signifies
wide. Caesar.
Laxare manipulos, was in battle, when the sundry bendes or companyes of footmen were set in a ray, one man a convenient distance from an another, that they
might fight the more at their liberty.
LEae, an Island by Cyrenaica, a regyon of Affrike. Leiena, a lioness.
Leander, the name of a man. Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boil in. Lebadia, a
city in Boeotia. Lectica, a thing like to bed, wherein rich men, and noble
men were borne by six servants. It may be taken for a lyghter. Lecanomantia, a
divination or prophecy by the noise of basins. Lecticarij, they which bare
Lecticam. Lectio, onis, reedynge. Lectipes, an herb. Lectisterniator, oris, a
chaumberlayne, or he that makes the beds. Lectisternium, a solemnity among
the paynims when in the honor of their goddis Jupiter, Juno, and Minerua,
beds were spradde in the temples, in the which first the idolles were laid,
in the resydue as many as might lie and eat. Lectito, are, to read often.
Lectrum, a part of Asia, lyenge into the sea. Lecturio, ire, to desire to read.
Lectus, a bed. Lectulus, a little bed. Lecythus, a pot of earth, which
served only for oil. Legatarius, ia, to whom any thing is bequethed.
Legacitius, pertaining to legacies. Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any
thing, the testatour. Legatum, a legacye or bequeste. Legatus, an ambassador,
that has commissyon to treat of matriers. He that is sent oonely to salute
or congratulate, is called Orator. Legerda, a city in great Armeny.
Legirupio, onis, a breaker of laws. Legio, onis, a company of men of war,
co^taynyng commonly, six thousand footmen, seven hundred thyrty and two
horsemen. Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion. Legirupa, a breaker of
laws. Legislator, a maker or gyuer of laws. Legifer, idem. Legittimus, a, um,
according to the law. Legittimi dies, days in bank, when the party
should appear or plead. Legittima iuditia, iugementes confirmed by laws
written, or ancient custom. Legiuncula, a small legion. Lego, are, to send
as an ambassador, or as a legate, or deputy, to commytte, or appoynte, to
bequeathe. Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to read, to pass by to stryke. Legula, a
fyllet. Leguleius, a lawyer. Legulus, a gatherer of small things. Legumen,
minis, all manner of pulse, as beans, peason, vetches, tares. etc. Legumentum,
and legarium, the same. Leleges, seu lelegae, people, which were always
wandrynge, and dwelled sommetyme in Thessalia. Lema, a tear. Lemanus, a river
which runs into the river of Rone. Lembus, a swyfte lyttelle ship, which
may be called a bark. Lemnisci, labelles hanging down from garlandes.
Lemnos, an isle in the sea called Aegeum. Lemnia terra, that which is now
called Terra sigillata. Lemosi, they that weep lightly. Lemonici, a people in
Guyan, Lemonoise. Lemures, spyrites, which do walk by night with horrible
fygures. Lenaeus, one of the names of Bacchus. Lenas, a bawd. Lendiginosus, a,
um, full of nyttes. Lenio, iui, ire, to pacify, to appease, to treat
gentilly, to make plain, or smoth, to comfort. Lenis, lene, that which has
no roughnes, meke, tractable, soft of conditions. Lenitas, and lenitudo,
meekness, gentilnesse, easynesse to please, softenes, smothenes. Leniter,
softely, swetely, moderately. Leno, a baude, a merchant of hoores. Lenobates, a
treader of grapes. Lenocinium, the practyse of bawdry. sometime immoderate and
exquisyte clenlynes or elegancye, to stir a man to vice. Lenocinor, ari, to
practice baudrye. Also to speak fair, or allure oone with words, and other
pleasant things. Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes. Lens, lendis, a
nytte. Lens, it is, a kind of poulse called fatches. Lentesco, scere, to be
smothe, or tender. Lenticula, a poulse called chittes. Lenticula, a manner of
vessel, out of the which kings and princes were anointed, a Chrismatorie.
Lenticularis, re, like a chytte or fatche. Lentigo, ginis, a thing like a
little warte in the face read or black. Lentiscus, a little tree, out of
the which comes Mastix, a sweet gum. Lent, easily, softely. Lento,
lentare, to do a thing softely or easyly, slowely. Lentus, ta, tum, soft,
gentylle, easy, slow, remysse, ydell, cleauynge, or clammy. Lenulus, a
little or young bawd. Lenunculus, idem. Also a little fishers bote. Leo, onis,
a Lion. Leo risit, a proverb touching the^, which be sour of countenance,
fierce, and vncurteyse. Lonem radere, spoken where one atte^pteth a thing
dangerous, and almost impossible. Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer.
Leodamas, the propre name of a philosopher. Leon, a philosopher. Leonides, was
king of the Lacedaemonians, which did feats of war against Xerxes king of
Persia incredible, and finally was slain in defendyng Greece, with four
thousand and eight hundrid greeks only, against.xvii. hundred thousand of
the hooste of Xerxes. There was also an other Leonides, which was tutour to
king Alexander, when he was a child. Leonina, an herb, which grows on
hills, whose flowers are like to a lions mouth when he gapeth. Leontopetalon,
an herb, having leaves like to colewortes, the stalk half a foot high, the
sede in husks as great as small peason, the rote like a rape rote, great and
black, which helps ageynste the styngyng and bytynge of all manner of
serpe^tis. Leontophon, a little worm, which if the lion do byte, he dies
incontinent. Leontophona, a little beast, whose heed is turned into ashes,
wherewith men do myxte flesh, and cast it in the ways, whereby lions do pass,
whereof if they do eat, they dye incontinent. Leontopodion, an herb callid
Pee de lion which has flowers like roses vnspradde. Leopardus, a Lybarde.
Lepadusa, the isle of Sicile. Lepidiu^, an herb like to a wyld parsnippe.
Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and pleasant, as well in speech, as in
gesture. Lepor, oris, and lepos, oris, pureness or netenesse in speech. Also
the good grace and dilectablenesse in speech and gesture. Leporarium, an
enclosure, Varro.3. de re rust.
or place enclosed, wherein are kept any beasts for pleasure or hunting.
Leporinus, rina, rinum, of an haare. Lepra, leprye. Leprium, a city in Achaia.
Lepus, poris, an hare. Laeptoludiae, black fygges. Lepusculus, a l^uret or
young hare. Lerna, a place, wherein the city of Argon laid all their ordure
and fylthe. Lernaeus, a, um, of Lerna. Lerna malorum. the dunge heap of
mischiefs. Leros, an Island in the sea Icarie. Lesbos, an i will in the sea
called Agaeum. Lesbius, a, um, of, the isle of Lesbos. Lessus, us, a lamentable
voice, used in the burieng of men, us we do say, Alas. Lestorum, a region of
Indie. Lestry gones, a people in the extreme part of Italye, which did eat
the companyons of Ulysses, rostynge them on broches. Letalis, le, mortalle.
Letania, uel litania, a supplycation or commune prayer. Lethargus, a syckenes,
which causes one to sleep continually, and to forget al thing. Lethargicus,
he that has the slepynge or forgetting syckenesse. Lethe, a river of hell, the
water whereof as soon as it is drunk, causes a man to forgette all thing
that is passed. Letisicus, ca, cum, causynge death. Leto, tare, to slay.
Letatus, slain. Letum, death. Leua manus, the left hand. Leuca, a
promontorie or elbowe of land, nygh to Corinthus. Leucantha, white bryer.
Leucanthemis, an herb, which phisytions of late days call Camomylle.
Leucates, a mountain in Epiro. also an isle. Leuce, a littell town not far
from Smirna. Leucola, an isle by Cypers. Leuconium, white cotton. Leucophaeus, a
brown or a russette color. Leucophaeatus, he that does wear a russet
garment. Leucopum, and leucopus, white of naturalle color. Leucophlegmantia,
a white dropsye. Leucosyria, a country, which is now called Cappadocia.
Leucosia, an isle against Pestanum, in the the sea Thyrrhenum. Leucothaea, the
goddess, which was called Matuta, and Aurora. Leuctrum and leuctra, a town
in Boeotia. Leuis, leave, light. Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes. Leui, one of the
sons of Jacob, the patriarch. Leuiathan, a dragon of the sea: it is taken in
holy scripture for the dyuell. Leuiculus, a, um, somewhat light. also wa^ton.
Leuidensis, se, thynne wrought, and of small substance. Leuifidus, da, um, of
light credence or trust. Leuir, ri, the husbands brother. Leuo, are, to lift
up. sometime to take away, to abate. Leuus, a, um, light. Also when it is spoken
of worldly things, it sygnifieth left, unhappy, contrary: when it is referred
to celestial things, it betokens right, fortunate, prosperous. For that
which to us is the left hand, to them, which are above us, and do look
toward us, is the right hand. Lex, legis, law. Lex municipalis, the
peculyar law, which every city has. Lex orchia, a law, which assigned
how many persons should be boden to souper, and that men should soupe at
their doors, to the intent that it moughte appear, how the law was obeyed.
Lex plagiaria, whereby men were whipped. Lexipyreti, medycines, which do heal
men of fevers. Lexouii, people in high France about Burbon.
L ANTE I.
LIae, be holes in the top of a maste, which do receive the cabulles, or
roopes. Liba, an isle in the Indian see. Libamen, minis, libame^tum, and
libatio, a taste or say taken, proprely in sacrifice. Libanius, the name of a
great Rhetorician. Libanotis, tidis, an herb called Rosemary. Libanotus, a
wind, which does blow out of the northweste. Libanus, a mountain between
Araby and Phenicia. It is also a tree, which brings forth incense.
Libellio, a writer of books. Libellorum praefecti, masters of the requests,
which do receive bills of supplication, being put in, to the king or prince.
Hieron.
Libellulus, a very little book. Libellus, a little book: also sometime an
epistell, a supplication, a lybell or declaration in the law, of debt,
trespass, covenant, and other like. Libens, willing. Libentiae, dylectations,
pleasures. Libenter, wyllyngely, gladly. Libentina, one of the names of Venus.
Liber, beri, the fynder of wine, called also Bacchus and Dionysius. Liber, ra,
rum, free, at liberty, not bounden, large, or greatte. Liber, libri, a book or
warke written, the inner rynde of a tree. Liberalis, le, lyberall. Liberales
arts, the lyberall sciences, or sciences belonging to a free manne. Liberale
iuditium, and liberalis causa, where a man contendeth for his liberty.
Liberalia, orum, the festiual days of Bacchus. Liberaliter, lyberallye.
Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalytie. Liberi, children, as well women as men.
Liberides, comes. P^^o^ua,
Libero, are, to deliver, to set at liberty. Liberare creditorem, to
content, or satisfy him, of whom money is borrowed. Libertas, tatis, liberty
taken always in the good part. Libertinus, and libertus, he that of a bondeman
is manumised or infranchised. Libet, it lyketh or contenteth. Libethra, a cave,
wherein was a well, called Libethros, where the Muses being conversant, were
therefore called Libethrides. Libethrides, the Muses, or ladies of sciences.
Libethras, a mou^tain in Macedonia, where the Muses did dwell. Libidinarius, a
haunter of lechery. Libidinosus, lecherous, wylfull. Libido, dinis,
sensuality, unlawful appetite or lust. Sometime it sygnifieth only appetite
or will. Libitina, a goddess, in whose temple were sold all things
pertaynyng to sepulture or funeralles. sometime for burienge. Also for death,
or the beer, whereon dead bodies are carried. Libitinarius, he that has the
suruayeng and charge about burienges. Libo, are, to taste any thing: sometime to
touch, sometime to sacrifice, sometime to take. Libra, a pound weight: sometime a
pair of balaunces. it is also one of the.xii. signs. Libra A^tica, contained
a hundred dragmas, and was called Mna, or Mina. Libra Romana, contained.xii.
ounces, that is to say four score and syxtene dragmas, Libralis, le, a pound
wright. Libramentum, poyse or weight. Libraria, a lybrary. Librarius, a, um,
pertaining to books, or of a pound weight. Librarius, a scriuener, a book
bynder. Librile, the hanging equally of the balance. Librilla, a cogell or
stone, to throw at one. Libripens, dis, a weyer. It was also among the
Romans he, which bought a bondsman or slave, taking a pound weighte of
brass in his hand, and saying: This man, which with this money and brason
pound is boughte to my use, by the laws of the Romans. I say, is mine own.
Libro, are, to way, to poyse, to make weightye, to houer. Libs, a wind, the
which blows out of the southe. Libum, a chief caake. Liburni, people of the
country called Liburnia, also commune messangers. Liburnia, a part of
Galmatia, or Slauony. Liburnum, liburna, liburnas, and liburnica, a light
ship, as a bark or galias. Libya, and libye, a royalme in Affrike. Libycis,
cidis, a city in Judea, on the east part of the river of Iordane.
Libycontes, stones, which are not very clear, Libycus, ca, cum, of Libra. Libya,
and Libyssa, a man and woman of Libya. Libyophoenices, people in Africa.
Liceo, cere, to cheapen. Liceor, ceris, ceri, to set the price. Licenter,
rashely. Licentia, license, unlawful liberty. Licentiosus, rash, using
unlawful liberty. Licet, it is lefull. sommetyme it is used for may. Mihi
licet, I may. Tibi licet, thou may. sometime be it so, admytte it. Lichas,
a measure, which excedethe not four fyngers. Lichenes, ryngewormes or
tetters. Lichenis, a foul breakyng out, which begins about the chynne.
Some do take it for the french pockes. Licia, be thredes, which sylke women
do weaue in lyncelles or stools. Liciatoriu^, a weauers shyttel, or a sylke
woman's tauell, whereon sylke or threde being wounden, is shot through the web
or lome. Licinia, a kind of olyue trees. Licitator, toris, a chepener, a
chapman, sometime it signifies a broker. Licite, lefully. Licitor, aris, ari,
to bye and selle for gaynes, or to bargayn by exchange or cheuisance, to
fight, to deceive a man by a craftye bargayne. Lictor, a sergeant, or other
like minister to execute corporal punyshement. A Consul of Rome had.xii. other
heed officers: syx which bare every one in their handis, rods and axes
bounden together, to do with them execution, as they were commanded.
Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to sergeantes and other like officers. Lictus, ta,
tum, lycked. Lidoron, a tyle in length one foot and an half, in breadth one
foot. Lien, nis, the spleen. Ligamen, minis, ligamentum, a bond. Ligellum, a
cotage. Liger, eris, a river in France called Loire. Lignor, aris, ari, to go
to carry wodde. Lignarius faber, a carpentar. Lignator, a carier of wodde.
Lignile, fuel, or a wodde stacke. Lignosus, a, um, as hard as wodde. Lignum,
wodde. Ligo, are, to bind. Ligo, onis, a spade. Ligula, a little tongue.
Liguria, the country in Italye, where the city of Geane is set. Ligurio,
ire, to eat lycorousely, or to devour sweet or dayntye meats. Also to eat
daintily or curiousely. Liguritor, toris, a dainty feder, an eater of delicate
meats. Ligus, guris, of the country of Liguria, a Ianuens of Ianeway.
Ligusticum mare, the sea that is by Ieane. Ligusticus, ca, cum, of Liguria.
Ligustrum, a tree, which does bear white flowers, and soote: whereof is made
an oil called oleum cyprinum: and this tree does grow in watrye places, as
wyllowes and salowes do. It is also an herb, which some men do call Mayor, and
grows by hedges. Ligyes, are people of Asye, which with Xerxes warred
against the Greeks. Lilibaeum, an hill in Sicile on the sea bank. Also a
town. Lilietu^, a place where do grow many lilyes. Lilinum, oil of lylyes.
Lilium, a lylye. Lima, a fyle. Limatulus, a little fyled. Limatura, powder,
which comes of filing. Limax, cis, a snayle. Also a man, which prieth or
seeks for some thing to consume. Limboratius, a maker of gardes or purfils.
Limbus, a purfyll of a woman's garment, or a guard of a man's garment. Limen,
minis, signifies not only the thrassholde of a door, but also the haunse,
sometime it signifies the enter of the door. sometime frendeshyppe, after the
expolytion of Seruius. Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the ports. Limes, mitis,
sygnifieth a bound or butting in fields. Limetanei agri, feldes lyeng in the
extreme marches of a country. Limetanei milites, soldiers appointed to keep
the borders of a country. Limito, are, to bound or lymitte how far a thing
doethe extend. Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded, lymytted. Limo, are, to fyle, to
polyshe. Limus, a vesture from the belly downward. Also mudde or slime, which is
in the water. Limus, a, um, crooked, a wrie, a skewe. Limis oculis spectare, to
look wantonly on the one side, to cast a wanton eye, to look a skewe.
Linamentum, lynnen. Linarius, a warker of lynnen. Linea, a carpenters line or
cord. it sygnifieth also every line generally, either made or ymagined to be.
Lineamentum, the facyon of a body. Linearis, are, pertaining to a line. Lingo,
xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. also to suck down by little and little.
Linctus, tus, lyckynge or suckynge down. Lingones, people in France, called
La^gres. Lingua, a tongue. also a language. Also an instrument, wherewith men do
take medycines or salues out of a box. Lingula, a little tunge. Also a lachet
or lingell. Also Lingua and lingula, do sommetyme signify a spoone. Lingua
bula, an herb called Langdebefe. Linguax, acis, a great speker, full of words.
Lingulaca, a woman full of words. Also a fyshe called a soole. Linio, iui,
ire, to annoynte. Lino, ni, ere, to annoynte or lay on sum thing, that is
thycke. also to line. Linostrophron, an herb, which is also called Marubium.
Linozostis, an herb called Mercury. Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leave.
Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen. Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe. Linteo,
onis, a lynnen weauer. Linternus, a river and town in Campania. Linteum, a
shete. It is taken for all lynnen clothes. sometime for sails. Lintres, little
botes made of holowe trees. Linum, lynnen. Linus, he that brought first letters
out of Phenicia into Greece, and was master to Hercules. Lynx, a beast, which
has the face of a lion, the body spotted like a panther, and is of the
greatness of a do, whose vryne is suddenly turned into a precious stone.
Lipara, an isle by Greece. It is also a soft plaster. Liparis, a river in
Cilicia. Lipopsichia, a soundyng, where one seems to be dead. Lipopthymia, a
traunse. Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or sand blind, or dymme of
sight. Lippus, bleare eyed. Lippitudo, the blearenesse of eyes. Lipsana,
scrappes, or leauynges of vitayle, or other things. Liquamen and liquatu^,
grease, or talow molten, sewet. Liquefacio, cere, to melte. Liquentia, a river
in Lombardy. Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or soft, as oil. Liquesco, scere,
to relente. Liquer, it appears, it is sure. Liquido, are, to discover, or make
to appear. Liquidus, da, um, lyquide runnynge and soft. sometime pure, also
prosperous. Liquido, plainly, apparently, purely. Liquo, are, to melte. Liquo,
ere, to run out, as lycour does. Lira, a rydge of land, which is over the
surrowe. sometime it sygnifyeth an harp. Lirae be trifles or iapes. Liratim,
in ridges. Liris, a river in Campania. Liro, are, to make rydges. Litem
aestimare, to assesse damages and costs for the playntyfe in an action. Lis,
litis, debate, variance, controversy. Litem suam facere, where oae medleth in
an other man's matter, as it were his own. Litera, a letter. Literae, a letter
or letters that be sent. sometime it signifies sciences. Litera salutaris, was
in the old time, A, as betokenynge absoluynge, Litera tristis, B, as
sygnifyenge condemnynge. Literae fugientes, blind letters, which either in
defaulte of the ynke, or of the parchemente, or for auncientie, may not be
radde. Literarius, a, um, pertaining to letters or sciences. Litterator, oris,
a grammarian, or a master of grammar. Litteratura, grammar. Literosus,
lettred. Litteratus, idem. Liticen, a blower of a small trumpette.
Lythargyrium, lytarge, or white leed. Lithargyrus, a stone of silver.
Lithiasis, the grief of the stone. Lithocolla, a cement, wherewith stones are
joined together. Lithoglyphus, a granour in stones. Lithologema, a heap of
stones. Theophrastus.
Lithospermon, an herb, which has seeds like stoones, and grows among
corn: which herb curethe the stoone of the bladder. Lithostratus, a place
paued with square stoones. Lithotomia, a masons warkhouse, or quarre Litigator,
oris, a stryuer. Litigiosus, a, um, full of strife. Litigium, a debate, or
variance. Litigo, are, to vary, to strive, to sewe one an another. Lito, tare,
to please god with sacrifyce, and to obtain my desire. Littus, toris, the
banks, as well of the sea, as of a great river. sometime land butting on the sea called the sea side. Littoreus, rea, um, and littoralis, littorale, of the sea side. Litura, a blottynge or stryke through that, which is written,
cancellynge. Lituro, are, to blotte or stryke through, or cancelle. Litus, ta,
tum, enoynted. Lituus, a crooked staff, which the diuinours called Augures,
held in their hands, wha^ they appointed places in their divination. Also a
scepter, and a trumpette. Liueo, ere, to be black, to envy. Liuesco, scere,
to envy. Liuidus, a, um, he that has his skyn black with beatynge, also
envious. Liuius, the prince of latin historiens. Liuor, the color, which is
left on the skin, after beatynge or whippynge. Lucanus.
sometime it is taken for envy. Liuor edax tibi cuncta negat, The gnawyng envy
denayeth the all things. Claudius lib. 3.
Rabiem liuoris acerbi Nulla potest placare quies, No quiet can content the
ragynge of bitter envy. Lix, ashes. Lixa, a skullyon, which carries wodde or
water in an host, or to the kychen. Lixabundus, he that for a small reward
does most vile service. Lixinium, lie made of ashes to wasshe clothes clean.
Lixo, are, to whette. Lixos, a town in Africa.
L ANTE O.
LObus, the lap of the ear. Loba, a branch of the grayn called Millium.
Locarium, the hyre of a house or lodgyng. Locatarius, he that lets house or
land, a lessour. Locellus, a little place. Locito, are, to let. Loco, care,
to set or lay, as a house is set in a place, a foundation is laid. Also to
lay up, as a thing is to be kept. Sometime to give in marriage. Also to let
a thing to hyretor to rent, to make a lease. Locator, toris, the lessour.
Locrus, a city in the vttermoste part of Italy, which was named Magna
graecia. Locrenses and locri, people of Locrus. there were also people so named
in Greece. Loculamenta, places made with bourdes, wherein tame culuers, and other
birds or conyes are kept to bread. Loculatus, ta, latum, dyuyded into sondrye
places. Loculus, a little place. Also a purse, an almorie, a little coffer, a
biere, whereon deed bodies are borne to be buried. Locuples, pletis, rich,
abunda^t, sufficient. Locuples fideiussor, a sufficient surety. Locupleto,
tare, to make rich of yerelye revenues. Locus, a place. sometime a family or
kindred. also slede, as Loco patris te habeo, I take the instead of my father.
Loci, plurali numer. the secret parts of a womanne. Locusta, a fly with
long hinder legs, which bourneth corn with touching of it, and deuoureth
the resydue. In India be of them three foot in length, which the people of
that country do eat. It is also a see fish, like to a creuys, called a
lopster. Locutor, cutoris, and loculeius, a prater or a iangler. Lodex, uel
lodix, icis, a sheet. Loedoria, a taunt or reproach in scoffyng. Arifto.
Metheor^^.
Loelaps, a blaste of wind turned from the earth upward. Logica, logike,
one of the lyberal sciences, the c^a^t^ of reasonyng or arguinge. Logion, a
place where iuges give sentence: also a gathering of rent, or other revenues
Logodaedalus, he that speaks craftily to deceive: or in eloquente words
induces sentences vain, or of little purpose. Logomachia, a contencion with
words, or an vnd^^rete altercation. Logos, used for a latin word, is taken
for trifling words, or vain language. Loligo, ginis, a fyshe, which has his
heed between his fete and his bealy: and has also two bones, one like a
knyfe, the other like a pen. Lolium, a wiede growing in corn, called
Cockyll. Longobardia, a regyon of Italye, called Lumbardye. Lombricus, a
lampraye. Lomentum, bean meal. Longa Alba, a city in Italye. Longaeuus,
long lived. Longanimis, he that suffers long. Longanon, a gutte, out of the
which ordure issues. Long, an aduerbe, signifies long, far, exceeding.
Longinquus, a, um, far of, far, strange. Longisco, scere, to be long.
Longitudo, dinis, length. Longobardi, Lumbardes. Longurius, a long pole.
Longus, a, um, long. Longum, a long time. Lopades, a shelle fyshe.
Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge. Loquacito, are, to babble or speak much.
Loquax, cis, a babbler or greatte speaker. Loquela, speech. Loquor, eris, qui,
to speak. Loquitor, tari, to speak much. Lora, sieve lorea, a drink made of
grapes, after that they be pressed, called Second. Loram, servants which
served to bind men, or to beat them, when they were by their masters
commanded. Lorica, an haberion, a place made upon walls like an open galery,
with grates of timber or hurdels, to keep men from falling. It is also the
wall plate, before that mortar is laid on it. Loricatus, armed with an
haberion. Loricatio, wallynge with mortar. Lorico, care, to put on an haberion.
Loricion, a mantell. Loricula, in warfare is a munyme^t or fortification, that
the besigers of cites do make. Loripes, edis, whose fete ar, as if they were
bounden or gyrte. Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or other like thing,
wherewith beasts are bounden or tied. sometime a whip, wherewith a man or
beast is whypped. Lotaringia, a country between Pycardye and Normandy.
Lotophagi, people in Affrike, which do live by eating only of a fruit, callid
Lotos. Lorium, vryne or pysse. Lotos, and lotis, lotidis, is a notable tree in
Affrike, or herb, of whose fruit if a stranger do eat, he does
incontinently forget his own country. Loxias, one of the names of Apollo.
L ANTE V.
LVbentia, and libentia, myrthe, pleasantnes, most proprely in words. Lubido
pro libido, sensual appetite. Lubrico, care, to make slypper. Lubricus, ca,
cum, slypper, waueryng. sometime ready to slyppe or slide. Luca, a city in
Italye, of which the inhabytantes are called Lucenses. Lucae boues, were taken
of the old latins for Elephantes. Lucania, a countray belongyng to the
royalme of Naples. Lucani, people of the country of Lucania. Lucanica, a
pouddynge made of porke, ^ sawsage. Lucanus, a famous poet, which wrate the
battle between Caesar and Pompeye. Lucar, money bestowid in woddes, dedicat^
to goddis, called Luci. Lucaria festa, feasts, which the Romans made in holy
woddes. Lucellum, a little gain, a small markette. Lux, lucis, light,
sometime it signifies day. Luci, by day. Lucens, that which has his light
of an another thing. Luceo, luxi, lucere, to shine. Luceres, the third part
of the people of Rome, distributed by Catius and Romulus. Luceria, a city of
Apulia. Lucerius, a king of Ardea, which help Romulus against Tatius.
Lucerna, a lantern. Lucernarius, the lantern bearer. Lucernula, a sconse.
Lucesco, scere, to be bright or clear, as day. Lucetius, a name of Jupiter.
Lucetia, one of the names of Juno. Lucibile, that which is light of it self.
Lucido, are, to make clear, or to give light. Lucifico, care, idem. Lucidus,
da, dum, clear. Lucifer, the day sterre. Lucifigus, ga, which flees from
light, and delyteth in darkness. Lucilius, the name of an old poet.
Lucina, one of the names of the moon, called also the goddess of birth.
Lucini, they which have little eyes, and small syghte. Lucius, a man's name.
Lucretilis, an hylle in the countreye of the Sabynes. Lucrifuga, he that flees
from lucre or gains Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Ca^pania. Lucrio, onis,
a covetous manne, an inordynate gayner. Lucror, aris, ari, to gain, or to win. Lucrum, lucre or gain. Lucta, wrastelynge. Luctatius Catulus, a cytesyn
of Rome. Luctiferum, cause of waylynge. Luctificus, ca, cum, idem. Luctitor,
tari, to wrastell often. Luctor, aris, ari, and lucto, are, to wrestle.
Luctuosus, a, um, lamentable. Luctus, tus, weepynge and waylynge, the habyte of
mourning, Lucubro, are, to make any thing by candelle light. Luculentus, ta,
tum, full of light, clear. Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne. Lucus, a
high and thycke wodde, sometime it signifies light, when it is of the fourth
declination. It is also a city in Spain by Compostella, which is now called
Lucensis. Ludia, a daunsynge wenche. Ludibruini, a mock, or any thing that is
mocked. Ludibundus, a, um, playing, or full of play. Ludicru^, any play or
pastime, or an interlude Ludicrus, cra, crum, pertaining to play or myrthe.
Ludifico, are, to mock. Ludii, and ludiones, players in enterludes or stage
plays. Ludius, and ludio, onis, a player. Ludo, si, dear, to play, to mock
or deceive in game. Opera luditur, The warke or labor is lost. Ludus, play in
acts, mirth in words: also a school or place of exercise. Lusus, us, idem.
Lues, pestilence in men, murrayn in beastis. Lugdunum, a city in France,
callid Lions. Lugeo, luxi, lugere, to mourn, to lamente. Lugubris, bre,
pertaining to mourning. Vestis lugubris, a mourning garment. Luma, a
brembyll. Lumbago, ginis, feebleness of the loins. Lumbare, breeches of hosen.
Lumbrici, worms called easts. Lumbi, the loins. Lumen, luminis, light.
Luminare, that which gives light. Luna, the Moon. Lunaris, re, pertaining
to the moon. Lunaticus, he that is mad or sick at a certain time of the
moon. Lunatus, ta, tum, like the moon. Luo, ere, to suffer punyshement or
death. Luere capite, to have the heed stryken of. Lupa, a female wolf. also an
harlotte. Lupanar, a brothell house. Lupanaris, re, pertaining to a brothel
house. Lupanarium, a brothell house. Lupari, to meddell with common harlottes.
Luparius, a hunter of wolfes. Lupatum, a hard bytte. Lupercal, a place
dedicate to Pan, the god of shepeherdes. Lupercalia, sacrifices and plays made
to Pan. Luperci, minysters of that solemnity. Lupinus, na, number, of a wolf.
Lupinus, a kind of poulse. Lupus, a wolf. Also a bytte for a horse. also a
hoke to draw up things our of a pyt. Also a kind of spyders. Lupus est in
fabula, a proverb, when he comes, which is spoken of. Lupum auribus tenere,
a proverb in things that be dangerous, either to retain, or to let goo.
Lura, the mouth of a bottelle. Luridus, da, dum, pale of color. Lurco, are,
to eat rauenously. Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his own substance Luscinia, a
nyghtyngale. Lusciosus, poreblynd. Luscio is the disease. Luscitus, he that
sees plainly by night. Luscus, porblynde. sommetyme a man having but one
eye. Lusitania, the realm called Portugal. Lusito, tare, to play often.
Lusorius, a, um, pertaining to play. Lustralis, le, pertaining to riot and
lechery. sometime a thing done every fyfte year. Lustrici dies, the day when a
child is first named, which in men chylderne was the nynth day, in womenne
childern it was the viii. day. It may now be used for the day of christenynge
of chylderne. Lustro, are, to go about in circute, to make satisfaction by
sacrifice, to consider in the mind, to shadow, to behold about. Lustror,
aris, ari, to search out. Lustrum, a den or cave of wild beasts in woddes,
an hid place and vile, a house where gluttonye and lechery is haunted, also
the hauntynge of the same vices: sometime it sygnifyeth the space of five
years. Also the general purgation of the city by sacrifice every fyfte year.
Luter, eris, a cup, wherein wine is delayde with water Lutesco, scere, to be
claye. Luteus color, the color of yelowe, approchinge toward read, of the
color of the yolke of an egg, or of wax new made. Luteola, a little flower
of the color of yelowe, in greatness and savor, not much unlike a vyolette.
Luteum oui, the yolke of an egg. Luto, are, to claye. Lutia, sieve lytra, a
beuar, or a beast much like to it, which gnaweth trees asonder. and does
haunte greatte waters, and lives like an Ottar. Lutum, claye. Lux, lucis,
light. Luxo, are, to lowse or make loose. Luxatus, whose bones are out of
ioynte. Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abunde more than is necessary in the body
or personage. Luxurior, aris, ari, to abound excessiuely in things
concerning the mind or goods: Also to be wanton with to much wealth or
prosperity. Luxuriosus, to prosperouse, or living in to much pleasure.
Luxuriosus, a, um, exceeding in abundance. Luxus, luxuria, and luxuries, all
superfluity or excess, as well in carnalle pleasure, as in sumptuous fare,
apparayle, or buyldyng.
L ANTE Y.
LYaeus, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes. Lyceum, was the
schole of Aristotell in Athenes. Lycaeus, a mountain in the countreye of
Archadia. Lycaon, the king of Archadia, whom Jupiter turned into a wolf.
Lycaonia, a country in Asia: after sum writers, it is a part of Archadia.
Lycaones, people in Asia the less, Ptho. li. 3.
nere to Lycia, as writes Ptolome. Lycastus, a city of Candy. Lychnis, an
herb whose flower shyneth by night, and first springs, and longest dureth:
which in drink helps them that are stongen with the Scorpion. Lychnites,
white marbyll. Lychnobij, they which do turn the day into night, and the
night into day. Lychnus, a match of a candelle, sometime the self candell.
Lycia, a country in the less Asia. Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a
shepeherde in Vergile. Lycion, a thing made with the juice of an herb,
wherewith soore eis be cured. Lycisca, a dog commen of a wolf and a dog.
Lycius, one of the names of Apollo. Lycurgus, a king of the Lacedemoniens,
which gave to them their first laws. Lycus, a river in the countreye of
Caesaria. Lydia, a royalme in Asia the more. Lydus, a, um, of the country of
Lydia. Lyenteria, the flyxe or continual lowsenes of the bealye. Lympha,
water. Lymphaticus, a mad man, which like to a wodde dog, runs hither
and thither. Lympidus, a, um, clear, smothe. Lynceus, was a man, who (as
Varro writes) could see ships on the sea.Cxxx. miles from him, and did
nombre them. And some wrate, that he could see through a wall. And therefore
they, which have very sharp syghtes, be said to have Lynceos oculos, the
eien of Lynceus. Lyndus, a city at the Rodes, where they did sacrifice to
Hercules with reproaches and curses. Lynter, eris, a cockebote. Lynx, cis, a
beast like to a wolf, having many spots, whose sight does perce all
things. It is also a bird, which has a tongue like a serpente. Lyra, an
harp. Lyricen, cinis, an harper. Lysander, a Captain of the Lacedemonyans, a
man contentious, which did set all Greece in the Lacedaemonians top, and was
slain of the Thebans. Lysanias, an orator of Greece. Lysias, an orator most
pleasant, of whom Quint. speaks. Lysimachus, a noble man of Macedony, the
scholar of Callisthenes. Lysippus, an excellent caruer. Lysius, a river of
Archadie. Lytta, a worm in a dogs tongue.
M ANTE A.
MACARIVS, the name of a man. In latin it sygnifieth blessed. Maccabaeus, the
name of certain noble men, which were capitains of the Jews. Macaedonia, a
realm ioinyng to Greece, whereof the great Alexander was king. Macedo, onis, a
man or woman of Macedony. Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedonie. Macellarius, a
vittayllour or seller of all manner of vittayle. Macellum, a place where all
manner of vytayle is sold. Macellus is sometime taken for a lean man. Maceo,
and macesco, scere, to be lean. Macer, cra, crum, lean. Maceresco, scere, to
make soft with lyeng long in lycour. Maceries, and maceria, a wall of stone
without mortar, made in the stead of an hedge. also leanness. Macero, are,
spoken of the body, signifies to make lean, or thynne, or soft by steapynge
in lycour: referred to the mind, it sygnifieth to vex or inquiete. Machaera,
a sword. Machaerophorus, a sword bearer. Machaeropios, a Cutlar, or a
bladesmyth^e. Machaon, the son of Aesculapius, an excellent surgeon. Machina,
a thing craftilye invented, or a crafty invention, an engyne. Machinor, aris,
ari, to invent craftily, to deuyse, to ymagine. Macies, and macritudo,
leanness. Apulcius.
Macidatus, ta, tum, wette. Macilentus, lean. Macio, aui, are, to make lean.
Macra, a river, which rounneth between the mountains of Liguria. Macresco,
scere, to wax lean. Macreo, ere, to be lean. Macrobij, people of Aethiopia,
which do live very long. Macrobius, the name of a great learned man.
Macrochie, he that has long hands. Macrochera, a garmente with long sleues.
Macteae, precious meats. Macticus, he, which has greatte chekes, and a
gapynge mouth. Macto, are, to slay or kylle: also to beat, sometime to honor.
Mactra, an hutche, wherein bread is put: some do call it a brake, wherewith
dowe is wroughte. Macte uirtutis and uirtute, proceed in virtue. Macte animi,
be of good courage. Macti ingenio, men of excellent wits. Macula, a spotte, a
blemyshe: Also infamye or reproach. Sometime the masshe of a net or hole
between the thredes: also a net, images wrought in marble. Varro.
Maculo, are, to spotte or make foul. Maculosus, spotty, unclean, or foul.
Madaura, a city set in the bounds of Getulia and Numidia. Madefacio, cere, to
weate, to wash, to bain. Madefio, fieri, to be washed. Madeo, dear, to be
wette or washed. Madesco, scere, to sweat, or be through wet. Madian, a city
beyond Arabia on the south part in the desert of the Sarasyns, against the
cast part of the red see. Madido, dare, to make wette. Madidus, dida,
didum, wete or washed with lycoure. Madifico, facere, to make weate. Mador,
oris, moisture, sometime sweat. Mados, a certain kind of white vynes.
Madulsa, dronken. Maeander, a river of the countray of Phrigia, which has
many tournynges and wyndynges: and of that all crooked and subtle tournynge
ways, means, and deuyses, be called Meandri. There is also of that name a
mountain in India. Maedia, a city in the realm of Thracia. Maee, a kind of
great crabbes of the sea. Maemacrerion, the month of Septembre. Maenala, uel
Maenalus, a high mountain in Archadia. Maenas, adis, a fyshe, which I suppose
we do call a Menowe. Maenades, women, which did always follow Bacchus, with
their hear scatterid like mad women, running hither and thither. Maenoles, one
of the names of Bacchus. Maeonia, is a country in Asia the less, called also
Lidia. Maeonius, a, um, of Maeonia. Homere the excellent poet was named
Maeonius, either because that he was borne in that country, or else that his
fathers name was Maeon. Maeotis, a greatte mere in the country of Scithia,
which is always frosen. Maereo, es, look after in Maereo et Mereor. Maero, are,
to make heavy. Maeror, heuinesse with weeping. Maestit^a, et maestitudo,
heaviness. Maesto, et Maest^sico, care, to make heavy. Magalia, villagis. Magia,
Magike, which is in two sorts, one is the secret knowledge of the natural
qualyties and hid operations and causes of things, and that is called Magia
naturalis, natural magike: A another is superstionie and deuillishe, called
witch craft, sorcery, or other like detestable names, which is unlawful by
the laws of god and man. Magicus, ca, cum, perteynyng to magike. Magidae,
kychen bourdes, or instruments perteynynge to the kechyn. Magida, a kind of
bread. Maginor, aris, ari, to trifle. Magis, more. Magitteriu^, the dignite or
office of a master. Magistrauis, tus, a great offycer, a man having authority
in governance of people. all be it that some have more authority by the laws,
and some have less. Magister populi, the chief ruler of the people, by the
which name the Dictatour among the Romans was called. Magister, tri, a
master or teacher of sciences. Magistro, are, to rule. Magister scriniorum, an
offycer like to the master of the rolls. Magmata, confections made of diverse
sweet spices in paste only for the savor, as pomaundres and washing balls.
sometime it is taken for the dreggis of sweet oils. Magna Graetia, that part
of Italy from Larentum to Cumas. Magnalia, great things to be wondered at.
Magnarius, a great merchant. Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantness of courage or
heart, magnanimity. Magnas, atis, et Magnatus, a noble man, a man of great
estimation. Magnes, etis, an Adamant stone. Magnesia, a part of Macedonia.
Magnifico, are, to extol. Magnificus, he that does great things. Magna, at a
great price. Magnificentia, a disposition and administration in doing or
making of great things and sumptuous. Magnus, a, um, great. Magog, the son
of Iapheth. Maguderis, a kind of Caules called also Laserpitium. Magus,
signifies in the Persiane tongue a wise man, expert also in the mysteries of
their ceremonies, sometime it signifies a witch. Maia, the mother of
Mercurius. Maiestatem constituere, to confirm the astate of princes dignity.
Maiales, barowe hogs. Maiestatem soluere, to lose the preeminence of princes
dignity. Maiestas, tatis, majesty. Maiestatis crimen, mysprision. Maiores,
auncetours, progenitors. Mayor, oris, greatter. Maius, the monthe of May.
Malae, the chekes. Malaca, a city in Spain. Malatia, calm of the Sea, also
the grief of the stomach not susteynyng meat, abhorrynge all things, as a
womanne with child, some do call it the abomination of the stomach.
Malachites, a stone of a dark grene color. Malacisso, are, to knede or make
soft. Malaces, ces, a kind of malowes. Plaut. i^ Epi.
Malacostracha, soft as fish without shelles. Malacus, ca, cum, soft.
Malagma, it is, a mollifienge plaster, whereby hard impostumes be made soft or
ripe. Malasso, are, to make soft or ripe. Also to exercise. Male, ylle,
unhappily, vncommodyousely, myscheuousely Malea, a promontorie or hylle lienge
into the sea by Laconia, which is dangerous for ships to pass by. Male
audire, to be ill reported of, to have an ill name. Male cogitare de aliquo, to
have ill opynion of one. Male accepti, ill handled, ill entreated. Ci. in Ver.
Brutus i^ Cice.
Maledicentia, ill report. Maledico, xi, cere, to curse. Maledicus, ill
tonged. Malefica, a wytche, which with sorcerye does hurt to her neighbors.
Maleficus, a harm doer. Maleficium, and maleficentia, damage, wrong
displeasure, hurt, a myscheuous deed. Malefice, myscheuousely, harmefully. Male
meritus est de me, He has ylle entreated me. Male optare, to curse. Male
accipere, to entreat one ylle. Male accipere uerbis, to give ylle language to
one. Male acceptus, ill entreated, ill handelyd, shrewdely welcome. Male
cadere, to chance ylle. Male conciliatus, cost lost, he on whom a man has
lost all that he has bestowid. Fugitive prodi, male conciliare, Come forth
mycher, on whom I have lost all that thou costest me. Plautus in Amph.
Plautus in Asinar.
Male formido, I am ill or soore aferde. Male me habet haec res, I am sorry or
ill apayde for that mattier: or that mattier greueth me soore. Maleloqui, and
maledicere, to curse. Plaut. in Castle.
Male maceror, I am ill vexed, I am il at ese. Male mereri, to do displeasure.
Male metuo, I am ill aferde. Male moratus, ill manerde. Male morigerus,
disobedient, or froward. Terent. in Adelph.
Male odi, I hate deedly. Male precari, to ask a vengeance. Male ue^tat illi,
God send him yuell luck thereof, ill may he brook it. Male suada, she that
gives shrewed counsel. Malenolentia, malice, ill will. Maleuolus, malyciouse.
Malicorium, the rynde of a pome granade. Malign, enuiously, disdainfully,
maliciously Malignor, and maligno, to bear malice, to be hatefulle. Vergilsus.
Plinius.
Malignus, a, um, wicked, cruel, enuyous, and covetous, maligna uia, an ill
way. Malignus ager, ground that is ylle to be brought to tylthe. Maligna lux,
a dymme light. Malignitas, tatis, wickedness, malignitie, envy, malice,
vnprofytablenesse, the vice contrary to lyberalitie. Malitia, contrary to
virtue and goodness. sometime it signifies subtlety with deceyte. Malitiose,
malyciousely. Malleatus, a, um, hammered. Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer.
Malleolus, a lyttelle hammer. It is also a small boughe or twygge of a vine.
Also Malleoli be sommetyme taken generallye for small sticks. Malleus, an
hammer. Malluuium, and malluuiae, arum, a basyn, where in men do wash their
hands. Malobathrum, a sweet ointment, wherewith men were wont to wash their
hear. Malo, I had leauer, or rather: mauis, mauul. Malobathron, which in
latin is called foliu^, is a sweet herb growing in India, upon waters without
any root. Malta, a clay, which touching any other mattier or substance,
settethe it on fire. Malua, an herb called Mallows. Malus, an appull tree of
the femynyne gender. Malus assyria, nel medica, an orange tree. Malus, in the
masculyne gender, a maste of a ship. Malum, being an aduerbe, Terent. in
Phor^.
sygnifieth with a myschiefe, or like thing. Quid uo^ malum ergo me sic
ludificamini? Than wherefore with a myschiefe do you thus mock me. Quid tua
(malum) id referi? what with a myschiefe reckest thou therefore, or have thou
therewith to do? Malus, a, um, ill, contrary to good: sometime labor, vexation,
sycknesse, grefe, malice. Mamertini, people in Campania. Mamilla, a little
dugge, or pappe. Mamma, a dugge or pappe. Mammare, to give the dugge or breast
to a child. Mammeata, a womanne with greatte dugges or breasts. Mammillare, a
kerchefe, wherewith women do cover their pappes. Ma^mona, in the language of
Syria, worldly substance, richesse. Mammosus, sa, and mammeatus, ta, tum,
Plaut.
having great dugges. Mammothrepius, the child that soucketh long. Mamphula,
a certain bread used in Syria, which ere it be through baken, fallyth into
coals. Mano, are, to drop or stylle out, or run out softly. also to
descend, to proceed. Mana, in the old time, was taken for Bona, good.
Manapia, an Island in the north part of Britannia. Manceps, cipis, he that
byeth or hyreth any thing of the people. Mancinati, persons condemned.
Manciolae, little hands. Mancipium, that which is sole^nely bought before
witnesses. Also a man's propre goods or catell. sometime a bondeman. Mancupi,
the solemn form or manner of byenge any thing before wytnes, by lyuerye and
seyson, or possessyon taking, with other things executed, requysyte for the
assurance of any bargayne and sale. Mancipatio, the assurance by lyuerye and
possessyon. Mancupes, the principal takers of land, or other thing, whereof
grows yearly revenues. Also they, which do take on them to perform any
work in greatte. Mancupio dare, to give or selle a thing with warrantie.
Mancupio accipere, to take a thing with warantie of him, the which gives or
sells it. Mancipi, the interest or right of a thing. Mancipo, are, to
deliver in bondage, to deliver possession, to make lyuery and sayson. Mancipij
sui esse, to be his own manne, and none other man's subject or servant.
Mancipio dare, to deliver possession, reserving a rent. Vi^ruuius.
Mancipio accipere, to take possession or lyuerye and saison. Mancus, lacking
one hand. also generally that, which lacks any thing necessary. Mandatarius,
he to whom commandment is given. Mandatum, a commyssion. Also a
commandment, a charge. Mandatus, ta, tum, given in charge. Mandibula, a
^awebone, wherein the teethe be set. Mando, are, to commit, memoriae
mandare, to remember, to put in remembrance, to leave in memory, or for a
memorial. Mandare aeternitati, to write a thing, to the ^^^ent to be in
perpetual remembrance. Mandare literis, to put in memory. Mandare
siderahcuius, to put a man in trust with a thing. Mandare teriae semina, to
put sede into the ground. Mando, di, dear, to chewe meat, or grynde it with
the tethe. Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is always eating. Mandra, a
cabin, a shepehouse, or oxehous. Mandragora, an herb called Mandrag, which
bears a little apple: the juice whereof dronken or smellyd to, causes a man to sleep. Manduces, imagis carried about in pagea^tis with great chekes
and wide mouths. Manduco, are, to chewe meat. Manduco, conis, a great eater.
Manducus, idem. Mane, early, also the morning. Maneo, mansi, manner, to
abide, to tarry, to persiste, to happen hereafter. Manner promissis, to keep
promise. Mane dum, tarry a while Mansio, onis, a place to abide in, also a
post place, for conuayinge of letters or other things spedyly. Manes, the
good and badde angel. Some time they be taken for deuylles, sometime for
spyrytes or sowles, not pourged of sin, sommetyme for the peynes, which
souls do suffer. Mango, onis, was taken for a seller of childerne to
abominable uses. It is also taken for such one as polyssheth or paynteth a
thing with a falls color, to selle it the deerer. Mangonicus, a, u^,
pertainynge to that craft. Mangonium, the craft to make things saleable:
Mangonizo, nizare, to polysshe, paynte, or trymme a thing, to make it more
vendible, or to be better sold. Mania, madness. Maniacus, a mad manne.
Maniae, arum, images defourmed. Manibus, pedibusque, with all might and main.
Manibus pedibusque ire in sententia^, is where in a parlyament, greatte
counsel, or other great assembly, to have the consent of many men, the
greatter part consentyng to one man's opinyon or sentence, to goo toward
him, holding up their hands, in token that they be thereunto agreed. Manicae,
sleues of a garmente. Also manacles to tie the hands together. Also gantlettes
and splyntes, and myttaynes, or long gloves. Manichaei, a sect of heritikes,
so called of an Archeherytyque called Manychen. Manicula, a little hand.
Manifestarius, a, um, notoryous. Manifesto, tare, to manyfeste or make
apparaunt. Manifestum, manyfeste or clear. Manifestum habere, to know surely.
Manifestus mendatij, proved a liar. Manifesto, an aduerbe, sygnyfyeth clerelye,
plainly. Manifestatius, a, um, clear, euydente, openly known. Manimoria,
things, which do abide in remembrance. Maniolae, Isles against India,
beyond the river of Ganges, where as be rocks of Adamant stones, which do
draw to them ships that have iron nails. Manipulus, an handefull, a grype,
a bend of men, proprely of ten soldiers. Manipularis, and maniplaris, a
standerd bearer, or baner bearer. Manipulatim, by bendes. Manliana imperia,
cruelle governance or rule, without any mercy. Manlius, a noble Romayne.
Manna, a delycate meat, which god sent to the Jews being in the deserte.
also a sweet dew, which falls in the mornings, and lyethe on leaves
congelyd like white honey, which phisicions do use for a medycine to purge
coler easily. Manna thuris, the powder or duste that comes of frankincense.
Mannus, an amblynge hackeney. Manor, aris, ari, to steal. Mannobarbulus, a
balle of lead to throw. also the caster thereof. Mart. li. 12
Mannulus, a nagge, a little horse. Mansisterna, a pytcher pot. Mano, are, to
run out, as lycour does: also to drop out, to appear out, as sweat out of
the poores. Mansio, one days journey. Manstus, stolen. Mansito, tare, to
abide long. Mansuesco, scere, to wax tame or gentle. Mansues, for mansuerus.
Mansuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylnesse, a moderate temperance betwixt pride
and symplicitie. Mansuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentle, tame. Mansuete, mekely,
gentylly. Mansum, meat, which the nourices do chewe, and after give it to
the child, putting it into his mouth. Vestus.
Mansutius, a great eater: also ripe and apt to be eaten. Mansus, a, um,
chewed. Mantaelum, and mantaelium, and mantile, a towel wherewith men do wype
their hands, when they have washed. Also a cloak. Manteum, a place where
dyuels in ydolles gave aunsweres. Manthicora, a beast which is in India, in
body like to a lion, but more rough, having a face like to a man, and in his
mouth.ii. rewes or set of teeth, the rail of a scorpio^, and the voice of a
small trumpette: and is of color read, and will never be made tame. Mantica,
a bag, sometime a cloak. Manticula, a purse. Manticularius, a stealer of
napry, also a pike pours, or cut pourse. Manticularia, towels or other like
thyngis wherewith men do wype their hands. Manticulor, aris, ari, to do a
thing slyly, as to pike a purse. Manticulatio, slyenesse, deceit. Mantinea, a
city in Greece. Mantis, a prophet. Mantiscinor, aris, ari, to stele or pike
craftily. Mantissa, the addition in weight. Manto, tare, among the old writers
to abide. Mantua, a noble city in Italy, where Vergile the excellent poor was
borne. Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua. Mantuari^^ tunicae, sleuyd iackettes.
Manuarius, a, um, manual. Manubiae, the pray taken of ennemies: also money,
for the which the pray was sold. Manubinarius, the partner of a proye.
Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a weapon or instrument. Manuleatus, ta, tum,
having long sleeves. Manum de tabula, a proverb, sygnifienge, Leave whiles
it is well. Manum conserere, to join in battle, to join in issue, when one
sueth a another. Manum ferulae subducere, to learn as scholars do in the
schools. Manumitto, to manumyse or infraunchise a bond man. Manuconsertum ex
iure vocare, to challenge right or propretie in a thing, it may be taken for
derayning of battle in a write of right, after the laws of England. Manus,
a hand, a grapul to fasten ships together, sometime it signifies a multitude
of men in the aid of one, sometime power, sometime writynge, also the nose or
snoute of an olyphant. Manus iniectio, attachement, also saisen or saisure of a
thing, whereunto we make title. Mapalia, cotages builded round like oue^s.
Mappa, a table clothe. Marathon, a field in the country of Athenes, and also a
town there. Marathron, et Maratrum, an herb, which is called fenell or
fenkill. Marathusa, an isle wherein is abundaunce of fenell, and it is also
called Clazomenia. Marceo, cui, cere, to corrupt, to putrify Marcellus, a
propre name. Marchia, a country in base Germany. Marcor, oris, corruption, or
putrefaction. Marconianni, people in Germany, which are now supposed to be
either of Boeme or of Morauia. Mardi, people adioyninge to Persia. Mare, the
Sec. Mare coelo miscere, to trouble all the world. Marcipor, oris, the servant
of Marcus. Mareotis, oridis, a River in Egipte, also a part of Libia, a part
of Epirus. Mariotides, grapes of that country. Margaridae, small dates,
round and white. Margarita, margaritum, margarites, margaris, garidis, a
perle, a Margarite: sometime generally all preciouse stones are called
Margaritae. Plinius.
Margaritarius, a seller of perles. Margariteferus, ra, rum, that which bears
Margarites. Margina, a region in Asia. Margo, ginis, the brymme or edge of
every thing, the margent. Margus, a river in Asia. Maria, a propre name.
Mariaba, the chief city in Saba. Marinus, na, um, of the sea. Mariscae,
unsavory fygges, wild fygges, fygges which do open, that the seeds do appear,
also great piles in the fundement. Mariscus; a bull rushe. Marita, a wedded
woman, a wife. Maritigenus, a, u^, com of the kyndof Mars Maritimus, of the sea
side, or of the sea. Maritus, a wedded man, a husband. Marito, are, to wedde.
Marius, a propre name of a man. Marmarica, a country of Affrike. Marmor, oris,
marble stone. Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble. Marmoratio, building
with marble. Marmoreus, a, um, of marble. Marpesus, an hill in the isle called
Parus. Marpesius, of the same hylle. Marplacidae, shyps or barges used in
Media. Marra, a mattocke. Marrubium, an herb called horehounde. Marracim,
people in Italye. Mars, martis, called god of battle. some time it is taken
for battle. Martia, a country in Italye. Mart suo, of his own propre
wit, with out any counsel. Marspiter, the father of Mars. Marsup^um, a
powche or pourse. Martiacus, ca, cum, belonging to wars. Martiaca, wages
given to souldyours. Martialis, borne under the planet of Mars. Martius, a, um,
pertaynyng to Mars. Martius campus, a fyelde at Rome, dedycate to Mars. Martius
mensis, the month callid March. Martyr, in greek, a witness. Marty^^um,
martyrdom. Man maris, a man, or mankind. Masculus, a, um, manly, great, wise.
Masculesco, sci, scere, to be manly, great, or wise, to be come of the male
kind. Masculo, are, to make manly, or strong. Masdoranus, a mountain, which
diuydeth Parthia from Aria. Massagetae, a people in Asia, which rounnynge on
horseback through deserts, do drink their horses bloudde myxte with milk,
they also do eat their parents, if they die for age: but if they be sick,
they cast them to wild beasts to be devoured. Massinissa, king of Numidia,
and great friend to the Romans. Massica, a country in the southe part of
Spain. Massicus, a mountain in Campania. Massilia, a cite in high France,
callid Marsiles. Massiliensis, se, of Marsiles. Massylia, cum y, a countreye in
Affrike, among the western Moors. Masticeos, reverend, honorable.
Mastiche, a soote gum. Mastigia, and mastigeus, a knave worthy to be beaten.
Plautus (...) trucule^ Plaut.
Mastigophorus, a fellow worthy to be whipped. Also certain ministers, which
with whyppes removed the people, where there was much prease. Mastos, a teate.
also a cesterne, whereinto water does run, and eftesones runs out by a
cock or spoute. Mastruca, a garment, which men of Sardinia used to wear.
Mastix, cis, a whyppe. Mastrupari, to touch dishonestly the privy members of a
man. Masarius, the name of a famous lawyer, which wrate on the laws ciuyle.
Matella, an vrinall, or other vessel, seruyng to that purpose. Matellio,
onis, idem. Mataeotechina, the vanity, which is in a science or craft.
Matter, tris, a mother. Materfamilias, ae, an houswife, goodwyfe of the house,
she that has governance of other women, be she married or unmarried. Matter
matrina, she that is a mother, and has mother living. Materia, and materies,
matter, wheerof any thing is made, be it metal, wodde, stone, earth, or any
thing else. Materialis, le, that which is of some matter. Materiarius, a
carpenter. Materior, aris, ari, to warke in timber. Materis, a french spear,
or a iauelyn. Matertera, an aunte or mothers sister. Mathematicus, he that is
cunning in aulgryme, musyke, geometry, and astronomy. Mathesis, and mathema,
lernyng by a demonstracyon. Matralia, the solemn feasts of Matuta, called the
mother of gods. Matresco, scere, to be like a mother. Matricida, he that
kylleth his mother. Matrimonium, wedlock, matrimony. Matrix, cis, the mother
or matrice in a woman, in the which the child is conceived. also matrix is
any female kind that concenieth and bears. Also the city in a country,
where as is the archbishops see is called matrix vrbs, which in greek is
callid Metropolis. Matrona, a wife. also the name of a river in Burbon.
Matronalis, pertaining to a wife. Matruelis, the son or daughter of my
mothers sister. Matta, a matte. Mattiacae pilae, soap balls. Mattiacum, a
town in Germanye. Plaut. in Milite.
Matura aetas, full or perfyte age. Maturate, quickly. Iube marurate illam
exire huc, Bid her come for the quickly. Mature, tymely, nor to soon, nor to
late. Maturesco, scere, to be ripe. Matutitas, tatis, rypenes in all thing,
and as it were perfection. Maturo, are, to make ripe or perfyte, to do a thing
perfectly in due time and measure: sometime to do a thing spedily or quickly.
Maturus, a, um, ripe, perfect, sometime it signifies aged. Maturus homo, an
aged man. Matuta, the morning, or morrow. Matutinus, a, um, of the morrow.
Mauors, ortis, Mars. Mauortius, a, um, pertayninge to Mars. Mauritania,
Moriske, or the countreye of Moors. Mauri, people called Moors. Mausolus, the
king of a realm callid Caria Mausoleum, a sepulcher or tomb, which
Arthemisia made for her husband Mausolus, which for the excellent warkmanship
was accou^tid to be one of the meruailes of the world, and for the famousnes
thereof, every great and notable sepulcher is callid Mausoleu^ Maxilla, the cheke
bone. Maximus, a, u^, greatest, or most in estimation. Maximates, the greattest
men in authority. Maximitas, tatis, ancient writers used for greatness.
Maza, a cake made of flower and milk. Mazaca, a city in Cappadocia under the
hill callid Argeus, now called Cesaria. Mazeras, a river in the mouth of the sea, called mare Hircanum. Mazononiu^, a platter wherein meat is carried
M, ANTE E.
MEapte, mine own. Meatus, tus, a passage, a way. Mecastor, a form of
swearynge, as who says, so Castor help me. Mechanicus, a crafts manne.
Mechanica ars, a handy craft. Mecoenas, aris, minion to Augustus the emperor,
and because he was the supporter of great learned men, all favorers and
succourers of learned men be so called. Meconis, a kind of letuse, which
causes a man to sleep. Mecon, in greek, is popye in english. Mecu^, with me.
Mecu^ facit, it makes for my purpose. Mecu^ sentit, he is of min opinion.
Medea, wife unto Jason, a witch and cruelle womanne. Medela, remedy by
medicine. Mederga, for erga, toward me. Medeor, eris, eri, to heal or cure.
Media, a region in Asia. Media vocabula, words which may be taken in a good
or ylle part, as tempestas which signifies tempest and time, facinus, a
notable deed good or ylle, ualitudo, health, or syckenes, and other like.
Medianus, na, nu^, that which is in the middle. Mediastinus, a drudge or lubber,
which does in the house all manner of vile service, as swepe or cleanse the
house, carry wodde to the kytchen, and other like drudgery. Budeus.
Mediastimus, a, um, the myddelmoste. Mediastrinus, the servant, which has
the rule of the house under his master. Medica, an herb, which specially
nourysheth horses, and ones being sown, eftesones springs ten years
continually, and commonly it is called Sylla. Medibile, in state to be healed,
curable. Medicabilis, le, curable. Medicamentarius, a phisycion.
Medicamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to medicyne. Medicina, medicamen,
medicame^tum, a medicine. sometime it sygnifieth poison. Medicinalis, le,
medicynable. Medico, and medicor, aris, ari, to hele or cure. Medicus, a
phisytion. Medicus, ca, cum, pertaining to phisike. Medimnus, a certain measure
of corn, co^taynynge six times the measure called modius. Vide modium.
Mediocris, dlocre, measurable, in a mean, moderate. Mediocritas, tatis, a
mean. Mediolanum, the chief city of Lombardy, called Myllayne. Medioximus,
a, um, mean, or in the mids Medipontus, an instrumente, wherewith ropes are
made. Meditabundus, cerefull, studiouse. Meditarise, to exercise him self.
Meditate, studiousely, Plautus in ^tich. in Bacch,
perfectelye on the fyngers ends. Meditatio, a thinking or dyuysynge in
thought. also an exercise, as well of mind, as of body. Meditatorius, a, um,
which belongethe to medytation. Mediterraneus, in the myddel of the land, and
furthest from the sea. Meditor, aris, ari, to think deeply, and in thinking
to find out, to purpose, to lay snares, to sing or play swetely. Meditrina,
the goddess of phisyke. Meditrinalia, ceremonies used by them, which drank
must or new wine. Meditullium, the myddell. Medius, a, um, the mids equally
distant from the extremytes. sometime mean. Medium commune, among all.
Medius, a mean or mediator between.ii. men. Medius fidius, an oath, which
although sometime it had a another signification, yet may it now in a commune
form of speaking be used in this wise, by the faith of my body: sens Dius
for Jupiter, and fidius for filius, be now out of use. Meduacus, a River
about Venyce, called now Brent. Medulla, marowe, which is in bones. Plaut.
Medullo, are, to take out marowe, sometime to express utterly. Narraiam rem
nobis omnem, atique emedulla, Tell and express utterly to us all the hole
matter. Medullitus, innerly into the marowe. Medusa, a lady, of whom fables do
report, that her hears by Minerua were turned in to adders, and they which
beheld her were turned into stones: whom Perseus afterward slew. she is
sometime taken for one of the furtes of hell. Melansilium, a certain weapon to
throw. Maegabizi, priests of Diana, which always were gelded. Megaera, a
fury or turmentour of hell, which Paynyms supposed did provoke and ^^ere men
to woodnes. Megalesia, the festiual day, dedicate to Cybele, called the mother
of gods among Paynyms. Megalenses, and megalesia, plays to the honor of
Cybele. Megalium, a sweet oyntement. Megalop^epeia, an honorable facyon in
gyuynge or imployeng of great things, which besemeth a man of great courage.
Megaloprepes, he that does great things according to his dignity. Megara, a
City belonging to Athenes. It was also the name of oone of Hercules wives.
Megaris, idis, a country in Achaia. Megistanes, whom we do call nobles or
pieres of the realm. Mehercle, an oath sworn by Hercules. Meio, iere, to
pysse. Mel, mel is, honey. Mellene, a city in Arcadia. Melampus, a man's name.
Melamphyllon, an herb. Melancholia, melancolye. Melancoryphus, a bird called
a fynche. Melanthia, an herb called also Nigella. Melamirus, a fyshe having a
black tail. Plini.
Melandria, the lean parts of the fish called Tunny. Melculum, a wanton
word spoken by lovers unto their paramours, my litel honey. Meleagrides,
birds, which we do call hens of Genny. Melegina, an isle in the Venecian
see. Melenetus, a kind of faukons very little of body, black and puissant,
which haunteth mountains, and feeds her birds alone, a merlyon as I
suppose. Maelibeus, a shepardes name. Meliboea, a city in Thessaly. Meliceris,
idis, a soore or skalle in the heed like a honey comb, out of the which comes
an humor like honey. Melicraton, wine and honey sodden together. Melicerta,
whom the gentyls did honor for one of the gods of the sea. Melicus, a
musycyan. Melilotos, an herb called melilote. Melimela, sweet appulles.
Melina, a sweet shalme. Melinus, na, number, white russette, or a gynger color.
Melioresco, scere, to be better. Melipecta, meats made with honye. Melis, seu
melius, a beast called a graye, a brocke, or a badger. Melisphillon,
smallache. Melissa, a woman, who with her sister Amalthea, nourysshed Iupyter.
It is also an herb, commonly called baume. Melite, sieve melita, an I Will lyeng
between Italy and Epirus. Also a city made by the Carthaginensis. Melitites, a
drink made of honey and must, or new wine. Mellitones, places where bees be
norished. Melitaei canes, and melitenses, were praty littel hounds, in the
which ladies took pleasure and delight, which were brought out of the said isle
of Melite. Melites, a precious stone of the color of an orange. Melissus, the
name of him, which did first sacrifice unto ydolles. also the name of an
auuncient philosopher. Mellium, a dogs coler. Mellarius, a honey man, or
sellar of honey. Mellarius, a, um, of honye. Mellatio, the time of driuynge of
hyues, when honey is taken out. Mellanu^, new must, wherein honey is sodden.
Mellifico, care, to make honey. Mellificatio, making of honye. Mellificum,
idem. Mellifluus, a, um, sweet as honye. Melligo, ginis, a mell dew, which
falls on leaves of trees, and sometime on corn. Melliloquus, a sweet
speaker. Melilla, my honey, my sweetynge, a word of wanton dalyers. Mellisones,
they which do practyse dressynge of honye. Melliturgus, a warker or maker of
honey. Mellitus, a, um, myxte with honye. Melitus, the name of him, which
accused Socrates. Melizonum, a confection made with honye clarifyed. Apitius.
Melleus, a, um, of honey. also sweet, as Vox mellea, a sweet voice. Mellica, a
kind of poulse, of the color of read, of the form of Mylle. Melo, a river
called also Geon. Melodia, melodye. Melodes, he that syngeth cunnyngely, and
swetely. Meloessa, an isle by Sicile, in the which was great plenty of sheep.
Melomeli, when apples, very ripe and fair, be conserved in honey. Mellonia, uel
Melona, called the goddess of honye. Melos, odis, melodye, armonye. Melora,
and melote, a shepes fell or skin. Melpomene, one of the nine Musis.
Membrana, parchement or velume, wherein men do write, also the ouermoste skin
of any thing. Membrosus, a, um, having a great membre. Membraneus, a, um, the
par hemente or velume. Membranulum, a small membre. Membrare, to form
members. Membratim, by every membre. Me^bratura, the setting or order of
me^bres. Membrum, a membre. Memet, my self. Memini, I remember. Memerylus, a
lyttel tree like a citron tree. Me^non, the son of Thiton, which came to the
aid of the Troyans. Me^noniae aues, birds, which were supposed to grow of
the ashes of Me^non. Memor, oris, he that remembers. Memorabilis, le, worthy
remembrance. Memoratus, tus, et Memoratio, a remembrynge. Memoria, memory,
remembrance. Memoriale, a thing, which should be remembered. Memoriosus, he
that has a good memory. Memoriter, parfitely by heart, or with good
remembrance. Memoro, are, to remember, sometime to tell, or expound, to recite
or rehearse. Memphis, a great city in Egypt. Memphiticus, of that city.
Memphe, idem. Mena, a little fyshe, black in semer, and white in winter.
Menechmi, the name of a comedy of Plaut. Menalippa, queen of Amazon, whom
Hercules vaynquished. Menapij, people of the country called Gellarlande, or
Gylderlande. Menander, a famous poet, a writer of comedies. Menaria, an I Will
in the sea between Carthage and Sicile. Menceps, he or she, which is out of
her wit. Menda, et Mendum, a fault or vice in writing. Mendarium, a lie.
Mendaculum, a little fault or lie. Mendax, acis, a liar. Mendicabulum,
beggynge. Mendaciloquus, a teller of lies. Mendicitas, tatis, et Me^dicimoniu^,
beggary. Mendico, are, to beg. Mendicula, a certain vesture. Mendicus, a
beggar. Mendix, an office among the old Italyans called Osci. Meneletus, a
bird like to a small egle. Memana aedificia, building outewarde in prospectes
or galeries. Menix, an I Will against the less Africa. Men's, it is, the highest
and chief part of the mind. Mensa, a table or bourd to eat on. sometime
dinner or soupper. Mensarius, the banker or exchaungeour, of whom men do borow
money upon gain, called exchange. Mensio, a measure. Mensis, a month.
Menstrualis, and menstruus, a, um, pertaynyng to a monethe. Menstruatus, ta,
tum, that which has flowers like to women Menstruum, a woman's natural
purgation called flowers. Menstruus, a, um, that which happens every month.
Mensura, a measure. Mensurnus, a, um, monthly. Menta, et Mentula, the preuye
membre of a man. Mentagra, a dyssease, which covers all the face with a
skurfe. Mente captus, a mad manne. Mentha, an herb called mynte.
Menthastrum, wild mynte. Mentibor, for mentiar, I shall make a lie. Plaut.
Mentigo, a dyssease, which infectith beasts with scabbes about their
mouths and lyppes. Mentior, iris, iri, to lie. Mentoas, the famous river,
which is now called Danubius. Mentor, an excellent grauour of vessel. Mentum,
a chynne. Menus, a river in Germany. Meo, are, to go, to flow. Sidonius.
Meo nomine, for my cause, on my behalf. Mephiucus, ca, cum, stynkynge.
Meatus, condutes or ways, whereby any humor flows. Mephitis, a stenche or ill
savor, which proceeds of corrupt water or licour, mixed with earth. Meopte
ingenio, by mine own wit. Meracus, ca, cum, et Merax, racis, pure without any
mixture. Vinum meracum, wine without any water. Mercalis, le, Vendible, or
that, which may be bought. Mercator* oris, every byar, a merchant. Mercatura,
the feate of marchaundyse. Mercatus, tus, the act of byinge. Mercatus, ti, a
market, or fair. Mercatus, ta, tum, bought. Mercenarius, an hired servant.
Mercenarius, a, um, that which may be hired. Merces, cis, marchaundise, ware,
chaffer. Merces, cedis, wages, the reward of labor or service. Mercimonium,
that which is turned in byenge and selling. Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to
sell for gaynes. sometimes to bie generally. Mercurialis, an herb called
mercury. Mercurius, was of the paynimes called god of Eloquence, and messager
of Jupiter, it is the name of one of the seven planettes. Merda, the excrement
or ordure of a man or beast. Merdo, are, to expel or cure. Merenda, meat
eaten at after noone, a collataion, a none m^le. Mereo, ere, et Mereor, eri, to
take wages, to deserve, to exercise a vile occupation. Mereor been de te, I do
somewhat for the, I d^serue to have the my friend, or to have thy favor. Male
mereor de te, I do the displeasure, I do ill deserve thy favor. Also Merere,
to serve in wars. Merere stipendia, to take wagis as a souldyour, or to be a
soldier. Plautus in ^ilite.
Meretricie, hoorishely. Meretricius, hooredome, or brothelry. Meretricium, a,
u^, perteyning to brothelry. Meretricor, aris, ari, to live in brothelry, to
play the harlote. Mere, purely. Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell.
Mergae, pitcheforkes for to take up sheues. Mergites, gripes of corn. Mergi,
vines, or other small trees, which ar bowed and have the tops bow wise
turned and set into the earth. Mergo, si, gere, to drown in the water.
Mergulus, an instrument where the match of a lamp is contained. Mergus,
goris, a bukket to draw up water. Mergus, gi, a waterfoule called a dyue
doppar, some do call it a foul of the sea like to a gull, which dyueth under
the water to take fish. Meribibulus, he that drynketh much wine without water.
Meridies, noonetyde. Meridianus, a, um, perteynyng to none. Meridio, are, et
Meridior, ari, to dyne, to eat meat at noone, to sleep at none. Meridiatio,
noone rest. Merismos, a figure called also dystributio, whereby the oration is
distributed into so^dry sentences. Merito, worthily, with good cause. Merito,
are, to be worthy, also to serve in wars. Meritorius, a, um, that which is
let or set for advantage. Meritoria taberna, a house wherinto a man is
received for his money. Meritoria, howses or shoppes let to hyre. Meritum, a
benefit, a deserte good or ylle. Meritus, ta, tum, deserved, convenient.
Meritus, a mountain in the third part of Europa beyond Greece. Meroe, an isle
on the great river of Nilus in Egipte. Mero, was in scorn the name of Nero,
because he was so great a drynker of wine. Merobiba, she that drynkethe wine
without water. Merops, a bird which does eat bees. Meroctes, a little stone
of the color of leekes, which sweateth a lyckour like to milk. Meropes, men
of diverse languages. Meropus, a mou^tain in Greece by Thessaly. Meros, a hylle
of Inde, at the foot whereof is the city called Nisa. Merso, are, to drown
often. Merto, idem. Merula, a bird. Merum, wine vnlayde, without water. Merus,
a, um, soole, mere, pure. Merx, cis, one kind of marchandyse. Mesa, a river
which runs by Braband and the land of Luke and Gellar, called the Mase.
Mesapia, a country called also Apulia. Mesauli, entrees between the haule and
the parlour. Mesia, a Country ioynynge to Hungrye, Myse. Mesochorus, he that
plaieth on a flute or other pype in the mids of the daunsers. ^udeus.
Mesonauta, a drudge in a ship, or a ship page, which does all vile service
in the ship. Mesoleucos, a preciouse stone, black, having a white struck in
the mids. Mesomelas, a white stone, having a black line in the mids.
Mesonyxion, midnyght. Mesopotamia, a countreye lyinge between the two greatte
ryuers Euphrates, and Tigris. Mespilus a medlar tree. Mespilum, a fruit called
a medlar. Messala, a noble orator of Rome. Messalina, wife to the emperor
Claudius a woman of insatiable lechery. Messana, a city in Sicile. Messene, a
city in Greece. Messiah, Christ. Messis, harvest, sometime it sygnifieth the
corn or the grapes new mowen or gathered. Messio, onis, a reapynge Messor,
oris, a reaper. Messorius, messoria, rium, perteynynge to reapynge. Meta, a
but, or prick to shote at, sometime a mark or gowle in the field, where unto
men or horses do run, sometime a bound in lands. Also a reyke of corn or
heye, also the lower part of a myll. Meta lactis, a Chese. Metabasis, a
passage. Metabole, change. Metagonium, a promontory or mountain lyinge into
the sea, which divides Africa fro Numidia. Metalepsis, a figure, whereby a
word is put from his commune signification. Mettalli, hired soldiers.
Metallici, they which do dygge and warke metal out of the mines, wherein
metal is found. Metallum, mettalle. Metamorphosis, cos, a transformation or
chaungynge of figure. Metaphora, a translation of words from their propre
sygnifycation. Metaplasmus, a figure called transformation. It is a translatyng
of words being in prose into a form of meter, either for necessity, or to
augmente the elegancye. Metapontu^, a city in the realm of Naples.
Metempsychosis, the transposyng of souls after the opinion of the
Pythagoriens, out of one body into an other body. Metathesis, where one letter
is transposed from one place in a word into an another as Timber Tymbre.
Metaurus, et metaurum, a river of Vmbria, which runs into Flaminia.
Metellus, the propre name of diverse noble Romans. Meteoria, speculation in
high things. Meteorologus, he that is studious in such speculation. Meteora,
are books of Aristotle, wherein he treats of sterres, and such other
celestial things. Meteoroscopus, a beholder of high thingis Methodus, a
compendious or ready way, or a rule certain to learn by any science. Metonymia,
a figure called denomination, as Bacchus for wine, Venus for lechery, Cupido
for love. Methymna, a city in the isle of Lesboe. Meticulosus, temerouse or
fearful. Metior, tiris, tiri, to mete or measure, to give by measure, to
pass over. Meto, messui, metere, to reap. Metona, a town in Greece called
Modon. Metor, aris, ari, to set bounds, to measure land, to dispose.
Metopion, oil of almondes, also a tree in Africa, which destylleth down
gum like to rosyn. Metoposcopus, he that consydereth a ma^s face, and thereby
judges his condycions or affectes. Metreta, a measure for lyckour, which is
also called Amphora, and contained every way square one foot. Metropolis, the
chief city. Metropolitanus, a man of that city. Metropolites, the bishop of
the chief city. Metrum, a verse. Metuo, tui, tuere, to fear or dread with
trembling. Metus, tus, fear, dread. Metys, the refuse, of wax. Meu, an
herb. Meuani^, a city in the part of Italy, called Vmbria, wherein Propertius
the poet was borne. Meneuia, a city in wales called saint David. Meus, a,
meum, mine. Meum est, it is my duty or my part.
M, ANTE I.
MI, to me. Mica, a crumme of bread. Mico, care, to glisten, or shine. Diggnus
qui cu^ in tenebris mices, is applied to one, which is reputed to be an
honest man, and a trusty, which will keep touch and deceive no man. It may be
this wise translated, in a commune form of speaking, He is one, with whom
thou may assuredly bargayne. also to hold up now one finger, now two, as
men do when they trete or bargain together by signs. Miconium, an herb
called Popy. Microcosmas, a little world. Micrologia, curiosity about
things of no valor. Micrologus, a little communication. Micropsichia, feeble
courage, faint hearted. Micropsichi, they which have faint hartis. Micturio,
ire, to pysse. Mictytis, poor folks potage. Mida, a worm bredynge in beans.
Midas, a king of Phrigie, who excellyd all other in richesse. Miaesa, a town
in Macedonia. Mig^o, are, to remove from one place, to dwell in an other.
Miles, mi^^tis, a man of war, a soldier. Mil^^pte, Cato used for mihi ipsi.
Miletus, a city in Greece. Milesius, a, um, of that city. Militatis tua, the
high way. Militariter, warrely. Militia, war. sommetyme the exercise of
war. Milito, tare, to goo on warfare, or to be in wars. Milium, a small
grain called Myll. Mill and millia, a thousand. Millepeda, a worm having a
great number of feet. Millearium, a mile, also a cawdron, also a pyller in
Rome, wherein was graven all the ways of Italye. Milliarius, a, um, of a
thousand weight. Millies, a thousand times. Millus, a mastyues colar, made of
lether with nails. Milo, onis, the name of one, which at the game of Olimpus,
with his bare hand, slew a bulle, and after carried him a furlonge, and the
same day eat him every morsel. It was also a noble Romayne, for whom Tullie
made an oration, containing incomparable eloquence. Miluina tibia, a cornette,
or small shaulme. Miluus, and miluius, a kyte. There is also a fyshe and a
sterre of the same name. Miluinus, na, number, of a kyte, or like a kyte.
Mimallones, women dedicate to the folishe ceremonies of Bacchus. Mimas, a
mountain of Thracia. Mimus, a bourder or rayler, which in mocking other men
in gesture and countenance, does follow them, faynynge to be the same
persons, whom they do reprove. Mimi, be verses counterfaytynge much
wantonness without any reverence, having not withstanding sum wise sentences
myngled therewith. Mimicus, ca, cum, of such wanton facion. Mimographus, a
writer of such wanton matters. Mina, and mna, was the pound of Athenes, which
in weight contained.lxxv. dragmas: in money it contained a hundred dragmas or
old poyse grotes, whereof.viii. went to one ounce. Minae, arum, thretenynges.
also battylmentes of walls. Minax, acis, full of thretnynges. Minaciter,
thretnyngly. Mincius, a river of the Venecians. Minei, people in Arabia, nigh
to the red see Minera, and mineralia, are of sum used for mines, out of the
which metal is dug. Minerua, called goddess of doctrine and wysedom, which
was also named Pallas. Minerual, and mineruale, a reward given sometime by
scholars unto their masters, in meat or drink. Mingo, gere, to make water,
to pysse. Miniacius, a, um, read, of sinople color. Minime, and minimum,
lest. minime gentiu^, lest in all men's opinions. sometime minime signifies
no, in no wise. minime doctus unlearned. minime sapiens, unwise. minime mirum,
little marvel. Minio, are, to dye read. Miniati libri, limned books, having
letters of diverse colors. Minister, tri, a servant. Ministerium, service,
sometime generallye all warke. sometime ministeria be serua^tis. Ministro, are,
to serve, to give a thing in doing service. Minor, aris, ari, to thrette.
Minitor, aris, ari, to thrette soore. Minium, Synople or read lead. Minius, a
river in Spain. Minoa, the name of a city in Sycile, of an other in the i will
called Amorgos, by Sicile Minos, was the king of Crete, and gave to them
laws, whom paynyms for his excellent justice, supposed to be chyefe Judge of
hell. Minthos, bunge or ordure. Minotaurus, was a monster kept in Crete,
half a man, half a bulle. Minturnae, a city in Campania. Minuo, ere, to
mynishe. Minurizo, are, to sing small, or to feyne in singing. Minus, less.
Minutal, a meat made with chopped herbs, a iussell. Minutarius, a sellar of
tryfles or small haberdashe ware. Minutatim, piece mele, in gobettes. Minutim,
idem. Minutia, the smallest thing that may be seen. Minutus, a, um, minished.
Minyae, a town in Thessalia. Miniariae, mines, they be also veins of metal,
out of the which is taken synope. Mira, wonders or meruayles. Mirabilis, le,
meruaylous, wonderful. Miraculum, a miracle, a thing exceeding nature, or
commune reason. Mirifico, care, to make wonderful. Mirificus, ca, cum,
wonderfully done, mervaylouse. Mirmeciae, wertes in the privy parts.
Mirmillones, chalengers at fighting with swords. Miror, aris, ari, to
marvel, to like a thing. Mirum in modum, in a meruaylouse facion.
Misanthropos, he that hates the company of men. Miscellanea, a myxture of
diverse things. Vide compo^.
Misceo, cui, scere, to myxe or meddyll together, to confound together, to
trouble or to do a thing out of order or reason, sometime it sygnyfyeth to
serve one with drink. Misellus, a little wretch. Miser, eri, a wretch,
sometime innocent. Miserabilis, le, miserable, wretched, lamentable.
Miserabiliter, miserably, lamentably. Miserandus, to be pitied. Miserator, he
that does an act of charytie on him whom he pytieth. Misericors, dis,
merciful. Misere, miserably, pitiousely, vnhappyly. Misere, amat, he loves
excedyngely. Miserior, eris, misereri, to have pity. Miseresco, scere, to be
moved with pity. Miseret me, I have pity. Miseretur, I am moved with pity.
Miseria, misery, infelicitie. Miseritudo, idem. Misericordia, pity.
Misericorditer, pitiefully. Miseriter, miserably. Miseror, aris, ari, to have
pity. Misogynia, an hater of women. Missenus, an hill in Campania. Missiculo,
are, to send often. Missile, all thing that is thrown. Missilia, things
which the ancient emperors were wont to cast among the people, as bread,
cakes, sweet oynteme^t, and such like things, which was done in the Theater,
in the feasts, called Saturnalia. Missio, a message, also leave to depart.
Missito, tare, to send often. Missus, a, um, sent. Missus, us, a course, when
one thing comes in a distance after a another, a turn. Missum facere, to
omit or pass over a thing, also to give leave to depart. Mitellum, a lyttel
miter. Mitis, mite, mieke, simple, quiet. Mitesco, scere, to wax tame or
quiet, sometime to wax ripe. Mithra, the Persians do call the son, and also
the chief priest of the son. Mithrax, a stone of the color of a rose, but
against the son he is chaungeable. Mithriaca sacra, ceremonies of the son.
Mithridates, a puissaunt king of Ponthus in Asia. Mithridaticum, a medicine
like to tryakle, called Mitridate. Mithylenae, aru^, a city in the i will of
Lesbos. Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to swage. Mitifico, to pacifye or make
quyete. Mitra, a myter. It was also attire of womennes heedes. Mitto, misi,
mittere, to send, to leave or lay aparte, to give. Mirtere sanguinem, to let
bloudde. Mittesanguis, a bloudde lettyng, or a bloudshede. Mitterin, an Iyle
six days saylynge out of England, wherein is greatte plenty of tynne.
Mittas frenum affectibus, Brydelle thine affections. Mitte hunc ire, Let him
goo. Mitte hanc noxiam, Forgive me that fault. Cice. pro Cluencio. Asc. Ped.
Mittere in consilium, to let the iuges depart to give sentence, after that
the orator has finished his oration, or the lawyer his plee. Mixtarius, a
cup, wherein wine is alayde with water.
M, ANTE N.
MNa, idem quod mina. Mnemosyne, memory. Mnesterae, wowars. Mnestheus, the name
of a Troyane.
M, ANTE O.
MOab, a city of Araby. also the name of oone of the sons of Loath, of whom
the people are called Moabtae. Mobilis, le, mouable, sone moved. Moderatus, ta,
tum, moderate, temperate. Moderator, oris, a gouernoure, Modero^, aris, ari, et
Modero, are, to govern, to rule, to set a measure in things, to moderate.
Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce. Modestia, modesty, temperaunce. Modeste,
temperately, sobrely, advisedly. Modetius, temperate, well advised. Modialis,
le, that which contains a bushel Modi^us, ca, cu^, which excedeth not,
measurable, sometime little or few. Modi^e, meanly. Modif^cor, caris, cari,
to take the measure of a thing. Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is
drawn out of a well: or a pot fastened to a whele, which brings up water,
and pours it out. Modiparatores, men ordained to see measure kept. Modius, a
bushel: it was proprelye a measure of day things, which contained.xvi.
Sextarios, vide postea in sextario. Modo, new, now late, sometime it
signyf^^th so that. Non resert, modo id faciat, It makes no mattier, so that
he do it, also ^^^ly. Modo nostro, after our facion. Modulor, aris, ari, to
make or do a thing by number and measure, also to sing. Modulus, et
Modulamen, a song, a modulation, the time in singing. Modus, manner, measure,
furme, facion, way, quantite, Ci. ad At. Columel.
end. Etsi nihil scripsit, nisi de modo agri, although he wrote nothing but of
the quantity of the field. Moechor, aris, ari, to commytte auoutry. Plautus in
Castle.
Moechus, an auoutrer, or lechour. Moechisso, are, to commytte auoutry. Moenia,
walls of a town or castle. Plautus in bacch.
Moenitus, ta, tum, walled. Moereo, ere, to be sorrowful. Moero, are, to make
one sad and heavy. Moeror, oris, sorrow. Moestitia, idem. Moesta, a province
in Asia nygh to Pontus. Moestiter, heuyly, sorowfully. Moero, are, to make one
sorye. Moesius, a, um, sorry or sorrowful. Moesio, are, Moestifico, care, to
make sorrowful. Moga, a countreye in Asia, called now Cesaria. Moguntia, a
noble City in Germany, called Mense. Mola, a myl, it is also a great piece of
flesh without shape, grown in a woman, which causes them sometime to think,
that they be with child, it is also a cake made of mele and salt. Molaris, a
cheke tothe. Molaris, re, et Molarius, ia, um, perteyning to a myll.
Molendinarius, ia, um, idem. Molarius equus, an horse, which dryueth about a
malte myll. Molendinarius, a myllar. Moles, a thing that is very greatte and
weightye: sommetyme it is taken for diffycultie. Molestia, grief. Molesta
tunica, a garment which was myxt with some matter, which gathered fire, put
on some persons that should suffer death. Moleste, greuousely. Molesto, are,
to grieve, to offend, to do displeasure to one. Molestus, a, um, that which
greueth, offends, or discontenteth. Moletrina, a mortar or querne, wherein any
thing may be ground with the hand. Molimen, et molimentum, that which we
go about and endeavor us to do. Molior, iris, iri, to move, to be moved, or
styrted to do a thing. moliri classem, to prepare a navy. moliri iter, to
perform a iourneye. moliri habenas, to rule. moliri insidias, to lay snares,
to lay in awayte. Moliri arcem, to build a fortress. Moliri bellum, to make
war. Moliri is sometime to deuyse or invent, also to go about to do a thing,
to make, to be tarried or let. Moliri mora^, to tarry. Molitor, oris, a myllar.
Mollesco, scere, to wax soft, to be pacified from wrath. Molestra, a shepes
fell. Mollicies, et mollicia, softness, tenderness, delicateness,
womanlynesse. Mollicina, fine clothe or silk. Molliculus, la, tender delycate,
Mollifico, to make soft or tender. Mollio, ire, to make soft or tender, to
pacific or appayse, to make wanton or tender. Mollis, soft, tender. molle
ingenium, a wit which lyghtely takes. mollis homo, a man effemynate, or
womanly, not hardye or constant of wit, inuolued an wanton pleasures and
sensual appetite, sometime mollis sygnifieth ripe, also remiss, sometime
pleasant, also easy to be pleased. Molliter, gentylly with good will, easily,
delycately. Mollitudo, inis, softnes and gentylnes. Mollusca, a nutte with a
soft shale, a fylberde. Molluscum, the wenne of a tree. Molo, molui, lire, to
grynde. Molochinus color, a color like to the flowers of mallows. Molorthus,
a plumrule, such as masons and carpenters do occupy in squarynge of stone
and timber. Molossa gens, people in the part of Greece called Epirus. Molossus,
a mastiue dog. it is also a foot in meter. Molothros, a kind of white vynes.
Molucrum, a square piece of timber, whereon the paynyms did sacrifyce. It is
also the trendyll of a myll. Also the swellynge of a woman's bealy, which does
happen as well to maidens, as to wives. Molybdena, an herb called also
Plu^bago, it is also the oore of lead or silver. Molybditis, the spume or foam
of lead. Momentaneus, a, um, that which durethe but a little whiles, or
shortly alters. Momentarius, a, um, that which is done in a little space.
Momentum, the least part of time, which can not be assigned, a moment. Momus,
called the god of reprehencion. Momo satisfacere, to content him, whom almost
nothing may please. Momo iudice decertare, to contend before a rigorous and
extreme judge. Monachus, a solytarie person, all be it that it is used for a
monk. Monachris, a mountain in Archadia. Monarcha, a prince, which reuleth
alone without piere or companyon, monarche. Monarchia, the rule of one
monarchy. Monas, monadis, the number of one, unity. Monasterium, a place
solytarie. Monedula, a bird callydde a Choughe or Cadesse. Moneo, monere, to
warn, to put in remembrance. Monitor, toris, he that warns a man, or
puts him in remembrance. Moneta, money, also the name of Juno. Monetalis,
le, pertaining to money. Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner. Monile, a
colar or be, which women use to wear about their necks, It is also a
poytrell of a horse. Monitio, warning. Monitus, tus, idem. Monitorius, a, um,
that which does warn, or exhort. Monna, an I Will pertaining to England,
which some do suppose to be Angle sey, sum Manne, between Lancaster and
Irelande. Monobeli, they which have a long thing like to spyttes. Also they
that be veraye high in personnage and above other. Lampridius in uita Alex.
Monochordium, an Instrumente, having many strings of oone sown, saving
that with small pieces of cloth, the sons be distinct, as Clauycordes be.
Monoechus, a haven of Liguria. Monoceros, otis, an Unicorn. Monoculus, a man
having but one eye. Monodia, a lamentable or mournyng song, such as is songen
in funeralles. Monodos, was a man, which instead of teethe, had but oone
boon, like as king Pirrhus had. Monogamus, he that never had but one
wife. Monogammi, men lean and yuelle colored. Monologium, a long tale of
one mattier. Monomachia, a battle, wherein oonely two men do fight.
Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone. Monophagia, a meal of one only meat or
dyshe. Monopodium, a table set on one foot or trestylle. Monopolium, where
one manne ingrosseth things, to have all in his own hand, that no man may
gain, but he only. It may be also one country or market, that takes away
the gaynes from other countries or markettes. Monoptaton, a word having but
one case. Monosceli, men in India, which have but one leg, so great, that
therewith they cover them selfs from the son. Monostelon, where as is but one
pyller. Monotropos, solitary, of one facion always. Monoxylon, a boat made in
oone piece of timber. Mons, it is, a mountain or hylle. Mons feratus, a country
in Italye. Monstrificus, a, um, monstrous. Monstro, are, to show. Monstrum, a
monster, that which excedeth or lacks in natural form or order.
Monstruosus, monstruosa, struosum, monstrous. Montanus, a, um, of a mountain.
Monticulus, a little hylle. Montigena, borne on a hylle. Montinagus, wandringe
by hills. Montosus, a, um, full of hills. Monumentum, a remembrance of some
notable act, as sepulchers, images, pylars, great stones, inscriptions,
books, and other like: whereby any thing excellent, concerning great wits,
kunnynge, entreprise in arms, puyssaunce, or richesse is remembered. Monycha,
chae, the name of saynct Austens mother. Monychus, a giant, one of the
Centaures. Monyma, the wife of king Mithridate, which after that her husband
was vainquisshed, killed her self. Mopsopia, the contray of Athenes. Mopsus,
the name of a Poet. Mora, taryenge, leysar. Moralis, le, pertayninge to
manners. Moramentum, taryenge, or abode. Moratus, instructed in good manners.
Morbidus, a, um, sick or scabbed. Morbisicus, ca, cum, that which causes
discase or sickness. Morbus, sickness, disease, a sore. Morbus animae, a
vice inueterate and hard to be cured, as ambition, avarice. Morbus regius, the
yelow iaundyse. Mordax acis, he that does byte, be it with the teeth, or with
langage. Mordeo, momordi, dear, to byte, to detract, or rebuke vehemently. ^
Mordere frenum, to gnawe on the brydell, which is spoken where it signifies
one to repugne against servitude or bondage. Mordicibus, with bytinges.
Mordico, care, to hurt with bytinge. Mordicus, bytinge hard and fast, as a
man holds a thing. Mordicus tenere, to hold fast, to persist obstinately in
an opinion or sentence. Moribundus, dyenge. Moriger, geri, obedient. Morigeror,
aris, ari, to obaye, to do as a man bedeth, to conform one man's manners to
another. Morini, people in france, dwelling about Turwan. Morio, onis, a
fool. Morior, iris, and eri, moriri, and mori, to dye. Morologus, he that
speaks treatably, sometime words treatably spoken: sometime it signifies him,
that speaks foolyshely. Moror, aris, ari, to tarry or abide, to let, or cause
to tarry. Moros, a fool. Morosus, waywarde, diverse in conditions, whom no man
can please, more curiouse than needs. Morotis, and Morosis, a madness or
frenesy, where a man loses his memory. Mors, it is, death. Morsicatim, bytynge
one another. Morsiuncula, a little bitte or snacke. Morsus, us, a bytt with the
teeth, a taunt in spekinge. Morsus, a, um, bitten. Plinius.
Mortalis, le, mortal. Mortarium, a mortar, wherein things are, brayed or
grounden. Morticina caro, moren flesh, which dies by it self, carrayne.
Morticini, corns which be on men's fete. Morticinum, corrupt. Mortiferus, a,
um, which causes any thing to dye. Mortuale, pertayninge to deed men. Mortuu^
mare, a great mere in Syria, where in no heavy thing may synke. Morula, a little
taryenge. Morus, a Mulbery tree, and a brembyl that bears black beryes.
Morum, a Mulbery, or black bery. Mos, moris, a manner, a co^dicio^, also
custom. Morem gerere, to obey. Moscatulae, pearis, which do sauoure like
musk, Mosculus, a calfe, also an herb. Moschum, Musk. Moscus, a Region in
Asia nyghe to the river of Phasis, divided into three partis, in the one do
dwell people called Colchi, in the second Hiberes, in the third Armenii. Moses,
sis, si, the great captayn of the jews which lad them out of Egipte. Mosini,
people in Asia toward the north. Motabilis, always mouinge. Motacilla, a byrd
called a wagtayle. Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abiding. Moto, are, to move
often. Motus, ta, tum, moved. Motus, tus, moving. Moueo, ere, to move, to
remove or put away Mouere animu^, to slyre or allure the mind. Mouere
tragoedias, to do things to be lamented. Mouere camerinam, to stere things,
which shall be to his own displeasure, that begins it. Mox, anon,
forthwith. Muceo, cui, to be fylthy or vinewed. Mucidus, a, dum, fylthy,
vinewed. Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, such as is on bred or meat long kept.
Mucro, onis, the point of a sword or knife. sometime it is taken for a sword.
Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted. Mucus, the fylthe, which comes out of the
nose. Mugil, lis, A fish called a codde. Lucilius.
Muginor, ari, to murmr. Mugio, gire, to bellowe like a cow or bull* sometime
it signifies the noise of thunder, or great wyndes. Mugonia, a gate at Rome,
whereby catell did enter into the city. Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or
other noise like. Mularis, re, pertayninge to a mule. Mulceo, si, cere, to
pacyfye, to appease, to mitigate, to make sweet, to anoynte, to polyshe.
Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane, called god of fire. Mulctor,
ctaris, ctari, to punysshe, or be punysshed. Mulcta, a penalty, a
condemnation, a fine sessed. Mulctam dicere, to give an iniunction. Mulctam
committere, to forfayte, to run in the pain. Mulctam remittere, to pardone.
Mulctra, the mylkyng, the payle, wherinto it is milked, which is also called
Mulctrale. Mulctrum, the act of mylkynge. Mulei, certain shoes of purple
color, which the kings of Alba ware, and afterward the noble men of Rome.
Mulgeo, mulsi, mulgere, to milk or stroke. Mulgo, are, to publishe. Muli
mariani, forkes, whereon fardels were trussed and borne by men. Muli mariani, a
proverb referred unto the^, which be obedient to every commaundment, be it
never so greuouse. It may also be applied unto the^, which be inuolued in
perpetual and intolerable labors and business. Muli mutuum scabunt, mules
do gnappe one an other, a proverb applied to persons ylle and defamed, when
one of them commends the other. Mulier, eris, A woman, proprely she that is
no virgin. Muliebre folliculum, dicebant vuluam. Muliebria, natural
euacuations, which women have, called their flowers. Muliebris, bre,
perteynynge to women. Muliebritas, delicateness, tenderness. Muliebriter,
womanly, delicately, tenderly. Mulierarius, a follower, or dotar on women.
Muliero, are, to effeminate, or make like a woman. Mulierosus, a great lover of
women. Mulio, onis, and Mulius, a dryuer of Mules, a muletour. Mullus, a fish
called a Mullet. Mulsum, wine and honey soden together. Mulsus, a, um, any
licour mixed with honey* Multa, idem quod malcta. Multatitius, pertaining to a
forfait, or pain assessyd. Multesima, a part representinge an infinite
quantitye. Quam paruula pars, quam multesima constat, so little a portion, se of
how wonderful gretnesse it is. Multibarbus, he that has much hear on his
bearde. Multibibus, he that drinks much. Multicolorius, a, um, of many
colors. Apulcius.
Multifacio, ere, to make much of, to esteem much. Multifariam, many ways,
in many facions. Multifarius, diverse in manners or condicio^s. Multigenetis, re,
of diverse kinds. Plautus. Lucilius.
Multiforatilis, le, with many holes. Multi iugus, a, um, diverse, many
diverse, manyfolde. Multiloquus, full of speech. Multipes, having many feet.
Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, diverse. Multiscius, a, um, knowinge much.
Multitia, garments made of fine thredes or sylke. Multiuidus, he that sees
much. Multiuolus, desyringe diverse things. Multo, and Mulcto, are, to
punysshe, to condemn, to put fro, to entreat ill, or disorder. Multare
matrimonio, to deuorse, or dissolve matrimony. Multus, ta, tum, much, many.
Mulus, a Mule. Mundanus, na, um, worldly. Mundities, and Munditia, clenlynesse.
Mundifico, are, to klense. Mundo, are, to wype, to make clean. Mundus, the
world, a woman's attire. Mundus, da, dum, clean, nete. Muneralis, le,
pertaining to gifts. Munerarius, he that makes a common game or play at his
propre charges. Muneror, aris, ari, and munero, are, to reward Mungo, xi, ere,
to make clean, proprely ones nose. Municipalis, le, privately or particulerly,
belonginge to one city. Municipale ius, the private law of every particular
city. Municipalia magisteria, civil offices in every city or town.
Municipatim, town by town. Municipium, a city or town incorporate, having
their propre officers and laws. Municeps, a citezen, or burgeyse, enioyinge
the liberties of the town. Munificus, liberal, Munificentior, more liberal,
Munificentissimus, most liberal. in the old time Munifici, were taken for
them, which consented to that, which their friends did or spoke. Munimen, and
munimentum, a fortifycation of a town or castelle. Munio, tui, and ij, nire,
to fortifye, to prepare, to repair. Munia, commune duties, offices. Munis, he
that bears the charges, which the people should do. Munus, neris a gylt, a
charge, a duty or office. Munera, commune plays and gaye sightes for the
people to behold, to rejoice them, prepared by officers of cities. As in Rome,
sundry plays, sword players, called Gladiatores, huntyng of wyld beasts.
Also now in the city of London, the watches and syghtes on midsomer nights.
Munychia, orum, the solemnities of Pallas. Murena, a lampraye. Murenulae,
small chains, which women do wear. Muralis corona, a garlande given to him,
which in the siege of a city first skalyd the walls, and entered. Muralis
herba, an herb called perytorye, or pelytorie. Murani, were the kings of
Alba. Muratus, ta, tum, walled. Murcia, goddess of slouthe. Murcus, a
slothful or luskyshe person. Murex, ^^is, a shelle fyshe, of whom comes
the lycour, which makes purple color. Sometime it sygnifyeth the same
color. Also an herb, which grows in a pyt, where no son shyneth.
Murginor, ari, to tarry, to be slouthfulle. Murguana regio, a country in the
southe parts of Spain. Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or slouthefull person.
Muria, water, wherein salt is sodden, brine. Muricatus, salted in bryne.
Murices, caltrappes, like three iron pryckes so joined, that being thrown, one
standethe vpryghte, used in battle for horsemenne. Fulgentius.
Muricati gressus, where oone gothe fearfully, as if he went on caltraps or
thorns Plaut.
Muricidus, a mouse killer, a fool, a rat killer. Muries, a bryne made with
salt sodden in water. Murmilonica scuta, targettes, wherewith men faught upon
walls. Murmur, the noise of rounnynge water. Murmurillum. idem. Murmurabundus,
and murmurator, he that murmureth. Murmuro, to murmour, or make noise like to
water. Murmurillo, idem. Murmurillum, a murmuring. Plautus.
Murrha, a stone of diverse colors, clear as cristall, having spots purple
and white. Murrheus, and murrhinus, a, um, of that stone called murrha, whereof
cups, pottes, tables, and other vessels were made: there be of them diverse
sent from Venyce. Murrhina, seu murrhynia, was wine made with diverse spices, as
that which is called ypocras. Murtius, a hylle at Rome, called also
Auentinus. Murtia, one of the names of Venus. Murus, a wall. Mus, muris, a
mouse or ratte. Musa, a sweet song. Musae, Muses, were maidens, whom poets
feigned to be the daughters of Jupiter and Memory, and that they were ladies
and governors of poetry and musyke, which were in number nine. Some call
them gyuers of eloquence, and do name them goddesses. Musaea, Musaica, and
Musiua, be warkes cunnyngely painted, that they seem to be in some place
imbocid out, in some place graven, although it be all plain. Museus, an
ancient poet, which was in the time of Orpheus, and was one of them which
went with Jason to the wynninge of the fliece of gold. Musaeum, a house,
whereunto learned men in all sciences used to repair, and dispute: it is also a
house dedicate to the musis. Musca, a fly. Muscula, a small fly. Muscari, to
be covered with moss. Boethius.
Muscarium, and muscaria, a flappe to drive away flies. It is also the top of
fenelle, dylle, and such other like herbs, wherein be the seeds. Muscarius,
a, um, pertaining to flies. Muscenton, a certain Rose, that springs of a
stalk with many small branches, and has leaves like to an olyue tree.
Muscerda, mouse dunge. Muschus, a beast, which bears musk, a musk catte.
Muscinus, a, um, of a fly. Muscio, onis, a catte. Muscipula, a trappe,
wherewith myse or rattes are taken. Musculus, a little mouse. Sommetyme an
engyne of war, whereby they are defended, which do approach the walls of a
place besyeged, to fylle the dyches, It is also a little fyshe, which guydeth
the whale that he do not run on rockis. Musculi, be certain pieces of hard
flesh compacte with synewes in the body, which do enclose the spiritual
members. Muscus, moss, which grows in wells and moist places, sommetyme
on trees, specially in cold countries. Musica, and musice, musyke. Musice,
hole, that nothing lacks. Musicus, a musycion. Musmones, sheep with hearye
wolle. Mussitabundus, a man speaking to him self privily. Mussito, tare, to
speak or talk alone. Musso, are, to talk softely and secretly, to keep
silence. Mustace, a tree having leaves like to laurel, but greatter and
weaker. Mustacula, a little instrumente made with two rules, between which
the show is put, whiles the sole is in sowynge. Mustaceus, and mustaceum, a
caa^e or paste made to comfort the stomach. Mustela, a beast called a
wesell. also a fish like a lampraye. Mustelinus, a, um, of a wesyll. Musteus,
a, um, sweet as must, or mustye. Mustum, new wine, new ale, new beer.
Mustus, ta, tum, new, young, late made. Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable.
Muteo, mutui, tere, and mutesco, scere, to be muete, or dumme. Mutili, horned
beasts, of nature lacking horns, as oxen, gotes. etc. Mutilus, la, lum,
lacking sum principalle part, mutilate. Mutilo, are, to cut of, to
mynyshe, to take away. Mutinensis color, a natural color, as wull or clothe
never dyed. Mutio, tiui, tire, to speak softely, or with an vnperfyt voice, to
muttre. Mutito, tare, to feast one an other. Mutuli, scaffolde holes, or
places made on the walls for culuers to bread in. Muto, tare, to change, to
translate, to barter one thing for an other. Muto, tonis, the privy membre of
a man. Mutuatitius, a, um, borrowed. Mutunus, who was also called Priapus.
Mutuo, together, or one an other, Mutuo diligebant, They loved one an other.
Mutuare, sygnyfieth both to borowe and to lend. Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe.
Mutus, he that can not speak. Mute, dumme. Mutuum, a lone, that which is
borrowed. Mutuus, a, um, one for an another, mutualle. Mutuus amor, mutual love,
where one loves an another equally.
M ANTE Y.
MYa, a shel fish in the sea called Bosphorus, which brings forth little
read stones, and round. Myagrus, the god of flies. Mycaene, and Mycaena, a
city in the part of Grecia, called Peloponesus, and a little region, where
Agamemnon reigned, the chief captain of the greeks against Troy, called
now Morea. Mycon, the name of a famous paynter. Mycone, nes, a little isle.
Mydia, an isle, named also Delos. Mydriasis, a syckenesse of the eyes, where no
color of the eyes ar changed, but makes them much brother: all be it it
takes away the sight, or makes a man to se the less, and the things, which
be seen, to seem less than they are. Mygale, a ratte. Mygdonia, a part of
Macedonia on the sea side, where Niobe was turned in to a stoone. Aristotle
says, that it is a part of Phrigia, ioynynge to Lidia. Solynus says, that
it was called Bebrycia, and after Bythinia. Mylochos, a butterfly, which is in
mylles. Myoparo, onis, a kind of ships used in the sea called Mare
Tirrhenum. Myophnos, a kyller of myse. Mymphur, a tourners pynne or spyndelle,
whereon he turns or warketh any thing. Myra, a city in Licia, whereof saint
Nycholas was bishop. Myriarches, a captayn of ten thousand me^. Myriades,
many times ten thousand. Myrias, adis, the number of ten thousand. Myrica,
a little bushe called in Italye Tamarico. Myrinus, the male kind of a
lampray, which has a tothe out of his mouth. Myrmus, the propre name of
Apollo. Myriophillum, an herb called myllfoyle. Myristica nux, a nuttemygge.
Myrlea, a town in Bythinia. Myrmecia, a little warte. Myrmecites, a stone,
wherein is the figure of an emotte. Myrmetiu^, a kind of spiders, like an emote
having a black bealy with white spots. Mirmillones, were sword players,
where the one provoked the other to battle. Myrsenium, a kind of fenell,
having gretter leaves, and a sharper taste. Myrsum, a town in the part of
Greece, called Peloponesus. Myrmicoleo, a little beast, which deuoureth emotes.
Myrobalanum, a fruit growinge in India, like unto plummes or damsyns, whereof
be diverse kinds, which easily do purge al superfluous humors, and also
comfort nature, in so much as a man, which eats them, being condite,
shall not look oldely. Myrobrecharij, they which do make sweet oyntmentes.
Myron, onis, the name of an excellent carner. also old oil. Myropola, a
seller of oyntementes. Myropolium, a place where oyntementes were sold.
Myrothetium, a box of sweet oyntme^tes. Myrrha, a sweet gum, called myrre.
Myrrheus, and myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre. Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle
trees be set. Myrteus, and myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles. Myrtopetalum, an
herb called blodewort. Myrtoum, a porcyon of the sea, which is between the
sees called Aegeum and Ioniu^. Myrtus, a little tree, bearing bearyes of
sweet odor. Mys, mios, the name of a cunnyng grauer. also a shelle fyshe of
the sea. Mysia, a country beyond Hungarye, toward Greece. Ptholomeus writes
of two countries called Mysia, the more and the less, and both in Asia,
beyond Bythinia, not far from Ida. Mysteria, mysteries, things secret or
hid in words or ceremonies. Mysticus, ca, cum, mystical. Mystris, a fyshe
called a see mouse. Mythologia, a declaration or exposition of fables. Mythos,
a fable. Myxa, the fylthe which comes out of a man's nose. Myxus, a snuff
of a candell.
N, ANTE A.
NABATHA, the name of a certain city. Nabathea, a countreye between the red
see and the sea called Persicum, containing with in it Arabie. Nabatheus, a,
um, of that countreye. Nabis, in the langage of Ethiope, is a be having a
heed like a camel, a neck like a horse, legs and fete like an ox. Nablum,
and nablium, an instrument of musyke, called a psaltrie. Naccae, and neae,
fullers. Nactus, the participle of Nansciscor, Nactus sum, I have gotten,
nactus es, nactus est, thou, he has gotten. Nae, sygnifieth valde, or nimis.
Nae tu homo facetus es, thou art a very merry fellow. sometime it signifies
Certe, profecto, ita. Nae illi vehementer errant, surely they be far out of
the way. Nae ego multo libe^tius emerim diuorsoriu^ Tarracinae, In good faith
I had leauer have bought a house at Tarracine. Naeera, a woman's name. Naenia, a
mourning song, wont to be songen at burielles, sometime it signifies the
so^ge that the mother or norice does singe dandyllynge of her child. Neuia, a
woman's name. Neuus, a mole or like mark in the body or face, from the time of
the birth. Naiades, fayries, of the ryuers and fountaynes. Nain, a city of
Galyle. Nais, a river, which comes out of the hill called Taurus, and runs
in to the sea called Pontus. Nam, for, therefore. Nanciscor, sceris, nactus sum,
nancisci, to get or opteyne. sometime to find. Nancisci hospitium, to find a
lodging. Pom. Fest.
Nancitor, for nactus erit. Nanque, verily, truly: if it be set before other
words: if it be put after, it sygnifyeth for. Nanum, a little vessel and
broad. Plaut.
Nanium, a little woman. Nanus, a little person, a dwarf. Napataei, people
in Ethiopia. Napeae, called goddesses of flowers and woddes. Napaei, people in
the isle called Lesbos. Naphtha, a kind of pitche, also lyme, wherewith fire is
nourished. Napina, a place where Nauewes be sown. Napitae, people in Scithia.
Napus, a Nauew. Nar, the name of a river. Narane, a river in Dalmatia.
Narbasis, a city in Spain. Narbone^sis gallia, the south part of France
wherein is Dolphinay, Prouance, Langedok. etc. Narciscus, a flower in facion
like a lyllye, and white, saving that the chalese, wherein the flower is closed,
is purpleisome have purple flowers, leaves narower than leke blades, a stalk
half a foot high, plain without leaves, a round rote and white. Also the
name of a young man of excellent beauty, who for the love of a maid e^ died,
and after the fables of poets, was transfourmed into the same lylly.
Narcoticum, a qualytie or virtue in things to make a man to sleep. also to
make a membre insensible. Physytions use medycines, which have this virtue,
where the grief or ache is otherwise incurable, or where they will cut any
part of a man's body. Nardinum, the name of a sweet ointment. Nardus, the
herb and rote, which is called Spikenarde. Nare, to swymme, sometime to flee.
Virg. Geor.
Nares, nosethrylles. Narica, the name of a little fyshe, which does swymme
very swyftely. Naris, a river in Vmbria. Naritia, an isle in the sea called
Aegeum. Naritium, a city of the people named Locri in Greece. Narnia, a town
in Italy. Narnienses, men of that town. Narratio, a narration or report of
things that are done. Narratiuncla, a little narration. Narro, are, to
tell. Nartheticium, a place, wherein medycines are kept. Nasamones, people in
Affrike about Libia Nasamonites, a stone of color languyne, having black
veins. Nascor, sceris, sci, to be borne. Nasica, the surname of one of the
Scipions a noble Romayne. Nasiterna, a water vessel, wide above, having
handelles. Naso suspendere, to mock couertely, or craftelye. Nassa, a fyshers
we will or bow net, wherein if a fyshe be ones, he can not get out.
Nasturtium, an herb called Cresses. Nasus, a nose: sometime sharpenes in
speech, and tauntynge wit. also judgment in letters. Nasuti, taunters,
checkers, skorners, sometime wytty persons, which do quikly perceive a
thing. also men, which have their privy members very great. Nasute, wyttyly,
skornefully, tauntyngely. Nasutila, a tauntynge wenche, or a shrewe. Natalis,
le, et natalitius, tia, tium, the day of birthe or nativity. Natales, is
taken for progeny or dyscente, or blood. Generosi natales, gentyl blood.
Obscuri natales, a poor dyscente or low birth, sometime it is used for years.
Natalibus restitui, where a man has arms and title of nobylitie, Budeus.
given unto him by the king. Natatilis, that which can swim. Natatitius, a,
um, that which does swim. Natator, toris, a swymmer. Natatorium, natabulum,
et natatio, a place wherein men do swymme. Natatus, tus, the act of swymmynge.
Nates, buttockes. Natinatores, trauaylours, or they which have much
business. Natio, a nation. Natiuitas, tatis, birth. Natiuus, where a thing is
borne or begone. Natiuus color, the natural color. Nato, are, to swymme,
sometime to go, to tremble, to sail, or row. Natrix, a water serpent. also an
herb, whose rote smells like a got. Natura, nature, members of generacyon.
Sometime facion or manner. Naturalis, le, natural. Naturalia, the privy
members. Natus, ta, tum, borne. Natus, nata, son and daughter. Natus grandis,
aged or old. Naualis, le, pertaining to ships. Nauale, the docke where
shyps be laid up. Nauale, a docke or place where ships are made. Nauarchis,
the admyralles ship. Nauarchus, an admyrall. Nauaria, a country in Spain
called Navarre. Nauci, a nutte shale, a thing of naught. Nauci esse, to be
naught worth. Naucifacere, to set naught by one. Naucleriacus, et nauclerius,
a, um, perteynynge to a ship master. Nauclerus, and nauiclarius, a ship
master. Naucrates, a city in Egypt. Naufragium, a shypwrecke. Naufragor,
aris, ari, to peryshe on the sea. Naufragus, whose goods are peryshed. Nauia,
a holowe tree like a ship, which is occupied when grapes be gathered.
Nauicularius, a captain of a ship. Nauiculor, aris, ari, to row or be
rowed in a boat for salace. Nauigabilis, le, where a ship may pass,
Nauigable. Nauigatio, a iourneye or goinge by water in a ship. Nauiger, the
pilate of a ship, which rules the stern. Nauigium, the leadynge or setting
forth of the ship. It is also all kind of vessels to sail or row in.
Nauigo, are, to sail or row, that is to say, to be carried on water in a
ship or any other thing like. Nauis pomparica, a ship which serves only
for pleasure, having chaumbers and bankettynge tables for great men to solace
in. Nauis, a ship. Nauiter, diligently, valyauntly. Naulium, a city in
Liguria. Naulum, the fraite or fare paid for passage Naumachia, battle on
the Sea, also the place where the battle is. Naumachiarij, they which do fight
on the sea or water in ships or botes. Nauo, are, to accomplish dylygentely,
to give, to apply with effect, to be in aid. Iam mihi videor nauasse operam
quod huc venerim, now me seems I have well applied my labor, that I am come
hither. Nauare beneuolentiam, to confer or declare benevolence. Naupegus, a
ship wrighte. Naupo^itus, a river, which passes out of Slauony. Nausea, the
abhorrynge of things seen, whereby a man is provoked to vomyte. Nauseosus, a,
um, dysposinge to vomyte. Nausiabundus, dysposed to vomyte. Nauseo, care, et
nauseor, to be dysposed to vomyte, sometime to vomyte. Nausicaa, was daughter to
Alcinous, king of Phaeaces, which found Ulysses, when he escaped from
drounynge, and brought him to her father. Nausio, ere, to open or gape as a
bean does when he spryngeth. Naustilious, the son of Neptunus, and father of
Alcinous. Naustibulum, an hiue made of the facion of a ship. Nauta, et
nauita, a shyppeman. Nautea, curriers bleche or lycour, also the stynkynge
water, which issues out of the pumpe of a ship. Nauticus, a ship master.
Nauticus, ca, cum, perteynyng to shipmen. Nautulus, a shypman, also a fyshe,
which is in similitude like to some that sailed. Nautilia, the craft of
shypmen. Nauus, quick, actife. Naxos, an isle in the sea called Aegeum.
Nazarcus, a man consecrate or dedycate to god. Nazarei were men, which had made
vows until a certain time. Nazaret, a little town in Galilea. Nazara, a
city in Cappadotia, afterward called Caesaria.
NE, an aduerbe, signifieng forbeading or dissuading. Tu ne cede malis, give
thou not place to adversity or mysaduentures. sometime it is a conjunction
copulative, and signifies nor or. neither. sometime rational, and signifies
wherefore. sometime causal, and signifies not. sometime lest, also or not,
whither. sometime it is an interrogatiue. Ego ne? I trowest thou? Nea, an i will
between Lemnos and Hellespontus. Necunde, nor from any place. Ne plura, ne
multa, but to be short, Cice. (...) Cluend^, and in Ve^. Ci. ^ C^.
what needs any longer tale, to make a short tale. Ne multis, in few words.
Ne multis Diogenes emitur, In few words Diogenes is bought. Ne dicam, I will
not say. Nectere moras, to make delays. Cor. Tacitus li. 1^.
Nec, nor. neque, nor. nequaquam, no. Necnon, and, or also. Nequicquam, in
vain, no or not. Ne viua^, I would I lived not. Ne viua^ si tibi concedo, I
would I lived not, or I would I should not live, if I grant that to the. Cicero.
Neutiquam, in no wise. Nequaquam, no. Necubi, in no place. Nedum, not only,
sometime nor yet, where the thing of least estimation is put last. Nedum,
sygnifieth not only, as Fundere pro te sanguinem, nedu^ pecuniam, I would
spend for the not only my money, but also my blood. where the thing of most
estimation is last put, it signifies nor yet. Ne crederem tibi obulum, nedum
vita^ meam, I will not commytte my life unto thy crede^ce, nor yet lend the
one halfepeny. Nec dum, nor yet. Neapolis, a city called Naples. Neapolitanus,
na, number, of Naples, Nebrides, feasts in the honor of Bacchus, also skins of
dear wherewith they were clad which kept the ceremonies of Bacchus Nebrodes, an
hyl in Sicile, where there is great plenty of falowe dear. Nebrundes, the
stones of beasts. Nebula, a vapor or mist rysynge from the water, which
either tourneth forthwith into a cloud, or shortly vanysheth. Nebularium, a
house where corn is thresshed, or wynn owed in time of rain. Nebulo, onis, a
thief, a knave, a lewd person, or vacabunde. Nebulosus, a, um, mysty.
Necessarius, a kynnesman. Necessarius, a, u^, necessary, needful. Necesse uel
necessu^, of force, it must needs be. Necessitas, tatis, need, necessity.
sometime a bond of friendship or kynrede. Necessitudo, dinis, idem. also
amity. Necim, the old writers used for nec cum, nor with. Perottus.
Necunquam, for necunquam aliquem. Necne, or not. Necum, in the old Spanyshe
tungue was the image of Mars, garnyshed with beams like the son, it also
signyfied in latyne mas, the male kind. Necydalus, a sylke worm, when he is
yo^ge sprounge out of the sede. Neco, caui, care, vel necui, to slay. Neci
datus, slain without weapon, as with poison, famyne, prisonement. Necromantes,
a Necromancer, or caller up of ill spirits. Necromantia, necromancy.
Necromanticus, a necromancer. Nectar taris, the drink of gods, sometime it
signifies immortality. Nectareus, a, um, immortal, deuyne. Necto, nexui,
nectere, to wind or plat together. Necubi, in no place. Necunde, from no
place. Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be spoken or named. Nefarius, a, um,
cursed not worthy to live. Nefas, a cursed deed, a wicked thing, execrable,
detestable. Nefasti dies, days when it is not lefull. Nefrendes, pigs
weaned, called shotes. Negabundus, he that denies. Negabundus, for negans,
denyenge. Negatio, a denyer, a nay. Negatiuus, a, um, that which denies.
Negito, tare, to deny. Plautus in ^ercatore
Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglect, to have lyttel regard. Neglectus, tus,
contempt. Neglectus, ta, tu^, contemned not regarded. Negligentia, negligence.
Negligens, it is, negligent. Negligenter, negligently, contemtuousely.
dysdeynousely. Nego, aui, are, to deny, to refuse, to say not. Negocialis, le,
perteynynge to denyenge. Plautus in ^^ch.
Negato esse ituram, say that she will not go. Negotior, aris, ari, to practyse
marchaundyse, to be occupied in business. Negotiosus, he that is much occupied
with business. Negociator, toris, a marchaunte, he that is busied in an other
man's affairs. Negotialis, ale, perteynyng to business, occupation, or
trouble. Negotium, remedy. Omnis res palam est, neque vllum pol de hac re
negotium est, quin male occidam, All the matter is known: therefore in this
case in faith there is no remedy, but that I will kill him. Negotiosus, a, um,
full of business, care, or trouble of mind. Negotium dare, to give in charge.
Negotium, business, occupation, sometime trouble, care, or labor of mind.
Negotiorum curator, a factour or solicitor in a man's business. Neleus, the
father of duke Nestor, which was at the siege of Troy. Nem, was used of old
writers for sometime, also for but, or except. Nemea, a great wodde, where
Hercules slew an horrible lion. Nemeaeus, of the wodde called Nemeae, which
is in Grecia, not far from the city of Argos. Nemesis, a goddess, which
was supposed to take vengeance on malefactors. some time it sygnifieth
fortune, also justice, also reproach. Nemartes, nymphs or maidens of the sea.
Ne my quidem, is applied to him that dare not speak. Ne my quidem facere audet,
He dare not ones mutte, or make countenance to speak. Nemo, no man, or none.
Nemo non, some man. Nempe, is an aduerbe confyrming a thing. for because,
surely, verily, sometime for. Nemus, nemoris, a wod for pleasure, wherein dear
or other beasts may feed. Nemoralis, et nemorensis, perteynynge to a wood.
Neo, neui, nere, to spynne. Neogamus, new married. Neomenia, the first day of
the new moan. Neophitus, a new man, or a plant newely sproungen.
Neoptholemus, is in english a new knight, It was also the name of Pirthus the
son of Achilies. Neotericus, he that is now, or was of late time. Nepa, vel
nepes, a scorpion. Nepenthes, a drink or an herb, which causes a man to
forgete heaviness. Also the herb called dorago. Nepeta, a city of the
country of Thuscane in Italy. Nephalia, feasts wherein no wine was sacryfysed
or drunk, but only mede, and they were called the feasts of sobre men.
Nephele, a cloud, also the name of a womanne, which was mother of Helles, who
gave the name to the sea callydde Hellespontus. Nephritis, peyn in the raynes
of the back. Nepita, an herb called nepe, or calament. Nenum, was sometime put
for non. Nepos, otis, the son or daughters son, sometime a waster of
goods, a riottouse person. Nepotes, do sometime signify all the descent,
which comes after a man's sons or daughters. Nepotor, ari, to live
prodigally, or riotously. Nepotulus, a dimynutiue of Nepos. Meus Nepotulus, my
little son, or young son, from the first descent. Nepotatus, tus, riot,
superfluous expenses. Neptis, the daughter of a man's son or daughter.
Neptunus, called god of the sea. Nepus, unclean. Nequa, no where. Nequalia,
detrimentes or harms. Nequam, a noughty fellow, a man to be nothing
esteemed. Nequando, at no time. Nequaquam, in no wise, not a whitte. Nequior,
oris, Nequissimus, warse, warste of all. Nequiquam, in vain, Nequicquam, not.
Ne quid nimis, nothing to to, that is to say, much exceeding, or much
lacking. Nequino, are, to be wanton, also to deny. Nequinu^, a city in
Italy, now callid Narnia. Nequinunt, in the old time they used for nequeunt,
they may not. Ne quis, that no man. Nequiria, vnthriftynesse, lecherous,
wantonness, vicious dalyaunce. Nequitus, and nequiter, unthriftily. Nereides,
nymphs or maidens of the sea. Nereus, was called oone of the goddis of the sea, and sometime it is put for the sea. Nerio, enis, the wife of Mars, called
god of battle. Neritae, a certain kind of shelle fysshe. see Pliny.
Neritos, vel Neritum, an isle or city nyghe to Epirus, a country of Greece.
Nerium promo^totium, Compostella, where saint James the apostelle lies. It is
also a little tree, having leaves like to an almonde tree, but greatter and
fatter. Nero, the name of an emperor, of a monstrous and cruel nature.
Neruiae, harp strings, or lute stringes. Neruiceus, a, um, of synewes.
Neruicus, he that has pein in his sinews. Neruij, people about Tournay.
Nerulani, people by Rome. Nerulonenses, people in Campania. Nerulum, a town in
the countreye called Lucania. Neruosus, a, um, that which has many sinews.
It is sometime taken for strong. Neruus, a synewe, it signifies sommetyme
strength. Also stocks, wherein offenders be put. Nerui be also stringes of an
instrument. Sometime it sygnifieth the priuye membre of a man. Nesa, a
country in Sicile, ioynynge to the hill of Ethna, which always sends forth
flames of fire or smoke. Nescio, sciui, scire, to not know, to be ignorant of a
thing. Nescius, he that does not know, or is not known. Nesium, uel Nes^s,
an isle by Campania. Nesia, a nymphe or maiden of the sea. Nessus, and Nesius,
sons of Ixion the Centaure. Nessotrophion, a place, where duckes are kept to
be made fat. Nestor, oris, a Capytayne of the Greeks, which were at Troy, who
lived the ages of three old men, and in gyuynge counsel was excellent. Neu,
for ne ue, nor yet. Neuceria, a city of Vmbria, which is a part of Italy. Ne
ue, or not, or no. Ne unquam, in no wise. Neuolo, I will not. Neuri, people of
Scithia. Neurobatae, goers on cords. Neuter, tra, trum, neutrius, none of
them. Neutiquam, in no manner of wise, in no condition. Neutralis, le, neutre,
of no part. Neutro, neither on the one part, nor the other. Neuus, a mark in
the vysage or body of a man or womanne, as a mole, a red or black warte.
Nex, necis, death by force. Nexilis, nexile, any thing that may be knit.
Nexo, as, and is, nexui, nexere, to knitte often. Nexus, a, um, knytte,
bounden. Nexus, nexus, uel nexi, a bond, an obligation Nexi, free men, that do
bind them selves to labor or service, Var^^.
to be acquitted of the dettes, which they owe. Nexus inire, to be bound by
oblygation or covenant. also to be wrapped in bonds, as is the commune
saying.
N, ANTE I.
NI, but if, except, lest that. Nicander, the propre name of a man. Nicanor, a
man's name. Nicator, a great vanquysher. Nicca, and Nicia, a city in Asia.
Niceteria, things given for vyctorie, as rings, colers of gold, and crowns
or garlandes. Nicopolis, a city in Egipte, where the emperor Octauian
vanquysshed Antonie and Cleopatra. Nicomedia, a city in the country of
Bithinia, in the less Asia. Nicostrata, the mother of Euander the old king of
latynes. Nicto, tere, to vent as the hound does, which follows the dear or
hare, or other game. Nicto, are, to wynke. Nictus, tus, a wynkynge, as when one
does sygnifie his mind to an other by loking. Nidifico, are, to make a neste.
Nidere, sometime to savor, sometime to shine. Nidor, oris, a savor or smell of
some thing burned or roasted: sometime it signifies grennynge. also brightness.
Nidulor, aris, to bread as a bird does, to make a neste, or air. Nidulus, a
little neste. Nidus, a neste, sommetyme it signifies the bird that bredeth.
Also a vesselle like to a neste. Also Nidi be coffyns, wherein marchantes do lay
their sundry wares. Nigella, a wiede growinge in corn, called also Lolium,
cockle. Also a black seed, good to smelle unto against rewmes or
distillations. Nigellus, a, um, somewhat black, brown. Niger, gra, grum,
black, foul. Also it is sometime used for deed. Nigidius, a noble philosopher
of Rome. Nigredo, nigrities, and nigritia, black color. Nigrefacio, and
nigresio, to make black. Nigreo, and nigresco, to be black. Nigrico, care, to
be somewhat black. Nigris, a fountain in Ethiopia, which is of sum men
supposed to be the heed of the greatte river Nilus. Nigro, are, to make black,
also to be black. Nigror, oris, blackenesse. Nihildum, not yet. Nihilifacio,
cere, to set naught by. Nihili pendo, ere, to esteem nothing. Nihilominus,
nethelesse. Nihil, and nihilum, nothing, naught. ^^^^tus in ^^cch.
Nihil cum fidibus graculo, Nihil cum amacino sui, The dawe has nothing to
do with the lute: nor the sow with maiora^: A proverb applied to them,
which presumynge to much of their own wits, do meddel malapertly with
things, whereof they can no skylle. Nil, nothing, none, naught. Nilion, a
stone like a Topace, but that it is more duskyshe. Nilus, a great river in
Egipte, called also Geon, and is one of the greattest ryuers of the world.
Niliacus, and niloticus, ca, cum, of Nile. Nimbifer, the bringer of storms or
shoures. Nimblis, an isle in the sea called Ionium. Nimbus, a sudden great
shower or storm of rain or hayle. Also a cloud or a great wind, also a
vessel, out of the which wine is drawn or powered. Nimbosus, stormy, or
showrynge. Nimirum, undoubtedly, surely. sometime it signifies but yet, no
marvel. Nimis, and nimium, an aduerbe, signifyenge abundance. Nimis bonus, to
good. Nimis malus, to ylle. Nimietas, superfluousnes. Nimius, a, u^, whereof is
to much, or excess. Ningo, ninxi, ningere, to snow. Ninguidus, da, guidum,
where there is much snow. Niniue, a great cite in Assyria, also an other
greatte city in the corner of Judea, toward Arabia. Ningulum, none, nor any.
Ninus, a great king of Assiria, and Babylon. Niobe, a woman, who having a
greatte number of children, and they being deed all at ones, so much lamented
and sorowed, that she lost her speech: wherefore the paynyms feigned, that she
was turned to a stone. Niphates, a river in the country of Scithia Niptrum, a
lauer. Nis, was of old time used for nobis. Nisaee, a lady of the fayrye.
Niseus, a place in Media, where fair horses were bredde. Nissa, a city in
Lydia. Nisi, but if, except. Nisus, a kings name, of whom it is feigned, that
he had one golden hear. It is also a kind of hawks. Nisus, sa, um, the
participle of Nitor, teris. Nisyros, a little isle by Greece. Nitedula, a seld
mouse. Also a glow worm that shines by night. Nitella, a toothe pike.
sometime it signifies elegancy in speech. Niteo, tui, tere, to be clean,
nete, gaye. Nitesco, idem. Nitide, clenlye. Nitido, are, to make clean or
bright. Nitidus, da, dum, clean, brighte. Nitor, teris, niti, to be styffe, or
to resyste against a burdeyn, to endeavor, to lean on a thing, to flee, to
be sustained, to enforce him self, or take pein, to travail. Nitere, to live
a pleasant life. Nitor, oris, clennesse, brightness, gayness. Nitrea, a
region or Contray in Egypt, also the name of two cities in Egypt, above the
city of Memphis. Nitrum, Salt peter. Niualis, le, of snow. Niuatus, ta, tum,
made cold as snow. Niueus, a, um, of snow, snowy. Niuosus, full of snow, or
where it snoweth often. Nixu^io, I will endeavor me, I will assay to do a
thing. Nixus, a, um, borne as a child is. Nixus, us, ui, birth of a child.
Nix, niuis, snow.
N. ANTE. O.
NO, are, to swymme. Nobilis, noble, notable. Nobilitas, nobilytie, nobleness.
Nobilito, tare, to make noble, or to add to dignity, or estimation, to cause
to be known. Noceo, cui, cere, to hurt, to indamage. Noctesco, cere, to be
dark. Noctes atticae, a book that Aulus Gellius made, which was so called,
because it was written in the winter nyghtes at Athenes. Nocticorax, a night
crow. Noctifuga, he that flees or exchuith the night. Noctiluca, is a name,
whereby the Moon is called because that she does shine by night, also a little
be, which shyneth by night. Noctiuagus, a wanderar or goar by night. Noctu,
at night, or in the night, by night. Noctua, an owl. Noctuae Athenis, oules to
Athenes, a proverb, whereby is signified any thing to be abundant, and more
than enough. Nocturnus, na, um, of the night. Nocuus, a harm doar. Nodo, are,
to knytte. Nodus, a knot. Nodosus, a, um, knotty, or full of knottis. Nodus
herculis, where there can be found nor beginning nor endinge, that which may
never be losed. Nodus is also in an host in battle, a throng of men, so
thick, that it can not be perced. Nodum in scyrpo quaeris, Thou sekest for a
knot in a rushe, it is applied to him, which is scrupulouse in a thing that is
not doubtful, but plain. Noegeum, a white napkyn. Noema, may be called every
sentence. Noenon, for non. Noeo^ae, the wertes, which be in the chekis of a
got or swyne. Noes, a river in Thracia, which runs into the river of
Ister, or Danow. Nolani, people in Italy. Nolito, or Noli, do not. Nolo, non
vis, nolui, nolle, to not will. Nolo, I will not. Nomarcha, a mayre, bayliffe,
or prouoste. Nomades, people in Scithia, called now Tartary. Nomae, sores,
which be grievous. Nomen, minis, a name, or nowne, sometime it signifies
worship, authority, nobleness of blood, kynred. Also cause. Eo nomine, for
that cause. Meo nomine, for my sake. Nomenclator, oris, an officer, which
called every man by his name. Nomenclatura, a namynge of men. Nomentum, a town
in Italy by Rome. Nomina, beside the commune signification, does also signify
dettours or dettes, also articles written. Nomina facere, to lend to many men.
Nomina exigere, to demand or call for dettes. Nominatim, by name. Nominibus
honestis, for an honest pretense or consyderation. Nomino, are, to name.
Nomisma, coin. Nomissis, nine pound weight of brass. Nomophilax, acis, a
kepar of laws. Nomus, a jurisdiction, as a mayraltie, a baylywyke, or
prouostshyp of a town. Non, no, not. Nonaginta, fourscore and ten. Nongenti,
nine hundred. Nonus, a, um, the nynthe. Non ita pridem, not long agone. Non
modo, not only. Nonnullus, some man. Nonnunquam, sometime. Non sobrius,
drunk. Non tacenda, prayseworthy. Nonacris, a place in the countray of
Arcadia. Nonae, nine days in every month before the Idus. Noricum, a contray
in Germany, wherein is the duchy of Bauaria, or Beuar, also the town of
Nurenbergh. Norma, a rule. Normandia, a contraye in France called Normandy.
Normatus, a, um, ruled. Noruegia, a royaulme called Norwaye. Noscito, tare, to
know much. Nosco, noui, noscere, to know, to favor tenderly. Noscomion, an
hospytalle or place, where sick folk are kept. Notabilis, le, notable.
Notae, notes, cyfers, marks, made for remembrance of some thing. Notarius, a
clerk, which writes instruments or plees. Notesco, notui, scere, to be
known or made known. Nothus, a bastard. Nothia, that which by some laws is
appointed to a man's bastard. Notifico, are, to make known. Notio, knowledge.
Notitia, idem. Noto, are, to note or mark, to make a mark or token, to write
after an example. Notus, ta, tum, known: also a friend, or of acquaintance.
Notus, noti, the southwynde. Nouacula, a barbers knyfe or raser. Noualis, land
sown every other year. Nouelletum, a new grown vine. Nouello, are, to tylle
new ground, or set new vynes. Nouellus, a, um, new. Nouem, nine. Nouenus,
the nynthe. Nouenarius numerus, the number of nine. Nouendium, the space of
nine days. Nouendiale sacrum, ceremonies the nynth day after the burienge.
Nouenniae, a city in Thracia. Nouerca, a stepmother, or stepdame. Nouercari,
to do like a stepdame. Nouitius, a, um, new or late begone. Nouo, are, to
make new. Nouocomenses, a people in Italy. Nouum Comum, a town in Italy.
Nouuncium, of nine ounces or inches. Nouus, ua, um, new, fresshe, late commen
up or begone. Noui homines, men of late commen up, which are not
gentylmenne of an ancient stock. Nouissimus, ma, mum, the last. Nouiter,
newely, or lately. Nouissime, last of all. Nox, noctis, night. Notesco, scere,
to be night. Noxa, pain, offense, or trespace. sometime it signifies hurt or
harm. Noxia, a fault. Noxius, noxia, noxium, harmefull.
N, ANTE V.
NVbecula, a little cloud. Nubes, a cloud. Nubilarium, a house, wherinto
corn is carried for fear of rain. Nubilis, maryable, of full age to be wedded.
Nubilo, are, to make clowdy or dark. Nubilosus, a, um, full of clouds.
Nubilus, a, um, clowdy, dark, Nubo, nupsi, nubere, to be wedded, or to wedde,
proprely of the woman's part. Nucamenta, things hanging down from the boughs
of trees or pitchtrees, and are no leaves. Nuceria, a town in Campania.
Nuceus, ea, eum, of a nutte. Nuci frangibula, a nutte crack. Nucleus, the
kernel of any thing. Nucula, and nucella, a little nutte. Nudipedalia,
ceremonies done bare foted. Nuditas, nuditatis, nakedness, symplenesse,
playnnesse. Nudius tertius, the day before yesterdaye: Nudius quartus, Nudius
quintus, Four days passed, five days sens. Nudare, to make naked, to
discover, or open. Nudus, da, dum, naked, uncovered. Nugae, nugarum, tryflynge
tales, fables, merry matters. Nugalis, le, tryflynge. Nugamenta, tryfles.
Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge. Nugax, acis, a tryfler or sabler. Nugigerulus,
and nugigerus, a teller of lies. Nugiuendus, a seller of tryfles. Nugor, aris,
ari, to tryfle, or go about vain things. Nugator, toris, a tryfler or mocker.
Nullatenus, in no wise. Nullibi, no where. Nullo negotio, without pain or
labor, without any difficulty. Nullus, a, um, none. Nullus sum, I am undone.
Nullus dum, no man yet, none to this day. Number, for an, or vtrum, which happens
in a demand or question. Number ego te spoliaui? Did I rob the? Number nam, for
number. Numa, was the second king of Romans. Numatio, having great store of
money. Numellae, a tumbrelle, wherein men be punysshed, having their heedes
and fete put into it. Numen, proprelye is the will of God. Sommetyme the power
of god, sum time it sygnyfyeth god, sommetyme apparayle. Numerabilis, rabile,
that may be numbryd. Numeralis, rale, pertaining to number. Numerarius, seu
numerator, he that casts account, or reckneth a thing in numbres. Augustinus
Numeratius, ia, um, wherein is number. Numeratim, in number, or by numbres.
Numerato, promptely, redily, sometime in account or reckenynge. Fab. Quin. v^.
De Actore facile dicente ex tempore dictum est ingenium eu^ in numerato
habere, of the plaintyfe, wha^ he speaks quyckely and without study, it is
said, that he has a quycke wit and a ready. Claudius Isidorus testamento suo
dixit, Plin. li. 31.
quamuis multa Civilly bello perdidisset, tamen relinquere seruorum quatuor
millia, iuga boum tria millia sexcenta, reliqui poecoris ducenta quinquaginta
millia, In numerato po^do sexcenta millia, Claude Isidore said, that not
withstanding that he had lost much in the Ciuyle wars: yet had he
left in his testament four thousand slaves, three thousand and six hundred
yoke of oxen, of other cattle two hundred and fyfty thousand, In money ready
told syx hundred thousand pound. Numero, are, to number or count, to tell
money, to reken catell. Numerosus, great in nombre. Numerus, nombre, sometime
quantity, as of grain, it is also a precise order in harmony, in length and
shortenesse of syllables. And therefore sommetyme verses be called Numeri.
(...), in (...)
Also it signifies company or feloweshyp. It is also taken for the warste
sort of the people. Numeris omnibus absolutus, on every part perfytely.
Numidia, a royalme in Affrike. Numida, a man of Numidia. Numitius, a river in
Italy by Lauinium. Nummarius, nummaria, rium, pertaining to money. Nummarius,
a keeper and lover of money. Nummarus, moneyed, rich in money. Numitor, toris,
the grandfather of Romulus and Remus on the mothers side. Nummularius, he with
whom exchange of money is made. Nummulus, a little coin or piece of money
Nummus, and numisma, money. It was a coin, which was the tenthe part of a
golden penny. Nummus adulterinus, counterfayt money. Numella, a pair of
shakelles, or fetters for a horse. Nunc, now, at the last. Nunquando for number
aliquando. Valla in Rauden.
Nuntiatio, report, relation. Nuntio, are, to tell or sygnifye. Nuntius, a
messanger, sometime a message. Nuntium, idem. Nuncupo, are, to name. Nuncupare
uota, to make a solemn auowe. Caesar.
Nuncupare testamentum, to declare a will or testament by mouth. Nuncupatio,
a namynge, a declaration of a will. Nundinae, the market days, which in old
time was the nynthe day: and than did the husband men come to the city to
bie and selle, and also to here their laws declared, which were new made.
Nu^dinalis le, and nu^dinarius, a, um, pertaining to a market or fair.
Nundinatio, marchaundyse exercysed in fayres. Nundinator, toris, a market man.
Nundinor, naris, to selle openly: sometime to bye often. Nunquam, never. Ci. in
ver.
Nunquam non, ever. Nunquid, a demand. Nunquid ego sum? Is it not I? Nunquis,
que, quid? Is there any. Nunquid vis? will ye any thing with me? or, Is
there any thing that I may do for you? Nuper, late, awhyle agoone. Sommetyme
long ago. Nuper admodum, a little while ago. Nuperrimus, the last of all.
Nuperus, a, um, signifies late done, or happened, or new begone. Plautus in
^apt.
Nuptialis, le, pertaynyng to marriage. Nuptiae, marriage or wedding. Nupturio,
ire, to desire to marye. Nuptus, ta, tum, married. Nuptus, and nupta, the
husbonde and wife. Nuptus, tus, marriage. Nursia, an old city in Italy. Nurus,
a daughter in law, the sons wife. Nusquam, no where. Nusquam gentium, no
where, never. Valla in Rauden.
Nusquam non, for vbique, every where. Nutrico, are, and nutrio, ire, to
nouryshe. Nutricatus, tus, norture. Nutritious, the foster father. Nutritious,
nutritia, nutritium, that nourysshethe. Nutrix, cis, a nourse. Nutricula, idem.
Nutus, tus, a beck, or countenance with mouynge the eye or hand. Nuto, tare,
to becken or wynke. Nutu, ac tenutu, with a beck and rebecke, with a call and
a beck. Nux, nucis, a nutte. Nux auelana, a fylberde. Nux iuglans, a wall
nutte. Nux pinea, a pyneappull. Nux graeca, an almonde.
N, ANTE Y.
NIcteris, a reremous or back, with litel fete, that they seem to have none.
Nicticorax, racis, a night crow, or shryche crow. Nictileia, sacrifices by
night unto Bacchus. Nyctilopes, he that does see nothing by night, and
little in the evening. Nictimene, the daughter of Nictes, which lay with her
father, and afterward was turned into an owl, who would not be seen but at
night. Nymphae, goddesses of the waters, or spirited, being conuersaunt about
waters, elfes, women of the fayrie. sometime the Muses be so called. also young
bees, as soon as they have received their form. Nymphea, natural bathes.
Nymphus, he that is wedded, the brydegroome. Nysa, a man's name. also a city in
Arabia. Nysia, a kind of Iuie, having black beries. Nyserus, an isle by Grecia.
Nysus, the name of a man.
O, ANTE A.
OATARICA, the spaune of fisshe salted. Oaxis, a river in the isle of Crete or
Candy. Oaxus, a city in Crete or Candye.
O ANTE B.
OB, for at, ob rem, for my profit, ob oculos, Plaut.
before mine eyes. Obaeratus, bounden by ernest money. Obacero, are, to let a
man that he can not tell out his tale. Obambulo, are, to walk a gaynst an
other. also to walk together, or with an other. Obacerbo, are, to make one
angry. Obaresco, scere, to dry all about. Obaudio, ite, to here hardly, or
unwillingly. sometime to obey. Obba, a bottelle. Obcaeco, care, to blind.
Obdo, dear, to thruste again, or put to. Obdormio, ire, to sleep fast or
soundly. Obduco, xi, ere, to lay over, or cover a thing sometime to uncover or
open. also to bring against or overthwart a place. Obdulcesco, scere, to be
sweet about. Obdureo, rui, ere, and obduresco, scere, to be hard. Obduro,
are, to make hard. Obedio, dire, to obey. Obedo, dear, to consume or eat al
about. Obeliscus, a great stone, square like a butte, waxing smaller and
smaller, until the top, of a great height, made plain by a warkman: there
were of them diverse in Rome. Obelus, a spyt or broche, also a long strike in
writing like a spit, for a note or diversity. Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to go
about, to be at hand, to mete with one. Obesus, a, um, fat, gross of body.
Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye. Obire vadimonium, to go to be surety. Liuius.
Obire legationem, to go in ambassade. Obire prouinciam, to exercise
authority. Obire bellum, to go to battle. Obire haereditatem, to take
possession of lands, wherein a man has a state of inherytaunce. Obedibo,
was in the old time used for obediam, I shall obey. Obequito, tare, to ride
about. Oberro, are, to wander about. Obesco, care, to feed fat. Obesus, a
man that is very fat. Obesitas, fattenesse. Obesus, a, um, in Virgil is
fat, Vergilius. Suetonius
in Neuio it sygnifieth lean or little. it is most commonly taken for fat
in the body. Obex, bicis, an obiecte or let. Obgannio, and ogga^nio, ire, to
whister in ons ear. Also to tell a thing often. Obherbesco, scere, to grow
up as herbs done. Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lie about. Obiecto, tare, to
object, or often impute, or lay to ones charge, also to cast out. Obiectum,
any thing that is before a man's eyes, and may be seen. Obiectus, ta, tu^,
thrown or laid against. Obiectus, tus, the layenge or setting of a thing
before ones eyes. Obiicio, ieci, iicere, to lay or throw against, or to lay
before one. Obigitare, to stere or move before. Sex. Pom.
Obinunt, they dye. Obiter, by the way, incidently, beside the purpose, in the
mean time, precisely. Obirus, ta, tum, the act or conclusion. Obitus, tus,
the dieng or decesse of a man. sometime the coming of one. The ancient writers
took obitum for the access of one. Obiurgo, are, to chide or rebuke.
Obiurgatio, chiding, rebukynge. Obiuro, rare, to bind by an oath. Obiurgator,
and obiurgatrix, he or she that chydeth or rebukes. Oblatio, offryng. Oblatus,
ta, tum, offered. Oblecto, ari, and oblector, ari, to delight. Oblectatio
oblectame^ and oblectamentu^, recreatio^ Oblicio, to take recreation or
pleasure. Obligo, are, to bind. Obligatio, an obligation or bond. Obligurio,
ire, to eat delicate meats gredily or rauenousely, and to consume goods in
feastynge and bankettynge. Obliquus, a, um, contrary to straight. Cor. Tacitus
lib. 2.
Oblique perstringere, to taunte or check. Oblimo, are, to cover with mudde or
soft claye. sometime to stop or daube. Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foul.
Obliteratus, ta, tum, scraped out, or blotted. Oblitero, are, to scrape out, or
put out of remembrance. Obliteratio, a scrapynge or blottynge out of a
word. Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten. Oblitus, imbrued, defiled. Obliuiosus, a,
um, forgettefull. Obliuiscor, sceri, sci, to forgette. Obliuium,
forgetfulness. Oblo^utio, ill report. Plautus in C^^gul.
Obloquor, eris, qui, to speak against or contrary, to report ylle, to
curse. Obloquutor, an ill reporter, or detracter. ^
Oblucinio, are, to err. Oblucinasse, to have erred. Obmanens, abiding long.
Obmoueto, move or put to. Obmordeo, ere, to byte. Obmutesco, as we communely
say, I hold my peace, I speak not, I hold my tongue. Obnato, tare, to swymme
against. Obnecto, to knytte fast. Obnexus, a um, fast knytte. Obnexio, a
fast knyttynge. Obnitor, teris, ti, to resyste. Obnoxious, a, um, bounden,
subject, apt, in danger. sometime it sygnifyeth gyltie or fautie. Sum tibi
obnoxious, I am bounden unto the, obnoxious morbis, subject to sickness.
Periculis obnoxious, subject to perils. etc. Minari interdu^ ferro, nisi sibi
obnoxia foret, And thretned her sommetyme with his weapon, if she would not be
obediente to his requests. Salustius. Colum. 5. Ci. ad At.
Obnoxium feris, Cast out to wild beasts. Obnoxie, fearfully, like a
subject. Obnubo, bear, to hyde. Obnubilo, are, to make dark. Obnuere, to
cover the heed or body. Obnuntiare, to deny, to resyste against a thing
purposed. Obolus, a poyse wayinge half a scruple. it was also a coin of
silver, which varied in poyse after the country, as obolus Atticus, Salu. in
orati. Memmii.
obolus Romanus, obolus Hebraicus. Oborior, ri, to begin to spring or come
forth Obrado, rasi, dear, to shave against the here. Obortus, a, um, begone or
spronge, as rumor obortus, tidings spronge. Ob rem, for the purpose. Obrepo,
pere, to come privily or steal in, to come unawares or unlooked for. Obrepere ad
honores, Ci. in (...)
to come or attain to honor by crafty dissimulation. Obreptio, the getting
or obteynynge of a thing in form aforesaid. Obrepticiae literae, letters
opteyned by the said means. Obrideo, dear, to laugh against one. Obrideo, si,
dear, to laugh at one, or to mock one. Obsio, a mock. Obrigeo, gui, gere, and
obrigesco, scere, to be or wax styffe for cold. Obrion, one of the yles
called fortunate. Obryzum, pure or fine gold. Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in
hydynge sum thing, which should be spoken, to atteyne the thing that we
desire. Obrodo, rosi, dear, to gnawe about. Obrogo, are, to check or
interrupte a man in his speech. Obrogare legem, to derogate one law by an
other. Obruo, ere, to overthrow, to cover a thing in casting an other thing
over it. Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which sodaynely happen, throwynge
down and burning things, before they be procured or looked for. Obsaturo,
rare, to be filled to much with a thing. Obsaluto, are, to offer my self to
salute one. Obsatum, old writers used for hallowed. Obsaeuio, ire, to be wode
angry against one. Plaut^^ in Epid.
Obscoeno, are, to bring or cause ill luck. Obscoenus, na, number, abhomynable,
all thing which is to be eschewed, dysshonest, unclean, pernicious, Also
brynging ill luck. Obscoenitas, villainy in acts, rybauldrie. Obscurus, a, um,
dark, hid, dysfuse, unknown, of no gentle blood. Obscuritas, darkness,
difficulty, vngentylnesse of bloudde. Obscuro, are, to make dark, to shadow,
to hide, to keep in silence or from the knowledge of other, to make of no
reputation. Obsecratio, a special desire. No. (...)
Obsecro, are, to beseech or heartily pray, Obsecrare ab aliquo, to desire of
one. Obsecro, is sometime an aduerbe. Hem, obsecro anis est? How, I pray the is
that he? Terent in Eunuc^o.
Obsecundo, are, to make prosperouse, also to obey or do all thing at an other
ma^s will, to make a thing better than it seems to be. Obsecundanter,
obediently. Obsepio, iui, ire, to enclose about with an hedge Obsequela,
dilygence, endeavor. Obsequia, things done to the pleasure or appetite of him,
that they be done for. Obsequens, obedient. Obsequentissime, with great
obedience. Obsequere animo, Take thy pleasure, make good chere. Obsequibilis,
diligent, ready to do that, which is commanded. Obsequiosus, idem. Obsequium,
redynes to do all that is commanded. sometime it sygnifieth flattery.
Obsequor, eris, qui, to follow an other man's pleasure. Obsero, seri, rere, to
sow or set about, to plant. Obsero, are, to lock or shut a door.
Obseruabilis, le, mete to be observed, worthy to be had in reverence.
Obseruantia, reverence, obseruaunce. Obseruatio, idem. Plautus in Asinar.
Obseruo, are, to awayte diligently with the eyes, and also the mind, to
honor, to take good head, to have in reverence. Obseruare ianuam, to keep the
door. Obses, idis, an hostage, or pledge in wars Obsessi, they which ar
besieged, that they may not issu out of the place where they are. Obsessor,
oris, he that lays siege. Obsidiae, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take away any
thing craftily. Obsidianum nitrum, a glass which is pure black.
Obsidionalis corona, a garlande given to them, which delivered a town or
fortress besyeged with enemies, which was of grass. Obsidior, aris, ari, to
ly in await to take one. Obsidium, obsidio, obsessio, a syege about a town or
fortress. Obsido, and obsideo, sessi, dear, to lay siege. Obsigno, are, to
close letters and seal them. Also to sign them. Obsignator, toris, he that
puts to his sele or sign to a deed or instrument. Obsipo, are, to throw or
cast, as when men of the country do say. Obsipa pullis escam, Cast meat
to the chyckens. Obsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste. Obsitus, ta, tum,
wrapped, set about with herbs or trees. Obsolesco, scere, to decay, to wax
old, to be out of use. Obsoletus, ta, tum, decayed, old, out of use, worn,
as a garment, when it is bare. Valla in Rauden.
Obsonium, all meats, except bread and potage. Obsonus, sona, number, that
which has an ill sown. Obsono, and obsonor, nari, to feast or banquet.
Obsonito, tare, idem. Obsonatio, feastynge or bankettynge. Obsonator, and
obsonatrix, he or she that makes feasts or bankettes. Obsono, are, to sown
ill. Obsorbeo, bui, bear, and obsorbo, psi, bear, to suppe up all. Obsordeo,
dui, sordere, to be filthy or unclean, or sluttyshe. Nonius declaryth it to
wax old. Obstaculum, an obstacle or impediment. Obstetrico, care, to do the
office of a mydwyfe. Obstetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe. Obstinare, obstinately, or
fyrmely. Obstinatus, ta, tum, obstinate, firm, or stable Obstinatio,
obstynacie, styffenes in opinion. Obstino, are, to be obstinate, or persist
firm in one sentence or purpose. Obstipo, pare, to stop. Obstipus, crouped
shouldred. Obstitum, crooked, sometime vyolated. Obsto, stiti, stare, to
withstand, to let. Obstrepo, pere, to cry out on one, or make a noise.
Obstrigillo, are, to resist or repugne against, to speak in detraction of one.
Obstringo, xi, gere, to bind or tie. Obstrictus, bounden. Obstringere fidem,
to make a faythefulle promise. Obstrudo, fi, dear, to hyde, to stop a man's
throat, that he can not eat meat. Plautus in Stich. Pom. Fest.
Obstrudulentum, a stoppynge. Obstruo, xi, struere, to shut, to stop.
Obstructus, stopped or shut. Obstruere luminibus, to set that a man can
not look out of his wyndowes, Cice. pro domo sua.
or to stop his lyghtes. Obstupidus, a, um, astonyed. Obstupefacio, facere,
to abasshe, Plautus in Milite.
or make abashed. Obstupesco, scere, to be abashed. Obsum, obsui, obesse, to
hurt or hinder, or indamage. Obsurdesco, obsurdescere, to be or wax deaffe.
Obtempero, perare, to obey, or be at commandment. Obtendo, to lay an excuse.
Obtendiculum, a colorable answer. Obtentus, tus, a pretense. Obtero, triui,
obterere, to tread or thruste down, to suffocate, to bruyse. Obtego,
obtegere, to cover about. Obtestatio, an humble desire, proprely not to do a
thing. Also to take god or some other thing to witness. Obtestor, aris, ari,
humbly to beseech, to desire for gods sake, or for the remembrance of some
thing, which to him that is desired, is thankfully herd. Obtexo, ere, to
wayue about. Obticeo, cui, cere, to keep silence, not to speak. Obturo, are,
to shut. Obtueor, eri, to behold, to look on. Obturatio, shutting. Obtineo,
^ere, to opteyne, to hold, to retain still, to get, sometime to have. Si
istam animi firmitudine^ obtines, salui sumus, If thou haste that firmness of
courage, we be saulfe. Obtingere, to hap. Obtigit, it happened. Obtorpesco,
obtorpui, pescere, to be very slow or dull. Obtorqueo, obtorsi, obtorquere, to
wringe or wrythe about. Obtrecto, tare, to ylle report, to deprave, to have
in de^pyte. Obtrectater, toris, an ill reporter, or backbyter. Obtrectatio, ylle
report. Obtrigo, are, to bind by an oath. Obtrudo, si, dear, to thruste
down, to put to with force. Obtrudit fores, He pullid to the door. (...) in
(...).
Also to set forth. Aliquid prius obtrudamus, Let us first set forth
sommewhat. Terent in (...).
Obtrudere vxorem, to give to a man a wife against his will or appetite.
Obtrunco, uncare, to slay, also to stryke of a man's heed. Obtundo, dear, to
stryke, to break, to make dull, to hurt a man with speking, to make werye.
Obturbo, are, to trouble all. Obtusus, a, um, dulle. Obtutus, tus, and
obtuitus, a look or regard. Obuagio, gire, to cry out, as a child. Obuallo,
are, to enuyronne or compass about with a dyche or wall. Obuaricator, toris,
he that tourneth one out of the right way, or lets him that he may not
pass. Obuaro, are, to peruerte. Obuarico, care, to stop or let oone of his
passage. Obuenio, nire, to comme against, to mete with. also to happen.
Obuersor, aris, ari, to be present, to come in remembrance. Cicer. pro Sextio.
Obuerto, and obuerso, tere, to turn again, or back. Sed mihi ante oculos
obuersabatur reipub. dignitas, quae me ad se rapit. But before mine eyes camme
the estate of the publyque weal, which plucketh me unto her. Obuiam, an
aduerbe, which signifies before in the way, against one. Obuiam ire, to go
against one, to prevent. Obuio, are, to meet with one. Obuius, a, um, that
which meteth with one. Obumbro, brare, to make dark with a shadow: sometime
to defend. Obuolo, are, to fly against. Obuos sacro, the ancient Romans
used for obsecro, I beseech you.
O, ANTE C.
OCca, an harowe or dragge, which has iron teeth, wherewith cloddes are
broken. Occatio, a breaking of cloddes, or harrowynge. Occaeco, care, to make
blind. Occalleo, ere, to wax or be hard flesshed, or brauned, like as a bore
is. Occano, and occino, occanui, and occini, occanere, and occinere, to sing
against one, to lay in rebuke. Occaso, sere, to be lost, or undone. Plautus
in Casi.
Occasio, occasyon. Occasiuncula, a small occasyon. Occasus, us, death of man or beast. Also the going down of the son, or sonneglade. Occatorium,
an harrowynge. Colum^. li. 2. Pom. Fe^^.
Occedo, pro accedo. Occentassint for conuitia fecerint, They shall give rebukes
or words of reproach. Occento, tare, to cry out against one with rebukefull
words. Occentus, tus, where one syngeth against another. It may be also taken
for a countretenor. Occepso, pro incepero, I shall begin. Plaut^^.
Occidens, it is, the west, or ponent. Occidio, onis, a slaughter. Occido, di,
dear, to slay or wound to death, to fall grievously. Occisa res est, the matter
is dasshed. Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they be slain here and
there, or in diverse places. Occido, dear, to fall down, to perysshe utterly,
to dye, to goo down, as the sun does, and other sterres. Occidit spes
nostra, our hope is lost. Plautus in Pseudo^^*
Occisa est haec res, this thing is lost or in despair. Occiduum, the place
where the sun goes down. Occino, nere, to sing to another. Occilare, to
bear or buffat. Plaut. in Casina.
Occissimus, of all other most lost or desperate. Occifio, onis, a slaughter
or death of men or catell. Occidi, I am deed, I am lost. Occipio, pere, to
begin. Occiput, and occipitium, the hinder part of the heed. Occlamito,
tare, to cry out. Occludo, dear, to shytte fast. Occludere linguam, to
stop a man from speaking. Occlusus, occlusior, occlusissimus, fast shut.
Occo, occare, to harrowe and break cloddes and balkes in the corn fields,
Also to cover with earth. Occulo, lere, to hyde. Occulto, tare, idem. Ocultus,
ta, tum, hyd, which is not known. Occulte, paiuyly, unknown. Occumbo, cubui,
cumbere, to be slain, to be deedly wounded. Occupatitius ager, the field,
which is neglected of the owner, and labored by other. Occupo, are, to
occupy, to get or take before an other man, to use in commune, to take or
hold a thing with force, to let or empeche, to possede, sometime to lend
for advantage. Occupans, it is, he that does occupy or use a thing, the
occupier. Cl. in Ver. act. 2.
Occupatus, let, in business, occupied. Occupatio, a color in rhetorike,
where the playntyfe in preventing the words of the defendaunt, reherceth that
which he will lay for excuse, and disproueth it. Plautus in Menech.
Occupare consilium, to find advise or counsel. Occupare locum, to take or
keep a place with force. Liui, li. 33.
Occurro, si, rere, to meet with, to come to remembrance, to offer him self.
Also to resist, to run, to come to mind, or remembrance, also to be
proffred. Occurso, are, the frequentatiue of occurro, to come often to
remembrance, to mete often, or run against one. Occursus, us, a runnynge
against one. Oceanus, the sea, which gothe about all the world. Alsoo a
great poole made in Rome, for many persons to swymme in. Oceanius, a, um, of
the occean see. Ocellatus, ta, tum, that which has eyes, or holes like to
eyes. Ocha, a goose. Ocquinisco, scere, to inclyne or bow to. Ochus, a river
which passes through Acarnania, a countray in greece. Ochra, oker, which
paynters do use. Otior, aris, ari, to be unoccupied, or without business.
Otiosus, ydell, unoccupied, quyete. Otium, vacation from labor, leyser,
quietness, ydelnes, lack of busynes. Ocreae, leg harneyse, boots. Ocreatus,
boted or harneised on the leggis. Octangulus, a, um, eight cornerd. Octo,
eight. Octies, eight times. Octonus, a, um, the number of eight, in sundry
partis. Octobris, the month of Octobre. Octopes, having eight feet. Sueton.
in Cali. Quint.
Octophorum, a carre with eight wheles. Oculatus, full of eyes, also quick
sigted, circumspect, espyenge a thing shortly. Oculatus testis, a witness
which saw the thing. Oculeus, full of eyes, wyly. Oculis captus, blind.
Oculitus eam amat, he loves her as well as his own eyes. Oculus, an eye,
alsoo a young budde of a tree. Oculu^ adijcere, to be in love with the thing,
which is seen. Ocymum, an herb. Ocyor, swifter, ocyus idem. Ocyssimus, a, um,
most swift. Ocyus, sooner, quicklyer.
O, ANTE D.
ODaea, places, wherein singing is exercysed. Ode, a song. Odfacio, for
olfacio, cere, to smelle. Odi, I hate, or have hated: Odisse, to hate, or have
hated. Odiosus, he that is hated, displesant, troublous, tediouse. Odiose, with
hate, displeasantly. Odit eum cane peius, and angue, He hatethe him wars than a
dog or a serpente: as who says, mortally without hope of reconcylynge.
Odites, oone of the sons of Ixion the Centaure. Odium, hate, displeasure,
tediousenes. Odoeporicon, an Itenerary, wherein is written the distance of one
place from an another, or a like thing, as the iestes of princis are, assignynge
their iourneys. Odor, oris, and odos, savor, sent. Odoramentum, every thing
that sauoureth well. also savor. Odorarius, a maker or seller of things that
smelle sweet. Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is perfumed. sometime that which
does savor, odoriferous, or smelling sweet. Odorator, a hounde made to the
suit. Odoriferus, a, um, idem. Odorisecus, a hounde or spanell, which hunteth
by sent. Odoro, and odoror, ari, to smell. Odorus, a, um, that which sends
furthe savor, or has a good savor.
O, ANTE E.
OEagius, a river in the countraye of Thracia. Oeanthe, a city, alsoo the
flower of a vine. Oebades, king Darius horsekepar, by whose polycye he
atteyned to the kyngedome of Persia. Oebalia, the countraye in Greece, called
also Laconia. Oebalus, a man's name. Oechalia, a city in Laconia. Oeconomia,
the orderinge and prouydinge of things concerning household, alsoo an order in
writing, whereby every thing is set in his propre place. Oeconomica,
pertayninge to husbandry. Oeconomus, a steward of household. Oeci, placis,
where women do sit and work with woull or sylke. Oecumenicus, universal,
pertayninge to all the world. Oecumenicum consilium, a general counsel,
wherein things are universally treated concerning all countries. Oedipus, a
man, which dissolved subtle and dark questions. Oedipodionius, nia, um,
belonging to Oedipus. Oenanthe, the bery of a wild vine. Oenamhinum, an
oynemente made of the said bery. Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the last wife
of Hercules. Oenophorus, a servant, which brings wine to the table.
Oenophorum, a pot wherein wine is carried. Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernour.
Oenopolium, a wine tavern. Oenotria, Italy. Oenotrides, two Isles nyghe to
Calabria. Oesipum, the fylthy oil, which is in wull, that is in the flanks of
a sheep, or about his neck, which oil is soden out, and used for medicyne.
Oestrum, woodnesse, or mad fury: alsoo a fly, which makes a great noise,
when he flies, some do suppose it to be, a dor, like to a be, but that he is
black and grettar. Oeta, a mountain in Thessaly. Oeteus, the father of Medea,
wife of Jason.
O, ANTE F.
OFfa, a poodinge, also a dish made with fatt broth, hard chese, peper, and
cynamom, or other like iunkat. sometime it is taken for a morsel. Offarius, and
offaria, a maker of such iunckettes. Offatim, in morselles. Offector, toris, a
dyar. Offella, a little morsel, as of flesh mynced, also a potage made with
pieces of flesh, as stuyd brothe or forced gruell. Offendo, dear, to meet
with, to fall into, to find by chance, to stryke or hytte any thing unware,
to offend. Offendere apud aliquem, to do a thing, which lyketh not them
that do see it done. Offendiculum, an impediment or let, an obstacle.
Offendimentum, and offendix, the knotte of a ribon or lase, wherewith a bonet
or hatte is knytte fast to the heed. Offensa, offensio, and offensus, us, an
offense. Offensatio, a metynge. Offensaculum, that which is laid in a man's
way, whereat he stumbleth. Offensator, satoris, he that stackereth in redinge,
as if he were not perfyte in reding, Quint.
or redeth otherwise than it is written. Offensans, it is, that which hurts or
lets. Offenso, are, to hytte often, or to let. Offensiuncula, a small
offense. Offercio, to stuff or fill. Offero, obtuli, offerre, to offer, or
present, to give willyngly, to promise. Offerumentae, strypes. Plau i^ Rudes.
Ne offerumentas habebis plureis in tergo tuo, quam vlla nauis lo^ga clauos,
tum ego ero mendacissimus, and if thou have not moo strypes on the skyn of thy
back, than a galy has nails, I shall be the falsyst liar that ever was.
Offerumenta, offrynges, things offered to God. Offerre auxilium, to promise
aid. Offerre crimen, Justin.
to put a complaynte against one. Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont, Cicero in
^ael^^*
Domus ardebat in Palatio non fortuiro, sed oblato ince^dio, My house in the
Palaice did burn not by any chance, but by fire thrast in by some man.
Pla^tus in ^en.
Offerre mendicitatem, to bring one unto poverty. Offerre moram, to let.
Offerre se obinam, to mete with one. Cic. off. 3. Terent. in Adelph.
Offerre stuprum, to commit aduoutry. Offerre vitium virgini, to defloure a
virgyn. Officere luminibus, to stop the lyghtes. Officina, a werkhouse, a
shop. Officialis, ale, pertayninge to offices or duties. Quint Ilia.
Officialis, an officer. Officio, ficere, to hurt, sometime to do, also to die
cloth. Officiosus, a seruysable man, or he that is glad to please, or does
well his duetye. Officiosus dolor, a grief which proceeds of a good cause or
raison. Officium, office, duetye, or a thing, which ought to be done. It is
sometime taken for honor done to one, and it may be used for that, which we
do call homage, done in such form as our law does appoint it, it is also
taken for benefyte. Cic. de amicitia.
Officium vsurpare, to do his duetye. Officiose, diligently, seruisably.
Offirmo, are, to abide in one purpose or opinion, to be obstinate. Offlecto,
xi, tere, to turn a thing contrary or about. Offoco, are, to power water
into the mouth of a man or beast. Offritiae, crafty or deceytfull taches.
Offringo, ere, to break with a plough, land cared before. Offuciae,
cawrellis, crafty ways to deceive. Offula, a little morsel. Offundo, fusi,
dear, to power about, to make dark or blind, to stayne, to cast in, or
bring in. Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour into a man's mouth, to
sowke down, as they use to do to like men, which for feoblenesse can not by
them selfs take any sustenaunce. Offuseo, are, to make black, or dark.
O, ANTE G.
OGdous, a king of Egypt, which first builded the city of Memphis. Ogdoas,
adis, the number of eight. Ogdolapis, a river which comes out of the hills
called Alps, and runs to Rome. Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to
speak with chydinge. Oggero, ^si, gerere, to cast in, or set. Oculos oggerere,
to cast or set the eyes on one. Oggrassari, to go. Plaut. in Trucu.
Ogyges, he which first builded the city of Thebes. Ogygeus, a, um, made or
found by Ogyges. Ogygea, an I Will between Phenicea and Syria. Ogyris, an I Will in
Syria.
O. ANTE. H.
OHe, an exclamation, signifienge that he, which speaks that word ^s saciate
or weary of that, which he sees or heereth.
O, ANTE I.
Oino meli, wine and honey soden together
O, ANTE L.
OLea, is most proprely the fruit of an olyue: yet sometime it is used for an
olyue tree. Oleaceus, a, um, oily. Oleacu^, a color, which is mixed with grene,
black, yelowe, and white. Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree. Oleagineus,
idem. Olearis, re, and olearius, a, um, pertayninge to oil. Olearius, a maker
of oil. Olearus, one of the Isles called Ciclades. Oleaster, a wild olyue.
Oleastellus, a diminutif of Oleaster. Oleastrinum, oil of wild olyues.
Olearus, a, um, of oil. Oleitas, the time of gatheringe of olyues. Olenus, a
city in Greece. Olenius, a, um, of that city. Olentica, things which have an
ill savor. Oleo, eui, and olui, olere, to savor, or have savor. Oleosus, a,
um, full of oil. Olesco, lescere, to grow. Oletum, a place where olyues do
grow, also the dung or ordure of a man, proprely it is a draught or iakes.
Oleum, oil. Olfacio, feci, facere, to smell. Olfacto, are, to smell much or
often. Olfactus, tus, the sense of smellyng. Olibantum, a measure of wine.
Olidus, da, dum, that which has a great savor, either good or badde, most
communely stinkinge. Oligarchici, they which do advance the state of noble
men and rich men, above the popular astate. Olim, sometime, as well in the
time passed as in the time to come, now late, long time passed. Olitor, a
gardynar, or sellar of herbs and roots. Olitorius, a, um, pertaining to a pot
garden. Oliua, an olyue tree. Oliueta, the time of gatherynge of olyue beryes.
Oliuerum, a place where do grow olyue trees. Oliuina, plenty of olyues, alsoo
revenues, which do come of olyues. Oliuitas, and oleitas, the qualytie of
olyues, the gatheringe time of olyues. Olino, are, to gather olyues. Plautus in
Pseudolo.
Oliuum, oil olyue. Olla, a pot. Ollares, grapes conseruyd in pottes. Olli,
for iili. Varro.
Ollula, a little pot. Ololy goues, crokynge frogs. Olor, oris, a wild
swanne. Olus, leris, herbs which serve for potage, pot herbs. Oluscula, small
herbs. Olus atrum, an herb called persely. Olympia, a city between the
hills of Ossa and Olympus. Olympia, orum, plays and great games, on the hill
of Olympus, made to the honor of Jupiter. Olympiacus, ca, cum, pertaining to
that plays or hill. Olympias, piadis, the space of five years, whereby the
old greeks did account, as we do now by the years of our lord: as ^he first
Olympias, the second, the third. and so forth. Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus.
Olypionices, he that has had victory in the games at Olympus. Olympius, a, um,
heavenly. Olympus, a mountain or hill in Greece, above the which appears no
cloud: and therefore among the Poets it is usurped for heaven. Olynthus, a
city in Thracia. Olyras, a river in Greece by the place called Thermopylas.
Olyfippum, a city in portugal, now called Vlysbona, in englysh Lusseborn.
O, ANTE M.
OMasum, a fat gut, or chitterling. Omen, minis, luck, also a word or
sentence suddenly spoken, after the which some thing happens to follow
according thereunto, above the expectation of them which herd it. Omentum, the
call or sewet, wherein all the bowelles are lapped, also the thynne skyn in the
heed, wherein the brain is contained: of some called the ryme of the brain,
and of surgeons Pia matter. Omentatus, ta, tum, mixed with sewet. Ominor, aris,
ari, and omino, aui, are, to guess what shall happen or follow. Ominator, oris,
he that tells a man's luck or fortune. Ominosus, a, um, lucky. Terea. in
^ea^^.
Omissus, a, um, left, not meddled with. Omisso animo, Vbi te vidi animo esse
omisso, wha^ I saw that thou caryddest for nothing. Omitto, omisi, omittere,
to forbear, to leave, to neglect. Omit hunc, let him alone, pardon him.
Terea. Phor^^.
Omit me, let me go. Omne tulit punctu^, he touched every point, A proverb.
applied to him, which omitteth nothing expedient or necessary, and is
therefore of all men commendyd. Omnibus numeris, in all points. Res est omnibus
numeris absoluta, it is a thing perfyte in all points. Omnifariam, all manner
of ways, of every kind. Omnifarius, a, um, sondrye, diverse, Omnigenus, a,
um, of every kind. Omnimodus, da, dum, all manner. Omnino, holy, thoroughly,
allwaye, finally. Omnipotens, it is, allmyghty. Omnis, ne, all. Omophagi, they
which do eat raw flesh. Omphax, acis, a grape not fully ripe. Omphacium,
licour made of fruit that is not ripe, as of grapes, and than is it called
veriuyse. Omphacium vinum, a grene wine not pleasant or sweet. Omphacinum
olcum, oil made of olyues, not being ripe. Omutesco, tescere, to be dombe,
and can not speak.
O, ANTE N.
ONae, sweet fygges. Onager, onagri, a wild Ass. Onerarius, a, um, that which
seruethe for bourdon. Onero, are, to charge, bourdon, or lade. Onerare populum,
to put impositions or taxes on the people. Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned,
ladyd. Onerarius, raria, rarium, that whereon bourbourdayne is laid. Onerosus,
a, um, bourdeinous. Onixes, a kind, of marble. Oniscus, a worm, which bends
him self like a bow when he goes, which is reed, and found under trees,
which have lain long on the ground. Onoba, a city. Onocentaurus, a beast
half a man, half an ass. Onocrotalus, a bird like to a swanne, which
putting his heed into the water, brayeth like an ass. Onomatopeia, a word
made of sown or pronouncinge, as bletinge of a sheep, lowinge of a cow,
hissinge of an adder. Ononium, a blind nettyll. Onus, oneris, a bourdon, a
lode. Onustus, ta, tum, lodyd. Onyx, ychis, a white stone, like to a man's
nail, also some be found in Inde, which are of diverse colors, having white
spots like unto eyes. Onychinus, na, um, made of the stone called Onyx.
O, ANTE P.
OPaco, care, to shadow. Opacus, ca, cum, shadowed, or in the shadow. Opera,
ae, wark, labor. Operae, plurali tantum, warkmen, laborers. Opera, warkes,
buyldinges, private or commune. Operam do, operam impendo, operam nauo, I do
mine yndeuour, I put to my diligence I spend my labor. Operarius, a laborar.
Operarius, a, um, that which is done with labor. Operculo, are, to keuer a
vessel. Operculum, a keueringe or led. Operaeprecium, profitable, necessary,
a joyful thing, much to be esteemed. Operimentum, any thing that keuerith.
Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde. Operior, iris, iri, to tarry, to abide. Operor,
aris, ari, to wark. Operatio, the wark, or that wheraboute a man labors.
Operosus, a, um, busy, diligent in labouringe laboriouse, paynefull.
Opertorium, a coueringe. Ophiaca, pertaining to serpents, they were books,
which Nicander, and Petridius wrate, of the nature of serpents. Ophiophagi,
people in Ethiope, which do eat serpents. Ophiucus, the name of Esculapius,
because that he is ymagyned to hold a serpent in his hand. Ophites, a stone
having spots like a serpente. Opicus, pica, picum, unclean, dishonest,
shameless. Opici, they which used abominable rybauldry. Opifex, ficis, a
warkman, a craftys man. Opifi cium, the wark. Opigena, Juno, Juno was so called
of women, because they supposed, that she help them when they trauayled.
Opilio, onis, a shepeherde. Opima spolia, the spoil, which by one chief
Capytayne is taken from another in battle, as his cote armure or harneys.
Opime, aboundauntly, richely. Opimo, are, to make fat. Opimus, ma, mum, fat,
also rich. Opimium, seu opimianum vinum, wine which moughe endure good, two
hundred years. Opinabilis, le, that may be conceyned in opinion. Opinio, onis,
opinion, sometime hope, also fame. Opino, for opinor, I suppose. Opinor,
pinaris, nari, to suppose, Plautus in Bacch.
to have opinion. Opinatus, ta, tum, supposed. Opinator, toris, a supposar.
Opipare, plentuously. Opiparus, a, um, aboundaunt, fresh, or gaye. Coena
opipara, a delicate souper. Opis, opis, a lady, companyon to Diana, she was
also wife to Saturnus, and by her is signified the earth among the Poets.
Opistographus, a book written on the back side. Opisthotonicus, he that can not
turn his neck. Opisthotonos, the cricke, or disease, which lets a man to
turn his neck. Opiter, itris, he whose father deyed before his grandfather.
Opitulor, aris, ari, to help. Opitulator, oris, a helpar. Opitulus, Jupiter,
Jupiter the helpar at need. Opium, the juice of an herb called black Popye,
alsoo Opius, is he that fights in armure. Opobalsamum, balm natural, which
in a part of Judea, called Ierocinthe, stilleth out of a little thorn.
Opoponax, acis, the juice of an herb, called Panax. Oporice, a medicine made
of fruytes. Oporae, all fruits which do grow in the last end of somer.
Oporotheca, a place, wherein fruit is kept. Oportet, it behooves, it is
expedient or necessary. Oppedo, dear, to fart against one. Oppeto tere, to dye:
also to be slain. Oppetere sebrem, to fall into the fever. Oppidanus, a
cytezen or towns man. Oppidicus, idem. Oppidatim town by town. Oppido, an
aduerbe, signifienge very much, sometime it signifies furthwith, verily.
Oppidulum, a little town. Oppidum, a walled town, or city. Oppignero, are,
to lay in pledge. Oppilo, are, to stop or shit. Oppleo, ere, to fill full.
Opploto, are, to lament. Oppono, ere, to lay or put against. Opportunus, na,
number, that which is in due time, and as it ought to be. Salustius ^^^^g^r.
Opportunus iniuriae, fete or apt to take wrong. Opportunitas, tatis,
opportunity, convenient time. Opportunae, opportunatly conuenientely, as it
ought to be. Opprimo, ere, to oppress, to keep or shit in, to take sodaynely,
to rauyshe a woman, to grieve, to thrust hard. Opprobrium, and opprobramentu^,
a reproach Opprobro, are, to object against one, to reproach. Oppugno, are, to
assault. Ops, opis, the suster and wife of Saturn: also it signifies aid or
help. Opes, richesse. Opsonator, atoris, a puruayour of vytayles, or Catar.
Opsonatus, tus, and opsonatio, preparation for dinner, or souper. Opsonito,
tare, to prepare often for dinner or souper. Opsonium, al thing belonginge to a
meal, except bred and drink. Opsono, nare, and obsonor, onari, to prepare
things necessary for dinner, souper, or bankat. Optabilis, le, that which is
desired. Optato, with desire. Opticus, ca, cum, perspectife, pertaining to
sight. Optice, the science whereby the raison of sight is known. Optimates,
the heed men of a city, also they which defend the part of nobility and
rich men. Optimatus, tus, the state or condition of heed men of a town or
contraye. Optimus, best. Optio, the choice, the request or desire. It was also
to a captain in wars, a ministre to do his commandment, and be assistent
unto him. Opto, tare, to desire, to chouse, to require. Adopto, coopto, exopto,
vide suis locis. Opulento, tare, to make rich or plenteouse. Opulentus, ta,
tum, rich abundant. Opulentia, and opulentitas, richesse. Opuncalo, he that
syngethe like to a sheparde. Opulesco, scere, to be rich. Opus, operis, a
warke, a labor. Eius opere by his mean or diligence. Opus est, it is
necessary, or need. Si opus sit, if need be. Opus, opuntis, a city in Locris.
Opus intestinum, that which most communly is called impleme^tes of houshoulde,
proprely of timber, as fourmes, stools, cupboordes and other like things.
Opus est conuento. Ita res subita est, celeriter mihi hoc homine opus est, The
chance is so sudden, or the matter requires such have, that I must needs
speak with the man shortly or quickly. Opus est facto, it must needs be done,
or executed. Opus est remissam. Terent. i^ Hecyra.
Vosmet videte ia^ Laches and tu Pamphile, remissam opus sit nobis an reductam
domum, Now Laches and Pa^phile advise your selfs well, whither it be necessary,
that she be sent home, or fetched home. Opus sunt tibi, thou have need of them.
Plautus in Capt. Terent. in Heau.
Vt cu^ desponderim, des qui aurum ac vestem, atque alia quae opus sunt, That
when I have affiauncyd her, thou deliver money and apparayle, and all other
things needful. Plautus (...) Music.
Opere maxumo, with all means possible, in most hearty wise. Rex Seleucus me
opere orauit maxumo, vt sibi lationes cogerem, King Seleucus desired me, as
much as he possibly might, that I would geate him soldiers to be about his
person. Terent. in Eunuc^^
Thais maximo te orabat, opere vt cras redires, Thais desired the as hartyly as
she can, that thou woldeste come again to morrow.
O, ANTE R.
ORa, the extreme part of every thing, as the edge, the brym, the skirtes, the
hem, the border, the cabull that tyeth the ship. Ora marittima, the sea side.
Oraculum, where aunsweres were given by ydolles: sometime the answer, sometime
the saying of some wise man. Orarium, the vestement, wherein the priest does
say mass. Orata, a fyshe called a gylte heed. Oration, an oration, a prayer.
Orator, toris, an orator. Oratoria, Rhetorike. Oratoriae, like an orator, or
in form of Rhetorike. Oratorius, a, um, pertaining to an orator. Oratus,
tus, prayer. Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made round. Orbiculus, a little cerkle.
Orbicus, ca, cum, round. Orbis, a cerkle. Also the world. Orbs, dyshes, the
holes of the eien. sometime the eyes. Orbem facere, where people do gather
them round together in battle. Orbita, a whele, sometime the tracke that
wheels do make in the ground. Orbo, are, to depryue. Orbus, proprely blind.
Orbi, they which have lost their chylderne. Also orphans. Orbitas, the lack
of chylderne: sometime the lack of a father. Orbitus, ta, tum, round as a
cerkle. Orca, a great monster of the sea: also a great vessel, as a butte or
vate, wherein Rennyshe wine is put. Also a box, wherein dyce be shaken, and
after thrown on the tables. sometime a coffer. wherein wome^s payntynge is
kept. Orchades, thyrty Isles in the sea by Scotland. Orchestra, a place,
wherein the Senators and honorable persons sat to behold plays Orchomenus, a
mountain in Thessaly. also a city in Euboea. Orcomana, a beer, whereon dead
corses do lie. Orcus, a river of hell: alsoo an another in Thessalye. it is
sometime taken for hell. Ordinarius, a, um, wherein order is observed
ordinarye. sometime a scoffer or gester. Ordinare, to order or dispose. Ordior,
iris, orsus, iri, to be begin to speak. Ordo, dinis, order, the dew place,
the astate of men. In ordinem redigere, to keep oone within his bounds,
that he do not excede his degree. Sulustius in Iug.
Ordines, is in battle that, which is called the raye. Ordines seruare, to
kepethe raye. Ordinatim, in order. Ordines conturbare, to break or scatter the
raye. Orea, the bytte for a horse. Oreus, a name of Bacchus. Orestes, the son
of Agamemnon. Ore tenus, to the mouth. Orexis, is most taken for vomyte, all
be it sygnifieth appetite. Organa, all instruments of musyke. Organum, an
instrumente pertaining to building, also an ordinance of wars. Organarij,
makers of instruments. Orgia, ceremonies or songs, pertaynyng to infernal
gods, or to Bacchus. Orgyia, a measure contaynynge.vi. foot. Suidas does
write, that it is the space, which is contained between the hands stretched
abroad, which I suppose is a spanne. Oria, a fyshers boot Orichalcum, a
metal, which as I suppose is lattyn. Oriculum, for auricula, a little ear.
Oricos, a city of Epire. Oriens, orientis, the East. Orificium, the mouth of
any thing. Origanum, an herb, called organny. Origo, ginis, a beginning,
kind. Orion, a sign in the fyrmament. Orior, eris, and oriris, riri, to be
borne, to rise, to appiere. Oriundus, commen by auncetours out of some
country or city. sommetyme borne, Nati Carthagine, sed orundi a Syracusis,
Borne at Carthage, but by auncetoures descended from Syracuse in Sicile.
Oriza, a grain called Rise, which is most commonly eaten in Lent, with
Almonde milk. Orminium, an herb like to horehounde. Ornamentum, apparayle,
also honor. Ornithoboscion, a house where poultry is fed, a cowpe. Ornithon,
thonis, a place wherein birds are kept. Orno, nare, to garnish, to deck or
trymme, to make fair, to prepare, to make meet, to honor with some
authority or dignity. Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trimmed, garnyshed,
instructed, fournyshed. Ornatus, tus, apparayl, trymming, deckyng. Oro, orare,
to pray, to demand, to speak openly and eloquently, as Orators do, to
plead. Orobia, a kind of Frenkynsence in little graynes. Orontes, a river by
the city of Antyoche. Orphanus, he which lacks his father and fatherly
succor. Orpheus, a poet, son of Apollo, and Calliopes. Orpheus, a, um, of
Orpheus. Orsus, he began. Orsus, he that begins to do a thing. Orsus, a,
um, begone. Orthodoxia, the right opinion or faith. Orthodoxus, a man of the
right opinion or faith. Orthogonius, a right corner. Orthographia, the right
form of writing. Orthopnoea, a disease, when a man can not fetch his
breathe, but holding his neck vpryghte. Orthopnoeci, they which have that
sickness. Orthostadios, a garmente, which was always worn vngyrte. Ortus, ti,
uide Hortus. Orti pensiles, gardeynes made on howses, or pyllours. Ortus, ta,
tum, borne. Ortus, tus, the birth or nativity, Also the rysynge of the son.
Ortygia, the name of an I Will. Ortix, tigis, a bird called a quayle. Oryx, gis,
a beast of the kind of gotes.
O, ANTE S.
OS, oris, the mouth, also the vysage: sometime the proporcion of all the
body, ^
sometime countenance, also presence, and language. Os distorquere, to make a
mow. Os durum, a shameless knave. Os sublini^e, to mock or deceive craftily,
with fair words or promyses. Plin de vi. (...).
Os, ossis, a bone. Ossum, idem. Osae, laws concerning devotion. Osanna, I
pray the save us. Osas^m, for Odi, I hate. Oscedo, dinis, yanynge or gapyng.
sommetyme stenche. Osci, people in Italye. Oscillo, are, to bow down. Ocilla,
little images of wax to be offered. Oscillum, a little mouth. sometime a
little image or poppette. Oscines, birds, which by their voices do sygnifie
somewhat to come or happen. Ocinum, a general name of birds, which do sing,
a singing bird. Oscis, the abhomynable use of carnalle sin. Oscito, tare,
to gape, as men do for lack of sleep. Oscitatio, gapynge, Also quyetenesse
from labor. Oscitanter, softely, aduysedly, sobrely. Oscitabunde, idem.
Osculana pugna, battaylle, wherein they, which were before vaynquysshed, have
the vyctorie. Osculum, a little mouth, also a kiss. Osculor, aris, ari, to
kiss. Osiris, osiridis, the son of Jupiter begot on Neobe, the daughter of
Phoroneus, which succeeded Phoroneus in the kingdom of the Argiues, and
afterward was king of Egypt, who after his death was honored for a god. Ossa,
a high mountain in Thessalye. Osseus, a, um, bonye, or of a bone.
Ossiculatim, one boon from an another in pieces. Ossifragus, fraga, gum, that
which breaks boones. Ossilegium, a gatherynge of bones. Ossiculum, a little
bone. Ossuaria, a shryne or like thing, where the bones of deed men are put.
Ostendo, di, dear, to show. Ostento, ostentare, to show often. Alsoo to
booste. Ostentum, a thing, which happens seldom, and betokens, that some
strange thing shall happen. As a blasyng sterre, thunder on a fair day.
Sometime it signifies a thing monstrous. Ostento, tare, to boste.
Ostentatio, boostynge. Ostentus, tus, a skorne. Ostia, ostiorum, the entrees of
greatte ryuers, sometime havens. Ostia, a town nyghe to Rome. Ostiarius, a
porter. Ostiatim, from door to door. Ostiensis, a little hauyn at Rome.
Ostium, a door or gate. Ostracismus, a manner of exylynge of men at Athenes,
which excellyd other in power or authorytie: which exyle was done by
delyuerynge of oyster shelles, wherein the name of him, which should be exyled,
was written. Ostracum, a shelle. Ostrea, an oyster. Ostrearius panis, Brown
breadde, the which men are wont to eat with oysters. Ostreatus, ostreata,
ostreatum, hard as an oyster. Ostrinae uestes, garments of purple color.
Ostrum, purple or other like color. Osus, osurus, participles of Odi. Osus
sum, osus es, osus est, I hate, thou hate, he hates.
O, ANTE T.
OTior, swyfter. Otior, ari, to be ydell or at rest. Otiosus, a, um, ydell,
sure. Otiose, idelly, at leiser, surely, without care. Otium, idelnes, vacation
from labor, also leyser, rest, quietness. Othryades, a man's name of
Lacedemonia. Othrys, a hylle in Thessaly. Otides, birds like to partriches.
Otus, a shryche owl.
O, ANTE V.
OValis corona, a garlande of myrtels, given to him, which had vyctory without
effusion of bloudde. Ouatio, a small triumph of a prince or captain, which
had victory of his enmies without slaughter of men, or where battle was not
denounced: in the which triumph the captain went on foot, or only did ride
on a horse, with a garland of myrtelles on his heed, and his souldyours
singing about him. Ouatus, ta, tum, which is in symylitude of an egg.
Ouans, ouantis, reioysynge, being joyful. Ouiaria, a flock of sheep. Ouicula,
a little sheep. Ouifera gallina, a broude hen. Ouile, a fold or
sheepehowse. Ouillus, a, um, of a sheep. Ouinus, idem. Ouis, a sheep. Ouo,
are, to rejoice with noise or voice in a multitude. Ouum, an egg. Ouum ouo
simile, one egg like an another, applied unto them, which be like of
conditions or person. Ouo prognatus eodem, of oone father and mother, or
brought up under one master, or in one school.
O, ANTE X.
OXygala, sower milk. Oxygarum, sharp sauce. Oxylapathon, sorrel. Oxymeli,
honye and vynegre sodden together. Oxyporon, sharp sauce. Oxyporopola, he that
sells meat in sharp sauce, or sowce. Oxysaccharum, sugar and vynegre sodden
together, of sum men called Syrupus acerosus symplex. Oxytoca, medicines to
make a womanne to bring forth her birth quyckely.
O, ANTE Z.
OZena, soores about the nose, which have an ill savor. Ose, stynche of the
mouth. Ozinum, an herb called basyll.
P, ANTE A.
PABVLARIS, pabulare, pertaining to fourrage or meat for beastis. Pabulatio,
fourraginge. Pabulator, a forra grour. Pabulor, aris, ari, to goo in
forragynge. sometime to feed, as a beast does. Pabulum, forage or meat for
beasts. Pacate, peasybly. Pace tua, pace uestra, by thy license, by your
leave, or license. Pachiri, hills in the less Asia. Pachisos, a river of
Sicile. Pachynus, a mountain in Sicile on the sea side, or an elbowe of the
land there. Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace. Pacificatorius, a, um, that
which does pacyfie. Pacifico, care, to pacify. Paciscor, sceris, sci, to
make couenaunte, Plinius.
to bargayne, Paco, are, to mitigate, to apease, to accord. Pactilis, le.
platted, Pactilis corona, a platted garlande. Pactio, an accord, agreement.
Erasm. in Chiliad.
Pactoliopes, exceeding richesse. Pactolus, a river in Lydia, having golden
grauelle. Pactum, sometime a participle sygnifienge couenanted, promised,
sometime a nowne, signifienge a covenant. Pactum transitionis, a safe conduite,
Ti. L^uius.
to pass from one country to an other, a pasport. Pacuuius, the name of a
noble poet. Padua, and Patauium, a City in Italye, by Venyce. Padus, a river
in Italye called the Po. Padusa, a river, which sum say is an arm of the
Po. Paean, an hymn in the praise of Apollo. sommetyme the same Apollo. It is
now taken for any hymn, made to the land of God, or our Lady. Paedagium,
lodging for servants and chylderne. Paedagogium, a bond servant.
Paedagogus, he that is appointed to await on chyldern to see them well ordered.
Paeda^etus, a man's name. Paederastes, a lover of chylderne in unhonest wise.
Paederastia, a viciouse love of chylderne. Paedia, erudition and institution in
good arts, as Gellius teaches. Paedico, paedicaui, pedicare, to commytte
buggerye. Paedor, paedoris, sluttysshenesse, uncleanness, fylthe. Paedotribes,
and pedotriba, a schoolemayster. Paeon, a foot in meter, which is of oone
long syllable and three short. Paeonia, an herb callydde Pyonye. Also a
countreye in Europa, and is a part of Macedonye. P^stum, a city in Lucania,
where there is abundance of Roses. Paestanus, na, number, of that city. Paetus,
he that looks a squynte upward. Paganalia, ploughmens holyday, as wakes be
now adays. Paganus, a man of the countreye, or of the vyllage: sommetyme it
is taken for him that goth not to battle. Pagasa, a town of Thessaly, which
after was called Demetrias. Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage. Pagina, the side of a
leaf in a book. Paginula, a little side of a leaf in a book. Pago, gis,
pepigi, gere, pactus, to make covenant. Pagus, a vyllage. Pagytis, the name of
a river and of a city, of which the people are called Pagyritae. Pala, a
spade, also a p^ele to put in breadde into the oven. Also a fan to make wind.
Also the brodest part of a ring. Palae, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of
metal when it is fined. Palaca, pieces of fine gold. Palaemon, onis, was
callid a god of the sea. Palaestina, a country in Syrie, ioynynge to Arabie,
called in holy scripture Philist^im. Palaestra, a wras^lyng place: also the
exercise of wrastlynge. Ci. de ora tare primo
It is also the comeliness of mouynge and gesture, according to the state or
degree of the person, which shows it. Palaestricum, idem. Palaestricus, a
wrasteler. Palaestricus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to wrastelynge. Palaestrita, he
that uses wrastlynge. Palam, openly, before men, that all men may see it.
Palamedes, a noble greek, which sound certain letters of greek, Also to
set an arraye in an hooste, and the form of watches, with the watch word.
Palangae, leauers or porters, wherewith they left and bear tymbre, and such
like things of greatte weight. Palango, palangare, to bear on leyuars or
porters. Palangarii, men, which do bear on leyuers or porters, things of
great poyse or weyghte. Palatiar, and palatual, a Sacrifyce done at Rome on
the hylle called Palatinum. Palatio, onis, Vitrunius* li. 2.
a foundacyon made in a maryse ground with pyles of timber. Palantes, they
that wander about, and wot not whither to go. Palanteum, a city builded on
the hill called Palatinus. Palantia, a city in Arragonia. Palatha, a pressed
fygge. Palatim, an aduerbe sygnifienge scattered and wandrynge here and there.
Palatina officia, offices within a princes palayce or court. Palatinus mons,
an hylle at Rome. Palatium, a palaise of an emperor or great king. Palatus,
seu palatu^, the rouse of the mouth. Palea, chafe of corn, also a gristell,
which fallethe down from the neck of a cock or capon. Palearium, the
Dewelappe of a Rudder beast. Also a place, wherein chafe is kept. Paleatus,
made or myxte with chafe. Pales, called goddess of shepeherdes and of
pasture. Palene, a city, so called of Pallena, the daughter of Sython, and
wife of Cletus. Palepaphos, a city of Cypres. Palescamander, a river in Troy.
Palicenus, a fountain in Sicilia. Palilia, shepeherdes holidays kept in the
honor of Pales. Palimpsestus, parchemente rased. Palingenesia, a regeneration
or second natyuitie. Palinodia, a contrary song, or retractynge of that,
which oone has spoken or written: Now of sum men called a recantynge.
Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, which one has spoken or written.
Palinurus, was the Master of the ship, wherein Aeneas camme into Italye.
Alsoo an Elbowe of the land of Sycile into the Sea. Paliurus, a bryer, which
bears a codde, wherein are three or four black seeds. Palla, a woman's gown.
Palace, a concubyne. Palladium, the image of Pallas. Palladius, a man's name,
which wrote of husbandrye. Pallancana, a sharp oynyon, which causes the
eyes to water. Palladius, a, um, that songeth to Pallas. Pallas, autis, the
son of Euander, sommetyme king of Latynes. Also a Giant. Pallas, adis,
called goddess of battle, and also of wisdom. Pallax, acis, a concubyne,
such as one keeps instead of his wife. Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale.
Pallescere, idem. Palliastrium, a course mantell. Palliatae fabulae, Comedyes
or enterludes made in Grecia, and the personages there in were Greeks, as
Togatae fabulae, were enterludes in Rome, and the personages Romans, so
called because the ouermoste habyte of Greeks was called Pallium, of the
Romans Toga. Palliatus, cladde in a mantell. Pallio, are, to concele or hyde.
Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle. Palliolatus, idem. Palliolum, a short
mantelle. Pallium, a mantelle, such as knights of the garter do wear.
Pallor, oris, a palenesse of color. Paluster, ris, tree, and tra, trum, of the
fenne. Palma, the palm of the hand. Also a mesure called a handbrede,
sometime an ore to row with. Also a palm tree or daate tree. sometime it
sygnifyeth vyctorie. Palmam praeripere, to take the praise or honor from an
other. Palmare facinus, an act worthy the palm or sign of vyctorie.
Palmarium, worthy the sign or token of vyctorie. Palmaria spacia, a handbrede
space. Palmata, and palmaris uestis, a garmente of bawdekyn, which the consule
did wear in time of peace, and the vyctour in time of war. Palms, itis, the
small and tender branches, most proprely of a vine. Palmerum, the place,
wherein date trees do grow. Palmens, a, um, of a palm tree. Palmifer, and
palmiger, that bears palm, or date trees. Palmipedalis, a measure of a foot
and a handebrede. Palmipedes aues, all birds, which hau^ hole fete, as
commonly al water fowls have. Palmipes, splay footed. Palmyra, a great
castelle or fortress in the myddell of Syria. Palmyrena, a country in Syrie.
Palmo, are, to bind together: Also to do any thing with the palm of the
hand. Palmosus, full of palm trees. Palmula, a little oore or sculle. also a
date. Palmus, and palmeum, a mesure. If it be palmus mayor, it is of five
fyngers, or a hand breadth. If it be minor, it is but four fingers Palo, are,
to hedge or pale in: also to wa^der. Palor, palaris, to go asonder here and
there scattered. Palpebrae, the hears which do grow on the cheeks. Palpito,
rare, to quake or tremble. Palpator, toris, and palpo, ponis, a flatterer.
Palpo, and palpor, ari, to feel, also to flatter. Paludamentum, a cote armure.
Paludatus, cladde in a cote armure. Palumba, and palumbus, a stock douue, or
ring douue. Palumbarius, a certain hawke, which is long and black, and
flies the most part by night. Palumbes, wodde culuers. Palus, li, a stake or
pooste. Palus, paludis, a fenne or maryse. Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, which
do ear of all manner of things. Pamphilia, a region in the less Asia.
Pampillum, a charyotte. Pampilona, a cite in the royalme of Nauer. Pampinarium,
a heap of grene branches. It is also the tender branch, which grows out
of the hard tree. Pampinarius, a, um, and pampineus, a, um, of grene
branches. Pampino, are, to cut of the small branches of a vine. Pampinus, a
vine leaf, or grene branch. Panagron, a greatte sweep net, which takes
all manner of fyshe. Pan, panis, called the god of shepardes. Panax, acis, an
herb, which has a leaf like to the leaves of a fygge tree. Also a long
stalk mosy, and on the top a ^^ap, wherein are sweet seeds, with a sharp
sent: and a has a yelowe flower, and grows in diverse parts of Grecia.
Panarium, a pantry, where bread is kept. Panchaia, a region in Arabie.
Pancarpia, a garlande made of diverse flowers, or of all flowers that may be
found. Pancraciastes, a man expert and excellent in all feats of actiuitie.
Pancratium, exercise in all feats, as wrastlynge, rounnynge, leaping,
casting of the darre, and other like exercyses of strength. Pancratius, he
that does exercise the said feats. Pandana porta, a gate of the city of
Rome, which was first and last opened, for all things to be brought into
the city. Pandecta, comprehendynge all things: it is also the volume of the
law civil, called also the digestes. Pandiculario, gapynge. Pandiculor, aris,
to gape as they do, which come from sleep. Pando, didi, dear, passum, and
pansum, to open Pando, aui, are, to bow down. Pandocheus, an inholder.
Pandochium, an inn, or commune lodging. Pandus, a, um, open. Panegytis, a mart
or fair, or great asse^bly. Panegyricus, an open and solemn comme^dation of
princis. Pangaeus, an elbowe of Thracia. Pango, pepegi, and panxi, pangere, to
set, to plant, to join one thing to an other, to fasten, to drive in, to
write, to singe, to tell. Panhormus, a city in Sicile. Panicum, a sudden
fear, whereby sommetyme men be distraught, or out of their wits. Panicula,
that which on sum herbs or trees do hang down like hears, long and
round. Panicum, a grain. Panifex, ficis, a baker. Panificium, the craft of
bakynge. Panis, breadde. Panis nauticus, byskette. Panis secundarius, raunged
bread, or chete breadde, or crybell bread. Paniscus, a god of the woddes.
Pantacratiasta, he that fyghteth with hands and feet. Suidas.
Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all manner of games. Panneus, a, um, woullen.
Pannicularia, things of small valor. Pannicularius, a draper that sells
clothe. Pannonia, the royalme of Hungary. Pannonij, Hungariens. Pannosus, he
that wears pore apparel. Pannuelium, a handekercher. Pannus, clothe.
Panomphaeus, a name of Jupiter, sygnyfyenge that he hereth all men's voices.
Pansa, plain footed. Panselmos, the full moon. Pantagia, a river in Sicyle.
Pantasilea, a queen of Amazon. Pantheon, a temple of all the gods. Panthera,
a beast called a Panter, which has spots of sundry colors. Pantheron, a
net, wherewith all manner of foul is taken. Pantices, a greatte bealye, also
the flux. Pantomimus, a dyssarde, which can fay^^ and countrefeyte every
man's gesture. Panurgia, subtyltie. Panus, panula, and panulla, a kyrnell in
the share or gryne of a man, or behind the care. It is also a weauers roll,
whereon the web of cloth is rolled or wounden. Papare, to call dad as a
child does. Papas, a father, as chylderne do call Dadde. Papauerata uestis,
a garment not pure white, but of the color of popye. Papauer, eris, an herb
called Popie. Pape, an interiection of wondering, will ye see, a wonderful
thing. Papaeus, in the tongue of Scithia, sygnyfieth Iupyter. Paphlagonia, a
regyon in Asia. Paphos, and Paphia, a city in the ylande of Cypres. Papia, a
city in Lumbardy, called Pauia. Papilio, onis, a butterflye. Papilla, a
little wheale or pousshe in the skin of a man. Also a cock in a cundyte,
whereout water comes. More over the nyppell or teate of a womannes breaste.
Pappa, pappe made with milk and flower. Pappo, pappare, to eat. Pappus, a
grandesyre or grandfather. It is also an herb called groundswell. Papula, a
whelke. Papyrus, seu papyrum, is a great rushe, which grows in the fennes
and marys grou^des in Egypt and Syria, ten cubytes high: whereof the first
paper was made, whereon men did write. we have growing in our fenny grounds
like russhes with black knoppes, long and round, which are called Now
Papyrus is called paper, wherein men do use to write or prynte books.
Papyratius, of paper, or of the said rushe. Papyrius, the surname of a noble
Romayn. Par, ris, like, equalle, meet, even, reasonable. Pares, two like one
to the other in form or degree. Parem esse, to be sufficient, to do or
sustain a thing. Paria, payres, two together of any thing. Paria facere, to
requyte, to do one thing for another, like for like. Par refer, idem. Par
pari, to recompense one thing with another of equal estimacion. Par impar, a
game that children used, called even or odd. Parabilis, le, that which may be
sone gotten, or will be sone ready. Parabola, a comparison, or resemblaunce.
Paracletus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an advocate. Paraclytus, a man infamed,
ill reported of. Paradiastole, a dilatinge of a matter by an interpretation.
Paradigma, an example. Paradisus, Paradise. Paradoxa, a sentence, contrary to
the opinyon of diverse. Paradromis, a galery, or walk. Paraenesis, a precepte
contaynynge an exhortation. Paraeneticus, ca, cum, contaynynge such precepte or
instruction. Paragoge, is a figure, when a letter or syllable, is added to a
word, as Dicier for dici. Paragraphe, a thing written before a sentence.
Paragraphus, and paragraphum, a paragrafe. Paralipomenon, left out, unspoken,
or unwritten, which ought to have been spoken or written. Parallel, lines in the
sphere of the world equally dissaunt, whereby the son, when he passes,
causes variacion in hours of the day. Paralysis, a sickness called the
Palsy. Paralyticus, he that is taken with the Palsy. Paranymphus, he that is
the mediator in matrymony between the man and the woman: she which is on the
woman's part is called Pronuba. Varro. de lin. lat.
Parapechium, a light cloak. Parapherna, that which is added unto the womannes
dower, called the ioynture. Paraphrasis, an imitation of words, setting out
the sense or meaning of the autour more plainly. Paraphrastes, he that does
not translate word by word, but expresses the sentence of the autour more
openly. Pararium aes, was double wages, given to horsemen for having two
horsis. Parasanga, a mile in Persya, contaynynge fifty furlonges. Parasceue, a
preparacion, also good friday. Parasiopesis, a figure in spekinge, when we
feign that we will not speak, and yet covertly it is declared what we do mean.
Parasitus, a haunter of other men's tables uncalled for, also he which to fill
his belly with meat and drink, speaks all way to the appetyte of him, with
whom he dines or soupeth. Paras^^aster, he that countresayteth him that is
called Parasitus. Parastarae, certain stones in pyiars. Parastata also one of
the bones in the shanke of the leg. Parastates, stones, which do sustain
both sides of a door, called Iambes. Paratragoedio, are, to brag or crake,
to speak great or high words. Parcae, ladies of desteny, also it signifies
the self destyny, or disposicion in prolonging or shortnynge life. Parco,
peperci, parcere, to spare, to forgive, or pardone, to let or prohibit, to
leave, to forbear or absteyne. Parcere prerio, to spare for cost. Parcere metu,
to put away fear. Vergilius.
Parce, scarcely, nyggardly, nyghly, fair and softly. Parciter, idem.
Parcitas, frugalytie, No. Mar.
or moderacyon in living. Parcus, a nygarde. Parcus, ca, cum, nighe, or
nygarde, scarce in expenses, sometime it signifies seeld. Parcus comitatu, he
that has a small train. Parcus opera, an easy warkeman, he that is more ydell
than occupied. Pardus, a carte of the mountain, some take it for a Panthere.
Pardalus, a bird of dunne color, which fleyth in flocks. Parectata, and
Parectatus, he that is newly issued out of a childs years, No. Mar.
and begins to have the tokens of a man. Parectonia, the mother of Plato,
the most noble philosopher. Parens, father, mother, or any other auncetour.
Parentela, auncetry. Parentalia, festes made at the buryenge of auncetours.
Parenthesis, is a sentence comprehendyd within another sentence, without any
detriment thereunto, being marked with one half circle at the beginning, and
another at the end, as in this wise. Nihil adeo principem decet, (quod omnes
quidem fatentur) quantu^ iustitia, prudentiae, atque liberalitati aequaliter
coniuncta, Nothing so well becomes a prince (which all men do confess) as
Justice equally joined with wisdom and bounteousnes. Parento, tare, to
celebrate the funeralles of auncetours or friends. Pappi, the flowers of
thistels, which be like feathers. Pappous, a, um, pertaining to my
grandfather. Paranomasia, a figure in spekinge, where one word is like to
another, but of diverse sygnifications. Nam inceptio est ame^tium, non amantium,
this beginning is of mad men, not of lovers. Paratus, ta, tum, ready. Parate,
redyly. Pareo, rui, rere, to appiere, to be seen, to obey. Parergon, some
thing added to, being no part of the matter, as when a payntour does make an
image, he does add to trees, or towns. Parethonium, a white color that
peynters do lay, which is fond in Egypt. Paribit, for pariet, she shall
bring forth a child. Parici, iuges assigned for capital causes, as murdre or
felony that requires death. Paries, etis, a wall of a house. Parieti loque^is,
thou speak to the wall, which may be said of him, that will not eftsoon
reherce that, which he heryth spoken. Parieta^ia, an herb called Pelitory.
Parietinae, old walls. Parilia, festival days, which the Romans kept for
preservation of their cattle. Parilis, le, equal. Parili^as, equalytie,
symilitude in quantity or quality. Pario, peperi, parere, to bring forth
children, the like thing in beasts, sometime to bring forth generally.
Parius, a, um, of the isle called Parus, from whens is brought marbelle stone,
called Parium marmor. Parito, tare, to prepare. Pariter, in likewise, equally,
semblably. Parma, a Targat, which foot men did use. Parmula, a bucklar.
Parnasides, the nine muses, or ladies of sciences. Parnassidae vestes,
apparayle belonging to maidens. Parnassus, a mountain in Greece, having two
tops, under the which the nine musis did inhabyte or dwell. Paro, are, to
prepare, to geate, to apparel. Paro, onis, a little ship or hulke. Parochus,
an officer, which provided for wood and salt, for ambassadors, also it is now
used for a priest, which is a curate, or parish priest. Paroecia, a paryshe.
Parodus, a passage. Paroemia, a proverb accommodate to the matter and time.
Paroeci, parysshonars, or they, which do dwell within one parish. Paropsis,
idis, a potage disshe, or potynger. Paros, an isle. Parotides, kernelles behind
the ears. Paroxismus, the fit in a fever. Parthasia, a country in Grecia,
called also Archadia. Parthasius, an excellent payntour. Particida, murderars
of their parents, betrayours of their countray, sometime murdre generally.
Patricidium, murdre of kynsfolke, or traison to the propre countraye.
Pa^ricidium, Marricidium, murdre of father and mother. Pars, partis, part.
Parts primas agere, to play the first part. Parts primae, the chief part.
Parsimonia, moderate expenses. Parsi, the pretertence of parco, I have spared.
Parthenis, an herb called Motherwort. Parthenium, Diosc^^^^*
is an herb which has small leaves like to Coriander, and a flower white
somewhat yelowe within, and has a greuouse savor. Some poticaryes do take it
for the less mugwort, but I find not, that it is taken for feuerfue. Celsus
writes, that it grows on walls. Parthenope, the old name of the city of
Naples. Parthia, a countraye in Asia. Parthi, people of that countraye.
Parthicus, a, um, of the countray of Parthia. Partiarius, a partinge fellow, or
copartner. Particeps, cipis, he that takes part. Participo, are, to give part,
or take part, to make another man partner, or of counsayl. Particula, a
portion. Particularis, re, particular. Particulariter, particulerly.
Particulatim, particularly. Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners, which have
inheritance together. Partim, partly, in part, some time part. Partim hominum
venerunt, part of the men did come. Partio, onis, a birth. Partior, iris, iri,
partitum, and partio, ire, Plaut. (...).
to part to deuyde. Parthissus, a river on the north part of Germania.
Partitio, a particion, or division. Partitudo, for partus, the birth of a
child. Partus, ta, tum, gotten with labor. Parturio, iui, and rij, to labor
as women do in travail with child. Partus, ^us, and par^i, and partuis, the
birth of a child, sometime the child self. Parulis, a swellynge of the
goomes. Paruifacio, cere, to set little by. Parui aestimo, idem. Paruipendo,
idem. Paruitas, the lytelnesse. Parum, a little. Parumper, a little while, or
time, also very little: sometime quickly. Paruus, a, um, little. Salustius
Paruulus, a little one. Parum habere, to set little by. Pasalli, pomaunders.
Pascales, sheep or pultry, which do feed at large. Pascha, Easter. Paschalis,
le, pertayninge to Easter. Pasceolus, a letherbagge. Pascito, tare, to feed.
Varro. dear rust.
Pasco, paui, pascere, and Pascito, are, to feed, to give meat to another, to
norysshe or bring up, to augmente. Pascere oculos, to content or playse the
eye^ with the beholdinge of a thing. Pascor, sceris, pasci, to feed as beasts
done. Pascua and Pascuum, pasture. Pascuus, a, um, that which serves to feed
catell. Pasiphae, the wife of Minos the king of Crete, who having company
with a bull, brought forth the monstre, called Minotaurus, which was half a
man and half a bulle. Passales, be as well sheep as pultry, which feed
abroad. Passex, eris, a sparowe, also a fisshe, called a playce. Passerculus, a
little sparowe. Passili, a little grain called vatches or fitches. Passim, here
and there, sometime it signifies from all places, sometime indifferently,
also over all. Passio, a passion, grief. Passiuus, a, um, that which signifies
passion, or causes passion or grief. Passiui amatores, they which do love
all women indifferently. Passum, licour made of raysons. Passus, a, um, spread
abroad, or open. Passus, us, a pace, which does contain five feet. Pastillus,
vel pastillum, a pasty. Pastinaca, an herb called parshyps, also a fish.
Pastino, are, to velue in a garden: repastino, vide in R. Pastinatus, tus,
deluinge. Pastinum, a debill, or setting stick. Pastio, onis, pasturinge, or
fedinge of catell. Pastomis, an instrument, which is set on the nosethrilles of
horsis, that will not be ruled, and is called of horsebreakers, Barnacles.
Pastophori, certain preestis in Egypt. Pastophorium, the chamber of the
Sexten, or him which keeps the Temple. Pastor, oris, a sheparde or herdman.
Pastoralis, le, pertayninge to the shepharde or herdman. Pastorius, a, um,
idem, Pastoricius, a, um, of fedynge or grasinge of catell. Pastus, a, um, he
that has eaten. Pastus, tus, meat, fedynge. Patagium, a cloak of cloth of
gold, used to be worn on rich garments. Patagiati, they which do wear
rich clokes. Patagiarij, the craftysmen that makes such clokes. Patara, a
city in the countraye of Licia. Patauium, a city in Italy called Padua, nigh
unto Venice. Patauini, men of that city. Patefacio, cere, to make open, to
declare, to disclose. Patefio, fieri, to be disclosed or discovered. Patella, a
little pan or a skiller. Pateo, tui, tere, to be open. Pater, tris, a father.
Patera, a brood piece or bolle of gold or silver. Pater^amilias, the good man
of the house. Paterpatratus, to whom it pertaynyd, wha^ trues should be taken,
to receive the oaths and appoyntement of both parts, and was there in, chief
and principal ambassador. Pater patrimus, he that is a father, and has his
father living. Paternus, a, um, pertaining to a father. Patesco, scere, to be
open. Pathe, troubles or vexacions of mind, passions. Pathetica oration, an
oration moving the hearer to indignation or pity. Pathmos, an I Will in the se
called Aegeum. Patibulum, a woden lock of a door, or a bar wherewith the
door is made fast, alsoo a place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or cross.
Patientia, patience. Patillum, a pair of tongues or other like instrument,
wherewith coals are taken up. Patina, a dysh wherein meat is carried.
Patinarium, meat, which is stewed upon a chaffynge dysshe. Patior, pateris,
pati, to suffer. Plautus in Asinar.
Patitor, suffer thou. Patrae, tarum, a city in Achaia. Patrator, oris, he
that does a thing. Patres conscripti, senators. Patria, a countraye.
Patriarcha, a prince or chief man of the fathers. It was also the name of
dignytie, of five chief Archebyshoppes, as of Rome, Antioche, Alexandry,
Jerusalem, and Constantinople. Patriarchatus, the dignity of a patriarche.
Patricida, he that kills his father. Patricidium, the murdre of a man's
father. Plautus in Can.
Patrice, nobly, or like a noble man. Patricius, a senators son, or commen
of Senators. Patrimonium, goods commen by inheritance, patrimony. Patrinus
and Patrimis, he which has his father lyuinge. Patrinus, a, um, of the
father, or pertaining to the father. Patritus, ta, tum, that which happens to
one by his father. Patrius* a, um, of the countreye. Patrizo, and Patrisso,
are, to be like a father. Patro, are, to perform. Patrocynor, aris, ari, to
defend them, which be pour, or be falsely accused. Patroclus, a noble greek,
companyon to Achilles. Patrocinium, defense of men being in trouble or suyte.
Patronymicum nomen, a name taken of an auncetour, as Priamides the children of
Priamus. Patronus, he that is advocate on the defendauntes part. Patrueles,
cosyn germayns, or right cosyns on the fathers side. Patruus, the fathers
brother. Patruus magnus, my fathers uncle. Patruus maximus, my grandfathers
uncle. Pat^agia, a river in Sicile. Patulico, care, to be open. Patulus, a, um,
wydeopen. Patulus bos, an ox or cow, whose horns do stand wide open.
Paucis, in few words. Paucus, ca, cum, few. Paucitas, tatis, fewness.
Pauculus, a, um, very few. No. Mar. Pom. Fest.
Paucies, seldom. Pauciens, idem. Pauens, it is, he that fears for a time.
Paueo, ere, to fear. Pauera, wheat, which springs not well out of the hose
when it grows in care. Pauesco, scere, to be aferde. Pauicula, a pauynge
bytell, Cato der^ ^ust.
wherewith stones be driven into the ground in the making of a pauement.
Pauidus, he that allwaye fears. Pauide, fearfully. Pauimento, are, to make a
pauement. Pauimentum, a pauement, or place paued, ^ floor. Pauio, ire, to
stryke. Pauito, tare, to be sore aferde. Paulisper, a very little while. Paulum,
and Paulo, a little. Paulatim, little and little. Paulominus, little less. Paulo
mox, by and by. Paulo prius, a little erst. Plautus i^ Menech.
Paululum, very little. Paululum modo, never so little. Terent. i^ Heau.
Paululo tum erat contenta, she was than content with a very little. Pauo, onis,
and Pauus, a pecoke. Pauor, oris, extreme fear. Pauper, pauperis, a pour man.
Pauper, peris, an adiectif pour. Pauperies, and Paupertas, tatis, poverty.
Pauper, ra, rum, poor. Pauperculus, and paupercula, a poor man, or poor
woman. Paupero, are, to make pour. Paupertinus, na, number, pour. Pausa, a
pause, leysour. Pausias, a noble payntour. Pauso, are, to pawse. Pauxillatim,
by little and little. Pauxillisper, idem. Pax, pacis, peace, a quiet liberty.
Paxillus, a little stake. Pax sequestra, a truce between two hostis.
P, ANTE E.
PEccatum, a sin, an offense. Pecco, care, to offend or sin. Pecorarius, a
herdeman, also he that does hyar catell. Pecorarius, a, um, pertayninge to
catell. Pecorinus, a, um, of rother beastis. Pecten, inis, a wayuers lowme,
also a comb. it is also the place about the pryuy members, where hear does
grow, it is also the sticks, wherewith a man stryketh doulcemers when he does
play on them, also a fish, sometime a harowe. Pectinatim, in the facion of a
comb. Pectino, to kembe, or to harowe. Pectitus, ta, tum, kembyd, or harowyd.
Pecto, xui, tere, to kembe, or trymme hear, to card woulle, to set a harp
or other like instrument. Pectoralis, le, pertayninge to the breast. Fascia
pectoralis, a breast kerchef. Pectorium, a certain carte sometime used in
France. Pectorosus, a, um, great brestyd. Pectunculus, a little fisshe.
Pectus, toris, the breast. Pectusculum, a little breast. Pecuarla, store of
catell: alsoo places where they be kept, also multitude of catell, alsoo
revenues that comes of catell. Pecuariam rem facere, to breed catel.
Pecuarius, a breedar of catell. Pecuarius, a, um, belonging to catell. Pecu,
indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell number, catell, beasts. Peculator, and
Peculatrix, he and she that steals a commune treasor. Peculatus, robbery of
the common treasour, or of a prince. Peculiaris, re, propre, or special.
Peculiariter, proprely, specially. Peculio, are, to punysshe by the purse.
Peculiosus, rich, of great substance. Peculium, substance, that richesse,
which is only in money and catell. Peculor, aris, ari, to steal a commune
treasour, or any thing from a prince. Pecunia, money, it is taken of the old
Ciuilions, for all things, which we call catell. Pecuniosus, rich. Pecus,
cudis, seu Pecus, pecoris, all manner of catell: sometime the multitude or
flock of catell, sometime it is taken only for sheep or gotes. Peda, and
Pedatura, the step or token of a man's foot. Pedalis, of a foot. Pedamen,
and Pedamentum, a stake or forke, whereby a vine, hoppes, or other like thing
is sustained, or borne up. Pedaneum, idem. Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantity
of a foot, in length, or distaunce. Pedanei iudices, inferior iuges, which
went on foot. Pedarij, were Senators, which did not show their opynions in
words, but only meuynge them selfs toward those persons, which had
raysonned, whose sentences they did approve, like as they do in the parliament
house. Pedatim, where one foot goes with the other, foot by foot. Pedatio,
the setting up of vynes. Cato.
Pedato, suddenly. Pedatus, footed. Pedem struere, to take him to his feet, to
run away. Pedem refer, to retreat or go back. Caesar. Cicer. pro Plan.
Pedem confer, to come to a point of a matter in controversy. Pedepressim, a
foot pase, softly. Pes, pedis, a foot, sometime it is taken for all the leg,
from the thyghe to the sole of the foot. Pedes ire, to go on foot. Pedes,
feet in meter, sometime lyse. Pedes, ditis, a foot man in battle. Pedester,
he that goes on foot, or is on foot. Pedetentim, softely and fair, by little
and little. Pedecosus, lousy, or full of lyse. Pedem ponere, to begin a matter.
Pedare, to set proppes, or to prop up a vine or tree, that it shall not fall or
bow down. Pedem reuocare, to retrayte or recule back. Pedestris oration, a
numerouse speaking or wrytinge in the form of a verse, or meter allthoughe
it be not a verse. Pedicillus, a little worm, which breeds between the
skin and the flesh. Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thing which has a stalk,
as the most part of fruit. Pedicularis morbus, the lousy sickness. Pedio,
dire, to stamp with the foot. Pediolus, a little foot. Pedica, any thing,
wherewith the foot is tied, as a fettar, a pair of gyues, or stocks.
Pedicosus, and Pediculosus, lousy. Pediculus, a fisshe, the stalk of an apple
or pear, or other fruit: also a louse. Pedissequus, and Pedissequa, a
servant, who follows allwaye the master, or mastres. Peditatus, an host of
footmen. Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to farte. Pedum, a shepecroke. Peganon, the
herb called Rue, or herb grace. Pegasides, the Musis. Pegasus, a horse, which
was feigned to have wings: it is also a sign or number of sterres in heaven.
Pegma, matis, a stage, whereon pageantes be set: or whereon plate and jewels do
stand to be looked on. Peieratio, perjury, a forsweringe. Peiero, are, to swear
falsely. Peior, peius, warse. Pelagus, the sea. Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the sea.
Pelamis, midis, fisshe called Tuny. Pelargos, a bird called a storke.
Pelasgis, a countraye in Greece called Arachadia. Pelasgi, people which came
out of Greece, and inhabited Italy: they be also Arcadiens. Pelasgicus, ca, cum,
of Arcadia. Pelias, a king of Thessalia, uncle to Jason. Pelicus, a prince, of
whom the people called Peligni took their name. Pelides, the surname of
Achilles. Peligni, people in Italy, which came out of Illiria. Pelion, a hill
in Thessalia. Pella, a city in Macedonia. alsoo a payle, whereinto kyne are
mylked. Pellax, acis, he that deceyueth with fair words. Pellacia, sayre
speech to deceive. Pellex, she that is a wedded man's harlot. Pellicator, a
deceyuer with fair words. Pellicatus, tus, the act or life of her, which
companieth with a weddyd man, aduoutry on her part. Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to
deceive with fair words, to move a man pleasauntly to do a thing. Pellectus,
meuyd, tempted. Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a skin or hyde. Pellicula, the
skin. Pellicalo, are, to cover with a skin. Pellio, onis, a skynnar.
Pellis, a skin. Pellitus, cladde in skynnes. Pella, pepuli, pellere, pulsum,
to put out or expel. Pelluceo, cere, to shine bright, to shine through.
Pellucidus, a, um, very clear. Pellucide, clearly. Pelluo, luere, to wasshe
clean. Pellunium, a basin, wherein men's fete are washed. Peloponnesus, a
countraye in Greece, called now Morea: and lies between the sea called Ionium,
and the sea called Aegeum. Pelops, pelopidis, which vaynquysshed on horsbacke
in runnynge Oenomaus, father of Hippodamia, and wedded her. Peloris, a kind of
shelfisshe. Pelorus, a hill in Sicile on the sea side. Pelta, a Targat or
buckler, like an half moon. Peltati, they which do wear such bucklars.
Peluis, a basin. Pelusium, Pom. Fest.
a city in Egypt. Peminosus, a, um, stinkinge. Penates, the gentyles called
goddis of ma^s life: they be sometime taken for the most secret parts of the
house. Penarius, and Penarium, a cellar or store house. Pendeo, es, pependi,
pendere, pensum, to hang, or be hanged, to depend, sometime to be in pain.
Pendere animi, to be troubled in mind, to doubt what to do, to cesse from
all other things, and to attend to one thing, to be in suspense. Pendere
poenas, to be punyshed. Pendo, is, pependi, dear, to ponder or way, to
consider, to esteem or value, to pay, to sustain or suffer, look for
dependo, suspe^do, expendo, in their first lettres. Pendulus, la, lum, that
hangs. Pene, allmoost. Penelope, the wife of Vlyxes. Penelopes telam
retexere, signifies to do and undo, to take much labor in vain. Penes,
with, or at. Penes hunc, with him. Penetrabilis, trabile, that may perce, or
be perced. Penetrale, the inner part of the house. Penetro, are, to perce.
Peneus, a river in Grecia, which dyuydeth the countrayes of Elis and Achaia.
Penicella, a paynters pencell, wherewith he paynteth. Penicillus, peniculum,
and penicillum, a paynters pensell. Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garment, the
skirtes. Peniculus, sieve peniculum, any thing which serves to brusshe or
wype clean any thing. Penis, a tail: also the secret membre of a man.
Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, having a tail, also penitus inward. Penitus, an
aduerbe, utterly, to the vttermoost, far of. Penna, a pen, or quyll.
Pennarium, a pennar. Penniculum, a fether. Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that
which bears fethars. Pennula, a little fether. Pensa, that which is paid for
a thing bought, the payement. Pensa, in the plurell number, thredes of flax or
woull, when it is spunne, which may be called yarne. Pensiculate, wayghtely.
Pensiculo, are, to ponder a thing. Pensilis, le, that which hangs, or
stondeth on high. Pe^sile horreu^, a garnard, where corn is kept Pensilis
homo, a man hanged. Pensi nihil liabere, to ponder or consider no thing, Val.
in po.
not to ponder or consider any thing. Pensio, a pencion or yearly rent.
Pensito, tare, to ponder well a mattier, to pay money, to make recompense.
Pensitor, a ponderer or wayer. Verborum pensitatores subtilissimi, Gellius.
The most subtle ponderers of words. Penso, are, to ponder or way a thing.
Pensos, oris, a wayer. Pensus, a, um, wayed, examyned, sometime it sygnifieth
good and wise. Pensum, the flax, which is bounden on the distaffe, Ci. de ora.
out of the which the threde is drawn. sommetyme it sygnifieth the threde
that is spunne. It is also the execution or mynystration of an office. Also
regard that one has to a thing. Plautus in tru^ulen.
Pensilis hortus, a gardeyne made upon the roufe of a house, or upon pyllars.
Pensilis vrbs, a city standing on vaultes. Pentaphillon, seu pentepatalon, an
herb called cinkefoyle, which has five leaves, Pentapolis, a countray
between Palestina and Arabia, wherein were the cities of Sodom and Gomor,
bourned by the vengeance of god for sin against nature. Pentacontarchus, a
captain of fyfty men. Pentarchus, he that is captayn of five men.
Pentateuchus, the volume of the five books of Moses, that is to say,
Genesis, Exodi, Numeri, Leuiticum, Deuteronomium. Pentathlus, he that
exercyseth any of these five games, casting of the ball, or tryndell,
runnynge, leaping, wrastlyng, and throwynge the darte. Pentecoste,
whytsontyde. Pentesilea, a queen of Amazon, which was slain at the syege of
Troy. Pentimimeris, is a part of a verse, where a sentence is fynysshed in
the first syllable of the third foot. Pentorbon, an herb called also peony.
Penula, a Cloak, worn when hit raynethe. Penularium, a cloak bag.
Penulatus, cloked. Penuria, extreme necessity, penury. Penus, penoris, and
penum, and penu, and penuarium, a storehouse. Sometime stoore or prouysion of
vytayles. Plautus in A^lularia.
Penussime, utterly. Peonia, an herb called Pyonie, which bears a red
flower, and great round sede, wherein is marvelous virtue against the falling
euylle. Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other like covering of the heed.
Peperci, I have spared, or forborne, or pardoned. Pepigi, and pupugi, the
preter tence of pungo. Also pepigi is the preter tence of pango. Pepigit
foedus, He made a league or alyaunce. Pepo, onis, a Melon. Per, sygnifyeth by,
joined with an another word it sygnyfyeth perfection. Perpulchrum, Very fair.
Pergraue, Veraye greuouse. Peraetatem, for or by reasone of his age. Peptica,
medycines, which do make good concoction in a man, that the meat caten, may
digeste well. Also salues and oyntementes, which do make impostumes ripe.
Pera, a scryppe or bag. Perago, egi, agere, to perform, to make perfyte, to
consider, to draw or cause to be drawn with force. Peragere reum, to accuse
one, and to sewe him to a condemnation. Peragro, are, to walk or go about a
place. Peramo, are, to love well. Peranno, annare, to contynewe or live over
year. Perardeo, dear, to bourne out or through. Perareo, ere, to dry up, to
be very dry. Peraro, rare, to tylle all through. Perbelle, very well, right
well. Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drink all out. Plautus in Pom. Fest.
Cicer. ibi.
Perbitere, for praeire, to go before. Per causam, for a cause. Percedere, to
depart. Percello, li, ere, to stryke and overthrow. Percino, nere, to sing
stylle, to contynewe singing. Perclam, very priuyly. Perduaxo, for perdo.
Peredia, a meal, where men eat hu^grely. Percipio, caepi, cipere, to
perceive, to take, or receive. Percitus, styrred. Percoarcto, are, to bring
into a little room. Percolo, ui, ere, to worship much. Percontor, aris, ari,
to ferche. Percudo, di, dear, to break. Perculsus, and percussus, stryken.
Percunctor, aris, ari, to inquire, to demand. Percuro, are, to heal
perfytely. Percurro, rere, to run apace, to run by. Percutio, cussi, tere,
to stryke, or smite. Perdite, extremely. Perditus, ta, tum, lost, perysshed,
without recovery, out of hope. Perdius, abiding all the day, or watching all
the day, or he which does any thing in the day time. Perdix, dicis, a
partryche. Perdo, didi, dear, to lose, to slay. Perduco, duxi, ducere, to bring
to an end, to bring or lead by force. Perduellio, onis, treason against the
king, or the country. Also a traitor. Perduellis, an enemy. Peredo, edi,
edere, to eat much. Peregre, out of a man's propre country. Peregre uado, I
go out of the countreye, or on pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I come out of
strange countrayes, or from pylgremage. Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into
strange countries, or on pylgremage. Peregrinus, a stranger or alyen.
Perendie, the day next after to morrow. Perendinus dies, idem. Perennis
fluuius, a course of water that comes with rain, or a brook that is only
made with rain. Perenniter, contynually. Perennis, ne, perpetual, ever
during. Perennitas, tatis, contynuaunce, long abiding. Perenno, are, to dure
or continue. Pereo, iui, uei, ^i, ire, to be lost or consumed, also to dye.
Peretro, are, to go or ride al about. Perfacul, the ancient writers used for
facile, lightly. Perfas and nefas, by right or wrong, by one way and other.
Perfect, perfitely. Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplysshed, optayned.
Terent. in ^^nucho.
Perfector, toris, he that brings a thing to pass, or to a point. Perfero,
tuli, far, to bring in conclusion. Also to bring or tell tidinges. sometime
to suffer or endure. Perficio, cere, to accomplish, to bring to a point, to
obtain. Perfidiosus, a, um, full of disloyalty. Perfidiose, disloyally,
trayterousely. Perfido, dear, to trust much. Perfidus, false of promise, he
that does any thing against the trust that is put in him, disloyal.
Perfidia, falsehode against promise or trust, disloyalty. Perfidus, very
trustye. Perfines, for perstringas, strain thou hard. Pom. Fest.
Perflatus, a great blaste of wind. Perflo, are, to blow vehemently or
strongly. Perfluo, xi, fluere, to ru^ne out as water both out of a broken
vessel. Perfodio, dear, to door or perce through, ^^ stryke through, to dygge
through, or to the dottome or depest of any thing. Perfore, to come well to
pass. Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole through. Perfortiter,
myghtily. Perfossus, a, um, perced through, stryken or dygged through.
Perfracte, obstynately. Perfrigefacio, perfrigefacere, Ci. o^^^e. ^
to make very cold. Perfrico, care, to rub much. Perfricuit faciem, aut
frontem, aut or, Is in a proverb as mohe to say, as he has laid aparte
shame, or he is shameless, or without abashement. Perfricte frontis, without
shaame or honestye. Perfructus est, he has taken the fruit or pleasure of a
thing, he has used or exercysed a thing, or has left the use or exercise
thereof. Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfruitus, perfrui, to take all
the profit or commodity, to take pleasure or recreation in any thing.
Perfuga, he that flees to the contrary part in battle, or forsakes his
captain. Perfugio, gere, to rounne unto oone for succor. Perfugium, a place,
whereunto a man runs to have succoure, or to be kept from danger: It is
also taken for any thing, whereby a man may be succored. Perfunctorie,
passing over lyghtely. Perfunctorius, a, um, that which passethe lightly
away, or tarieth not long. Perfunctus, he that has done diligently his
office or duty. Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to pour out, or drop out, or
stylle out. Perfunditque genas lachrimis, ^uidi^^.
The tears dropped down on his chekes. Perga, a town in Pamphilia, whereof
Diana was called Pergaea. Pergama, orum, the towers of Troy. Pergamena charta,
parchement. Pergamum, sieve Pergamus, a City in Asya, the country of Galene,
the famous Phisycion. Perge, go to, pass forth. Perge in virum, play the
man, goo to like a man, go to hardily. Pergin? will thou not leave? will thou
not be gone. Pergrandis, de, very great. Pergo, per^exi, pergere, to go, to
proceed* to endeavor to do a thing, to continue, to make haaste, to assaye*
(...) devoured to go. Terent. in Phor^^.
Suspen^o g^adu (...) perrexi, I assayed with a ^yght pass to go softely.
Pergraecor, aris, ari, to ^^ ryottous, in eating, drinking, and hauntynge
harlottes. Pergraue, very greuousely, Pergula, a galerye, proprely. where it is
open on both sides, It is also the place in a ship, wherein men do,
walk. Also a vine raised in the form of an herber* Sommetyme the company of
warkemenne, obeyenge to the chyefe warkeman. Perhibeo, ere, to say, to give, to
set a price. Praetium perhibere. Perhibere testimonium, to bear witness.
Perhibere uerba, to say. Perhorreo, rere, to be soore aforde. Perhorresco,
idem. Perhumane, and perhumaniter, right gentilly. Periander, oone of the seven
wise men of Grecia. Periclimenon, an herb called woodbynde. Pericles, a
noble man of Athenes, in whom was a natural eloquence incomparable.
Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peril, also to experyence or prove a thing.
Periculosus, a, um, dangerous. Periculum, peril or danger. sometime
experience or proof. Periculum facere, to prove. Perhiodus, a clause, a circute
in words, or contynuance in speaking. Perhiodicae febres, fevers, which come
by courses or fyttes. Perillus, was an artifycer, which made a bull of br^sse
wherinto (being glowing hot) men should be put, that in tourmentynge of them,
by they^ crienge, a noise should issue out like the mowynge or belowynge of a
bulle, the which engine when Perillus had given to Phalaris, the cruel
tyrant, he caused the crafts manne to be first put into it, to prove his
own experience. Perimo, emi, imere, to kylle. Peremptus, ta, tum, killed.
Peridoneus, a, um, very meet. Periege^i^, a compass or ^y^cuy^e. Perii. I am
lost or distroyed. Perii animo, my heart or courage is gone. Perire mulierem,
to love a womanne feruentely. Perinde, so, in like wise, even ly^e, very
much, even as, in this facion. Perinthus, a city of Thra^^^, which now is
called Heracl^a. Periodicus, ca, cum, the ^ethe and comes by courses.
Periodica febris, a (...) comes by courses, (...) tercians and (...).
Peri^ci, companions or dwellers together in one house. Periparasi^a, the
hangyng of a house, with tapisrye or other like thing. Peripateticus, a
philosopher of Aristotels sect* or opinion. Peripheria, a cyrcumference.
Periphra^^^, circumlocution, one word expressed by many. Periplorema, a figure,
when a part of a sentence nothing necessary, is added unto a verse.
Peripneumonia, syckenesse of the lounges with the coughe. Peripneumonicus, he
which has that* disease. Peripsema, matis, the powder or dust that comes
of fylynge or shauynge of mettalle or wodde. Periscelis, idis, sloppes, which
womenne were wont to wear. Perissologia, a superfluous speaking. Peristerae,
house culuers or douues. Perister^on, a cu^uerhouse. Peristetrotrophium, idem.
Peristr^ma, tapesry, or couerlyds of Aras or Verdure. Peristyl^um, a place set
about with pyllers. Perito, tare, to peryshe or be lost. Perith^us, the
companyon of Theseus. Peritia, cunning in any science. Peritus, cunning,
perfyte in a science. Periuro, rare, to swear vntrewely, Plautus in Bacch.
Plautus in truculen.
to be perjured. Periuriosus, a man which is often forsworn. Periurus,
forsworn, periurid. Periurium, perjury. Peri^oma, matis, a breeche.
Peri^^nium, a corse or broad gyrth, wherewith maidens were wont to be gyrte
under their pappes. Perlego, legere, to ^ede over all. Pe^^ecebra, a thing
which pleasauntlye draws a man to favor it. Perlepidus, perlepida,
perlepidum, very fair. Perlibera^^s, very lyberall. Perlibro, to way
diligentely. Perligo, gare, to ^ynde hard or fast. Colum. 4.
Perli^^s* ta, tum, anointed hard. Perloquor, qui, to speak out all to an
end, to speak perf^tely. Perlucidum, and pellucidum, clear, that ^ manne may
see through, as water, glass, horn. Perluo, luere, to wash over or all.
Perlustro, strare, to behold all about. Permadesco, to be much wette, or to
be made very moist. Permadefacio, cere, to make very moist, or to wette
much. Permagnus, a, um, very greatte. Permano, and permanesco, are, and
nescere, to be disclosed, known, or diuulgate. Plautus.
Permaneo, mansi, nere, to abide. Permano, are, to run all over, or to fall
into, to be declared openly. Ti. Liuius.
Permanus traditum, that which is left from one to an other, or is taught by
one to an other: As the father tells or leaves to his son, and he to his
son, and so contynually by line. Permaturesco, scere, to be through ripe.
Permerdo, to defyle over all. Perme, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud
stare, when we, or any other thing is the cause, Plinius.
that a thing is not done. Omnia iam parata erant, nisi per eum stetisset,
Now al things were ready, if by his occasyon it had not be let* Permessus,
aut permessis, ssidos, a River in Greece, dedicate to the Muses. Permisceo,
permiscui, miscere, to myxte all together. Permissio, a suffraunce. Permitto,
misi, mittere, to suffer, to yield, or deliver, to thraste in, to throw down,
to committee, to send forth, to let down, us to let down one by a rope, or
other like thing. Permulceo, cere, to appease, addoulce, or mytigate a man's
displeasure. Permulti, very many. Permuto, mutare, to change oone thing for
an another. Permutatio, an exchange. Permutator, he that exchaungeth. Perna,
the pestyll and also the gammonde of bakon. Perniciabilis, pernicialis, and
perniciosus, causynge death, mortal. Pernicies, death. Pernicitas,
swyftenesse. Pernitior, tius, wars, more dangerous, more full of myschiefe.
Pernicissimus, cissima, mum, warste, most daungerouse. Perniciter,
dangerously, myscheuously. Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heel. Perniunculus, a
little kybe. Pernix, cis, swyfte, flyghty, sometime stubborn, also deedly.
Pernocto, noctare, to tarry all the night, to watch, to pray, to rest, to
walk, to stand, to dwell, to sleep, to lie out of his own house. Pernosco,
scere, to know perfectly. Pernumero, are, to tell out money. Pernox, all
night. Pero, onis, a show of raw lether, Also a sack. Perogiganus,
perogita, he that puttethe a stalyon to the mare, to season her. Peroleo, to
savor or stynke much. Peronatus, he that wears raw lether shoen, boteux or
cokers like a plough man. Perorior, iris, re, to begin, spryng, or grow by the
occasion of some thing. Peroro, are, to speak or raison to an end, Qui^^.
to reason perfectly, sometime to move the herers to indignation. Peroratio, the
last part of an oration, wherein the affectes of the herers are chiefelye
styrred. Perrori, a people of Aethiopia. Perosus, sa, sum, extremely hated.
Perpaco, care, to set all thing in peace. Perparum, very little. Perparce,
very scarsely, very nyghely, or nygardely. Perpasco, perpaui, perpascere, to
feed to the vttermooste. Perparuus, a, um, a very little one. Perpaucus, ca,
cum, very few. Perpauxillus, a, um, idem. Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to
make sore affrayde. Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to constrayne, to move or
induce one to do a thing. Perpendicularis, are, that is directly down right.
Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, such as masons and carpenters have, with leadde at
the end, whereby they do prove the evenness of their squares. Perpendo,
dear, to examine, also to consider. Perpense, advisedly, with a consideration.
Perperam, amysse, ouerthwartely, unhappily, wrongefully. Perperi, fools,
idiotes, shrewes, liars. Perperitudo, shrewdenes, foolyshenes. Perpero, are, to
mar a thing. Perpes, perpetis, perpetual. Perpessus, he that suffers with
much peyn. Perpetim, perpetually. Perpetro, trare, proprely to do or to
commit an act good or vlle. Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceassing.
Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetual everlasting, contynualle, holl, not in
porcyens or dyuyded. Perpetior, perpeti, to suffer pacientely, to endure.
Perpeto, perpetere, to ask importunately without cessynge, to perform.
Perpetratio, an act good or badde. Perpetuitas, eternity, an everlasting
contynuaunce. Perpetuum, and perpetuo, aduerbes, sygnifienge continually,
always, for ever. Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to content very much.
Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bind or twyste hard or fast, to meddle
so together, that a man can not know what the thing means. Perplexe loqui,
to speak now one thing, now an other, that a man wotteth not what he
means. Perplexim, idem. Perplexor, aris, ari, to speak doubtefullye, as
words, wherein are two intendementes. Plautus in Aulularia.
At scio, quo vos pacto soleatis, perplexarier, pactum, non pactum est, Non
pactum, pactum, est, quod vobis lubet, well, I know well enough, in what facion
you are wont to speak, that a man can not tell how to take you: It was
promised, It was not promised, It was not promised, It was promised, even as
hit lysteth you. Perplexabile, a word spoken, which has two diverse
understandings, or that which is one thing in herynge, an another in
understanding. Perplexabiliter, doubtefullye. Perplexus, plexa, plexum,
perplexed, twysted together, or hard to be lowsed, intrycate, doubtefull.
Perpluir, perpluere, to rain in the myddell of a house. Perplus, much more.
Perpol, an oath, sygnyfyenge by Pollux. Sommetyme the word Per, does pertayne
to the words following. Perpol quam paucos reperias meretricibus fideles
euenire amatores, Terent. in Hecyra.
By God thou fyndeste very few true lovers happen to commune womenne. Where
per belongethe to quam paucos, and not to Pol. Perpoto, perpotare, to drink
all day, or to drink stylle, or contynually, or until one be drunk.
Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drinking, drunkerye. Perpulcher, perpulchra,
perpulchrum, very fair. Plautus in Stich.
Perpulchre, very well done. Perprurisco, perpruriscere, to have a great
ytche, or desire to clawe or scratche. Perpurgo, gare, to make all thing
clean, or net. Perpuro, perputare, to declare al. Plautus in Cistel.
Nunc operam date, ut ego argumentum hoc uobis plane perputem, Now take ye
head, that I may plainly declare all this matter unto you. Perquam, added to
any nowne adjective, augmentethe his power. Perquam doctus, Very well learned.
Perquam stolidus, very foolyshe. Perquiro, quisiui, quirere, to make dilygente
search, to examyne. Perraro, very selde. Perrepto, tare, to goo softely, or
with much pain. Perrideo, perrisi, perridere, to lawgh hartylye. Perrisio,
sere, to scorn, to laugh at one, Perottus.
or to make an another to laugh. Perrogo, gare, to desire heartily. Perrumpo,
rupi, rumpere, to break on sender, or in the mids. Persa, a man or woman
of the country of Persia. Persaepe, very often. Persancte, veraye deuoutelye,
or solempnely. Perscribo, perscribere, to write a thing through, or to an
end, to regyster or inrolle a thing. Perscriptio, a deed of a man's own
writing. Perscrutor, scrutari, to search or inquyre dilygentely. Persefacul,
the old and auncyente writers vsyd for perfacile, very lyghtely, Pom. Fes^.
or very easyly. Persenex, persenis, very old. Persentisco, scere, to
perceive well. Persephone, the Surname of Proserpina, and sygnyfyeth the virtue
of seeds in spryngynge. Persepolis, a City in the countreye of Persya.
Persequor, eris, qui, to pursewe, to continue in that, which is begone, to
persecute, to be avenged. Persero, perseui, perscrere, to sow about, or
abroad. Perseuerantia, a stable abiding in any thing reasonable. Perseueranter,
constantely. Perseuero, rare, to contynewe with a steadfast mind. Perseus, a
noble knight, which delivered a fair lady called Andromeds from a whale, and
also slew Medusa, which turned men into stones. Also it is a sign among
the sterres. Persia, a countreye in the east part of the world, where now
Sophy reigns. Persica poma, a fruit called peaches. Persicus, ca, cum, of
Persia. Persideo, dear, to sytte by. Persisto, stere, to abide. Persoluo, uere,
to pay truly, to pay all, to accomplish. Persoluc^e grates, to give thanks.
Persolus, alone, without company. Persona, a vysour like to a man's face. also
person or personage, among dyuynes and late philosophers: sometime the quality
of a man. Personatus, a masker, or he that wears a visour. Seneca
Personata foelicitas, a counterfayte felicity. Personata uulnera, hydden
wounds. Personata, an herb, which grows by the water side, having great
broad leaves like gourdes, but that they be greatter and harder: I suppose it
to be the herb, which in some country is called Donye. Personatus, tus, a
mask. Persono, personare, to sown out, or sown perfectely. P^^^tus in (...).
Perspecto, tare, to look well about. Perspicaci^as, tatis, quyckenesse of
syghte, consyderation. Perspicace, aduysedly, with good consyderation.
Perspicaciter, idem. ^
Perspicientia, per^yte knowledge. Perspicue, clearly, openly. Perspicax, acis,
he that sees quyckely, and does all things with consyderation. Perspiceo,
spexi, spicere, to se or understand plainly. Perspicuitas, tatis, clerenesse,
proprelye in words or sentences, easynesse. Perspicuus, a, um, clear, plain,
easy. Perspisso, an aduerbe, very late. Plautus.
Perstino, are, to set a price on a thing. Persto, as, stiti, stare, to
abide fyrmely. Perstrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noise. Perstrictores,
tugglers. Perstringo, perstringere, to wrynge hard, to towche a thing
shortly in speaking or writing, to dull or dark with to much light.
Perstringere aures, to fylle the ears with noise. Perstringere nomen aut
famam, to give a man an ylle name. Horatius.
Persuadeo, persuasi, persuadere, to induce one to believe or trust, to advise,
to styre vehementely. Persuasibile, and persuasibili^er, in such wise as it
may persuade. Persuasor, oris, a perswader or inducer to do a thing.
Persuastrix, a woman, Plautus in Bacch.
which inducethe or moves one to do an act. Persuo, ere, to sow up all.
Pertaedeo, dear, and pertaedescere, to be very weerye. Pertego, tegere, to
cover all. Pertempus, in time conuenyent, in season. Pertendo, dear, to
extend. Pertento, tare, to tempte, to assay or prove much. Pertero, triui,
terere, to rub or frotte a thing. Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make
aferde. Perterrefacio, cere, idem. Pertesus, displeased, annoyed. Sermonis
pertesus, werye of the communication. Plaut. in Mostell. Suetonius in Caesar.
Pertesus ignauiam suam, displeased for his slouthefulnesse. Pertexo, texi,
texere, to make an end, to conclude, proprely to wayue out, or to weaue
perfectely. Pertica, a staff, a cogell, a perch or polle, wherewith ground is
met. Pertimeo, and pertimesco, pertimescere, to fear much. Pertinatia,
obstinacye, perseverance. Pertinaciter, obstynately. Pertinatius, more
obstynatelye. Pertinax, acis, obstinate, he that holdith fast. Pertinatior,
pertinacissimus, more and most obstynate. Pertingo, tingere, to touch much,
to ioyn hard unto a thing. Pertisum, old writers used for pertesum.
Pertolero, rare, to endure to the end, to sustain valyantely. Pertondeo,
dear, to clyppe or sheare all. Pertraho, xi, here, to draw to with force.
Pertranseo, siui, and sii, ire, to pass through. Pertransennam inspicere, to
look on a thing far of, or on part, and not all. Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to
stryke hard, or break a thing in strykynge. Pertundo, pertusi, pertundere,
to beat with hammers. Pertineo, nui, n^re, to pertayne or belong, to be
joined to. Perturbo, are, to trouble much. Perturbatio, a trouble of mind.
Perturbate, with trouble of mind. Pertusa uasa, vessels cracked or broken in
sum part. Peruade, Peruado, peruasi, uadere, to go over all. Peruagor, ari,
to wander about. Peruello, elli, ellere, to pluck, sometime to prick.
Peruenor, ari, to hunt over all. Peruenio, uenire, to come to a place or to an
end. Peruersus, a, um, froward. Perverse, maliciousely, myscheuously,
ouerthwartly. Plautus in Merca.
Perverse vides, thou see naughtyly. Peruerto, to make ill, to peruerte, or
deprave. Peruestigo, gare, to find in seeking. Peruestigator, oris, he that
seeks or looks for a thing. Peruicax, cacis, hard overthwart, ill to
entreat, stubbourne, obstinate, sometime constaunt. Non^.
Peruicatia, obstinacy: but sometime it is used in a good part, and taken for a
perseueraunce and constancy in a good act. Pertinacia allwaye in an ill part.
Peruicatior, oris, more obstynate, more stubbourne: sometime more constaunt.
Peruicaciter, obstinatly, stubbournly, constauntly. Actius in No. Mar.
Peruico, for Peruicaci. Peruigil, lis, he that watches. alsoo diligent and
industriouse. Peruigilium, much watch: alsoo watchinges* or vigiles before
solemn days. Peruigilo, are, to watch all night. Peruinco, uici, uincere, to
surmounte. Pacuuius in No. Mar.
Peruitere, the old wrytars used, for perire, to be lost, to peryshe. Peruiuo,
nixi, uiuere, to live long, or until the vttermoste. Plautus in Cap.
Et si peruiuo vsque ad summa^ aetatem, tamen breue spacium est perferundi,
quae minitas mihi: Although I live yet to the vttermooste age, yet is the time
little to suffer all: wherewith thou thretteste me. Peruius, uia, uium, that
may be gone in, penetrable. Peruolo, are, to flee out, or to the end.
Peruoco, care, to call them all. Peruro, ussi, urere, to burn all, or every
where. Peruolo, peruelle, to desire. Perula, a little bag or scrippe.
Perusia, a city in Italy. Peruulgatus, ta, tum, commonly used or known. Pes,
pedis, a foot, which now contains xii. inches, the old foot
contained.xvi. fyngres bredeth. Pessinus, nuntis, a town in Phrigia. Qu. Curti.
Pedes, and Pedibus, put for an aduerbe, signifies on foot. Pedes agmen
circuibat, the host went about on foot. In agmine non nunquam equo, Suetonius
in Caes.
saepius pedibus ante^bar, In the hooste, he went allwaye before, sometime on
horseback, but moore often on foot. Pedibus stipendia facere, to be a foot
man in wars. Pes, a louse: allsoo a cord, wherewith the sail in a ship is
bent. Pesnas, old wrytars used for pennas. Pom. Fest.
Pesestas, in old time vsyd for Pestis, Pom. Fest.
Pestilence. Pessum eo, ire, to go backewarde, to be lost or destroyed, to be
nowght set by. Pestifer, and Pestiferus, a, um, that which brings in
Pestilence. Pestilens, it is, pestilent, unwholesome. Pessulus, a bar or bolt,
wherewith doors or gates be made fast. Pessum, an aduerbe, which signifies
backewarde, downewarde, under foot. Pessundo, dedi, dare, to cast under foot,
to put to the wary. Pestis, Pestilentia, and Pestilitas, a pestilence, a
mortality of men. Petalum, a leaf. Petasatus, he that wears a hatte.
Petaso, onis, a flitche of bakon. Petasus, a hatte, a round kouerynge of a
house. Petaurista, a propre daunser. Petaurum, a cord, or a staff, or a
bourde, Iu^. pol*
or other like thing, whereon light personages do dance and prove maistryes.
it is also a rouste, where pultry does sit in the night. Petesso, sere, to
ask or require. Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runs over all a man's face.
Petilansura, the howfe of a white horse. Pom. Fest.
Petilara, things that are dry. Petilus, la, lum, small. Petilius, a flower
which grows among brembilles, in the later end of somer, Plinius.
and is like a wild rose in color, and has five small leaves, the budde of
diverse colors, having within it yelowe seeds. Petimen, a sore in the
shoulders of beasts, Pom. Fest.
which I suppose is a fassion. Petitia, a certain kind of appulles. Petisso,
sere, old wrytars used for Peto, Pe^ot.
to ask or demand. Petitor, toris, he that asks or demands: among
lawyers he is called the demaundaunt: also it is a beggar, which asks allmes
from door to door. Petoritum, a chariot or wagon. Petiolus, a little foot:
also a perch whereon fruits or onyons be hanged. Petitio, onis, a petition.
Peto, petij, petete, to ask, to get or attayn, to desire, to lay awayt, to
abide, to strike, to go to a place, to seek. Petere gladio, to stryke with a
sword. Petere veneno, to poison. Petere blandicijs, to ^later. Petere tactu,
to feel. Petere mutuum, to borowe: also to remember. Petere iugulum, to kill,
to follow. Petere auribus, to here. Petere naribus, to smelle. Petere oculis,
to behold. Petere osculis, to kiss. Petere vi, to enforce. Petere, is also to
assail or make assault on one. Petra, a stone. Pom. Fest.
Petrones, Carles of the countraye: also a wether sheep. Petroselinum, an herb
called Persely. Petulans, it is, want on dishonest, reprocheful, proud,
viciouse, ready to do wrong. Valla in Rauden.
Petulantia, wantonness, viciousness, pride. Petrens, a, um, of a stone.
Petreleon, an oil, which naturally runs out of a stone. Petrosus, a, um,
stony or full of stones. Petulanter, wantonly, proudly. Petus, he that has one
eye less than the other. Petulcus, wanton. Pexo, are, to kembe. Pexae velles,
Some men in expoundynge Pliny, do suppose Pexas vestes, to be of such thing,
as is shorn, as syne woullen clothe, or velvet. Pexati, they which do wear
such manner of cloth, or sylke. Pezitae, moussherons, growing at the roots of
trees.
P, ANTE H.
PHaeaces, people of the I Will of Corcira. Phaecasius, a shoo. Phaedra, the wife
of Theseus, and stepmother to Hypolytus. Phaeton, the sun. Phagedaena a,
runnyng cancre or pock, which shortly eats the flesh unto the bones.
Phagones, great eaters. Phalacron, bold. Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crow,
it may signify a coote. Affranius.
Phalango, gare, to move or drive a thing upon rollers. Phalaris, a cruel
tyrant, which reigned in the city of Agrigentum. Phagus, a beeche tree.
Phagineus, a, um, of beeche. Phalangae, staves, whereon men do carye packes,
plain staves, also leauars, to lift things that be heavy. Phalangarij,
portars, which do carye packes. Phalangium, a spyder. Phalanx, angis, an
hooste of footmen, set in such order, that they may incountre with their
enemies, foot to foot, man to man, shylde to shylde. It is also the beam of
a balaunce. Phalanges, are the joints or spaces in the fyngars: they be also
rollers, whereon ships or great pieces of timber be removed. Phalarica, an
instrument of war, wherein wild fire is enclosed, that when it is by shot
fastened to timber, it burns all shortly. Phalerae, a traper or bardes for a
horse. Phaleratus, trapyd, or bardyd. Do^^. in Teren. Phor^^
Phalerata dicta, gaye words, pleasant speech. Phalerij, a city in Tuscane.
Phalisti, people in Italy. Phanaticus, frenetyke, he that has vain vysions.
Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus. Orpheus.
Phanni, fantasyes, which happen to men in dremes. Phantasia, fantasy.
Phantasma, matis, a visyon. Phanum, a temple. Pharetra, a quyuar for arowes.
Pharetratus, he that bears a quyuar. Phariseus, a Pharyze, which was of a
sect of Jews, which lived in a more strayghter form than the commun people
did. Pharias, phariae, a serpent, which makes a furrowe in the ground with
his tail, as he creapeth, and so lyfteth him self up. Pharmacentice, that
part of physike, which heals with medicynes. Pharmacopola, a Potycary.
Pharmacum, a medycyne: sometime it signifies poison. Pharos, an I Will in Egypt.
Pharsalia, a countraye in Thessalya, where the battle was between Julius
Caesar and Pompey. Phasae, a word of Hebrew, which signifies a departing.
Phaseolus, a kind of poulse corn. I suppose it be that, which is called
Tares. Phasianus, a fesaunt. Phasis, a great river in the countraye of
Colchos. Phasma, atis, an horrible vision or sight. Pherecydes, a famous
Philosopher and wrytar of Tragoedies, which dyed of the lousy sickness.
Pheretra, things borne at great feastis or triumphs, as pageantes or jewels
of gold or silver, images, and such like things. Pheretrius, Jupiter.
Pheretrum, a thing, whereon pageantes are borne: also deed corpsis. Phia, the
general name to all plate, which serves for wine. Phiala, a pot or cup
of gold or silver, which serves for wine. Phidias, an excellent w^rkman, in
making great images of gold or yuory. Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias.
Phiditia, the soupers, which the Lacedaemonians used, which were openly kept
with a meruaylouse temperaunce, every man bringynge his measurable portion of
meat and wine. Philadelphia, a city in Asia. Philagathus, he that loves
goodness. Philanthropos, a lover of mankind: also ge^tyll and kind.
Philargyria, couaytousnesse, auaryce. Philargyrus, couaytouse. Philema, a
kiss. Philetes, a kissar. Philodolus, he that loves his servants. Philenus,
he that loves wine. Philippei, a certain coin of gold. Philippi, a city in
Thracia. Philippenses, men of that city. Philocalus, a good man, a clenly man,
or elegaunt. Philomela, a nightingale: also a fair maiden, which was
defloured by Thereus, husbonde to her sister, whom poets do feign was
transfourmed to a nightingale. Philologus, a lover of words. Philonicus, a
brawler: sometime a lover of victory. Philosophia, philosophy, the love or
fauorynge of wisdom. Philoginos, he that doteth on women. Philopaes, he that
loves children. Philoponus, laboriouse, paynefull. Philosophaster, he that
would be like a philosopher. Philosophice, like a philosopher. Philothesia, a
solemn feast among the Greeks. Philosophicus, ca, cum, philosophical.
Philosophor, aris, ari, to study wisdom. Philosophus, a philosopher.
Philoxenia, hospitality. Philoxenus, he that keeps good hospitalytye.
Philtrum, a drink charmed, which causes a man to be mad for love. Philura,
seu Philyra, small things hanging down of trees or herbs, like unto
hears. Phyma, matis, a sore on the finger, which may be called a whytblowe.
Phlebes, veins. Phlebotomia, bloodeletinge. Phlebotomum, the instrument,
wherewith blood is leten, a fleme. Phlegethon, ontis, a river of hell, which
allwaye burns. Phlegias, the son of Mars, a king in Thessaly, and father of
Ixion. Phlegrae, a people in Thessaly. Phlius, a place in Grecia. Phlox, a
yelowe flower like a violet. Phlegma, maris, flewme. Phlegmon, onis, and
Phlegmone, nes, an inflammacion of blood, which grows into an impostume.
Phoca, a se calf, it may be supposed to be a Seal, which is fisshe, and
breedith on the land. Phocensis, of the countraye called Phocis. Phocion, a
noble counsaylour of Athenes, whose life is a myrroure to all counsayllours,
which let them read in the warke of Plutarchus, intytled the lives of noble
men. Phocis, cidis, a countraye in Greece. Phoebus, the Sun. Phoenices, people
in Syria. Phoeniceus, a, um, right Crymson. Phoenicia, a regyon in Syria.
Phoenicopterus, a great bird, having read feathers. Phoenissa, a woman of
Phenicia. Phoenix, nicis, a bird, which lives above syx hundred years, and
finally caryenge sweet spices up to a high mountain, by the heat of the
sun, and labor of her wyngis, kyndleth fire, whereby she being all burned,
of her axen ryseth another like bird: it is also a date tree, or palm, also a
little river in Grecia: it was also the brother of Cadmus, which raygned in
Phoenicia. Pholoe, a mountain in Archadia, full of wood. Phonastus, he that
techeth one to pronounce and moderate his voice. Phorbas, a shepeharde that
found Oedippum, after that he was hanged up by the feet. Phorcus, one of the
sons of Neptunus, which was taken for a god of the sea. Phoroneus, the
most ancient king of Grecia. Phosphorus, the ^^ye sterre. Phrasis, The
propre form, or manner of speech, which in one countraye is oftentimes dyuer
^e^ ^s Southern, Northern, Deuenysshe, Kentyshe, French, Picard, Gascoyne,
walon: some do set the negatife before the affirmatife, some contrary, some
speech is quick, some grave, some flouryshynge, some temperate. Phrene, the
mydryfe, which dyuideth the vmbles of a man or beast, from the bowelles.
Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a frenesy. Phrenitis, seu Phrenisis, a
syckenesse called frenesy. Phrine, a famous harlotte at Athenes. Phrigia, a
countraye in Asia the less. Phrygio, onis, a brawdrour. Phrynos, a lyzarde.
Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia. Phthia, a city in Thessalia. Phthiriasis, a
syckenesse, in the which lyse do grow in such multitudes, that they devour
the body. Phthirophagi, people dwelling nyghe to the greek see, which lived
only by fisshe. Phthisicos, he that has the consumpcion of the lunges.
Physeter, a great fyshe in the French Occean see, which ryseth like to a
pylar above ships. Phthisis, a consumption of the body by a distillation
from the heed into the lunges, whereby the lunges are exulcerate. Phu, a
plant or herb, which some call Valeriane. Phygeton, a little swellyng or
botche, hard and read, burning and prickinge. Phylira, a tree called also
Tylia. Phyllis, a woman, daughter of Lycurgus, king of Thrace, which hynge her
self, despayriuge of the coming of Demoophon, whom she loved, whom poets
feign to be turned into an Almonde tree. Physica, warkes treating of the
nature of things, or the operacion of nature. Phisicus, a natural
philosopher. Physiologus, idem. Physionomia, seu Phisiognomia, a rule to know
a man's natural affections by his vysage or form of his members. Phyton,
one of the names of Apollo. Phitonicus, and Phitonica, he or she, which has a
spirit within them, that gives answer of things to come.
P, ANTE I.
PIabile, for the which satisfaction may be made, and god pleased. Piacularis,
re, that which is given or offered to god for satisfaction. Piabilis, that
which may be pourged or satisfied. Piacularia auspicia, tokens in sacrifice of
some heavy chance to come. Piaculum, any thing done for satisfaction of some
greuouse sin: sometime a great and haynouse offense. Piamen, seu Piamentum,
that which was given or occupied about satisfaction. Pica, a bird called a
py^. Picatus, cata, catum, pytched or rasyd with pitche. Picea, a piche tree.
Picenum, a countraye in Italy. Picens, it is, a man of that countraye. Picentus,
ta, tum, of the countraye of Picenum. Piceus, a, um, of pyche. Pico, care, to
dress with pyche. Pictatium, a table, pertaining to Iuges or bysshoppes: it
is sometime a plaster for the stomach or heed. Pictes, a wrastler. Pictor,
toris, a peyntar. Pictura, an image peynted. Picturatae vestes, imbroudred
apparayle, or rather of bawdekyn. Picturo, are, to make sundry pictures. Picus,
a little bird, which makes a hole in trees, wherein he breeds: it was also
the name of an old king of Latins. Picunnus, a pie. No. N^^.
Pieria, a mountain in Greece, dedicate to the Musis. Pie, and Pienter,
mercyfully, deuoutely, louyngly. Piens, it is, merciful, etc. Pientior,
Pientissimus, more and most merciful, most loving toward his pare^tes or
countraye. Pierides, the Muses. Pietas, etatis, the reverend love toward a
man's propre countraye and parents, of dyuines it is taken for the love and
honor due unto god. Lactantius calls it justice, Lact. lib. ^.
and devout worshyppynge and knowledge of god. Piger, gri, slow. Pigere, to be
sorry. Pigritia, Pigrities, Pigredo, Pigritas, Pigritudo, slownesse, ydelnesse.
Piget, piguit, pigere, it greueth, it dulleth, it lyketh or contenteth not*
Facti piget, he is sorry for that, that he has done: sometime, I am sorry.
Pigmentum, payntinge: also false color in speaking, disseytefull words,
pleasant lies. Pigmentarius, a maker or sellar of payntynge. Pigue, sloth.
No. (...)
Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge. Pigneratitius, a, um, that which is laid
in pledge. Pignora capere, to take a distress. Ci. de ora.
Pignora, is sometime taken for children. Pignero, Pignerare, and Pigneror,
pignerari, to lay to pledge or gage, sometime to take pledge. Pignus, noris, a
pledge or gage, or pawn. Pigresco, scere, to be or wax slow. Pigre, slowly.
Pigredo, slothfulness. Pigrefio, fieri, to be made slow. Pigriria,
slownesse. Pigritudo, idem. Pigror, idem. Pigro, are, to hold back, or tarry
one. Pila, a mortar, wherein any thing is beten with a pestill: also a pilar,
a ball, or any thing round as a ball. Pilani, they which fight with darts.
Pilates, a certain stone that is white. Pilatim, one pilar by another.
Pilatus, armed with darts. Pileatus seruus, a slave that is sold with his cap
on his heed. Pilentum, a wagan. Pileolus, a little bonet. Pileus, a cappe,
sometime liberty, for asmoche as bondmen, when they were infraunchysed, ware
copped cappes. Pilo, are, to begin to be heary, or grow in hear. Pilosus,
a, um, heary. Pilula, a little ball: also pills made for purgations. Pilum, a
barbours knyfe or rasour, also a dart of five foot long and a half.
Pilumnus, a man which found the manner to dunge land, and to grynde corn.
Pilus, a hear. Pilus, idem quod Pilum: it is also a pestell to braye or break
any thing withal in a mortar. Pinaster, a wild pyne tree. Pina, a fysshe
that has two great shelles. Pinachidia, tables made in books. Pinachtheca, a
case or place wherein tables are put or set. Pinarij, an ancient house or
famyly in Italy, of the which were the priests that sacrifised to Hercules.
Pindo, dis, si, sere: to braye or grynde. Pindus, a mountain in Thessalia:
also a city there. Pinea nux, a pyne apull. Pinetum, a wood of pynetrees.
Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree. Pingo, xi, pingere, to paynte. Pinguedo, and
Pinguitudo, inis, fat or fattenesse. Pingue, inconvenient, sometime
fruitful, Vergilius.
commodiouse. Pingires horti, gardens that bring forth good herbs.
Pinguefacio, cere, to make fat. Pinguesco, scere, to be fat. Pinguiarius,
he that loves that thing, which is fat. Pinguitudo, fatness. Pingu^s,
gue, fat, he that is fat, corsy, unwieldy. Pingue, grease. Pinna, a quyll,
or pen, the harder part of a fether. Pinnae, imbatelmentes of a wall, a
muskle, which is founden in muddy waters. Pinnae, the fynnes of a fyshe.
Pinnaculum, a pynnacle of a tower. Pinnula, the over part of the ear, a little
quyll. Pinsito, tare, to braye in a mortar. Pinso, sui, sere, to braye or
grynde. Pinso, are, idem. Pinsor, he that gryndeth in a qwerne: also a baker.
Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull. Plautus.
Pio, ij, ere, to honor god. Pipatio, a clockinge of a hen. Pinus, seu
Pinea, a pyne tree. Pipare, to clock like a hen. Piper, eris, peper. Pipio,
iui, ire, to peep like a chicke. Pipio, onis, a pigeon. Pipleides, the musis.
Pipleus, an hill in Grecia. Pipulum, a rebuke. Plaut.
Pirum, a pear. Pirata, a rouer or robber on the se, a pyrate. Piratica, the
practice of pirates or robbers on the sea. Pirrhica, a daunsynge in harneys.
Pisa, a city in Greece between the two mountains of Olympus and Ossa: also a
city in Arcadia. Pisae, arum, a city in Italy, called Pise. Pisani, people of
the city of Pise. Pisarurus, a river in Italy. Pisaurum, a city in Italy.
Piscor, caris, ari, to fisshe. Piscaria, the fysshe markat. Piscarius, a, um,
pertayninge to fysshynge, Piscarius, a fysshe mongar. Piscatorius, a, um,
pertayninge to a fysher. Piscator, toris, a fisshar. Piscatus, tus, and
Piscatio, the act of fisshinge. Piscina, a fysshe ponder: it is also generally
every ponde, allthoughe therein be no fish. Piscinalis, le, pertayninge to
fisshe. Piscinarius, he that nourysheth fysshe. Pissis, a fysshe. Pisces, also
one of the.xii. signs. Piscosus, a, um, that may be fysshed, or is full of
fysshe. Pisculentus, idem. Pisciculus, a little fysshe. Pisci, people of the
city Pisa in Gretia. Pisidae, people in Asia. Pistacia, a certain kind of
nuttes. Pisistratus, a noble man of Athenes, which changed the commune weal
of that city from the rule of the people, to the rule of one governor: and
therefore he was called a tyrant, notwithstanding that (as he wrate unto
Solon, which mayntayned the populer astate) he ruled by their own laws, and
was rightwyse and gentle unto the people. Piso, Varro.
sere, is proprely to braye, for in the old time men used to braye or break
corn in mortars: but after that they had quernes to grynde with the hand,
they used Pisere to grynde, and Pisor for a gryndar. Piso, sonis, the name of a
noble famyly or house in Rome. Pistillum, a pestell. Pistor, oris, a baker.
Pistoria, a city in Italy. Pistoricus, ca, cum, and Pistorius, a, um,
pertaining to bakynge. Pistrilla, a mill. Pistrinum, and Pistrina, a
bakehouse, or grynding house: sometime it signifies for paynfull service.
Pistris, a ship. Pistrix, cis, a woman baker: also a monstruouse fysshe in
the Indiane see. Pistura, the craft of bakynge. Pistus, ta, tum, grounden or
brayed. Pisum, a pease. Pithacusae, Isles in the se against Campania. Pythacua,
a certain tyle, sometime made in Spain, which being cast into the water,
would not synke. Pithagoras, he which first brought up the name of a
philosopher: who was borne in Samia, and was a beautyfull man, and of excellent
wit, and therewith of a pure and clean living, absteyninge from the eating
of any thing that lived: whose Philosophy was mystical and secret, and
declared by numbres and proporcions. Pitheta, a Comete or impression in the
firmament, which is like a turine, and does appiere as it were through a
myste. Plautus in Milite.
Pithecium, a defourmed or ill favored woman. Pithonoscomes, a place in Asia,
where after the Idus of August, great flocks of Storkes do assemble together.
Pitpit, in the old tunge of Oskes sygnified quicquid, whatsoever. Pittacus,
one of the seven sages of Grecia, and was of the city of Mytelene. Pityocampe,
a worm which is in a pyneappull tree, whose bytinge is venymouse. Pitysma,
spettyll. Pitho, the lady and presydent of eloquence to persuade. Pitisso, are,
to syppe, or drink little. Pituita, flewme, or rowme, descending from the heed:
alsoo the pyppe, which chykens have. Pituitosus, flewmatike. Pitylisma, matis,
an exercise, where a man goes fast on his toes, and moves his arms forewarde
and backwarde. Pitylisso, are, to exercise in that form. Pityusa, an I Will,
called also Myletus. Pius, a, um, religiouse, devout, pitiouse, ge^tyll,
chaste: he that loves his parents or countraye. Pix, picis, Pytche. Pix
liquida, Tar.
P, ANTE L.
PLacabilis, easy to be pleased. Placabiliter, thankefully, contentfully.
Placator, toris, a pacyfyer of debate. Placae, plates of gold or silver.
Placendus, da, dum, that which ought to content. Placenta, a tarte. Placentia,
a city in Liguria. Placentini, people of the city of Placentia. Placeo, cui,
cere, to please, to like, to glory. Placide, quietly, patiently, peasybly.
Placidus, da, dum, gentle, meek, pacient. Cor. Ta^ lib. 14.
Placita, studyes or exercises. Ipse placita maiorum colebat habitu seuaero: He
in a sage garment, haunted the studyes of the ancient fathers. Placitum, a
firm consent in an opinyon, an ordinance. Placitus, ta, tum, that which
lyketh or contenteth. Placo, care, to pacyfye, to appease. Pladarotes, a
disease, whereby the eye lyddes wax feeble, and will uneath be plucked up.
Plaga, a wound, also a nett to take beastis* sometime the armyng cords: also
a great space in the earth, called a Cooster alsoo a shete for a bed:
moreover a great space on the earth, called also Clima. Plagae, and plagulae,
blankettes. Plagiaria lex, a law made against them, which were called
Plagiarn, which for their offense were whypped. Plagiarius, he that whyppeth
men. Alsoo he that byeth a man for a slave, knowinge him to be free. Alsoo he
that intyseth a man's servant to go from his master: also a stealer of books.
Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped. Plagiosus, a school master, which
is a greatte beater. Plagium, the offense, for the which oone is whypped.
Plagosus, fulle of strypes, or he that beats much. Planaratrum, the culter
of a ploughe. Plancae, plankes. Planci, they which be splaye footed. Planctus,
tus, waylynge, sorowynge. Plancus, a noble man of Rome. Plane, truly. Planeta,
a planette. Plango, xi, gere, to weep or wayle, to strike or hytte. Catullus.
Plangor, plangoris, a noise made with the mouth, as in lawghynge, or
weepynge. Planidus, plain. Planidior, more plain. Planities, a plain or
level ground. Planior, playner, euenner. Diomedes
Planipes, he that gothe without shows. Also a player in an interlude.
Planta, the foot with the toes. Sommetyme only the soole of the foot. Alsoo
a plant or tree newely set: sometime an herb that grows low. Plantago,
ginis, an herb called Plantayne. Plantaria, settes or plants, or the places,
where plants be set. Plantaris, re, pertaining to the foot. Plantarius, a,
um, mete or ready to set. Plantigerae arbores, trees which bring forth
settes. Planto, tare, to set or plant. Planula, a plain, a ioyners
instrument. Planum facere, to declare or expound. Plaut. in ^ilite and in
^ersa.
Planus, na, number, plain, even, clear, apparaunt. Planus, ni, a deceyuour or
mocker, Also a Iugglar, which makethe things to seem in apparaunce, where in
deed no such thing is: As water to come into the house, or trees to grow,
or money of leaves or stones. Plasma, plasmatis, the w^rke of a potter, or of
him, which works in earth. Also a plaster. Plasmo, are, to make pottes, or
any other thing of earth. Plastes, a warker of images or other like thing in
earth. Plastice, the craft of warkynge in earth. Pla^anus, a plane tree.
Platane^um, a place where plane trees do grow. Platanodes, a promontory or
hill in Italy. Platanonis, ne, of plane tree. Platea, a high way or street,
Also a court in great places. Moreover a see gull. Plateae, a city in Boeotia,
not far from Thebes. Plateenses, people of the city of Plat^e in Greece.
Plato, tonis, the Prince and chief of all philosophers, as well in wisdom
and counnynge, as in good living and eloquence. Plaudi, they which have great
hanging ears. Plaudo, plausi, plaudere, to rejoice with countenance
Plausibilis, plausibile, that which the people does receive with joy, and
clapping of their hands. Plautus, a writer of comedies. Plaustrum, seu
plostrum, a carte. Plausus, sus, a reioycynge with voice and gesture, clapping
of hands together for joy Plebecula, the poor people. Plebeius, a, um, of the
people. Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminaltie, Plautus is penulo.
not being a gentylman. Plebeus, idem. Plebicola, a favorer of the
comminaltie. Plebiscitum, a law, which sometime was made by the only consent
of the common people of Rome, without the authority of the Senate. Plebs, bis,
seu plebes, plebei, the commune people. Plecto, plexi, plectere, to punish, to
stryke. Plectrum, an instrument, wherewith men played on the harp or
doulcymers, for hurtynge of their fyngers. Also a spur set on a fighting
cock, when he lacked natural spurs. Pleiades, the seven sterres, which
marynours do use in tryenge of costs. Plemmyrium, a city in Sicili^. Plene,
largely, abundantly. Plenilunium, full moon. Plenitudo, dinis, fullness.
Plenus, na, number, fulle. Plerus, plera, plerum, of old time was v^d for more.
Plera pars, the more part. Pom. Fe^t*
Plaerique, pleraeque, pleraque, many, a great sort. Plerusque, pleraque,
plerunque, the more part of any thing. Plerique, sygnifyeth some. Plerique
omnes, for the more part. Terent in H^^vra. in Andria.
Plerunque, oftentimes, sometime. Pleonasmos, a figure, wherein is superfluity
of words. Plethtum, a measure of land, contaynyng a hundred fete. Pleuritis,
tidis, and pleuresis, a sycknes in the side, called the Pleurilye. Pleuriticus,
emitica, he or she, which has the Pleuresy. Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, baseness
of bloudde. Cato in No. Mar.
Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden. Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to fold.
Plicatilis, le, that which may be folden. Plintus, the name of two noble
learned men, the one wrate the most excellent warke, called the history of
Nature, the other wrate eloquente Epistles, and an oration to Tratane in his
commendation, which oration is called Panegyricus. There is also a warke of
the practice of phisyke in the name of Plinius, but whither it were of the
first Pliny or no, it is not very certain. Plocum, a small reed. Plodo,
si, dear, to make noise with hands or feet. Ploro, are, to weep. Ploratus,
tus, weepynge. Plorabundus, he that weepeth much. Cato.
Plostrum, for plaustrum, a wayne or cart. Plostrarius, a, um, that which
belongethe to a wayne or carte. Plostellum, a little wayne. Plota, a lampray.
Ploti, they which have plain feet without holownes in the soles of the
feet. Ploxinum, a coffer or cheste. Plumo, mare, to be in feathers. Also to
enbrowder. Vopiscus.
Pluma, a fether. Plumarius, ria, rium, of feathers, a warker with feathers.
Plumatilis, le, made of feathers. Plumbago, aginis, a vain of mettalle or oore,
wherein is both silver and lead, it is also an herb, which has leaves like
sorrel, and a great rote and rough. Plautus in P^nulo.
Plumbea ira, wrath which long contyneweth. Plumbatura, sowlder. Plumbata, a
pellette of leadde. Plumbatio, sowlderynge. Plumbatius, a plummer or worker in
lead. Plumbatae, balls or clubbes of lead, wherewith men faught. Plumbeus,
plumbea, beum, of the color of leadde, leedye. Plumbeus homo, a lumpyshe man
without courage or spirit. Plumbo, are, to leadde, to sowlder or ioyn
mettalle. Plumbum, leadde. Plumesco, scere, to be or wax penned. Plumeus, a,
um, of feathers. Plumiger, that bears feathers. Plumo, are, to be fetherid, or
have feathers. Plumula, a little fether or plume. Pluo, plui, pluere, to rain.
Plura, many. Pluria, idem. Plurifarius, a, um, of diverse facions. Plurifariam,
many ways, in many places. Plurimifacio, cere, to set much by. Plurimum,
very much. Plurimus, very much, many, long. Ci. in Ver.
Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of. Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I selle for more
or deerer. Plusculus, a, um, a little more. Plutealis, le, that which is
set in a table or case. Plutealia sigilla, small Images in tables or cases.
Pluteum, a space or distaunce, whereby the lower pyllers were dyuided from the
higher in the front or foreparte. Pluteus, an engyne of war, to conuaye men
to the scalynge of walls, keeping them from ordinance. Also hutches or
greatte coffers, or other like places, wherein books, tables, or such things
are kept. Pluto, tonis, called god of hell. Puuia, rain. Pluuialis,
pluuiatilis, and pluuius, a, um, rayny, or of rain. Pluuia aqua, rain water.
Pluuiosus, full of rain. Plyssima, ancient writers used for plurima, very
many.
P, ANTE, N.
PNeuma, atis, spirit or wynd or breath. Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wind or
breathe is used. Pneumonici, they which be sick of the longes.
P ANTE O.
POcillator, pocillatoris, He that brings cups to the table, or a cup
bearer. Pocillum, a little cup. Poculum, a cup. sometime a draught.
Podagricus, and podagrosus, sa, sum, fulle of gout. Podagra, the gout, pain
in the feet. Podalirius, one of the sons of Esculapius a greatte surgeon.
Podaris, a long gown to the feet. Poderis, a strait garment of lynnen
cloth: It may now be called the Albe, which priests do wear when they
say mass. Podex, dicis, the arse. Podia, the cord, wherewith the sail is
spredde. Podium, a place made without a wall, for men to stand and behold
things, Also a stage, whereon is set candelles or books. Poema, matis, and
poesis, a poets warke. Poena, pain, tourment, execution. Poenalis, le,
penal, peynefull. Poenam pendere, to suffer punyshement. Poenas petere, to be
aduenged, to punish. Salustius in lugurt.
Poenas reddere, to be punyshed. Poenas luere, idem. Poenio, ancient writers
used for punio. Poenitens, it is, penitent, repentant. Poenitendus, da, dum, to
be asshamed of, to be little esteemed. Poenitentia, repentance, penance.
Perottus.
Poeniteor, I am in pain, I am grieved. Poenitudo, repentance. Poeniturus, to
be sorye. Poenula, a cloak. Poeon, a man, whom Homer calls excellently learned
in phisike. Poeonia, an herb callid Pyonie. Also a region or country in
Macedonia. Poenicus, poenica, cum, of Affrike. Poeninsula, a place, which for
the more part is enclosed with water. Poeniter, tuit, tere, to repent, to
forthynke, to be sorry for a thing. Poenus, a man of the city of Carthage.
Poeta, a poet. Poetice, ces, poetry. Poeticus, ca, cum, poetical. Poetor,
aris, ari, to exercise poetry. Poetria, and poetris, idis, a woman poet.
Pogonia, a blasing sterre, with a long beam before like a berde. Pol, an aduerbe
of swearynge, as it were by Pollux. Polenta, was barley ordered in this form.
They stepyd barley in water one night, and dried it, and the next day they
fried it, and than ground it, And so kept it long, which their slaves and
pultrye did eat. Polentarius, a, um, pertaining to barleye ground, as is
aforesaid. Polite, freshely, gayly, klenly. Politia, civility, politic
governance. Poliricus, politica, liticum, civil, or pertaining to a city.
Politiones, they which are dylygente in husbandrye. Politius, more clean or
trymme. Pollen, linis, wheat flower. Pollens, it is, puissaunt. Polliceor,
polliceri, and polliceo, pollicere, to promise. Pollicitario, a promise.
Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge syue, wherewith the flower is syfted from the
branne, it may be called also a boulter. Pollinarius, pollinaria, narium,
pertaynyng to flower. Pollit for pila ludit. Polimenta, the stones of boore
pigges. Polio, poliui, polire, to polyshe, to garnyshe or deck. Politus,
polita, politum, polysshed, decked, trymmed. Polities, cleanlynesse. Pollentia,
power, also a city. Polleo, ere, to may, to have power, to shine. Pollex,
licis, a thumb of the hand, It is also an ynche, which is a synger bredthe
and a half. Pollicaris, re, of a thumb. Pollincere, to minister about
funerals, also to boulte meal. Pollinctor, toris, the administratour or
officer in ordaynyng of funeralles. Pollinctura, the ministration of
funeralles. Pollintor, toris, a daker that syfteth meal. Pollis, linis, and
pollen, inis, meal. Pollubrum, a basin. Polluceo, cere, to mynyster sacrifyce,
specially to Hercules. Pollucibilis coena, a costely supper. Pollucibiliter,
costely, gorgiousely. Polluctum, a costely supper. Polluo, luere, to pollute or
defyle. Pollutus, ta, tum, polluted, defiled. Pom. Fes^*
Polus, the pole. There be imagyned to be two certain points in heaven, as
hit were the ends of Extree, where about heaven is meuyd, the oone is in the
North, and is callydde Polus arcticus. The other in the Southe, callydde Polus
antarcticus. Pollux, lucis, was brother to Castor, both being borne at one
bourdeyn, which Poets do feign to come of one egg, laid or brought forth by
a woman, called Leda, with whom Jupiter companied in likeness of a swanne.
Polyama, he that has many lambs. Polybotes, a gyaunte, whom Neptunus slew.
Polycarpus, he that has many flowers. Polycrates, a tyrant, which was so
fortunate, that he never suffered any aduersytie, or grief. Wherefore he at the
last dredynge the change of the favor of fortune, having a ring with a
stone of an excellent valewe, did cast the same ring into the sea, to the
intent that he would suffer sum displeasure, and so satisfy fortune: but a
fysshe devouring the ring, was the same day taken of a fyssher, and given to
the king, for the greatness of the fysshe, which being opened, there was
the said ryng found and brought to the king: whereat as well he, as all other
about him meruayled. Sone after the same king was oppressed by his people, and
hanged. Polydamas, a Troyane, oone of them, which betrayed the city with
Eneas and Anthenor. Polygonum, an herb, which is also callye Sanguinaria, and
has leaves like to Rewe, but it runs on the ground as grass, the juice
thereof put into the nose, stops bledynge. It is supposed to be swynes
grass, or knotte grass. Polyhistor, oris, he that knows much, or of many
things done. Polilogus, he that has many words. Polymirus, mita, tum, of
twyne or twysted thredes. Polymita, a garment made of twisted threde or sylke.
Polymnia, one of the Muses, which word sygnifieth much memory. Polymorphus,
of many forms or facions. Polymyxos, a candelstycke, which bears many
lyghtes. Polyphagus, a greatte eater. Polyphemus, was a gyaunt, that had oone
eye in his foreheed, which was put out by Vlyxes. Polypodium, an herb like
to fern, growing on trees. Polyposus, he that has a soore in the nose.
Polypus, a fyshe, having many feet, which changes his color often: Also a
piece of flesh, growyng in the ouermost part of the nose, which causes a
stynkynge air out of the nose. Polyrizon, that which has many roots.
Polysyntheton, a figure, where many artycles comme into a sentence, as Ille
trahebat, Hic vociferabatur, He drew, and he cried out. Polytes, one of king
Priamus sons. Polytrichon, an herb called Maydenheer. Polyxena, the daughter
of king Priamus whom cruel Pirrhus slew on the tomb of Achilles. Pomarium,
an orcharde, sometime a place wherein fruits be kept. Pomeridianus, and
postmeridianus, a, um, any thing done after noone. Pomiferus, a, um, bearing
appuls. Pomilius, and pumilio, onis, a lyttelle personage, a dwarf. Pomoerium,
the ground without the walls of the city, which moughte neither be
ploughed, nor inhabyted, the territory. Pompa, a pomp, or solemn sight.
Pompeius, the name of a noble Romayne. Pompeianus, of Pompeius part, or a
favorer of Pompeius. Pomum, the general name of all fruits. It is most used
for an appull. Ponderitas, hefte, poyse. Pondero, raui, rare, to way, to
ponder, to consider, to esteem. Pondo, a pound weight, sommetyme.xii. pound.
It was among the Romans the pound of money, as Mina, and mna, was in
Athenes, which was of the value of a hundred old poyse grotes, whereof.viii.
went to an ounce: so that in those grotes after our rate, it contained a pound
and a mark of new grotes ten to the ounce.ii. pound and five grotes.
Pondus, deris, weight. Varro.
sometime it signifies number, also authority. Ponderosus, a, um, wayghty.
Ponere spem, to hope. Pone, after, or behind. Plautus in capt.
Pone eum esse victum, Put the case that he be vanquyshed. Pono, posui,
ponere, to put, to set, to cesse, to build, to lay a part. Pons, pontis, a
bridge. Pontica nux, a kind of fylberdes, which came from the countreye
called Pontus in Asia. Ponticum, is a taste, which has no sent to be
discerned. Ponticulus, a little bridge. Pontifex, ficis, an archebyshoppe.
Pontificatus, tus, the dignity of a bishop. Pontificius, a, um, of a
bishop. Pontones, whyry botes. Pontus, the sea, which is from the great
fenne, callydde Maeotis, unto Tenedum, It is sommetyme vsyd for all the sea. It
is also a prouynce in Asie the less. Popa, fat, grease. Popana, fat
oyntementes. Popanum, a cake of breadde. Popellus, the little or poor people.
Popina, a couern^ or vyttaylynge house, where meat is eaten out of due time.
Popinatio, ryotte. Popinalis, le, pertaining to riot, or places of ryotte.
Popinor, aris, ari, to eat out of due time, to be ryottous. Popiniones,
haunters of tauernes. Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a ma^s leg behind the
knee. Poppisma, oratis, the noise made with the mouth and the hand, in
ryding, or wanton dalyaunce. Populabundus, wasting the countreye, or he that
gothe in forragynge or robbynge of countries. Popularis, re, pertaining to the
people, accepted or favored of the people. Also it sygnifyeth a familiar
friend, or as we use to call country man. Populariter, and populare, homely,
like the people. Populatus, ta, tum, wasted, distroyd. Populeus, a, um, of a
popler tree. Populnus, and populneus, idem. Popularitas, the conjunction or
amytie of people of one country. also affability, humanity, toward the
people. Populatia, boys plays. Liberius i^ No. Mar.
Populatim, of all the people. also euerich one. Populatio, a wasting of the
countreye, a fourragynge. Populator, a forrageour or waster of countries.
Populifugia, was a day in the month of June, at the which day by reason of
a rumor, the people fled. Populor, aris, to wast or distroy a country.
Populosus, a, um, full of people, populous. Populus, people. Also a poplar
tree. Porca, a sow, a rydge of land, a balke. Porcarius, a, um, of a swyne.
Porcarius, a swyneherde. Porceo, cere, to prohibyte. Pom. Fest.
Porcetra, a young sow, or yelte. Porcinus, na, number, of a hog. Porculatio,
bringing up of swyne. Porculator, a fatter of swyne. Porcus, a hog.
Porcellus, a pygge. Porculus, a shoot, a porcatte. Porcus troianus, a hog
roosted with many other beasts and fowls within his bealye. Porgam, used of
the ancient writers for porrigam, I will deliver or take to one. Pori, poores
in the body, out of the which issues sweat. Porphyr^tes, a red marble.
Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of read marble. Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple
color. Porphyrio, a bird, which drinks as if he did byte the water, he
has long red legs and bylle. Porraceus, a, um, of the colors of leeke
blades. Porrectus, ta, tum, stretched. Porrecte, straight out. Porriginosus, a,
um, like to lekes. Porrigo, portexi, rigere, to sprede out, to offer, to
overthrow. Porrigo, ginis, skales which do fall from a man's heed or berde,
like branne. Porro, surely. also long before, far of, after, in time
coming, beyond, forsooth. Porrum, potri, in the plu^ell number leeke.
Porraceus, a, um, of a leeke. Porsena, the name of a king, that besyeged Rome.
Porta, a yate. Portendo, dear, to sygnifie before a thing happens.
Portentiferus, a, um, that which signifies strange or monstrous things
coming. Portentificus, ca, cum, idem. Portentosus, a, um, monstruouse,
sygnifieng some thing to come. Portentum, a thing monstrous or very seldom
seen, which may sygnifie sum what to come. Porticus, cus, a porche. Portio,
a portion. portiuncula, a little porcio^. Portiusculus, the pylate of a ship,
which rules the maryners. Portitor, oris, the customer of a haven. Also a
porter, that does bear things that be bought, whither as the byer will have
him. Also he that bears men fro the haven to the ship. Porto, tare, to
bear, to bring. Portorium, the frayte paid for passage or caryage of
merchaundyse. Portulaca, an herb called Purselan. Salustius in iugur.
Portuosus, full of havens. Portus, tus, an haven. Posca, a sauce made with
vyneygre and water. Poscinumius, mia, um, that which requires money. Posco,
poposci, poscere, to ask, to require, to provoke, to assail. Pos, a bridge.
Varr^.
Positio, a setting of a thing. Positura, idem. Positus, ta, tum, put or
set. Positura, and positus, tus, a setting or putting. Possessio, onis,
possession. Possessor, oris, he that has the possession, the owner. Possideo,
sedi, sidere, to possede. Possum, potui, posse, to may. Caesar.
Post, after, afterward, behind. Postea, afterward. Postergo, are, to leave
behynd, to cast back. Posteritas, tatis, the world to come. Posterius, later,
slower, ^yler. Posterus, ra, rum, that which comes after. Postera dies, the
day after Posteri pedes, the hinder ^ete. Post fero, to set after or behind,
to set less by. Post habere, idem. Posthac, from hensforthe. Posthumus, ma, a
child borne after that the father is dead. Posthumus, ma, mum, following, or
to come. Posticum, and posticus, a back door. Postica, all that is behind
us, like as Antica is all that is before us. It is also a line which divides
the feldes from the cast to the weste. Postilena, a crouper. Postis, a post.
Postlimineum redire, is when any man happeth to go from us to our ennemies,
and after retourneth home. Postmitto, tere, to leave behind, to forget.
Postmodum, afterward. Postquam, after. Postremo, at the last. Postridie, the
day after to morrow, the day following the day before expressed. Postomis, a
braake, wherewith a horses mouth is broken, and is made to bear his heed
easyly. Postulo, are, to require, to demand a thing which is dew to the
asker. Also to accuse or sewe oone in the law, or to complain on one.
sometime to desire. Postulatio, a supplication made to a prince. Pl^. in epis.
Potens, it is, mighty, puissant, hable. Potentia, power, puissa^ce, habilite,
great rule. Potenter, myghtily, puissantly. Caes. lib. 1. belli galli.
Potentatus, tus, power. Potestas, tatis, power, authority, counsel, and
reason. Potestatem sui facere, to suffer men to come to him, or to speak with
him. Potiono, are, to give a medicyne. Potior, potius, better. Potior, poti^us
sum, potiri, to have in possessyon, to obtain, to take pleasure of. Potestur,
for potest, he may. Potis sum* I may, potis est, it is possible. Potitius,
Hercules priest. Potito, tare, to use to drink. Poto, tare, to drink: Also
to give drink to one. Potorium, a cup. Potus, ta, tum, that which has
drunk, and that which is dronken. Potus, tus, drink.
P, ANTE, R.
PRae, before, in regard, or in comparyson, for. Prae amore, for love. Also
of. Prae studio, of study. Praeut, sygnyfieth than. Modestior nunc quidem est
de uerbis, praeut dudum fuit, He is more soft or gentle of words, than he
was wont to be, or than he was late. Praebitere, to pass by, or pass forth
in journey. sometime perire, to lose, to cast away. Plautus. Pom. Fest*
Praebeo, bui, bear, to give, to show. Praebia, orum, things given to sick
men. Praecaluus, balde before. Praecarus, ra, rum, very dear. Praecedo, cessi,
dear, to goo before. Praecello, lui, lere, to excelle. Praecentio, that which
is songen or playde at the beginning of a song or balade. Praecentor, toris,
he that first sings. it may be taken for the chaunter in a quyre. Praesultor,
toris, he that leads the daunse. Praeceps, pitis, a high place stepe down.
Praeceps homo, he that is to haslye in his business, and does things
unadvisedly. Praeceps, heedlynge. Praeceptum, a precepte, a rule given, a
commandment. Praecidanea porca, a swine, which the Paynims did sacrifice
before they did cut down their corn. Praecidaneus, a, u^, that which is first
killed. Cice. in Achad. que^^
Praecido, dear, to speak or tell precisely, or certainly, to strike, to cut
of, to beat, to deny styffely. Ci. ad A^. lib. 8.
Plane sine ulla exceptione praecidit, Truly he styffly denied it without
exception. Praecino, nui, nere, to sing before or first, also to tell a thing
before it happens. Praecipio, coepi, cipere, to prevent or take first* to
forsee: also to command. Praecipitium, a down right place or step, which
may not be gone on. Praecipito, tare, to throw down heedling.
Praecipitanter, heedlynge, unadvisedly. Praecipuus, a, u^, chief, special,
principal. Praecipue, chiefly, specially, principally. Praecise, precisely,
determinately. Praecisum, hard, intractable, cutted, very short, Quin^^^^*
lib. ^.
Qui praecisis conclusionibus obscuri, Salustium atque Thucydide^ superant. The
which being hard to be understand in their cutted sentences, do excede
both Saluste and Thucydides. Praeclamo, are, to cry before. Praeclare, very
excellently, very nobly. Praeclarus, very noble: sometime it signifies good.
Praecognitus, ta, tum, known before. Praeco, conis, a cryar, a publysshar of
things. Praeconium, a solemn cry: sometime it signifies praise or glory.
Praecoquor, queris, qui, to be sone ripe. Praecordia, the skin, which
dyuideth the over part of the body from the nether: it is also taken for the
place under the rybbes: sometime all the numbles, as the heart, the spleen, the
lunges, and liver. Praecox, cocis, and Praecoquus, a, um, sone ripe or tymely
ripe. Praeda, a proye, a thing gotten or taken in wars. Q^. Curt^.
Praedabundus, going on foragynge in the time of war. Praedaceus, a, um, of
a proye. Praeda^iuus, idem. Praedator, a seekar for a proye. ^a^^stiu^
Praedator ex socijs, a robber of his company. Praedensus, a, um, very thick.
Praedestino, are, to purpose before. Praediator, toris, a man of law expert in
actions real, or matters concerning lands. Praediatorius, a, um, pertayninge
to lands. Praedicatio, a publysshynge, or open declaration. Praedico, care, to
publysshe, to tell a thing openly, to praise. Praedico, xi, dicere, to tell
before. Praediolum, a little manor. Praedisco, didici, discere, to understand
before. Praeditus, ta, um, adourned: also Praeditus more rore, replenyshed with
heaviness: Praeditus lachrymis, washed with tears, or full of tears.
Praedium, a manor. Praedonulus, a little robber. Praedo, donis, a robber of
countrayes. Cato.
Praedor, aris, ari, to rob a countraye, or to take prays. Praedotiunt, they
chiefly desire. Pom. Fest.
Praeduro, are, to be harder than it was wo^t. Praeeo, iui, ire, to go before.
Praefacio, feci, facere, to set more by. Praefanda, not honest to be spoken or
reherced. Praefari, to speak or say before. Praefatio, onis, a preface.
Praefectus praetorij, was with Emperors the principal officer in his court:
as now in France the great master. Praefero, tuli, far, to prefer.
Praefericulum, a great basin, which was carried before him that did sacrifice.
Pom. Fest.
Praefestino, are, to make to much ha^te. Praefica, a woman, which is hired to
lament at the buryenge of men or women. Praeficio, faeci, ficere, to put in
authority, or to give rule. Praefectura, an authority or rule. Praefectus, a
rular. Praefigo, xi, gere, to shut before. Praefinio, niui, ire, to determyne
before, to assign or appoynte. Praefinitus, ta, tum, prefixed. Praefoco, care,
to strangle, or choke. Praefractus, cta, etum, hard and unflexible, which
will rather break than bow: also that which was before broken. Praefracte,
obstinately. Praefrigidus, da, dum, very cold. Praefulcio, cire, to fortifye.
Plautus in Pseudolo.
Praefulgeo, fulsi, gere, to shine much. Praefu^^ium, the mouth of an oven or
fournayse. Praegelidus, da, dum, exceeding cold. Praegigno, nere, to begin, to
bring in first. Nolebam ex me morem praegigni malum, I would not that an ill
custom should be brought up by me. Praegestio, ire, to rejoice much.
Praegnans, it is, a woman with child. Praegrandis, de, very great.
Praegrauatio, a great grief. Praegredior, gredi, to go before. Praegrauo, are,
to grieve much. Praehendo, di, dear, to take. Cic. in P^^^. and ad Atti. Ti.
Liuius.
Manum praehendere, to take by the hand. Praehensatio, a solicitinge or
laboringe for the attayninge of some great office. Praehenso, are, to embrace
or set hand on one, to solicit. Praeiacio, praeieci, praeiacere, Colum. 9.
to cast before a thing. Praeiacio, cui, cere, to lie before. Praeire
iuramentum, to ministre or give an oath. Praeiuditium, a thing which being
ones decyded and determined, makes a rule or example to men that do follow, to
discuss semblably in a like matter. As those which we do call ruled cases or
matters in the law, which be as examples to iuges. Praeiudico, to judge before:
sometime to condemn, also to let. Praeiuro, rare, to swear before other.
Praeiuratio, the oath that is taken by him that first swears. Praeiurator,
toris: he which first takes an oath, as the fore man of a Jury, or the first
witness, or any other, after whom other men do swear, according to the oath
given unto him. Praelabor, beris, by, to fall first. Praeliaris, are,
pertayninge to battle. Praeliator, toris, a warrior. Praelicenter, very
wantonly. Praelior, aris, ari, to fight in battle. Cato
Praeliganeum vinum, a praeligando, which I suppose to be so called, either
because it is first runned or put into vessels, or else because it is put into
a sack, which is fast knytte before. Praeligo, gare, to bind before. Praelium,
battle also the fight in battle: sometime the act of generation. Praelongus,
a, um, very long. Praeloquium, the beginning of a communication, or thing
spoken, as that which in thetorike is named exordium. Praeloquor, queris, qui,
to speak or tell before. Praeluceo, cere, to bear light before one, as a
torche or candel: also to give more light than another. Praelucere alijs
virtute, to shine in virtues before other. Praeludium, a proheme, or that which
Musicians and Mynstrelles do play at the beginning, er they come to the
song* which they purpose to play. Praeludo, si, dear, to play before.
Praelum, a press. Praelumbo, are, to break ones loins. Praeluo, luere, to
pourge or wasshe clean before. Praemando, daui, to send before. Praemanibus,
ready at hand. Pla^t in Mo^^e^^.
Praemature, to soon, or before the just time. Praemature vita careo, I dye
before my time. Praemeditor, taris, tari, to advise before a man do a thing.
Prae me sero, prae me tuli, prae me far, to declare by deed, word, or
gesture. Prae te fers iracundiam, thou shewyste thy self to be angry: also to
confess: also to have before him a thing (as it were) in remembrance.
Praemercor, caris, cari, to bye aforehande. Praemessum, a sacrifyce or offrynge
to Ceres, of the cares of corn that was first repyd. Praemetium, the
fyrstcroppe. Praemiatores, thieves which steal by night, as we might say,
which commytte burglary. Praemiator, is a rewardar. Praemineo, nui, ere, to be
better than another or excel above another in astate or virtue. Praemior, aris,
ari, to give rewards. Praemiosus, rich of money. Praemissio, a sendinge
before. Praemitto, misi, tere, to send before. Praemium, a reward, given to him
which has done any notable and laudable thing. Cellius.
Praemoderor, aris, ari, to play before on an instrument. Praemodum, above
measure. Praemolestia, fear of a thing to come. Ci. Tus. ^
Praemollis, le, very tender or delicate. Praemoneo, nui, nere, to forewarne.
Praemonstrator, toris, he that tells or shows a thing before that it
happens. Terent. in Heau.
Praemonstro, are, to show before. Praemordeo, dear, to byte or rebuke before.
Praemorior, riris, ri, to dye er the time come. Praemunio, iui, ire, to
prepare. Praenarro, rare, to tell before. Praenato, tare, to swymme before.
Praeneste, a city in Italy. Praenestini, people of the city of Preneste in
Italy. Praenestinus, a, um, of Preneste. Praenomen, the first name: as Marcus.
Quintus, Lucius: and as we now have the name at baptysme. Praenosco, noui,
noscere, to know before. Praenoto, tare, to make annotations or inscriptions.
Praenuncio, are, to show before. Praenuncius, the first messenger, he that
first brings tydinges. Praeoccupatio, a figure in Rhetorike, when we will
say that we will not tell a thing, and yet thereby covertly we will declare the
matter, or make it suspected. Praeoccupo, pare, to take or possede a thing by
preuencion. Praeopto, tare, rather to desire. Praeordinatio, the first
ordinance. Praeordinator, he that made the first ordinance. Praeordino, are,
to ordain before. Praeparcus, ca, cum, very scarce or nygarde. Praeparo, are,
to prepare, to make ready. Praepedimentum, a let before. Praepedio, diui, to let
much. Praependo, dear, to hang before. Praepes, praepetis, swyft. Praepetes
aues, were the birds, which showed them selfs first to the diuinours called
Augures, whereby they supposed to know what should ensue. Praepeto, tere, to
begin first. Praepilatus, ta, tum, hedded with iron, as a Iauelyn or dart:
also sharp before like the heed of a dart, though it has none iron* as the
horns of a lopster, wherewith he swymmeth. Praepinguis, very fat. Praepondero,
are, to way more, to be more worth. Praepolleo, lere, to excede other.
Praepono, sui ponere, to put or set before. Praepositus, ta, tum, set or
advanced above other, set in authority. Praepositus, ti, he that is in
authority, or chief in any office. Praepotens, very puissant or mighty.
Praepoto, tare, to drink before, to bring good luck in drinkinge.
Praeposterus, ra, rum, overthwart, out of order. Salustius (...) Iug.
Praeposteri homines, they that do that thing last, which they should have
done first. Praepostere fieri, to be done against all good order. As when the
servant commands his master, the people their rulars, or a fool a wise man.
Praeproperus, ra, rum, very quick or hasty. Praeputium, the skin which
covers the heed of a man's priuey membre. Praeripio, pui, pere, to prevent, to
catch. Praerideo, dear, to lawghe before. Praerisor, oris, he that laugheth a
fore one. Praerodo, si, dear, to gnawe or eat very much. Praerogata
beneficia, benefytes before employed. Praerogo, gare, to employe or give before.
Praerogatiua, and praerogariuum, a prerogati^e, where one is preferred before
another. Praerumpo, pere, to break asonder. Praeruptus, ta, tum, all to
broken. it is sometime taken, where a hill is broken by the sides, and hard to
go on. Praerupta loca, places broken here and there, that no man may pass.
Praesagio, gire, and praesagior, to perceive or know a thing before that it
happen. Praesagus, a pronosticatour, or perceyuer of things er they hap.
Praesagium, and praesagatio, among the ancient writars, a perceiving of a
thing before that it happens, sometime a conjecture. Praescientia, an
understanding and perfyte knowledge of all that shall happen. Praescius, he
that knows perfytely things er they happen. Praescio, scire, to know before.
Praescribo, psi, bear, to assign, to note or entitle, to put, to lay before,
to tell before, to appoint or determyne. Praescriptio, and praescriptum, a
rule, a law, an order, a form. Praescriptum, a precepte, a form, a rule.
Praeseco, care, to cut before, sometime to cut on sonder. Praesegmina, the
parings of a man's nails. Praesens, it is, present. In praesentia, and in
praesentiarum, at this present time. Praesentius, better. Praesentissimus, a,
um, the best, the surest. Praesentissimum venenum, the greatest and most
fervent poison: also strong. Presens animus, a strong or good courage, also
favorable. Deum praesentem haber, he has god favorable unto him. Praesentaneum
remedium, a short or sudden remedy. Praesentia, presence. Praesentio, and
praesentisco, cere, to feel or perceive before. Praesento, tare, to have ready.
Praesepe, and praesepium, and presepes, a stable, a stall, a shepehouse.
Praesepi^, pire, to hedge before a thing. Praesertim, specially. Praeseruatio,
a preservation. Praeseruare, to preserve. Praeses, sidis, Plautus in Casina.
he that has authority in a province next under the prince: sometime it
signifies a defendour, alsoo sure. Locum praesidem, a sure place. Praesideo,
dear, to be in more autoritye, or of a more dignity: also to have authority
or rule. Praesideratio, tempest, which comes at the beginning of winter,
sooner than it is looked for, or is accustomed to happen. Praesidero, are, where
tempest comes very soon, and before the time accustomed. Praesicco, care, to
dry before. Praesidiarius, a, um, that which is ordained to be aid to another
thing. Praesidium, a garyson of men with a capytayne, set by the chief
captain, to defend a fortress: sometime it is taken generally for all manner
of aid or defense: also for a fortification of a thing. Praesilio, silire, to
lepe before, to sterte out. Praesisto, tere, to stand or be set before.
Praespeculor, ari, to look before. Praespicio, spexi, spicere, to see before.
Praestabilis, le, excellent. Praestabilius, bettar. Praestantia, excellency.
Praestat, it is bettar. Praestans, it is, excellent. Praestanter, excellently.
Praestare culpam, to take the blame on him. Praestare officium, to do his
deuoyre. Cicer. T^.
Praestare iusiurandum, to take an oath. Praestega, a place open before, and
keuered behind like a porche, where men do sit for recreacion after their
business. Praester, a venymouse serpent, of whom he that is stryken, dies
for thurst. Praestigiator, toris, a iuggler. Pom. Fest.
Praesies, titis, of the ancient wrytars called a prelate. Praestigium, a
iugglynge cast, an inchauntment, a delusyon. Praestino, are, to prepare in
byenge a thing. Praestituo, ere, to determine before, to prescribe or appoint
before, what shall be done. Istam enim culpam, quam vereris, ego praestabo, Ci.
de ora.
for the blame, which thou fear, I will take upon me. Praesto, stiti,
state, to be better than another thing, wherewith it is comparyd, to excel:
also to undertake, to waraunt, sometime to grant, also to do, to be
beneficial, to beware, to exchue, to fear, to do or perform, Ci ad Q. (...).
to give, to exhibit, to represent or show, to lend, to assign or appoint,
to do a thing. Praesto, an aduerbe, ready, at hand. Praestosis, help me.
Praesto esse, to appiere, as me^ do in places of iugementes. Praestolor, aris,
ari, to tarry, to be at hand, or ready to do service. Praes^tingo, xi, gere, to
bind fast, to shut, to dasell the eyes, to touch quickly, or shortly, to
shave, to grieve somewhat. Praestruo, struxi, struere, to ordain first, to
build. Praesul, lis, a prelate. Praesulatus, tus, the dignity of a prelate.
Praesulto, are, to leap or daunse before. Praesultor, praesultoris, he that
leads a daunse. Praesum, fui, praesse, to be before or above an other, to be
of more dignitye, to be in autorytye. Praeesse negotio, to be chief in the
business. Praesumere animo, to coniecte. Praesumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take
first, to preuente. Praesumptio, a taking or receyuynge before: it is also
that, which is called preoccupation, when we declare first what our adversary
will say, or what is the iuges opinion: and against that we do argue, to
dissolve it with reason. Praesuo, ere, to sow before. Praesurgo, gere, to rise
before or first. Praetego, gere, to hyde or cover chiefly. Praetendo, ere, to
lay for a thing er it come: also to carry or bear before, also to show or
pretend, to allege, to set a thing about for an enclosure. Praetendere
sepem, to make a hedge about. Praetento, tare, to tempte or assaye before.
Praeteriue, very sklenderly. Praeterduco, cere, to lead before, to lead forth.
Praetergredior, di, to pass by, to go beyond. Praeteritus, ta, tum, passyd.
Praeteriti, deed, departed, decessyd: also they which in suynge for an office,
did suffer repulse, or were put back. Praeter propter, for an other cause than
that which is reherced. Praeter, except, also beside, over and above, before.
Praeter oculos, before the eyes, Against or contrary. Praeter morem, against
the custom or facion. Praeter spem, unlooked for. Praeter opinionem, otherwise
tha^ I thought. Praeter caetera, more than the other. Praeter aequum, against
raison. Praeterbito, tare, to go by. Praeterea, moreover, beside, none else.
Mihi credis praeterea nemini, Thou beleuest me, and none else. also it
signifies afterward. Praetereo, iui, ire, to go over or pass, to leave out a
thing, which should be spoken of. Praetermitto, misi, tere, to leave untouched,
to forgete, to leave out. Praetermissio, forgetynge, or leuinge out of a
thing. Praeterquam, but only, otherwise than, moreover. Praeterquam quod,
but. Praeterueho, here, to carye through. Praeteruolo, are, to pass through
quickly. Praetexo, ui, ere, to make or ordain first, to cover or hyde.
Praetexta, a long garment myxte with purple silk, which was the vesture of
noble men's sons, until they came unto.xvii years of age: and therefore
such children were called Praetextati, but they had alsoo about their necks,
a little round jewel of gold, facyoned like a heart, wherein was enclosed some
thing of great virtue. Praetexta, was also the robe of astate, which the
king of Romans, or the other chief officers did wear, when they sat in
their majesty. Praetexta comaedia, an interlude, wherein are personages of
high dignity. Praetextatus, ta, tum, dishonest, Suetonius Gellius, Macro.
or unclean in speech or acts. Festus takes it in the contrary sense.
Praetextum, a pretense or color. Praetiamitatores, officers which went before
the prelates called Flamines, proclayming openly, that all men should cease of
their warke, because it was not lefull to those prelates to behold any man
warkynge. Praetimeo, ere, to be sore aferde. Praetingo, gere, to touch before.
Praetondeo, to sheere or klyppe, or round before. Praetoritius, a, um, for
Praetorius. Praetorium ius, law made by the Praetor. Praetor, toris, a chief
captain in wars, in a city or contraye. Praetor is he, which has
autoritye to sit in judgment, and to give sentence in causis. Praetorianus, he
that is attendant to him that is Praetor. Praetorium, the house or pauylyon of
him that is Praetor. it is alsoo a princes palayce or manoure: it is sometime
the place, where iugementes are given, sometime the counsel, whereunto
Praetores are assembled. Praetorius, he that has been Praetor. Praetorius, a,
um, belonginge to the office of Praetor. Praetura, the dignity and
ministration, of him that is Praetor. Praeualeo, lere, to prevail, to be
better or of more value. Praeualidus, a, dum, very strong or mighty, sometime
very great. Praeuaricario, is a collusion: alsoo it is where one touches a
thing lytely, which ought to be inculked with a more plain declaracyon, or else
repeted, as making much to the purpose. Praeuaricor, aris, ari, to swarne
from truth, to go out of the right way, to leave vnsayd that, which should be
spoken, to touch a thing shortly in speaking, to warke by collusion, in
suffringe his adversary to obtain, to hurt another person. Praeuaricator,
toris, he that leueth the right way, or speaks not that which ought to be
spoken: also he that in spekinge for him self aydeth the cause of his
adversary, or does any thing by collusion. Praeuelio, here, to bring first.
Praelo, are, to cover or hyde before. Praeuello, lere, to pull or pluck before.
Praeuenio, nire, to come before or prevent. Ti. Liuius. de bell. pu. Ci. de Di.
Praeuentio, a prevention. Praeuideo, dear, to foresee, to beware. Praeuius, he
that leads the way. Praeuerto, uertere, to set more by, or to care more for.
Plautus in Amphi.
Nec me vxorem praeuortisse dicant, prae repub. Nor let them not say, that I
set more by my wife, than by the weal publyke. Plautus in milite.
Also to turn or set a side. Neque praeripio pulpamentum, neque praeuorto
pocu lum, Nor I take away thy meat, nor set or turn aside thy drink.
Plautus in. capt.
Praeuertor, deponens, idem quod praeuerto: also to go before. Inde illico
praeuertor domum, from thense I went home before. also to be turned forth.
Foreis enim clausit, Plautus in Amph.
ne praeuorteretur for as, he has shyr fast the door, leest he should be
turned forth. Also to do any thing first or before any other thing.
Praeuorti hoc certum est rebus alijs omnibus, Surely this shall be done before
any other thing. Praeuertere serio, to turn it to ernest. Plautus in amph.
Si quid dictum est persocum, non aequum est id te serio praeuortier. If any
thing be spoken in iape, it is not rayson to turn it to erneste. Praeuerti
pigritiae, Plautus in Merc.
to be taken with sloth Cave pigritiae praeuortier, beware that thou be not
taken with slouthe. Praeuersus, a, um, that which is done or sped first, or
before any other. Praeuersum fulgur, Pom. Fest.
lightening which is not known, whyther it be by day or by night.
Praeuolo, are, to flee before. Pragmaticus, a practiser in the law. Pragma in
greek, is in latyne negociatio, an act or business: alsoo an exercise of
marchaundyse. Pragmatica sanctio, a determination of practisians of the law.
Prandeo, prandi, and pransus sum, prandere, to dyne. Prandiculum, a brekefast.
Prandiolum, a lyter dynar. Prandium, a dynar. Pransito, tare, to dyne or eat
often. Pransor, oris, he that is at dynar, or he that is boden to dynar.
Prasinus, na, number, green like leekis. Prasius, a green stone. Prasoides, a
stone of the color of leekes. Pratensis, se, of the meadows. Pratense foenum,
medowe hay. Pratulum, a little medowe. Praue, shrewedly, noughtyly, unhappily,
ouerthwartly. Prauitas, shrewdenesse, unhappiness, ouerthwartnesse. Pratum,
medowe. Prauus, a, um, crooked. Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in stone.
Precarius, a, um, that which is borrowed, as the will of the lender, that which
is occupied, at another man's pleasure. Precario, by desire at another man's
will. Preces, prayer. Precium, price, value. Preciosus, a, um, dear,
preciouse. Precor, aris, ari, to pray. Prehendo, prehendi, dear, to take. Et
manuta prehendi, and osculum detuli tibi, I took you by the hand, and also
gave you a kiss. Premo, pressi, premere, to press: sometime to vex, to
dygge, to prese on, to thruste, to destroy, to thrust down, to constrayne, to
restrain. Vergilius.
Premere dolorem, to hyde heaviness or sorrow. Premit alto cord dolorem, he
hyd his sorrow in the secret part of his heart. Varro.
Premere, to drive or put out. Premere, to shyt or close. Pressique oculos, ac
vulnera laui, Verg.
I closed his eyes, and washed his wounds. Premere, to cut away. Et ruris
opaci, false premes vmbram, Ver geo. 1
and with a sithe thou shall cut away the shadow of the dark feldes.
Premere, to trede down. Veluti qui sentibus anguem, Vergili. 2.
pressit humini tens, like as he, which thraslyng his foot to the ground,
tredeth down the snake, that lies in the brembles. Premere testimonio, to
conuicte a man by witness. Presa porca, a swyne which was offered in sacrifice
to Ceres, in satisfaction for a hole household, for as much as a part of that
sacrifice was made in the presence of the corpse, which than was to be buried.
Pressatus, ta, tum, oppressed, charged trodden down. Pres, predis, he that
undertakes, if any incommoditie do happen, C^o^ Nep. A^^ ^ian.
that he shall make sufficient recompense: it is also he that is bounden for
such money as is borowyd of a commune treasure or stock. Presbiter, biteri,
an ancient, or father in years or dygnytye. It is used for a priest. Presso,
are, to press or thrust together. Pressus, ssa, ssum, subtle, compacte, heavy,
pressed. Pressus, ssus, and pressura, pressinge, also oppression. Pretiosus, a,
um, preciouse, dear, of great estimacion. Pretiosior, pretiosius, more
preciouse or dear. Pretium, the price or value: alsoo the reward: sometime
peril or danger. Pretio emptas meo, Terent. in ptol. Hec.
bought with my peril or danger. Pri, of old time was used for Prae.
Priamus, the noble king of Troy, whose history is to no man unknown.
Priapismus, a sickness, wherein the pryuy membre of a man allway stands,
without having any appetite to lechery. Priapus, an ydolle, unto whom the
Paynymes, committed their gardynes to keep. Pridem, lare. Pridianus, a, um,
that which is done the days before. Pridie, the day before. Primas tenere, to
have the preeminence, to be chief, to hold the bettar part. Primas dare, to
esteem above other. Primaeuus, a, um, the elder. Primarius, a, um, chief.
Primas, atis, in chief authority. Primanus Tribunus, he that assigned tribute
to the first legion. Prima lux, the spring of day. Prima vespera, the
evening. Ci. de (...)
Primae, the chief praises. Cui primae sine co^trouersia deferebantur, to whom
the chief praises were given without any controuersye. Primitus, first.
Primetium, sacrifice of the ears of corn* which were first gathered after
that they were repyd. Primores, the tops of any thing. Plautus.
Digitulis primoribus, with the fingar tops. Labris primoribus, with the fore
part of the lyppes. Primotibus labris gustare, to touch a thing skantely, to
smater of a thing, and not to know it substancially or perfitely.
Primicerius, chief ruler. Primigenus, gena, genum, first borne or grown.
Primigenius, a, um, that comes naturally of it self, and is unmixed.
Primigenia, the title of the eldest child in inheritance. Primipara, she that
has her first child. Primipes, he that in battle fyghteth first with a
sword, and after chaungynge his form of fighting, uses a Iauelyne or
darte. Primipilaris, is he that fyghteth next to the standarde. It is most
proprely the Capytayne of a company in the fowewarde. Primitium, the
principal or chief. Primipilus, Vege^i. ^.
a capytayne of a company in the forewarde or vauntgarde, which had under
him four hundred Soldiers. Primiter, and Primitus, first. Primitiae, the
first fruits. Primitius, a, um, the first or foremoost. Primitiuus, a, um, that
which has none other beginning. Primesius, a stake, whereto a cabell or rope
of a ship is tied. Primo, an aduerbe, signifies first. Primodum, for Primo.
Primogenia verba, words which be not dyed from any other. Primogenitus, ta,
tum, first begotten. Primordium, the first beginning. Primores, the first,
the chief. Primores uiri au^ feminae, Noble men or womenne, or gentle men and
gentle women. Primulus, the diminutiue of Primus. Primum, an aduerbe, which
sygnifyethe first, or ever. Primus, a, um, first, best, the chief. Primo
quoque tempore, arre the first time. Prima quaque occasion, at the first
occasyon that shall happen. Princeps, cipis, a prince, the first or chief.
Principalis, le, principal, also, pertaining to a prince. Principaliter,
pryncipallye. Principio, an aduerbe, first, or at the beginning. Liuius
Terent. suetonius
Principia, the place in a Camp, where as are pyghte the pauilions of the heed
capitaynes: but the more propre sygnification thereof is, that it is the second
ward in battle, where in old time were the princis and noble men. Also it
was taken for the order of ray of noble men. Principior, piari, to begin.
Principor, pari, to rule. Principium, the beginning. Prior, the first. Priora
tempora, the old time. Priscus, a, um, ancient, or of the old time.
Pristinus, na, mim, that which was many years passed. Sometime it sygnifyeth
the first, ancient. Pristis, a fysh, of wonderful length, and sclender,
which cuttethe the wawes, as he swymmeth. Priuatus, he that is in none
auctorytie or dygnitie. Priuatus, ta, tum, that is proprely a man's own, that
which pertayneth to oone man or few, also particular. Sometime it signifies
deprived. Priuatim, and private, priuyly, aparte. Priuernum, a town in
Campania. Priuignus, na, the child by an another husband, or other wife,
which is deed, son or daughter in law to the husband or wife. Priuilegium, a
law concerning pryuate persons* also a private or special law. Priuo, are,
to take away, to deprive. Prius, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth before. Priusquam,
before that. Priuus, ua, uum, pryuate, synguler, every man's own or propre.
Pro, for, before. Pro rostris, at the bar or place of pleding. Pro tribunali,
in the place of judgment. also after or according. Pro Platonis sententia,
according to the sentence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke. Pro merito,
according to his deserning. Salust. in Iugurt.
Pro curia, before the court. Pro uirili, to my power. Pro sancte Jupiter, O
blessed Jupiter. Vide com.
Pro deum atque hominum fidem, O the faith of god and man. Proanus, my greatte
grandfather. Proauia, my great grandame. Probabile, that which may be proved.
Probatica piscina, a ponde, where sheep are washed. Probatio, a proof.
Probatus, ta, tum, proved. Probe, honestely, well, wisely. Probiter, idem. Vide
com.
Probus, a virtuous man, a good man. Probitas, goodness. Problema, it is, a
sentence purposed, having a demand thereto annexed. Probo, are, to prove, to
praise, to approve. Proboscis, dis, a long snowre, as an Olyphant or swyne
has. Probro, are, to reproach or rebuke. Probrosus, a, um, reprochefull.
Probrum, a reprocheful act. Also a reproach or rebuke, an infamy. Procax,
procacis, malaperte in asking, or desiring, shameless, wanton in craving, ill
tounged. Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonness in asking or crauynge.
Procare, to wowe, to crave, to be ymportunate. Procapis, a progeny, which
comes of one head. Procaciter, malapertely, wantonly, without shame.
Procalo, are, to call one to. Procatum, and procitu^, void, or of none effect.
Procedo, cessi, cedere, to go forth, to proceed, to prosper. Procella, a
storm. Proceleumaticus, a foot in meter of four feet short. Procello, ere,
to streeke, to turn up so down Procellosus, a, um, stormye. Procensu, the
company or felowshyppe of young men in the city, as we behold in London the
Bachelors together, when the Mayre takes his oath. Proceres, the heed men of a
town. Procerus, a, um, long, talle. Proceritas, length, tallness.
Proceriter, an aduerbe, which sygnifyeth long, or of length. Proceritus,
rita, tum, incensed or provoked with an ill spirit, mad or wood. Plautus in
Penulo.
Proceriti lapides, vengeable. Procerto, surely. Procet, for prouocet, let him
provoke, let him appeal. Processus, us, process or success. Procestrium, a
galerye to goo from oone chamber to an other. Also the ouermoste part of the
walls within the imbattylmentes, where men may go: some do call it a
trenche before the camp, in defense thereof from artyllery. Prochyta, an I Will in
the sea, in the gulf or rode of Puteolis, a city in Campania. Procidentia
any, when the bone of the fundement appears out. Procido, dear, to fall down
prostrate. Perottus.
Procico, ere, to provoke or call from far of. Procicta classis, a navy p^parid
ready to fight Procinctus, tus, the prouysyon before that any thing is done.
Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make ready. Procinctus, ta, tum, ready,
prepared. Procino, cinui, nere, to pronounce in singing, to sing out. Procio,
ciui, ire, to ask. Procito, tare, to provoke. Proclamo, are, to cry out, to
proclayme. Procliue, redily, easily in doing. Procliuis, ue, ready to fall,
inclyned. Alsoo ready or easy to be done. Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to
evil. Proclus, a noble philosopher of the sect of Plato. Proco, and procor,
ari, to ask malapertely. Also to dalye with wanton language, to eye or behold
a woman wantonly. Proconsul, lis, he that was sent with an extra ordinary
power of Consul into a prouynce of the Romans. Procrastinatio, a delay.
Procrastino, nare, to prolonge the time, to defer. Procreo, are, to bygette
chylderne. Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten. Procubitor, toris, he that kepethe
watch and ward without the camp. Procubo, bare, to watch. Procudo, dear, to
stryke or beat a thing. to make it less or thynner. Qu. Curti. Ti. Liuius.
Procul, far of, from far. Procul urbem, far from the city. Procul
muros, far from the walls. Proculco, care, to tread down. Proculdubio, out
of doubt, doubtless. Perottus.
Proculeio, ere, to extend, to promise. Proculiunt, old writers used for
promittunt, they promise. Pom. Fest.
Proculus, he that is borne when his father is far out of the country.
Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lie flat or prostrate, to come narowe together.
Procuro, rare, to do or solicit an other man's business, to inserche
dylygentely, to help or sustain, or succor. Procuratorius, ia, um,
pertaynyng to a proctour or factour. Procurator, to^is, a proctour, a factour.
Procuratio, mynystration of things concerning an other man. Procurro, rere,
to run far, or beyond. Procuruus, ua, um, very crooked. Procus, a wower, to
have a womanne in marriage, but most proprely where there be two, which woweth
every oone for him self. Procyon, a sterre called the Doggesterre, which
appears in the canycular days. Prodeo, diui, uel dij, to goo forth or out of
a house, to come before one. Prodigium, a thing seldom seen, which
sygnifyeth, that sum thing shall happen veraye good or veraye ylle, as
blasynge sterres, fyres, or fygures in the fyrmamente, things monstruouse or
against nature. Prodigo, digere, to lasshe out money in vain, or in things
not necessary. sometime to signifye sum strange thing to happen. Prodigus,
prodigal, wastefull, an outrageous expender. Prodo, didi, dear, to forsake, to
differe, or put of, to cast forth, to put out or far of, to show or
disclose. also to differ, to spread, to betraye. Prodere memoriae, to leave in
remembrance. Also to write. Prodire obuiam, to go against one, or to go to mete
with one, which is coming. Prodire in publicum, to goo abroad, to go in the
streets. Prodico, dixi, dicere, to speak more or prate. Quamobrem excutiemus
omnes istorum delitias, omnes ineptias, si prodixerint, Cicer. pro Caelio.
Wherefore we will set forth al these men's pleasures and fantasyes, if they
will prate any more. Prodigalitas, prodygalytie, or outragyouse expenses.
Prodige, excessyuely, outragiously, prodigally, wastefully. Prodigialis,
digiale, that which pertayneth to the procuryng of strange tokens or signs.
Prodigiator, he that by strange tokens or signs, tellethe before what shall
afterward happen. Prodigiosus, sa, sum, that which makethe strange signs or
tokens. Prodigitas, prodygalitie. Prodimentum, a treason or betrayenge.
Prodinum, for prodiunt, used of Ennius, to issue or come forth. Prodius,
further in. Proditio, treason. Proditor, toris, a traitor. Terent. in Hera^.
Prodere uitam, to put his life in danger. Prodromus, he that rounneth before,
as a lackey, or he that bring the tidings of ones coming. Prodromi, he also
sterres in heaven, the which do rise in the North east.viii. days before the
canicular days. Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to bring forth, to
consume or spend. Producere aliquem falsa spe, Vergilius.
to hold or keep one in a fools paradyse, to put forewarde: also to follow.
Productilis, le, that which is made out at length with beatynge. Producere, to
set forth to hyre. Audientem dicto matter produxisti filiam, Thou being her
mother, Pl^utus in A^^nar.
and she being obedient unto the, thou haste set her to hyre. Producere
filios, to begette chylderne. Productio, the making of a thing long.
Producte, an aduerbe, signifies long. Productus, ta, tum, made long or set
out at length. also brought or put out. Proaedifico, care, to build.
Proaedificatum, that which being a private place, is made commune or publyke.
Profanatum templum, the church suspendyd, where any horrible crime is therein
committed. Profano, are, to convert things being hallowed to a temporal use.
Varro.
Profanus, na, number, that which is not hallowed, temporal, men unlearned, and
that do hate learned men. Also that which is joined or annexed unto the temple.
Profari, to pronounce, to speak abroad. Ci. de ^el in civilly.
Profectio, a passage or. setting forth toward a vyage, a departing from
the place, where a man is. Profecto, in very deed, for sothe. Pil. in epis.
Profectum facere, to profit or goo forth, proprely in study and learning.
Profectus sum, the pretertence of proficiscor, I went. Profectus, tus,
profit. Profero, tuli, far, to bring forth, to show forth, to pronounce,
to enlarge, or dylate, Plautus in Ca^^na.
or make greatter, to prolonge. Profere dolum, to put a disceit in experience.
Profere gradum, to make have in going. Profesti dies, warkedays. Proficio,
sicere, to profit, to proceed. Ci. de sen^ctute, and de amicitia.
Proficiscor, cisci, to go and to come. Profireor, to promise openly, to tell
frankly or boldly. Also to tell or declare, how much a man has of money,
cattal, corn, Plautus in capt. Ci. de am^.
or any other thing. Also to speak or auaunt, Also to discover or confess a
thing. Also to read openly a lesson. Professio, an open confession, an open
redynge or lecture. Professor, oris, a reder in open schools. Profligo, gare,
to overthrow, to drive away, to bring to destruction, to put to flyghte.
Profligatus, ta, tum, overthrown, driven away, put to flight, distroyed.
sometime it signifies finished, brought to a point. Profligo, gis, gere, to
strive much. Proflubeo, ui, ere, to run out. Profluens, it is, a river: being
a participle, is signifies flowynge. Profluo, xi, ere, to run out of a
thing, to run from far. Profluuium, a flyre or laske. Profluus, a, um,
that which flows. Profore, to profit. Quae nocuere sequar, Horatius.
fugiam quae profore credam, That which has done harm will I follow: and
eschew will I those things, which I believe should profit me. Profugio, gere,
to fly far. Profugium, a place, whereto a man flyethe for succor. Profugus,
he that gothe far out of his own country. Profunda auaritia, insaciable
auaryce. Salust. in Iugur^.
Profunda cupido, insaciable couetyse. Profunda libido, insacyable lecherye.
Profunditas, depenesse. Profundo, iudi, fundere, to poor out largely, to
spend excedyngely. Profundus, da, dum, deep, sometime high. Profusus,
exceeding lyberall. Progener, ri, the husband of my dowghters dowghter, or
sons dowghter. Progentes, progeny, succcession in blood. Progigno, nere, to
get a child. Prognare, openly. Prognariter, hardyly. Festu^
Prognatus, ta, tum, begotten. Plautus in Penulo.
Prognosis, prescience, or knowledge before that a thing happens.
Prognosticon, a pronostication. Progredior, grederis, gressus sum, gredi, to go
forth. Progressus, sa, sum, passed over. Progressus, us, a marchynge forth,
or passing forth. Progressio, the same. Progymnasma, an assay or proof in
exercise. Prohibeo, bui, bear, to prohibit, to forbid, to turn away.
Proiecta, the over parts of a house, which do lean outward from the neither
part, as they be now in some rownes toward the streets: some men do call the^
garrettis. Proiecta audatia, fool hardynesse. Proiectare aliquem probris, to
rebuke one. Proiectitius, a, um, a child cast forth and nouryshed of a
stranger. Proiectura, a penthowse to conuaye rain from the walls. Proiectus
puer, a child which is laid abroad in the street, no man knowing who is the
father or mother. Proiectus, proiecta, iectum, thrown or cast out afar.
Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy. Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throw or cast,
to set forth, to leave, to extend or hold out a thing at length. Proin,
therefore. Salustius in (...).
Proinde, therefore, wherefore, like as. Prolabor, beris, by, to slide or slyppe
forth. Prolambo, bear, to lycke. Prolatio, an extendynge forth. Also
pronouncyng, or pronunciation, sommetyme bringynge forth or showing of a
thing. Prolatare, to defer or purre of, until a longer ryme. Prolatus, ta,
tum, set forth, brought forth. Prolectibilis, le, that which tickleth or
plesantly moves one. Prolepsis, a figure in speaking, where we do preuente,
to dissolve by reason that, which we think to be in the opinion of our
adversary, or of the judge. Proles, issue or fruit of a man's body. Also of
a beast. Proletarii, among the Romans were they which for poverty were not
able to goo to the wars: and therefore they were left at home to get
chylderne. Prolibo, are, to taste, or to sacrifice before. Prolicio, prolexi,
olicere, to induce or draw. Eius amor cupida^ huc me per tenebras prolicit,
Plautus in Curcul.
The love of him has drawn me hither in the dark, being desirous of his
company. Prolixe, lyberally, abundantly, at length. Prolixo, lixare, to make a
thing sharp in length. Quare magnopere mouendus putator est, Colum. 5.
ut prolixet acie^ ferramenti, and qua^tum possit, nouaculae similem reddat,
wherefore the cutter of the vine ought to be warned, that he make sharp in
length the point of the instrument, and as much as he may, that he make it
like to a raser. Prolixus, a, um, long, large, sometime ^^perfluous.
Prolixitas, and prolixitudo, length, largenes. Prolocutio, the first speech or
first entree into communication. Plautus
Prologium, idem. Prologus, a prologue. Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to defer.
Proloquium, the beginning of an oration or sentence. Fest^
Proloquor, queris, qui, to speak at length, to tell a long tale. Also to
speak before, to speak that which we think, to declare our opinion. Proludo,
dear, to flourysshe, as musytians do, before they come to the principalle
mattier: and as fence men do with the sword or the two handstaffe. Prolugeo,
xi, gere, to mourn longer than has been accustomed. Proluo, ere, to wasshe
much, to drown or surrounde. Proluuies, the fylthe or ordure, which is
washed of any thing. Proluuium, idem. Also prodigality. Promellere, to
promote or set forth suit^ in the law. Promercalia, things set forth to be
sold, specially that which is sold by retaylle. Promercale aurum, gold
sold in such wise, that besides the just value, so much gold remains to
the seller, as may serve to his propre use, as our nobles and royalles sold
beyond the sea at a greatter price than they be valewed at here in this
royalme. Promercor, caris, cari, to bie things good cheap, to the intent to
sell them dear, to bye at the first hand, to sell them at retail. Promereo,
rui, rere, to deserve. Promereor, reri, idem, Also to bind oone by his acts
to do for him. Also to help, to profytte. Promereri de aliquo, to do a man a
good turn. Promerens, it is, he that does pleasure or service. Plautus in
As^ua^.
Promerenti optime hoccine preth redditur? He that has done very good
service, shall he have this reward for his labor? Promeritum, deserte.
Promeneruar, old writers used for monet, Fest^^.
he exhorts or warns. Prometheus, he that first found and taught astronomy
in Assiria, and also the craft to make images of earth. Promieo, are, to extend
or set out at length. Promiuenter, at length. Prominentia, the extendynge or
setting out at length. Promineo, nui, nere, to appiere far of. Festus.
Promiscam, old writers did use for promiscue. Promisceo, cui, feere, to
mengle together. Promiscue, one with an other, myxte. Promiscuus, scua, scuum,
confused, myngled one with an another. Promissa batha, a long berde. Promise,
long, in length. Promissio, a promise. Promissor, he that promyseth.
Promissum, a promise. Vide co^p.
Promitio, mist, mittere, to promise, to let grow in length. Also to
thretten. Promo, prompsi, mere, to speak out, to tell, to take out of a coffer
or other like thing. Promontorium, a mountain or high place of a land or
country, which lies as it were an elbowe into the sea ward. Promptaria
cella, a prison from whens men be brought to be whipped or hanged. Promptarius,
a, um, that from whens any thing is brought or taken: Promptarium, and
promptuarium, a stoorehowse. Prompte, promptly, redylye. Promptior, more
prompte or ready. Promptitudo, promptness. Plautus in ^acch. and in Ps^udolo.
Prompto, tare, to bring often forth. Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, redye to
do a thing without tarseng. also ready. Promptum ingenium, A redye wit. Res
est in promptu, The thing is ready. also manyfeste. In promptu res est, The
thing is manyfeste. Promul^o nauis agitur, the ship is drawn with a boat.
Promulgator, and promulgatrix, he or she that does publyshe a thing.
Promulgo, gare, to publyshe. Promulgatio, a publycation. Promul^is, idis, Mede,
made with water and honey. Promurale, a countermure, one wall without out an
another. Promus, he that has the keeping of the stoorehouse or dry larder.
Pronepos, poris, and proneptis, my sons or daughters son or daughter.
Prone, redyly* Pronis, old writers used for prona, prostrate or on the
ground. Pronomen, a pronowne. Pronuba, she that attends on the bryde, and is
housewyfe during the feast. Pronabo, nupsi, pronubere, to have a rule in
weddinges or ioynynge of couples. Pronubus, he that leads the bryde home to
her husbands house, and has the surueyenge of the house, during the time of
the solemnisation. Pronubus, he that does celebrate the solemnity in marriage,
it may be now taken for the priest, which does mynister the solemn words
of matrimonye. Pronuntiat^o, a pronunciation or utterance of speech.
Pronuntiatum, a statute. Plautus in Trin.
Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare openly, to give sentence, to say.
Pronuper, long agone. Pronurus, the wife of my sons son, or daughters
son. Pronus, ready, inclyned, stowpinge down, nygh hand. Prooemium, a
proheme or beginning of a marrier. Propago, gare, to sprede as a tree does on
the top, to make to spread, to send far of. Propagatio, a spreadynge.
Propages, a long rewe. Propago, ginis, an old vine spread in many branches.
Sometime it sygnifyeth kind or generation. Propalam, openly, clearly in the
syghte of all men. Propalo, lare, to tell abroode, to grow in length.
Propatruus, my great grandfathers brother. Propatulum, wide open. Prope, nygh,
almooste. Propediem, now every day, shortly. Propello, propuli, pellere, to
drive or put away, far of. Propemodum, almost. Propendere, to hang up.
Prope^ndere, to examyne or consider far of. Propensus, inclyned. Propere,
quyckely, hastily. Properatim, quyckely. Properanter, and properiter, idem.
Properantia, and properatio, an approchyng. Catullus.
Properitas, the same among old writers. Properus, a, um, quycke, sudden.
Propero, rare, to go quyckely or hastily, to say or do any thing quyckely or
hastily. Festus.
Propetro, trare, to command that a thing be done. Prophasis, an excuse.
Proplieris, and prophetissa, a womanne prophet. Propheto, tare, to prophesye,
to sing praises to god: sometime it signifies to preach or interpret.
Propheta, a prophet, he that tells things, which shall happen. Prophetia,
a prophecye. Propilo, are, to make sharp before. Propina, a place by the
commune baynes, where after baynynge men took their refection. Propino,
propinare, to drink to an another manne, to quafte, to bring to, Sommetyme to
give. Propino tibi salutem, I salute the. Propinator, a cup bearer.
Propinquus, a neighbor. Also a kynnesman, of alyaunce. Propinquitas,
affynitie, alyaunce. Propinque, nyghe. Propinquior, quius, nerer.
Propitiabilis, le, that which is sone bowed or inclyned to desires.
Propitialis, idem. Propitiatio, sacrifyce to appease or pacyfye goddis
displeasure. Propitium, sommetyme sygnyfyeth very devout or loving. No. Mar.
Propit^^, peasyble men, or men soon appeased or satisfied. Propius, nerrer,
or nerre. Proplastice, ces, the craft to make mouldes, in the which any
thing is cast or fourmed. Propingeon, the place in a bayne or hot house, in
the which fire enclosed, sends forth heat. Propitiatorium, a table set on
the arc of the old testament. Propitio, and propitior, ari, to appease, or to
make merciful, or favorable. Propitius, pitia, tium, appeased, favorable,
mercyfulle. Propior, nerer. Propola, he that sellyth any thing at retayle,
specially vyttayle, a hukster. Propolis, a subburbes of a town. It is also
that which bees do make at the entry of the hyue, whereby cold and other
annoyaunce is defended. Propono, proposui, ponere, to purpose, to be aduysed,
to promise a price or reward for any notable act, to set out to the show.
Propontis, a see between Greece and Asie. Proportio, a proporcyon. Propositio, a
matter pourposed to be dysputed or reasoned. It is also that, whereby we show
generallye, whereof we will speak. Propositum, a purpose. Propraetor, toris,
he that was in the steed of Praetor, or Mayre. Proprie, proprely. Lucretius.
Propritim, idem. Proprietarius, a, um, whereunto the propretie of a thing
belongs. Proprietas, propretie. Proprius, propria, prium, propre. Propter,
for. Sommetyme nyghe. Alsoo at or in. Propterea, therefore. Proptosis, a
disease, where the eyes meuyd with inflammation, do fall out of their
places. Propudium, shame, dishonestie. Alsoo the most abomynable use of
lecherye, in an inconvenient form. Propugnaculum, a fortress, a strong hold.
Propugnator, toris, a defendour. Propugno, are, to fight far of, to syghte
valyauntly, to defend. Propulsator, he that resysteth a thing, or dryueth any
thing away. Propulso, are, to put of, to drive away. Propyleum, a porche.
Proquaestor, toris, he that exercyseth the office of Questor in his absence.
Prora, the foreparte of a ship. Prorepo, prorepsi, prorepete, to creep
further. Proreta, he that has the rule of the foreshyppe or deck. Prorideo,
ridere, to laugh afar of. Proripio, pui, pere, to withdraw or depart. joined
with me or se, Domum se ex curia proripuit, He departed or withdrew him
homewarde from the court. Prorito, tare, to provoke. Prorogatio, a prolongynge
or delayenge. Prorogo, gare, to prolonge. Prorsus, and prorsum, utterly, always,
in any wise, straight toward a place, surely. Prorsi, lymyttes in boundynge of
lands directed into the east. Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break forth, to
send forth with vyolence, to leap or go out of a place with violence, to
brast out Proruo, ruere, to drive down, or beat down. Prosa, prose, that
which is not meter. Prosapia, a progenye, a dyscente of blood, a petygree.
Proscenia, the place, wherein enterludes were played by the personages.
Proscindo, proscidi, proscindere, to cut out or under, to infame, to rebuke
shamefullye. Proscribo, scripsi, scribere, to sell openly, to proclayme any
thing to be sold, to banysshe, to condemn. Proscriptio, a condemnation, an
att^yndre. Proscriptus, condemned, attaynted. Proseco, care, to cut a sonder.
Prosecta, bowelles cut in sacrifice. Proseda, a strumpette or commune harlot.
Prosedanum, a disease, which happens to Rams at blysomynge time.
Proselytus, a stranger borne. Prosemino, are, to sow ^urth. Prosequium, an
affection. Prosequor, qui, to follow after, to pursue. Prosequor amore, I love.
Prosequor odio, I hat^. Prosequor honor, I honor. Prosequor verbis, I ^ha^e
him with words. Prosequor officijs, I show to him great kyndnesse, I do him
many pleasures. Prosequi praemio, to reward. Proserpere, to creape or slide
forth like a serpent. Proserpina, the wife of Pluto. Proseuche, a prayer to
God: alsoo a beggynge. Iuuen. No. Mar.
Proseucha, a beggar. Prosferari, to be optayned. Prosicium, that which is cut
of from any thing, and cast away. Prosilio, lij, lire, to leap forth. Pl^*
in epis. (...).
Prosocer, ceri, the father of my wyfes father. Prositum, old wrytars used for
propositum purposed. Prosodia, the craft of accentinge. Prosonomasia, the
likeness of one word or name to another: as locus and lucus, orator, and
arator. Prosopopoeia, where as personages are supposed or feigned to speak, as
one man to an other: a man to a beast: one beast to an other etc. Prospectus,
ctus, a sight far of, a prospecte. Prospecte, aduysedly. Prospecto, spectare,
to behold, proprely far of. Prospere, prosperously. Prosperiter, idem.
Prosperitas, prosperity. Prospica, and Prospicus, he that beholds a thing
far of. Prospices, for prospice, behold. Festus.
Prospiro, are, to fetch breath or wind. Prosper, and prosperus, prosperi,
prospero, that which gives felycitye. Felix, he that receives it.
Prospicientia, prouydence, circumspection. Prospicio, spexi, spicere, to see
far, to foresee, to provide, to beware. Prospicuus, circumspect. Prostasis,
preeminence. Prosthesis, an addicion of a lettre: as gnatus, for natus.
Prosterno, straul, sternere, to overthrow, or to vaynquysshe in battle.
Prostibulum, a commune brothelhouse: also a commune harlot. Prostibula, idem.
Prostituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot. Prostituere pudiciriam, to be commune
to al men or women in the act of lechery. Prosto, tare, to stand far of, or
before: also to stand to be fold or hired. Prosubigo, gere, to dygge deep.
Prosum, fui, desse, to be profitable. Prosumia, a little bark. Prosumirium, a
place without the walls of Rome, where the bysshoppes of the gentyles made
their diuinations, or took their significations of things to come. Prosupero,
are, to excede, or have more than enough. Protasis, a proposicion. Donatus.
Protego, texi, tegere, to defend. Protectio, a defense. Protector, toris, a
defendour. Protentus, ta, tum, stretched out. Protela, lare, to differ, or
tracte the time, to put out, to drive away, to vex. Protendo, dear, to set
forth, or put forth, to stretche forth. Protermino, to incroche. Protero,
triui, ter^re, to trede down. Proterreo, rere, to make aferde far of.
Proteruia, wantonness: it was also a sacrifice, wherein the manner was, that as
much as was left uneaten, should be consumed with fire. Proteruiam fecit, he
has consumed all that is left. Proteruio, ire, to play the wanton. Proterue,
proudely, immoderatly, Plautus in Ruden.
shamefully. Quis est, qui tam proterue, foribus facit iniu^iam: who is he,
that so proudely rappeth at the door? Ecce au^em tu quoque proterue iracundus
es, Lo and thou also art shamefully angry. Proteruiter, idem. Proteruitas,
tatis, pride, folly. Proteus, the son of Occanus, a iugglar, which could
show him self in sundry fourmes. Protestor, staris, stari, to declare
manyfestly. what should be exchued and not done. Protestator, he that
manifestly declares, what is to be exchued and not done. Protestatio, a
protestation. Protina, for protinus, furthwith. Proteruus, a, um, wanton,
malaperte, shameless, and (as I might say) knauysshe* or lewd. Protinus, a
far of* Also forthewith, without taryenge. Prothymia, promptitude: also
gentle entertaynement. Plautus in Seye.
Proh Di immortales quot ego voluptates fero, quot risiones, quot iocos, quot
fuauia, saltationes, blanditias, prothymias? O lord god, how many pleasures
have I, what lawghingis, what pastymes, what bassinges, daunsinges, daliaunces,
and sweet entertaynementes? Prothyrum, a porche at the utter door of a house.
Protipon opus, an image or form, whereof mouldes are made, in the which
things be cast of metal or earth. Protogenes, of the first kynred or
famylyrit was also the name of an excellent paynter. Protocollum, that which
is first made or written, which requires correction. Protogenus, the first
child. Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalion and Pirrha. Protologia, a
preface. Protollo, lere, to prolonge. Protomartyr, the first martyr.
Protomedicus, the chief physician about a Prince. Protomysta, the chief
priest, or deane. Protonotatius, a protonotary, or chief scribe or Secretary.
Protopages, and Protopagus, first made or wrought, or late made. Protoplas^es,
and Protoplastus, first fourmed so was Adam called. Protos, Proton, first.
Prototocos, a woman late bringynge forth her first child. Prototomus, the
stalk which is first cut. Prototypus, and prototypon, the first exe^ple, or
pattern. Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differe or prolonge. Protrepticus, a book
to instruct one, a doctrinall. Protrimenta, meat mynced small. Proueho, uexi,
u^here, to bring or carry further. Prouectus aetate, aged. Prouectum ingenium,
a long proved wit: also to promote, advance. Prouectus ad dignitatem,
promoted or advanced to honor. Prouectus aetate, run far in years.
Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted. Prouectus, aged. Prouenio, ire, to come forth:
alsoo to grow or increase, Plautus in Menech.
to happen or chance. Nimis prouentum est nequiter, It is ungraciously
chanced. Prouentus, tus, revenues, yearly profytes. Proverb, diligently.
Prouerbium, a proverb. Provide, circumspectely. Prouideo, dear, to provide, to
foresee, to beware. Prouidentia, providence, foresight: Cice. and Quint.
sometime it is used for god. Prouidus, provident, circumspect. Prouinciae, were
countrayes, which the Romans gate far from Rome, where only their officers
did rule. Prouincia is sometime taken for the rule or autoritye of an officer:
also an office, alsoo for a countraye or royaulme. Prouincialis, he that
dwells in a province. Prouinciatim, from countray to countray, or one
countraye with another. Prouiso, prouisere, to see or behold, to goo to see.
Prouidens, uidentis, foreseynge, provident. Prouidentior, dentissimus, more
provident, most provident or circumspect. Prouocator, he that provoke one,
or he that appeleth, the appellant. Prouoco, care, to call from a far, to
stere, to inuit, to provoke, to exhort, also to appele to an higher judge.
Prouocatio, an appele to an higher court. Prouolo, are, to fly away, or
beyond, also to run from aferre. Prouoluo, uere, to roll or tumble a
great stone or other like thing: sometime to lie down prostrate. Prout, for
Sicut, as, Proxeneta, a brokar. Festu^
Prox, of old wrytars was taken for Proba vox, a good voice or noise. Proximo,
proximare, to approach or draw nyghe. Proxim^rium, a place without the
walls, ioyninge to the city, where bysshoppes did assemble in their
conuocations. Proxime, next. Cato.
Proximi, for proximo: die proximi, the next day. Proximitas, nyghenesse,
neyghbourhede. Proximior, more nere. Proximus, a, um, next. Prouulgo, aui,
are, to publysshe, or declare openly to the people. Prudenter, wisely. Prudens,
prudentis, wise, prudente, knowing. Prudentia, wisdom in desiringe and
exchuynge of things. Prugnum, old wrytars used for Pronum, prone or apt.
Pruina, frost. Pruna, a burning cole. Prunioli, small mussherons. Pruinosus,
a, um, frosty. Prunerum, an orcharde set with damlyne trees, or plumme trees.
Prunus, a damlyne tree or plumme tree. Prunum, a ^syne, prune, plumme, slo, or
bullase. Prurio, rij, rire, to yche. Pruritus, rus, ychinge. Prutigo, gli^^s,
ychinge with a delectation, as in the sterynge of lechery. Prusias, a king of
Bythin^a, unto whom Hanniball fled after that he was banysshed from
Carthage. Prymnestus, a post or stake, where unto the cabull of a ship is tied.
Prymnos, a nymphe or maiden of the sea, one of the dawghters of Oceanus.
Prytaneium, a counsel house. Prytaneia, a counsel assembled of great of
fleers and iuges. Prytanis, the president or chief of the counsel.
P. ANTE S.
PSallo, li, lere, to sing. Psalmodia, a diverse or mixed song. Psalmus, a
song proprely to god, or of God. Psalterium, an instrument like to a harp,
also the Psalms called the Psalter. Psaltes, a singing man. Psaltrix, tricis,
and Psaltria, a singing woman. Psecas, adis, a drop. Psegma, the pouldre or
dust, which comes of the fylynge of brass. Psellus, the name of an old
writar, which wrote of diete. Psephisma, atis, a decree. Psephopecta, an
auditour or caster of account. Pseudoadelphus, a counterfayt brother.
Pseudoangelus, a false messager. Pseudolus, a false servant. Pseudo martyr, a
false witness. Pseudoprophera, a false prophet. Pseudothyrum, a faulse
posterne. Pseudo, false or countrefait: and every other nowne joined therewith,
is thereby made false or countrefayt: as Pseudopropheta, a false or countrefayt
Prophet. Ps^lotrum, an oynement to take away hears. Psimmithium, that which
we do call Ceruse or white led. Psitta, a fysshe, which we call a playce.
Pstracus, a popyn^ay. Psycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in cold water.
Psycomantium, a place where Nigromance is do call up spirits. Psora,
scabbydnesse* Psylli, people in ^ibia, whose bodies are v^enyme to se^ pe^e^:
and they also do cure the slyngynge and poysonynge of serpents by soukynge the
place, which is venymed.
P. ANTE T.
PTe, a syllable joined oftentimes to the ablatyne case, as meapre, tuapte,
suapte, mine own, thine own, his own. Pteris, fern. Pteromata, great
arches over the roofes made like wings. Pretigium, a little skin, which
grows from the corner of the eye, and keuereth the sight: it is alsoo a
grief under the fore part of the nail, when the flesh goes from the nail
with pain. Pterna, the lower part of a sail. Ptisana, the water, wherein barley
is soden, also barley husked, or excorticar, also frume^ty made of barley. Ptyas,
adis, Pli. 28*
an adder having the color green, drawing toward the color of gold.
Ptynge, a rauenouse bird, which takes his pray by night: and sometime
fyghteth with the Egle so valiantly, that in crab bynge together, they fall
both down to the ground, and are taken by Shepehardes. Ptysis, is spettyll:
it is alsoo an exulceration or soore in the lunges, with a consumpcyon of all
the body, and spettynge of blood. Ptisanarium, a mortar, wherein barley is
brayed. Ptochotrophia, an hospital for beggars, a spyttell house. Ptolomeus,
the name of kings of Egypt. Ptosis, ruy^e, also the case of a nowne.
Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a city.
P. ANTE V.
PVbens, he that is between a young man and a boy, of the age of.xiiii. years.
Puberesco, scere, to grow as a child does toward man's stare. Pubeo, es,
and Pubesco, ere, to begin to have a bearde benethe: sometime to spring, as
herbs done. Puber, beris, and Pubes, beris, a young mosy bearde, which
spryngeth in the nether parts of a man at.xiiii. years of age* of a woman at
younger years, wherefore a man or woman at those years is called Pubes: sometime
youth, or a multitude of young men: also the privy parts of the body: also
being an adiectif, it signifies young or tender. Pubertas, the young age of
men and women, when they begin to be apt unto generation: it is also the
first coming forth of bears about the pryucy members. Publicani, were they
which took in ferme of the people of Rome the rentes and revenues due to the
city at a rent certain. Publica sacra, sacrifice done for the people. Publica
fides, a saulfe condute, a general license. Publicanus, a fermour. Public,
and Publicitus, openly in the face of the world. Sumptus public dati, his
expenses borne of the city or town. Publicola, a fauorar of the people: the
which name was given to Valerius, which was one of the first consules of
Rome. Publico, care, to publysshe, to manifest, to make openly known.
Publicum consilium, the commune counsel. Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more
proprely, public, that is to say, pertaining to every state of the people
jointly and severally: See the true definicion thereof in my book called the
Governor. Publipor, poris, Publius boy, or servant. Publius, the name of a
Roman. Pucinum vinum, wine growing nyghe to the gulf of Venice. Pudefio,
fis, fieri, to be asshamed. Pudenda, the pryuy members. Pudens, it is, shamefast.
Pudenter, with shamefastness, basshefully. Pudeo, dui, dear, to be asshamed.
Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum est, to be asshamed. Pudibunde, shamefaslly.
Pudibundus, da, dum, shamefast. Pudice, chastely, honestly. Pudicitia,
chastytye, clennesse of living. Sylustius in Cat.
Pudicitia^ habere, to be violated in the act of lechery. Cicer. pro Flac.
Puditum, asshamed. Nonne esset puditum, si hanc causam agerent severe? had it
not been a shame, if that they had pursuyd that matter rigorously? Pudicus, ca,
cum, chaste. Pudor, doris, a moderacion that lets the mind, that it do not
any thing wantonly, or dishonestly, shamefastness, to say or do any thing
dishonest. Puella, a wenche, in Cambrige shyre they call her a modder.
Puellaris, re, childisshe. Puellascere, to wax young again, to be maydenly.
Puellus, a little child, a babe. Puer, a child, a boy: also a servant.
Puerilis, puerile, of a child, chyldysshe, or boyisshe. Puerilitas, a chyldes
act, chyldysshenesse, boyishenesse. Pueritia, chyldehode. Puerpera, a woman
that lies in of child. Puerperium, the time of a womanne to travail of
child, sometime the child, also the birth. Pugil, a champyon. Pugillaris, and
Pugillare, pluraliter Pugillares, a pair of tables to write in. Pugillatorius
follis, a ball filled only with wind, which is stryken with a man's fiste, and
not with the palm. Pugiunculus, a short daggar. Pugillatus, wrastlynge with
colars. Pugillus, a handful, in gatheringe of herbs or other like thing.
Pugio, onis, a daggar. Pugna, battle, the act of lechery: also an assault, a
disceyte. Pugnaciter, valyauntly in battle. Pugnator toris, a fightar. Pugnax,
nacis, a great fightar. Pugnatior, and Pugnacissimus, more or most fightinge.
Pugnicula, a skyrmysshe. Pugnitatiola, idem. Festus. No. Mar.
Pugnitus, in battle. Pugno, are, to fight. Pugnus, a fyst. Vide (...)
Pulcher, chra, chrum, fair, strong, good, talle. Pulcherrime, most
beautyfully. Pulcherrimus, a, um, fairest. Pulchralis, le, fair. Pulchre, an
aduerbe, signifies fair, (...)
beautyfully, well fauoredly: sometime valiauntly, also wisely: sometime it is
put for valde. Ac dum accubabam, quam videbar mihi esse pulchre sobrius,
Terent. (...) Eunuch^.
And when I laid me down, I thought my self to be very sobre. Pulchellus, a
fair little one. Pulchellus puer, a fair little boy. Ci. ad (...)
Pulchtior, oris, and Pulchrius, fayrer. Pulchritas, beautye. Pulchreseo,
scere, to be fair. Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultye, tallness of personage.
Pulegium, an herb called Penny royal. Pulex, licis, a flee. Pul^einus, a, um,
of a flee. Pulicosus, a, um, full of flees. Pullarius, the keeper of chykens.
Pullarus, a wesyll or Stote, which kylleth chyckens. Pullaster, a young
chycken. Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens. Pullatus, a mourner. Sometime a man
in poor apparayle, sometime rude, vnlernid. Pullesco, scere, to spring or
burgen. Pullicenus, a new hatched chycken. Pullicies, a bringing forth or
hatchynge of chyckens. also the folynge of coltes. Pulligo, ginis, blackenesse.
Pullinus, na, number, of a colte. Pullini dentes, coltes tethe, which be first
cast. Pullulatio, a spryngynge forth of a thing in growing. Pullulasco,
scere, to bourgen. Pullulo, lare, to spring, to come up young. Pullus, young,
tender, in all kind lyuinge. also a colte or fool, also a chycken. Pullus, a,
um, russette, sometime black, but rather puke color, between russet and black.
Pulmentarium, potage made with flesh or fyshe, as forced gruell, or coleyse.
Pulmentum, gruelle. Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes. Pulmonarius, he that is
disesid in the lu^ges. Pulmonaria, an herb called Lungworte. Pulmonia, be
certain apples, which be called in some place a hundred shyllingis. Pulpa, a
little synewe like to a vain. Pulpamentum, a delycate dyshe or meat.
Pulpitum, a hault pace or pulpyte. Pulls, a meat made of meal, water, honey,
cheese, and eggs. It may be taken for potage. Pulsatiles uenae, the poulses
of a man or womanne. Pulsatus, ta, tum, stricken as a harp or other
instrument is, which has strings. Pulsim, as a thing were stryken. Pulso,
are, to beat, to stryke, to hurt, to play on a harp, or other like
instrument. Pulsare hostium, to knock at the door. Pulsus, the wreste of the
arm, whereto the had is joined* but it is more proprely the poulse or stroke
that the arteries or beatyng veins do make, whereby the strength or debilitie
of the syckenes is known in touching them. Pultarius, a potage dyshe. Pulto,
tare, to beat at a door. Pulticula, a little potage. Pultiphagi, and
pultiphagonides, greatte eaters of potage. Puluero, rare, to lay with doust, to
be dusty. Pulueresco, scere, to be turned in to poulder or duste. Puluerius,
a, um, of poulder or duste. Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duste. Seruius.
Pulueratio, a layenge of fine earth about vynes. Puluinar, a bolstar of a
bed. also a bed which was wont to be made in temples, as it were for the
goddis. It is taken sometime for a temple. also a tabernacle, wherein an image
stands. Puluinatus, ta, tum, soft as a pyllowe. Puluinus, a pyllowe, sometime
a fetherbed, also a cusshyn, also a bed of herbs in a gardeyne, also
grauelle, also an engyne, wherewith ships are brought into the docke.
Puluis, ueris, powlder, duste. Puluisculus, fine powder or duste. Pumex, micis,
a pomeyse to make parchemente smoothe, also to take clean out spots or
letters. Pumico, care, to pomeyse. Pumicosus, a, um, like a pomeyse. Pumigatio,
pomeysynge or polyshynge. Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomaysed, or polysshed. Pumilis,
little in stature. Pumilio, onis, and pumillus, a dwarf, or any thing
little in stature. Punctim, foynynge. Punctus, seu punctum, a point or title.
Punctus temporis, a moment, the leest part of time. Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to
prycke. Vide co^p.
Punicus, a, um, of Africa. Punicus, aut puniceus color, read. Punicum malum,
a pomegranate. Punio, iui, ire, to punyshe. Punitio, punyshement. Pupa, a young
wenche, a gyrle, a modder. it is also a poppette, like a gyrle. Pupilla, the
balle or apple of the eye. Pupillaris aetas, the noueage of him that is in
ward. Pupillus, he that is in ward, or within age not able in years to
occupye his propre land. Also he that has no father alive. Puppes, and
puppis, the foreparte or deck of the ship. Pupus, a young child, a baby.
also a poppette or image like a child. Pupugi, the pretertence of purgo, I
have pricked or pounched. Pure, purely. Puriter, idem. Purgamen, seu
purgamentum, fylthe, which comes of any thing that is cleansed. Purgatio, a
purgation or purging. Purgo, gare, to make clean, to purge. also to excuse.
Vide co^p.
Purifico, to puryfye, or make pure. Purificatio, a purifyenge. Purime, old
wrytars used for purissime, most purely. Puritas, tatis, pureness, cleanness.
Puro, tare, to make pure. Purpura, a Purple, which is a shell fysshe. whereof
purple color comes. sometime it signifies a garment of purple. Purpurarius,
a, um, pertaining to purple color. Purpurasco, scere, to be of purple color.
Purpurissum, idem quod purpurissa. Purpureus, a, um, of purple color.
Purpuratus, apparayled in purple. Purpurati, be the noble men of a Royalme,
called peers. Purpurissa, read payntynge, wherewith harlottes do paynt their
vysages. Purpurisso, are, to paynte the visage ruddy. Purulentus, lenta,
lentum, full of matter, or corruption. Purus, ra, rum, clean, pure, fine. Pus,
puris, matter, which comes out of a soore. Pusillanimis, faint hearted,
feeble couraged. Pusillanimitas, faint courage, cowardyse. Pusillanimiter,
cowardly. Pusillus, a, um, little. Pusio, a boy. Pustula, a pusshe or little
wheale. Pusulae, blystars, which do rise on bred wha^ it is baken. Pusum and
Pusam, old wrytars used for Pucrum and Puellam, a boy and a gyrle. Pustulatum
argentum, roughe silver when it is new molten. Putamen, minis, the shale of a
nutte, or paring of an apple or pear. Puteal, the seat of a great offycer,
also the covering of a well. Putealis, and puteanus, a, um, of a well.
Puteanus, a, um, of a pytte or well. Puteana aqua, well water. Putearius, he
that diggeth a pytte or well. Puteo, tui, tere, to stynke. Puteoli, a city in
Campania. Puteus, a well. Plautus.
Puticuli, places where the commune people was buried. Putidus, da, dum,
stynkynge, unsavory, unpleasant. Putilatum aurum, pure or fine gold. Putisco,
scere, to stynke. Putitius, a fool. Vide co^p.
Puto, taui, tare, to cut of or pluck away. that, which is superfluous,
proprely from trees. Also to suppose, to consider, to discuss, to gather, or
confer, to esteem, to judge. Putare rationem, to make account. Putor, toris,
stenche. Putrefacio, to make to stynke. Putreo, tri^i, trere, to wax lean, to
be resolved into stynkynge matter. Vide co^p.
Putresco, scere, to putrifye. Vide co^p.
Putris, tree, corrupt, rotten. Putridus, da, dum, idem. Putredo, dinis,
corruption. Putulentum, stynkynge. Putus, ta, tum, pure, tried, fine. Purum
putum, fined.
P, ANTE Y.
PYcnostylon, a house or place builded, where pylars stand thick together.
Pycta and Pyctes, a wrastler with a cole^ Pyctatium, a table, wherein the names
of Iuges were written. Pygargus, a beast like to a falowe dear: it is also a
bird like to a hawke, having a white tail, I suppose him to be that, which
we call a ryngetayle. Pygmachia, wrastlynge with colars. Pygmachus, a wrastler.
Pygmaei, people between Inde and Cathay, which are but one cubyte long.
Pympleides, the musis. Pyr, fire. Pyra, a bonfyre, wherein deed bodies were
burned. Pyralis, a fly, which comes of the fire, and as long as he is
therein, he lives: and wha^ he is far from it, he dies incontinent.
Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus. Pyrama, a certain rosen. Pyramus, a
young man, which slew him self for the love of a mayde^ called Thisbe^ it is
also a river in Cilicia. Pyramid, midis, a great thing of stone or other
matter, which he is broad beneth, and upward is small and sharp on the top.
Pyratium, a kind of Sydar, called Pery. Pyrausta, a worm living in the fire,
It is also a kind of spyders, which hurts honey combs. Pyrenei montes,
Mountains, which do dyuyde France from Spain. Pyretru^, and pyretra, an
herb callid Pelitory. Pyretus, a burning fever. Pyraeus, an haven at Athenes.
Pyrgobaris, a house builded like a towar. Pyrgoteles, was a cu^nyng grauer in
stones. Pyrgus, in latyne a towar: also a box, out of the which men do cast
dyse, when they play: it is also a certain company of horsemen in battle.
Pyrgus, a box, out of the which dyse are thrown. Pyriasis, a certain
plaster to assuage the burning of a fever. Pyrim, a little kernel. Pyrites,
every stone, out of the which fire may be stricken. Pyrobola, a smythes hammer,
wherewith he beats on hot iron. Pyroboli, arowes or darts, which send
forth fire, when they be shot or cast, and do burn the thing that they
do touch. Pyrobolarij, they which do shoot such darts. Pyrocorax, a
crow with a red bylle. I suppose it to be of the kind, whereof cornyshe
chowghes are. Pyrodes, he that first struck fire out of a flynte. also a stone
of fyry color. Pyromantia, a dyuynation by fire. Pyrrhicha, and pyrrhiches, a
form of dansynge, with much mouynge of the body and gesture, like to them
which do sight in battle. Pyrrhicarij, they that dance in the form of
daunsynge, called Pyrrhica. Pyrrhichius, a foot in meter of two short
syllables. Pyrrhus, in latyne Flauius, sieve Rufus, he that has a ruddy or
fyrye vysage, by the which name the son of Achilles was calledde, and a
king of Epyre was so called, which did make war to the Romans. Pyrum,
a pear. Pyrus, a pear tree. Pythagoras, an excellent Philosopher, whose
Phylosophye was in mystycalle sentences, and alsoo in the Science of noumbers.
Pythagoricus, he that was of the sect of Pythagoras. Pythagorista, idem.
Pythius, one of the names of Apollo. Pythia, thiorum, plays made in the honor
of Apollo. Python, a Dragon, which was slain by Apollo. Pythopolis, a city
in Asye, in that part, which is called Mysia. Pytisma, matis, a spyrtynge
out of small spyttelle. Pyxacantha, and Pyxacanthos, a Berberye tree. Pyxis,
idis, a box. Pyxidicula, a little box, proprely wherein medycines are put.
Pyxidatus, pyxidata, pyxidatum, made like a box.
QVA, which way, by what place. Quada^tenus, unto what part. Quadi, people of
Boeme, or Boemia, which did eat the flesh of horses and wolfes. Quadra, a
trencher, whereon meat is cut: sometime a lofe of breadde cut square.
Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of fourtye years old. Quadragenus, a, um,
fourtye. Quadragena scuta, forty crowns. Quadragesima, Lent. Quadragesimus,
a, um, the fourtyth. Quadragies, fortye times. Quadraginta, fortye.
Quadrangulum, a figure, having four corners. Quadrangulus, a, um, four
cornerde. Quadrans, it is, a certain coin, which we may call a ferthynge: all
be it proprely it is the quarterne of a pound weight. Also it is the sum in
account where the receyte and the expenses do accord. Quadrantal, a figure
square like to a dyse. Also a certain mesure, contaynyng.xlviii. measures,
called Sextarii. Quadrantaria, a harlotte that will company with a man for a
ferthynge. Quadrata statura, a mean or competente stature. Quadratura, a
square. Qudratus, ta, tum, four square. Quadricornium, having four horns.
Quadriduanus, a, um, of four days contynuaunce. Quadriennis, four years
old. Quadriformiter, in a square. Quadrigati, certain coin, having in them
the prynte of a charyotte. Quadrilinguis, he that speaks four sondrye
languages. Quadrinatus, a child of four years old. Quadrilibris, bre, that
which does way four pounds. Quadringentenus, a, um, the four hundredth.
Quadringentesimus, idem. Quadringenties, four hundred times. Quadringentuplus,
a, um, four hundred times so much. Quadripartito, in four parts.
Quadriduum, four days. Quadriennium, four years. Quadrifariam, on four
parts. Quadrifidus, da, dum, that which may be slytte in four parts.
Quadriformis, me, that is of four diverse fourmes or facyons. Quadriga, a carte
drawn with four horses. sometime a carte horse. Quadrigarius, a carter.
Quadriiugi, four beasts yoked together. Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with four
sides. Quadrimembris, of four parts. Quadrimus, and quadrimulus, a child of
four year old. Quadringenta, and quadringenti, four hundred. Quadrinoctium,
four nyghtes. Quadripartitor, tiri, to diuyde in four. Quadriremis, a ship
with four rewes of oores, or with four tops. Quadrisyllabum, of four
syllables. Quadri^^um, where as four ways do meet. Quadro, are, to bring
in square, to consent or agree. Quadrum, a figure four square.
Quadrupedantia, and quadrupedia, four foted beasts. Quadrupedo, dare, to go
on four fete. Quadrupliciter, four manner of ways. Quadruplico, care, to
double four times, or to make a thing four times as much as it was.
Quadr^^bs, a city, unto the which do come, or are brought all the people,
being left in four cities, ^estus
by the which name the city of Athenes was called of Actius the poet.
Quadrus, a, um, square. Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beast having four feet.
Quadruplatores, were they, which for accusynge of other, had the fourth
part of the goods of them, that were condemned. Quadruplex, four double.
Quadruplo, and quadruplor, ari, to appeache a man for to have part of his
goods. Quadruplum, four times as much. Plautus in capt. Ci in Ver. Ti. Liuius
Quae, the which woman or other female kind. Quae malum, what a myschiefe.
Quaecunque, all that, what so ever. Quaerceus, a, um, of oak. Quercicus, ca,
cum, idem. Quercus, cus, an oak. Quercerus, ra, rum, cold, with a shaking, as
in a fever. Quaeritabundus, stu^s or dilygente in seekynge. Quaerere liberos,
to get chylderne. Quaerneus, and quernus, querna, number, of an oak. Vide c^m.
Quaero, quaesiui, quaerere, to demand, to ask, to get, to search, to
examyne. Quaerquetum, and quercetu^, a grove of oaks. Quaeritio, ritare, to
seek, search, or inquyre dylygently. Quaesitor, a ius^yce or commyssyoner to
inquire of crimes, defaultes, As. pedia^.
or abuses against the law. Quaesitio, an inquiry, an exai^ation, a search.
Quaeso, siui, sere, to beseech. Quaesticulus, a little gain. Quaestio, a
questyon. Questiuncula, a small or light question. Quaestionarius, an
examynour. Quaestor, toris, the treasourer of the commune Treasourye, a
Treasourer of the wars, a Lyeuetenaunt to the chyef capytayne in wars.
Alsoo a Justice by Commyssyon of Oyer and Determyner. Quaestores Parricidij,
Justices to inquere, of treason, or murder. We may call the coroners by that
name. Quaestores urbani, were as the chaumberlaynes of London be now.
Quaestores aerarij, Officers of the Receypte, as the Chaumberers and tellers be
now. Quaestorius, quaestoria, storium, pertaynyng to the receypte.
Quaestorium, was such a place as the eschequer is. Quaestor aerarij, a
general receyuour: but it seemethe to be such an offycer, as the eschetour is
now in England. Quaestorius, torij, he that had been in the office of
Questor. Quaestorius, a, um, that pertayneth to the office of Quaestor. Vir
quaestorius, a man, which has been in that office. Quaestuariae arts,
crafts, whereby men do gain money. Quaestuosus, a, um, of much gain,
studyous of greatte lucre. Quaestura, the office of Quaestor. Quaestus, tus,
gain, winning. Qualibet, where it lyketh the. Qualisqualis, what so ever.
Qualiscunque, such as it was. Qualiter, in the facyon or form. Qualis, le,
what, of what quality. Qualitates, qualytyes, as foul, fair, wise,
foolysshe, strong, weak, dylygente, slow. etc. Quallus, a baskette, out of
the which wine runs, when it is pressed: Alsoo a baskette or hamper, in the
which womenne do put their spyndelles, their bottomes of threede, and such
like things. Quam, thanne, Sommetyme after that. Sommetyme before that. Pridi^
quam occideretur, The day before that he was slain. Quam been, how well? Quam
fortiter, how valyauntly. Also it is often joined with the superlatiue degree,
to make it more vehemente: as, Quampaucissimi, As few as may be. Quam
doctissimus, excellentely learned. Sometime it imports as much as veraye. Cum
quo quam familiarissime uixerat, With whom he lived very familyarly. Alsoo it
sygnfyeth as. Duplo accepit quam perdiderat, He received dowble as much as he
lost. Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantu^libet, what so ever. Quammox, as soon,
sodaynely. Quamobrem? wherefore? for what cause? what to do? Quam pene,
almooste, hit lackydde but a lyttelle. Quamplures, how many, very many, a
greatte sort. Quamplurimus, qua^plurima, quamplurimu^, very much. Quampridem,
long before. Quamprimum, very shortly or soon. Quamuis, and quanquam,
although. sometime for Quantumuis. Quandiu, as long, during the time.
Quando, when. also sens that. Plautus in Amphi.
Quandogentium, when. Quandudum, how late sens, how long agoo? Quanquam, all
be it, all though. Quandoque, sometime. Quandoquidem, for as much as. Quanti,
for how much, of what price or valewe. Quantillus, and quantulus, a, um, how
little or small. Quantillum, how little. Quantitas, quantity. Quanto, how
much. Quantisper, how long. Quantus, quanta, quantum, how much, which is
referred to noumbre, weight, and measure. Quantum, how much, as to, as
concerning. Quantum intelligo, as far as I understand. Quantum suspicor, as
far as I suppose. Also, according as. Id de imperatore Romano, quantum
euentus postea praedictum patuit Iudaei ad se trahentes, rebellarunt, The Jews
gatherynge that of the Emperor, according as the thing, which was before
showed of that which should happen, appeared afterward, made rebellyon.
Quantu^ potes, in all speed that thou may. Quantuscunque, how much, or how
many so ever it be. Quantusliber, idem. Quantusquantus, idem. Quanuis, all be
it, all though. Quanuis, for ualde. Quapropter, wherefore. Quaquauersus, and
quaquauersum, on every side. Quaqua, on every side. Plautus in Epid.
Quare, wherefore. Quarto, and quartum, the fowrthe time. All be hit proprelye
Quarto sygnifyethe the fourth in order, as Quarto Consul, he that had three
in the office before him. Quartum Consul, he that has been the fourth time
Consul. Quartana, a fever quartayne. Quartanarius, he that has a quartayne
Feeuer. Quartarius, a Mulettour or keeper of mules, which takes but the
fourth part of the wages or gain. Quartusdecimus, the fouretenthe. Quartus,
ta, tum, the fourth. Quasi, Like as. Amas me quasi filium, Thou love me, as
if I were thy son. Alsoo, as who says, as thowghe. Tu obiicis, quod uxorem
repudiauerim, quasi tu idem non feceris, Thou imbraydest me, that I have
forsaken my wife, as who laythe, thou haste not done so to. Quasillum, a
little hamper. Quassabundus, he that shakes or moves his head. Plautus.
Quasso, are, to shake much or often, alsoo to break. Quassus, and quassatus,
quassata, satum, shaken, braste. Quatefacio, cere, to make or cause to shake or
move. Quatenus, how much, to the intent. also for as much, also how.
Quater, four times. Quaterdecies, fouretene times. Quatergemini, four
chylderne at oone bourdeyne. Quaternarius numerus, the nu^bre of four.
Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre as in a book, a leaf being folded into
four parts. Quaterni, four. Quaternus, a, um, the fourth. Quaternum denum,
the four tenthe. Quatinus, a conjunction, which sygnifyeth for, for as much.
Quatio, quassi, quatere, to shaake a thing. Vide com.
also to vex, to cast out. Quatriduum, four days, the spaace of four
days. Quatuor, four. Quartus, ta, tum, the fourth. Quadruplus, quadrupla,
quadruplum, four dowble. Quae, for and sygnyfyeth and. Also that is to say.
Quearah, a measure of the Jews, containyng two ounces and.ii. drammes.
Quentia, old writers vsyd for potentia, puissaunce, power. Queis, for quibus.
Queiscum, for cum quibus, with whom. Quemadmodum, like as. Queo quis, quiui,
quire, I may. Quercus, cus, vel ci, an oak. Querceus, a, um, of an oak.
Suetonius in caligula Ce^^^. ult.
Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus. Quercerus, ra, rum, quyuerynge or
shaking for cold. sometime it was taken for great and grievous, as Festus says.
Quercetum, a grove of oaks. Querela, and querimonia, a complaynt. Queribundus,
a, um, lamentable. Quaerimoniarius, a complaynant. Quernus, na, number, of an oak.
Querna folia, oken leaves. (...) com.
Queror, quaestus sum, quaeri, to lamente or complain. Querquedula, a
waterfowle called a teale. Quaerulus, la, lum, that which complains, or is
full of complayntes. It is put some time of the Poets for shrylle or loud in
singing. V^rgilius in georgie.
Cicadae querulae, grassehoppers, which do sing loud, or with a shrylle
voice. Quaesitah, among the Jews did sygnifye a coin, sometime a lamb,
sum time a sheep. Quaestus, quaestus, a complaynte, a lamentation. QVI, the
which. Alsoo sometime it sygnifyeth how. Efficite, qui detur tibi, Do what
ye can, how or by whatte means thou may have her. Qui uocare, Plautus in
Amph.
How art thou called? Alsoo yt sygnyfyeth why. Dauo istuc dedam negoti. Te^.
in An.
S. Non potest. P. Qui ^ S. Quia habet aliud magis ex sese. I will commytte
th^e mattier to Dauy. S. That may not be. P. Why? S. For he has an another
greatter mattier to do for him self. Alsoo it sygnyfyeth from whense. Qui
istaec tibi incidit suspectio? Ter. in An.
From whens is this suspycion happened unto the? Also it sygnyfyeth would to
God. Qui illum Di omnes perdiunt, Terent. in Phorm.
I pray god that a vengeance light on him. Alsoo yt sygnyfyethe because.
Terent* in prolo. An.
Nam in prologis scribundis operam abutitur, non qui argumentum narret, sed qui
maleuoli uaeteris Poetae maledictis ^espondeat, For he spendethe his labor in
writing of Prologues, not because he will tell the argument, but for as
much as he would make answer to the yuell reports of the old enuyouse
Poet. Alsoo it sygnyfyeth Wherefore. Cice. T^^
Qui enim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria uiuebat, quam Metrodorus, quod
Athenis? Wherefore was Epycure moore happy, that he did dye in his
countreye, than Metrodorus that he dyed at Athenes. Quia, for. Alsoo hit
sygnyfyeth that. Ci. de (...)*
Sed tamen recordatione nostrae amicitiae sic fruor, ut beatae uixisse uidear,
quia cum Scipione uixerim, All be it I take this pleasure in remembrynge our
frendeshyp, that I may seem to have lived most fortunatelye, that I lived in
Scypyones company. Alsoo it sygnyfyeth for as much. Salustias in Catil.
Sed quia multis and magnis tempestatibus vos cognoui fortes, fidosque mihi, eo
animus ausus est maximum atque pulcherrimum facinus incipere, But for as much
as in many great storms or daungiers I have proved you to be valiant, and
faythefull unto me, therefore my heart is bold to begin an excellent and
commendable enterprise. Quia nam, wherefore. Quia ne, in deed. Quias, quiatis,
for cuius, cuiatis. Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um. Quibus in extremis, for
quorum in extremo. Literae dantur mihi a te, quibus in extremis scriptum est? I
received letters from you, in the last end of the which hit is written.
Quicquid est, all that is, what so ever it be, what so ever. Quicquid
pauxillum, never so little. Plautus in trucule^.
Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loquitur filius? With whom does my son
talk? Quicunque, who so ever. Quicquam, any thing. Quid, What. Quid causae
est? What is the cause? Quid aetatis? How old? of what aege? Quid animi? What
mind? Plautus in mercarore
Quid animi est? What mind is he of? Quid captiuo^um? How many prisoners?
Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt secum? Plautus in Epidico.
Thanne how many prisoners do they bring with them? Quid id sit hominis, cui
Lyco nomen sier? Plautus in praulo. Terent. in Hea^^.
What man is he, whose name may be Lyco? Quid mulleris uxorem habes, What
manner of woman haste thou to thy wife? Quid rei est? What is the mattier. Ibo
intro ut quid husus sit rei sciam: Terent. in Eunucho.
I will goo in, that I may know what the mattier is* Quid rei est tibi cum
illa, What haste thou to do with her? Terent. in Phorm. Plautus in Picudolo.
Quid sententiae? what is his or thyn opinyon? Quid istue uerbi est? what
meanest thou thereby? Also quid is taken for Aliquid, somewhat. Also ob quid for
what, or wherefore. Quid? senem quoad expectas uestrum. Terent. in phormi.
But now? how long will ye tarry for your master? Note here that after the
daily form of speaking, quid is rehearsed, Donatus.
wha^ we pass from one matter to an other. Quid mecum est tibi? what have I to
do with the? Quid faceret aliud? what should he do else? Quid eo, what to do?
Propere curre ad Pamphilum. P. Quid eo? D. Die me orate ut ueniat. Ru^ne
quyckely to Pamphilus. P. what to do? D. Say that I prayed him to come. Quid
uerbis opus est? Plautus.
what need many words? Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid multis moror? what shall
I long tarry? Quid mea refert, Cicero de ^^icitia.
what care I? Also quid signifies wherein. Quid enim indigens Affricanus mei?
wherein had Scipio any need of me? Terent. in Iunucho.
Quid istic? Si certum est facere, facias^uerum ne post conferas culpam in me,
What woldeste thou I should do? If thou be determined to do it, goo to on
goddis name: but afterward put not the fault in me. Terent. in phorm.
Quidnam, what is hit, or wherefore is it? Quidnam ille commotus uenit? What is
it that he comes so chaufed? Also it sygnifieth what. Terent. in Eunucho.
Reuiso quidnam Chaerea hic rerum gerar, I come to se what Cherea does here.
Terent. in Heaut.
Quid ni, Why not? Quo ore appellabo parrem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With
what countenance shall I speak to my father* Wotest thou what I will say? S.
Wherefore should thou not do so? Also it signifies ye. Archimedem nosti? P.
quid ni? Terent. in Eunucho.
Know thou Archimedes? P. ye mary do I. Quidam, one, any man, in the
plurell number it sygnifieth some. Quid agimus, What shall we do? Quidem, an
aduerbe, affyrmyng that, which ye spoken. Sommetyme yt sygnyfyeth verylye.
Sommetyme it has no sygnyfycacyon, but is oonely a dystinction of things:
as, Ego quidem scribo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit, I do write, thou
reedyst, he alsoo slepethe. Quid ita, for Cur, wherefore. Quidpiam, any thing,
or any wise. Quid quaeris, What wylt thou more? What needs any more words?
Quid rum denique, Quid ergo, quid ^um poliea, Quid itaque, quid interea, quid
demum, all these do sygnifye, whereto speak thou this? What than, or what
meanest thou hereby? Quiescas, uel quiesce, Hold thy peace, Plautus in milite.
Leave. Quiescas caeter^, care not for the rest. Quies, and quierudo, rest,
ea^e, sleep. Quiesco, quieui, quiescere, To take rest, Vide com.
to cease. Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, callydde god of Hell. Quietus,
quieta, quietum, quyete, peasible, in rest. Quietus esto, care not. Quilibet,
cuiuslibet, cuilibet, who thou will. also it sometime signifies vile or base
in estymacyon. Quidlibet, what I, thou, or he will. Quin, but, why not. Quin
uenis, why come thou not? Quin pergis, Why ghost thou not? Ter. in An.
Quin dic quid est, go to, tell me what it is. Quin, for etiam, alsoo. Pudet
me. S. Terent. in Heauton.
Credo, neque id iniuria: quin mihi molestum, I am asshamed. S. I believe, and
not without a cause: And I am alsoo sorye therefore. Quin taces? Terent. in
Andria.
Will not thou hold thy peace. Also it sygnyfyethe but yet, or but for all
that. C. Perij. S. Quin tu animo bono es. C. Terent. in Adelp.
I am undone. S. But for all that be thou of good cheer. Alsoo therefore. Quin
tu uno uerbo dic, quid est quod me uelis, Therefore tell me at oone word,
whatte thou would have me do. Plautus in Aulularia.
Also more over, or that moore is. Quin, ipsi pridem tonsor ungues dempserat,
collegir, omnia abstulit praesegmina, And that more is, the other day, the
harbor paryd his nails, he gathered the parings together, and carried them
all away with him. Quincunx, quincuncis, of five ounces. Alsoo the gain of
five in oone hundrede by exchange amongeste Merchants. It was alsoo an order
of setting of trees in a gardeyne or orchard veraye exactelye, that which
way so ever that a man did look, the trees stood dyrectely oone
against an another. Quinarius, a, um, the nombre of five. quinarius lapis, a
stone of five pound weight. Quinarius, narij, was among the old Romans
their half penny, which was five pound weight of brass, called As, It is two
soulces of french money, which is of our money. Quincentum, of old writers
was used for quingentum, five hundred. Quincuntialis, le, of five inches.
Quincuplex, cuplicis, five double, or five fold. Quincuplus, a um, five times
so much. Quindecies, fyftene times. Quindecim, fyuetene. Quindeceremis, a
barge with fyftene cres. Quindecuplex, fyuetene double or fold. Quindecuplus,
a, um, fyuetene times so much. Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe. Salustius in
Iugort.
Quin ergo, Wherefore then. Quin ergo quod iuuat, quod charu^ aestimant, id
semper faciant, Wherefore than, what so ever lyketh them, that which seems
pleasant unto them, let them do it as long as it pleases them. Quingeni and
quingenti, five hundred. Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of five hundred.
Quingentenus, and quingentesimus, the five hundrethe. Quingenties, five hundred
times. Quingentuplus, a, um, five hunderde times so much. Quinimo, but rather.
Quinquagenarius, genaria, rium, of fyftie years old. Quinquaginta, fyftye.
Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyftie. Quinquagesimus, a, um, the fiftieth.
Quinquagies, fyftye times. Quinquagesies, idem. Quinquangulus, a, um, five
cornerde. Quinquatria, trioru^, a feast dedicate to Pallas, which duryd five
days. Quinquatrus dies, a feast so called, because it was after the fyfth Idus
of March. Quinque folium, an herb callid cynkfoyle, or five leauyd grass.
Quinque, five. Quinquies, five times. Quinquemestris, tree, of five months.
Quinquenalis, le, that which happens or is done every fyfthe year.
Quinquennis, ne, of five years. Quinquennium, the space of five years.
Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to dyuyde in five parts. Quincupertitus, in five
parts divided. Quinquertium, the exercise of five sondrye crafts.
Quinquertiones, they which exercised five sundry crafts. Quinqueremis, a
barge with five oores, it may be now taken for a ship with five tops, or
with five sails. Quinqueuiratus, an office or auctorite, wherein five men were
associate. Quinqueuir, oone which is in the said authority. Quintana porta,
was a gate in the Camp, where the army was lodged, which was the chief gate
next to that which was called Praetoria, where the market was wont to be
kept. Quintus, ta, tum, the fifthe. Quintia porta, and quintia prata, was a
gaate and meadows at Rome, which took their names of one Quintius, a noble
co^sule of Rome. Quintilis mensis, the month of July. Quintipor, tiporis, the
boy or servant of Quintus. Quintius, and Quintus, the names of diverse
Romans. Quintius, a, um, pertainyng to Quintius. Quinus, a, um, five: quini
denarij, five pens. Quipote, how is it possible? Quippe, surely, forasmoche.
Quippini, why not. Quire, for posse, to may. Plautus. in Mean.
Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome, where the temple of Romulus was set.
Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hill. Quirinalia, orum, days, in the
which men did sacryfyce to Romulus, callydde Quirinus. Quirinus, a, um, of
Romulus. Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne. Quirites, was a name, whereby the Romans
were called of their first king Romulus, called Quirinus, as hit were
Quirinus people. Quiritatus, ritatus, a cry of Romayne chylderne. Quirinus,
was the name of Romulus, after that he was taken for a god. Quiritare, to cry
out, to stir up the Romans with a cry. Quisnam homo est, what man is that?
Quisputas, idem. Quisquam, any manne. It is sometime vsyd in the femynyne gender
for any woman. Quisquam gentium, idem. Quisque, every manne. Doctissimus
quisque, Every well learned man. Decimus quisque, Every tenthe. Quisquilie,
arum pluraliter, be those things which in making clean of a garden or
orcharde, be carried out, as sticks, leaves, ^^d At. 1
and weeds: it is used of Cicero for noughty men, the refuse of all other.
Quisquilium, a little branch of a kind of holy, which bears grain,
wherewith scarlet and crymsyn colors be made. Quiuis, in the genitive case
cuius cuius, who so ever. Quiuis, in the genitive case cuiusuis, any man: one
of them Quis, quae, quod, vel quid, who or what. Quis, is sometime taken for
some man. Quispiam, some man. Quisquis, who so ever. Terent. in Adelph.
Quo, whyther. Quo abis, whyther go thou? Quo non. Perreptaui vsque omne
oppidum, ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I went all the town about, to the
gate, to the lake, there is no place but that I was in it. Also it signifies
from whense and where. Illuc quaeso redi, Terent. in ^^delph.
quo coepisti, I beseech the turn back again, where thou begannest: Terent.
in Eunucho.
also, because. Non pol quo quenquam plus amem, aut plus diliga^, eo feci, In
good faith I did it not because I more louyd or favored any man: Ter. in An.
also, wherefore. Forma bona memini videre, quo aequior sum Pamphilo, I remember
she is well favored, wherefore I am the less displeased with Pamphilus. Quo
gentium, whyther: also Quo, signifies, Plinius.
that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi molestus essem, Nor I did it not, that I
would displease you: also, to what purpose or use. Quo mihi fortunam, si non
conceditur vti, For what purpose shall fortune serve, if I may not have
commodity by it? Quoaxo, are, to cry like a frogge. Quoad, until, as long.
Quoad eius, as much as he may. Ci. pro lege Agraria
Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit expraeda, ex manubijs, ex auro
coronario? How much of the pray or spoil, garlandes or crowns of victours
is come^, or shall come to any of your hands? Ci. de ora.
Quoad eius facere possum, as much as I may do. Quoadusque, until. Quocirca,
wherefore. Quod, that, wherein. Sed si quid sit, quod mea opera opus sit,
Terenti.
aut tu plus vides quam ego, manebo, But if there be any thing, wherein ye
shall have need of my service, or that ye perceive more than I do, I will tarry:
Plautus in A^^nar.
also it is put for Quem. Allenum hominem intromittar neminem, quod illa aut
amicum, aut patronum nominer: She may let in no man, whom she will call
derlyng, Plinius.
or master. Nube grauida candicante, quod vocant tempestatem albam, grando
imminebit: when there does appiere a great cloud, that waxes white, which
they call a white tempeste, ye shall have hayle shortly after: also it
sygnifyeth for as much or because. Senatusconsulta duo facta sunt odiosa, quod
in consulem facta putantur, Cice Atti.
Catone and Domitio postulante: Two acts of counsel were made very
displeasant, for as much as they were supposed to be made, at the desire of
Domicius and Cato: Ter. in. (...)
also it signifies but. Quod si quiescem, nihil euenisset mali, But if I had
let it alone, there had none ill happened, or it had been well enough: also,
as much. Cice. Te^
Tu velim, quod cum commodo valetudinis tuae fiat quam longissime poteris,
obuia^ nobis properes: I would that ye, as much as may be with the heithe of
your person, make speed to meet with us, as far from home as ye can. Also
it signifies why. Vergilius in ^uc.
Si ad vitulam spectes, nihil est quod pocula lauds: If thou consyderest the
caulf well, there is no cause why thou should praise so thy pottes. Cice. Ter.
In uiam quod tedes hoc tempore, nihil est, There is no cause why thou should
take thy iournay at this time: Also it signifies wherefore. Hor. in ep.
Quod te per genium, dextramque, Deosque penates obsecro and obtestor, vitae me
read priori: Wherefore I beseech and pray the, for thy good aungelles sake,
and for the love between the and me, and for the saints which be thyn
auouryes, restore me eftsoon, to my first life, or to the state that I was in
erst. Ter. in Eu.
Also it signifies, as to that. Sane quod tibi vir videatur esse, hic nebulo
magnus est. As to that, that thou thynkest him a man, surely he is a stourdy
vagabunde. Quod absque molestia fiat, Cice. Sulp.
so that it be no displeasure unto you. Quare pergratum mihi feceris, si eum in
amicitiam receperis, atque eum (quod absque molestia fiat) si qua in re opus ei
fuerit: Wherefore ye shall do me singular pleasure, if ye take him into your
favor, and (so that it be no displeasure unto you) when need requyrethe, be
good lord or master unto him. Quod quidem, no that. Non nouisti me? P. Plautus
in Epidico.
quod quidem veniat in mentem. Doeste thou not know me? P. No that I remember
me. Quodammodo, somewhat. Ci. de. am^^
Quamobrem vt hi, qui superiores sunt, summittere se debent in amicitia, sic
quodammodo inferiores extollere, Wherefore likewise as they, which are superior
in state or degree, should humble them selfs in frendshyp, so they which are
inferior should advance and set them selfs forewarde. Quodcunque, what so
ever. Quodcunque militum, for quotcunque milites. Vos hortor, Cice. atti.
vt quodcu^que militum contrahere poteritis, contrahatis. I advise you, that as
many soldiers as ye can get, ye gather unto you. Terent. in andria.
Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, vt ne pater per me stetisse credat,
quo minus hae fierent nuptiae, volo: If it may be brought to pass, that my
father may believe, that it is not in my fault, that this marriage is not
concluded, I am content. Quomodo, how, by what reason, in what manner, Plautus
in Aulul. Plautus in milite. Plautus in amph.
by what mean. Quomodo tibi res se haber, How is the matter with the? Sed
quomodo dissimulabat? But in what manner did he dissemble? Primulo diliculo
abijsti ad legiones, By time in the morning thou wentest to the army. Amph.
Quomodo? In what manner or facion? also it signifies wherefore. Plautus in (...).
Illa quidem nullu^ sacrificabit. G. Quomodo? quid igitur me volt? She will do
no sacrifyce. G. wherefore? what thing would she than with me? Plautus in (...).
Quomodocunque, how so ever it be. Sed tamen quomodocunque, quamquam sumus
pauperculi, est domi quod edimus: Yet how so ever it be, though we be pour
folks, we have at home somewhat to eat. Quomodoliber, idem. Quondam,
Sometime, ones: signifyenge the time past, Virg.
or time to come. Quondam tua dicere facta Tempus erit: The time shall be ones,
when thine acts shall be declared. Alsoo it is put in the time present.
Vergili.
Quondam etiam victis redit in precordia virtus, Ye, and in them that are
vaynquysshed, sometime good courage eftsoon imbracith their stomakes. Sometime
it signyfyeth allwaye. Vt quondam in stipulis magnus sine viribus ignis, Like
as in stubbyll or holme sire is allwaye great without any puyssaunce. Plautus
in Trin.
Quonam, whyther, Eamus intro, sequere. S. Quo tute agis? C. quonam, nisi
domum. Let us go in, follow me. S. whyther wylt thou go? whyther should I goo
but home to my house? Quoniam, for as much as. Quo officio es? what is thine
office? Quopiam, any whyther. Itut^ne Thais quopiam es? Thais, will thou goo
any whyther? Quoquam, any whyther. Quoque, also. Quoquo, wheresoever. Quoquo
pacto, In any manner of wise. Ter. in A^.
Tum si maxim fateatur, cum amet aliam, non est vtile hanc illi dari: qua
propter quoquo pacto caelato est opus, Than if he utterly confess it, for as
much as he loves another, it were not convenient, that he were married to this
woman, therefore in any manner of wise, this thing must be kept secret. Quoquo
modo, idem. Quo quouersum, seu quoquouersum, every way, on every part. Eius
imperio classem quo quouersum dimittunt, Caes. in. (...).
By his commandment they dyspeched the navy in every part. Rates duplices
quoquouersum pedibus triginta e regione solis collocabat: he let ships
double against the son, thirty feet every way. Quorsum, seu quorsus, apud
Plinium, whyther, to what place, or thing. Quorsum istuc? to what purpose.
Quot, how many. Quota pars, how small a portion. Quotanuis, year by year, every
year. Quotennis? of what age? how old? Quot annos natus, idem. Quotenus, a,
um, how many. Quotidianae forma, Ter. in (...).
a commune beautye or facion, every day seen. Quotidiani sumptus, daily
expenses. Quotidianus, quotidiana, quotidianum, a thing that is or happens
daily or day by day. Quotidie, daily, every day. Quoties, how oftentimes.
Quotiescunque, as often. Quotquot, as many. Quotuplex, how many sorts.
Quotuplus, how much in measure or wayght. Quotus, ta, tum, of what number,
how many, Hora quota est, what is it a clock? Horatius.
Dic quotus es? Tell how many be of you. Quotas aedes dixerit, id ego admodum
incerto scio: How many houses he spoke of, I am not well assertayned, or I
remember not well. Quotusquisque, how many. Quouis, whyther, or to what place
ye will. Quouis genrium, idem. Quousque, how long, how far. Quousque tandem,
how long yet. Qur, and Quor, wherefore. Quum, seu qum, when, in the which.
Quum primum, as soon.
RAbia, old wryt^rs used for Rabies. Rabidus, da, dum, mad or wood, as a
mad dog. Rabies, madness of a dog. Rabiosus, a, um, mad or very angry,
wood angry. Varro.
Rabio, bire, to be mad or wood as a dog. Rabiosulus, a, um, somewhat
mad. Rabula, one which is hasty or wilful, in any cause, jangling, or full
of words. Racemarius, a twygge of a vine, out of the which the grapes do
spring. Racematio, the gatheringe of grapes after that the great clusters be
gathered to make wine, the glenynge of grapes. Racematus, ta, tum, that has
grapes. Racemosus, full of grapes. Racemus, a grape or a cluster of grapes.
Racha, a reprochefull word of Hebrewe, which signifies, thriftlesse,
braynlesse, finally it is a rebukefull word sygnifyenge the extreme ire of the
person that speaks it. Radicitus, from the root, or up by the root,
Radicitus euellere, to pluck up by the root. Radico, care, to root or take
root. Radicula, an herb, the juice whereof is good to wasshe woulle: also a
little root. Radio, are, to send forth beams like the sun. Radius, a beam
of the sun, or other bright sterre, sometime of the eyes: also a rod or
yerde, that Geometricians have to describe lines: also a wayuers shyttell,
wherewith he throws the yern in to the web also the spoke of a wheel, alsoo
an instrument, wherewith measures be shaven: alsoo long olyues or oil beryes.
Radix, dicis, a root. Rado, si, dear, to shave, or make smoothe, to cut or
pull up, to hurt, to rent, to offend, to fatigate. Aures delicatas radere, to
offend or fatigate delicate ears. Radula, an instrument to shave with.
Radulanus, a, um, that which is shaven of, from any thing. Ragadia, and
Ragades, cleftes or choppes in the fundament. Raia, a see fysshe called Raye or
skete. Ralla, a thynne garment. Rallum, the staff, wherewith plowghmen in
tyllynge do put the earth from their share. Ramalis, le, a bowghe. Ramale, a
seryd or deed bowghe. Ramentum, a little piece of any thing. Rameus, a, um,
that which is of a bowgh. Ramex, micis, a kind of rupture, when the bowels do
fall down into a man's coddes: also a rail or bar, which goes overthwart a
pale or a gate. Ramicosus, he that is broken. Ramnus, a white thorn. Ramulus,
and Ramusculus, a little bowghe. Ramus, a bowghe. Rana, a frogge: also a
sickness which does anoy cartell. Rana Scriphia, is a proverb applied to
the^ that can not speak in time convenient. Ranceo, cere, to be moldy or
putrifyed. Rancidus, da, dum, rankled, moldy, or putrifyed: also unsavory, or
unpleasant. Rancidulus, la, lum, a little moldy or putryfyed. Rancor, oris,
rancour, fylth. Randus, in old time was taken for aes, brass. Randuscula
porta, the brason gate. Rantum, in the old time was a quartern^ of a pound.
Ranunculus, a little frogge, or frosshe. Rapa, a plant and root called Rape.
Rapacia, rape leaves. Rapatior, more ravenous or catchinge. Rapacissimus, a,
um, most ravenous. Rapacitas, raueny. Rapaciter, rauenousely. Rapax, acis,
rauenouse. Raphanus, a plant, and root called Radysshe. Rapere aliquem in
ius, to arrest one, or cause him to be arrested to appear before iuges. Rapide,
quickly. Rapidus, a, um, very swift. Rapina, robbery. Rapinator, a robbar.
Varro.
Rapio, pui, pere, to take by violence, have, or fury: also to rauysshe a
woman. Rapo, Raponis, for Rapax. Raptim, hastily. Raprio, violent taking of a
person. Raptus, rauysshynge or deflourynge of a woman. Raptito, rare, to take
often violently. Rapto, to take or draw violently. Raptor, toris, a rauysshour
or vyolente taker. Rapulum, a little rape root. Rapuneulus, a little root,
which is eaten in salutes. Rara auis, a bird seldom seen* whereby is
signified any thing that seldom happens. Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or
slender. Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or slender. Rarenter, seldom. Rare^co,
scere, to wax thynne, or not thick grown, to be or happen seldom. Caes. in
co^.
Rari, a sonder, here and there one or a few. Raripilus, la, lum, thynne
heared. Rarior, rarius, more selde. Rarissimus, a, um, seldest. Rarissime,
most selde. Raritas, seldomnesse. Raro, selde, rare. Raro, aui, are, to make
scant or selde. Rarus, ra, rum, selde or not often, thynne, not thick grown or
set. Rasamentum, shauinge or shredes. Rasilis, sile, that may be shaven or
made smoothe. Rasito, tare, to shave often. Rasor, soris, a harbor, or shauour,
alsoo a ^ydler. Rasotius, a, um, pertaining to shauynge. Rasta, a duche mile.
Rastellus, a little rake. Rast^um, and Raster, a rake. Rasura, the shauynge.
Rata^iae naues, lyghters, or wood barges. Rates, it is, are pieces of timber
pynned together, whereon hay or other like thing being laid, they are drawn
on ryuers, as on the great streams of Germany and France is now seen: but they
be communly used and taken for ships, or the side beams of a ship.
Ratiarius, the master of a ship. Ratifico, care, to ratyfye, or confirm.
Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation. Ratio, rayson, counsel, purpose,
care, respect, cause, the manner, the way, the form, proportion.
Ratiocinatio, raysonynge. Ratiocinator, oris, a caster of account. Ratiocinor,
aris, to rayson, to gather in argument, to account. Rationabilis, le,
raysonable. Rationale, that which has the use of raison: alsoo that which a
priest wears at mass on his heed, and after puts it back like a hoode.
Rations refer, to yield account. Rationem dare, idem. Plautus in amph.
Terent. in Heau. Ter. in Ad.
Rationem dictare, to account. Ratio de integro ineunda est mihi, I must
find another mean. Rationem subducere, Nunquam ita quisquam been subducta
ratione ad vita^ fuit: quin res, aetas, vsus semper aliquid apportet noui,
There was never man in the order of his life so well aduysed: but that matter,
age and experience brings to him somewhat at that is strange. Ratio constat,
the matter appiereth, or is showed. Rationa^ius, a book of account: also a book
belonging to the counsel of Princes. wherein acts done and to be done are
written: also an auditour. Ratiuncula, a little account or reckoning. Rations
putari, when accomptes be examyned and tried. No. M^r.
Ratare, old wrytars used for Ratificare, to ratify, to confyrme. Ratum
habere, idem. Ratus, ta, tum, stablysshed, confyrmed, supposed. Ratus, a
participle signyfyenge, Supposing. Ratus sum, I supposed. Raua vox, Festus.
a voice that may not be well hard. Raucae, worms, being in the roots of
trees, and cares them. Rauce, horsely. Rauceo, Raucio, cere, to be horse.
Raucesco, scere, idem. Raucus, ca, cum, horse. Raucedo, and Raucitas,
horsenesse. Raudus, a thing unwrought, and vnpolysshed: it was also taken for
aes, brass. Rauenna, a city in Italy. Rauilia, purblynde or dull sighted.
Rauio, are, to be horse. Festus.
Rauis, horsenesse. Rauiscellus, a, um, little broune of color. Plautus.
Rauus, a, um, horse: also Rauus color, a dull or sad color, or broune.
R, ANTE E.
REalis actio, an action concerning the goods. Reapse, in the self or very
thing. Reate, a city in Italy. Reatus, a fault or offense. Rebellare, to
rebel. Rebellis, a rebel. Rebellio, rebellion. Rebito, tare, to return. At
vnum hoc te quaeso, si hue rebiter e Philocrare, vt eius mihi facias
conueniendi copia^. But one thing I pray the, if he return from
Philocrates, find the means, that I may speak with him. Reboo, are, to sown
again. Recalcitro, trare, to stryke with the heel, to kick. Recalesco,
scere, to wax warm. Recaluaster, tri, he that is balde before. Recaluus,
idem. Recalueo, ere, to be balde again. Recanto, tare, to charm away or
charm out a thing, which was brought in by inchauntement, as the witches
called wise women are wont to do. Recapitulatio, a rehercynge of things in
chapiters. Recedo, recessi, recedere, to depart or goo away. Recedere a
condition, a persona, a statu, is to change or alter the condition, person,
or state. Cic. de off.
Quanquam id nomen durius efficit iam vetustas, a peregrino enim iam recessit,
All though auncienty makes that name diffuse, yet is it now altered from
being a strange word. Recello, cellere, to pluck back, or withdraw.
Recens, it is, new late. Recentior, newer. Recentissimus, newest, or latest.
Rece^ti pede recurrere, to run eftsoon after that he has rested him, to
make a fresh course. Plautus in ^tin.
Postquam thermopotasti gutturem, recipe te, and recurre pede recenti: After
that thou haste warmed thy throat with good drink, take thy heart to the, and
make a fresshe course. Recenter, newly, fresshely. Recentius, more newly.
Recento, tare, to renew. Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed. Recenseo, ere,
to number or tell, to reken. Recensus, us, and Recensio, a tale or reckoning.
Recensitus, ta, tum, told, or rekenyd. Receptaculum, the place, which
receives things: also a place of suerty or comfort. Recepti in ciuitatem,
they which of strangers ^e made Citizens. Recepto, tare, to receive often.
Receptitius, a, um, that which is reserved from other. Receptum, taken in
custom. Receptus, tus, a retrayt in battle. Erasm. in Chiliad.
Receptui ca^ere, to blow the retrayte: also it is a proverb, which
signifies to fynysh or end the contention. Recessim, an aduerbe, which
signifies, going back. Recessus, us, a going away or back. Plautus in
Men^ch.
Recident in te hae contumeliae, those rebukes shall light on the. Terent. in
^olo. He.
Recidit ad paucos, it is come to a few persons. Recidipna, a garment to
soupe in. Recidiuus, a, um, eftsoon restored: sometime eftsoon decayed or
fallen. Recido, dear, to fall eftsoon: or to fall backwarde. Recido, di, dear,
to cut again, to cut behind. Recinium, a square garmente, which they that
did wear them, did cast the one part thereof over their shoulders at their
back, like to french clokes. Recinia^i, they that did wear such clokes.
Recino, ere, to sing again. Recipere se, to return or come again. Terent.
in Phorm.
Percuncta tum ibo ad portum, quoad se recipiat frater, I will go seek at the
hauyn, until my brother come again. Recipere se ad coenam, to come to souper.
Plautus in Capt.
Hic homo ad coenam recipit se ad me, This man will come to me to souper.
Recipe te ad me, come hither to me. Plautus in Per.
Recipere se ex opere, to return from his business. Recipere se domum, to
go home. Recipere in aures, to hear: No^ aedepol istaec tua dicta nu^c in
aures recipio, Plautus in cist.
In good soth I do not hear now what thou say. Recipere se in portum, to
arryue at an hauyn. Recipere se in Principem, Plinius in panegyr.
to take on him as a Prince. Recipere anhelitum, to fetch brethe or wind.
Priusquam recipias anhelitum, Plautus in mercatore
vno verbo eloquere, vbi ego sum, Or ever thou fetchest breath, tell me at a
word, in what case I do stand. Recipe animum, take breath. Terent. in Adelph.
Cicero in Cato. Cato speaks here of Fauius the wise Captayn^
Recipere, to recover. Cum quidem me audiente Salinatori, qui amisso oppido
fugerat in arcem, glorianti atque dicenti, mea opera Quint. Fab. Yarentum
recepisti: Certe, inquit ridens, nam nisi tu amisistes, nunquam recepissem: For
in my hearing, to Salinator, which (the town of Tarentum being lost) fled
into the castle, saying unto him, Thou have recovered Tarentum Q. Fab. by my
means: That is true said he, lawghinge: for if thou had not lost it: I
had not recovered it. also to reserve to a man's own use. Recipie, Cato uses
for Recipiam. Receptus, ta, tum, received. Receptio, a return back, Plautus
in Asinar.
drawing or bringing again. Quid tibi huc receptio ad te est meum virum? Why
draweste thou my housbande eftsoon back unto thy house. Reciprocatio, a
going back, or retournynge to the place that he came fro. Recipio, coepi,
cipere, to receive or take, to admit, to call again, to bring in
faulsgarde, to deliver, to undertake, to promise: also Recipere, is to reserve
to him self, or to except a thing in gyuynge or bargaynynge. Reciproco,
care, to turn back, to repete, to go back. Reciprocus, ca, cum, that which
is repeted or eftsoon reherced. Recisamentum, a little piece, a gobat. Recisus,
a, um, new cut. Recito, tare, to read that other may here and understand: to
recite or tell eftsoon. Reclamo, are, to deny with a loud voice or cry.
Festus. Val. in po. Verg.
Recliuia, and Recliuium, is when the skin of the fyngar is loose from the
nail. Recludo, si, dear, to open. Infernas reserat seeds and regna recludat
pallida, Undo he the locks of places infernal, and let him set wide open the
pale regions of death. Justinius puts Reclusus for clausus, shut. Recocia,
second or course cheese. Recogito, tare, to remember. Recognitio, a knowledge.
Recognosco, noni, noscere, to recognize, to know perfectly, to ouerloke.
Recolligo, legi, ligere, to assemble or gather together: also to reconcile.
Quod scribis, etiam si cuius animus esset in te offensior, a me recolligi
oportere, quid dicas? Where thou wrytest, that moreover if any man be
displeased with the, that he should be reconcyled by my means, whatte sayeste
thou? Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to call to remembrance.
Recommi^iscor, sceris, recomminisci, to remember, or call to remembrance.
Reconcilio, are, to reconcyle, to restore unto favor. Reconcilior, aris,
reconciliari, to be reconcyled. Plautus in cap.
Reconciliare in libertatem, to set at lybertye. Reconciliatio, a
reconcylynge. Reclusus, a, um, opened. Reconcinno, nare, to new make, to make
meet, proprely a garment. Recondo, dear, to hyde, to lay up. Recordor,
aris, ari, to remember. Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boil or sees eftsoon, to
amend with study. Recordatio, remembrance. Recreatio, a recreation, a
restoringe. Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refresshe, to restore. Recresco,
scere, to grow again. Recrudesco, scere, to renew a fault made by Princes to
their familiars. Recta, a souper, where they sat all in a rewe. Rectangulus,
is where lines are so joined, that no part is longar or shortar than another.
Recta, an aduerbe signifyenge strayghte. Terent. in Eunucho.
Cur non recta introibas? why wentest thou not straight, or the straight way
in. Recte, well enough. Quid tu igitur lachrymas? aut quid es tam tristis?
Pamp. Terent. in Hecy.
Recte matter. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than wherefore do thou mourn? or why
art thou so heavy? Pamph. It is well enough mother. S. what was all this
noise? Recte, parere, to bring forth no monster. Recte, of good right, with
good raison. Recte, dicis, thou say truly. Recte est, it is enough, or I
have enough. Tum quod them ei, recte est, Terent. in Heauton.
I have alsoo enough to give him. Recte facere alicui, to do good to a man,
Stultus and sine gratia es, tibi recte facere: Plautus in Aulularia.
quando quod facias perit, Thou art a fool and without thank, to do him any
good, when all is lost that thou do. Recte far, to take patiently. Si
sapis, neque praeterquam quas ipse amor molestias habet, Terent. in Eunucho.
addas: and illas quas habet, recte feras, If thou be wise, add to no more
grief than love brings with him, and them that he brings, suffer
patiently. Recte, signifies sometime nothing, as Donate says. Rogo, nunquid
velit. recte, inquit: abeo, I asked if he would any thing, Nothing, he said: I
went than my way. also ye, straight way. S. Tu rus hinc abis? Ter. in Ad.
D. recte, go thou now into the contray? D. ye straight way. Recte valet,
he or she is in good health. Rectius, better. Rectitas, and Rectitudo, Justice
or rightwysnesse. Rector, toris, a rular. Rectus, the nominatife case. Rectum
intestinum, the gutte from whense the ordure passes. Rectus, ta, tum,
straight, which is not crooked, upright, just. Recubitus, a lyenge at rest.
Recubo, are, to lie and rest. Recudo, cudi, dear, to new hamer, or new work,
as it were on an anduylde: also it is taken for, to make new, or new prynte.
Recuperatores, iuges assigned, or commissionars, for a pryuate matter. Recumbo,
to sytte at a table, or at meals: sometime to lean on one. Recumbebat mecum
vir egregius Fidius Rufinus, super eum municeps ipsius, There satte with me
that worshypfull man Fidius Rufinus, and above him his neighbor. Recuperatio,
and reciperatio, and reciperantia, was of old writers said, where there was a
law made between the people of Rome, and other nations and cities, wherein they
accordyd, that pryuate things taken, should be redelyuered, which is now
vsyd in our leagues and entercourses with strange countrayes and princes.
Recupero, rare, to recover. Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to desire much. Quin ita
faciam, ut recupias facere sumptum, and si ego uetem: And yet will I so
handle it, that thou shalt much desire to spend, although I would fordyd
the. Recurro, rere, to rounne again, to goo or come again quyckely. Recursus,
us, a runnyng back, a recourse. Recurso, are, to run often back or again.
Recurue, an aduerbe, signifieng bowid bakwarde, crokydly. Recuruitas, tatis, a
bowynge back. Recuruo, are, to bow back. Recuruor, ari, to be bowed back.
Recuruus, a, um, bowed back, or crooked Recusabile, that which is worthy to
be refusyd. Recusatio, a refusal. Recusator, a refuser. Recuso, are, to
refuse, also to defend. Recutitus, he that is circuncysed. sometime exulcerate.
Redabsoluo, uere, to discharge or dispeche. Sequere hac, te redabsoluam, qua
aduenisti gratia, Follow me thither, I will dyspatche thy mattier, for the
which thou came hither. Redactus, ta, tum, brought. Plautus. in Curcul.
Redambulo, are, to return. Cura quam optime potes. Er. been ambula, and
redambula, Do the best that thou canste. Er. well get the hens, and come again
quyckely. Redandruo, are, idem. Redamo, aui, are, to love mutually. Redarguo,
guere, to reprove. Reddo, di, dear, to render or yield, to deliver, to restore,
to give, to make. Reddere certiorem, to assertayne. Reddere rationem, to make
account, or reckoning. Reddere, to put in other. Tempestas uenit, confringit
tegulas imbricesque, ibi dominus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The tempeste
camme, and brake the Tyles, and the Eueyses, where as the neglygente owner
would not put other in their places. Reddere commotum, Ter. in An.
to cause one to make haste, to haste him forward. Reddere dictum ac factum.
Videre egisse ia^ nescio quid cum seen. S. De illo quod dudu^? dictum ac factum
reddidi, It seems thou haste done late, I wot not what with the old man. S.
Meanest thou that, the other day? thou had not so soon spoken, but it was
done. Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to pass. Plautus in Epid.
Reddere operam, to require a good turn or an ylle. Reddere aliquem, to
resemble or be like to oone. Redemptio, redemption. Redemptito, demptitare, to
redeem or bye again often. Redempto, tare, to redeem. Redemptor, toris, a
redemer. Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to return. Redhibeo, hibui, bear, to cause
the seller to have again that which he sold. Redhibitio, restitution.
Redigo, degi, digere, to bring by force or cunning. sometime to restore.
Redigere in ordinem, to compelle men to live according to their astate or
profession Redis ad ingenium, thou do after thine old facion, or as thou
art wont to do. Terent. in Hecy. Ter. in An.
Redire ad se. Sed paululum sine ad me ut redeam, But let me take breathe a
lyttelle. Tandem reprime iracundiam, arque ad reredi: Now leave thy fume, and
remember thy self. Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam, Terent. in phorm.
ac mittam illius ineptias, To the intent that I will be short, and pass
over his folly. Redi ad rem, goo to the purpose, Terent. in Heaut.
or to the mattier. Redijt ad restim res. Opera tua ad restim mihi quidem res
redijt, Terent. in phormi.
By thy means I am brought to the point to hang my self. Redijt ad rastros.
Nam si illi pergam suppeditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uere ad rastros
res redijt, Surely if I should maintain his expenses Menedemus, it would bring
me to rake corn or grass for my living. Redit res in eum locum, the thing
is come so to pass. In eum iam res redijt locum, ut sit necesse, The matter is
come so to pass, that there is no remedy. Redit mihi animus, Terent. in Hecyra.
my courage is comme unto me. Redit animo, it comes to my mind. Redire in
concordiam, to be agreed. Redire in gratiam, idem, Also to be eftesones in
favor. Redimicula, the ornaments or apparaylle of a woman's heed: as a
veluette bonette or french hode. Redimio, iui, ire, to adorn or apparayle, or
trymme. Plautus in Ruden.
Reditur, is returned. Redhibitum, restored. Redico, cere, to tell or say
again. Rediculi, a temple at Rome without the gate called Capena, where
Hannyball being aferde, retired back. Redimitus, ta, apparayled on the heed.
Redimere, to take in charge. Redinunt, for redeunt, they return or comme
again. Redinregro, a renewynge, a fortification. Redipiscor, sceris, sci, to
recover or get again. Redimo, demi, dimere, to redeem, to bye, to recover,
to recompense, to take in bargayne. Redemptores, they that hyre land, or
takes any thing in great or task. Ti Liuius Cae^. in co^.
Redintegrare, to begin a fresshe. Redintegrato animo, with courage reuyued,
with a fresh courage. Redito, tare, to return by and by. Reditus, tus, a
return. Reduuia, when the skin comes without the nails of the fyngers.
alsoo an adders skin. Rediuiuum, that which retourneth eftesones to life.
Also that which of an old thing is made new or young. Rediuias, a worm
called a tycke, which souketh blood from a man or beast. Redoleo, ere, to
smelle or savor. Redonatio, a gyuynge again of the thing that is taken.
Redono, are, to give again. Redorior, riris, riri, to begin again.
Redormio, to awake. Redormitio, an awakynge out of sleep. Festus.
Redostio, rire, of old writers was taken for to give thank. Reducem, and
reduces, they do call such which are brought out of exile or captivity.
Reducere, to bring saulfe. Meque oppido in arcem reduco, Apulcius.
And I conveyed my self quyckely into the Castle. Alsoo to pacyfye or appease.
Vergilius
Numenque reducant, Let them appease the wrath or dyspleasure of god.
Reduco, duxi, ducere, to bring back, or pluck back, to deliver or set out
of peril, to reconcyle. Reductus, a, um, brought back or safe. Redundo, are,
to ouerflowe, to reflowe or return back, to redounde. Reduro, are, to stop
or close. No. Mar.
Reduplico, care, to double eftsoon. Redulcero, rare, to impostume or make an
impostume in some part of the body. Refello, to prove falls, to repreue of
falsehode, to deny that which is objected. Referio, rire, to stryke again.
Refer ad aliquem, to ask one counsel in any matter. Refer de re aliqua
ad Senatum, was when the Consuls purposed a matter in the Senate, desiring the
Senators to reason and consulte thereof. Refer pedem, to set forth a foot,
or goo. Plautus in mercatore
Eutyche ha^c uolo rem prius agi, quam meu^ intro refero pedem, I will that
this thing Eutyche be done, or I go oone foot in. Retulit ad me pedem, He
came toward me. Plautus in Epidico.
Referunt haec ad rem, these things pertain to the matter. Refero acceptum,
Omnia quae uidimus, Cicero.
si recte rationabimus, uni accepta referemus Antonio. All that we see, if we
reckon well, we may impute it only to Antonie. Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum
refert: He confesses to be long of me, that he now lyuethe. Cicer. pro C^uen.
Verum omnem tranquillitatem and quietem senectutis refert acceptam clementiae
tuae, But all the tranquyllytie and quyetenesse of his age, he confesses to
proceed or have received of your mercy and goodness. Refer gratiam, to give
thank. Plautus in Mostell.
Nunquam ego illi possum gratiam refer, ut meritus est de me, I can never
give him thank suffycyent for that he has done for me. Spero ego mihi
quoque tempus tale euenturum, Plautus in merca.
ut tibi gratiam referam parem, I trust the time shall come, that I shall do
you as much pleasure. Ci. in Sal.
Non enim sperasti mutuam tibi gratiam relaturum, ut uicissim tuos compellarem,
Thou dyddest not think, that I would in this wise have requyted the, in
remembrynge thine auncetours, as thou haste done mine. Referri in acceptum, to
be brought in a reckenyng. Posteaquam reus factus est, primo negabat opus in
acceptum referri posse, after that he was accused, first he denied, that the
warke might be brought unto a reckenynge. Refer in melius, to turn it to a
better use. Refer mores, to express the condicyons or manners of an other.
Refer oculos, to cast the look upon one. Plin. epist. 156.
Refer par, to requyte. Ille quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit, studet
par refer, Whom thou gettest with benefytte, he does all things with a good
heart, and studieth to requyte the. Referte pedem, uel gradum, to step back,
to retreat. Refer, to show or tell. At illa retulit, quaesiuitque, quidnam
mihi uideretur, She told me all, and asked what I thought therein. Cicer. pro
Seruilio.
Refert. Cuius consilii magni referebat te inter esse. At the which
counsel, it had been very necessary, that ye should have been. Terent. in
phorm.
Parui retulit non suscepisse, It made little matter, that he took her not.
Mea quid refert? What care I? Mea nihil refert? I have naught to do with it.
Tua refert, It is for thy profit. Quid refert me fecisse regibus, ut mihi
obedirent, si me hodie hic umbraticus deriserit? What avails it, that I have
made kings to obey me, if now this lewd knave shall laughe me to scorn?
Refert, It is expedient or necessary. Ver. geor.
Neque enim numero comprehendere refert: It is not necessary, to reherce them
in number. Refercio, cire, to fylle. Refero, tuli, far, to bring again, to
resemble, to report, to refer, to revoke. Referebam me, I returned. To add
to, or ascribe, to turn, to renew, to bring, to declare or express. Ci. in
Pis.
Refero impensum, I make account of that which is bestowed. Refer rationem,
to yield or make account. Refectus, ta, tum, restored, renewed, amended, made
eftesoones. Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or restore, to amend, to make
again. Reficior, ceris, ci, to be restored, recovered from sickness, Also
renewed or new made. Refigo, fixi, figere, to make fast or sure, to thruste in
hard. Sometime it signifies the contrary, to draw out that which is
fastened. Ci. Phi. 13
Refigere tabulas and leges, to undo or destroy laws. Acta Antonij
rescidistis, leges refixistis: Ye have cancelled the acts of Antony, and
undone or dissolved his laws. Ver. aenei.
Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He stablyshed laws, and for money eftesoones
dissolved them. Refirmo, are, to fasten or stablyshe again. Terent. in Adelph.
Reflatio, a contrary wind. Reflatus, tus, idem. Reflecto, xi, tere, to bow
back, to turn back or again. Qu^ neque fides, neque ius^urandu^, neque illum
misericordia repressit, neque reflexit, Whom neither promise, nor oath, nor yet
pity, withdrewe or pulled back. Reflo, are, to blow again or contrary.
Refluo, xi, fluere, to flow. Refluxus, us, the tide, when the water flows.
Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreshyng, or recreation. Refocillo, are, to
recomforte, to refresshe, Plinius in panegyr. Plin. in epistol. 156. Plinius in
panegyri.
to recreate, to fortifye. Reformo, mare, to refourme. Reformator, a
reformatour. Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nourysshe or comfort eftesoones,
to restore or set in his first state. Refractarius, obstynate, in a wylfulle
oppinion. Refragor, aris, ari, to resyste with words, or clamor. Refrango,
fregi, refrangere, aut refringere, to braste open. Refreno, refrenare, to pull
back one from a purpose. Refrico, care, to renew a sore or grief, which was
out of remembrance. Refrigeratorius, a, um, that which cools or makes
cold. Refrigeratio, a koolynge. Suetonius in Claudi.
Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: also refreshed or comforted. Refrigerium, a
recreation or aduauncynge of the mind. Refrigesco, scere, to make cold.
Refrigero, are, to cool, or make cold, to refreshe or recomforte. Refrina, a
bean, which the old Romans were wont to bring home out of the field, Festus.
to do sacrifyce for the good luck of their corn. Refuga, an unruly
person, which will not be ordered. Refugio, gere, to flee or run away or
back. Colum. 4.
also to refuse. Refugium, refuge, succor, or place where one may be
succored. Refugus, a, um, that which gothe away, Sidonius.
or is laid aparte. Refulgeo, gere, to shine. Refundo, fudi, fundere, to
restore that which lacks. Quicquid deerit, Seneca.
ex meo refundam, Whatte so ever does lack, I will make it up of mine
own. Alsoo to pay home again, or to yield. Id erat non tam accipere
beneficium, quam refundere, That was not so much, Seneca de benefic.
to receive a good turn, as to do a good turn. Alsoo to cast up by
vomyte. Quod hesterna crapula ingurgitauerat, Plinius.
palam refudit, That which in his yesterdayes ryotte he ingourged or devoured,
he openely did parbrake or vomyte hit up. Refutatio, a denyenge, a
replycation, an argument to the contrary. Refuto, tare, to deny, to replye.
Regaliolus, a bird, between whom and the egle is contynual hostility, and is
yelowe of color. Regaliter, royally. Regalis, le, royalle. Regelo, are, to
thawe, or resolve that, which is frosen. Regenero, rare, to regenerate or
eftesones engender. Regero, gessi, gerere, to put in writing, to bring
back, to vomyte up. Regestum, earth cast up. Regia, a kings house. Regiesco,
scere, old writers used, for crescere, to grow. Regificus, ca, cum, that
whereby a king is made. Regilla, a kings robe. Regillus, a little king.
Also the name of a river in Italy. Regimen, minis, a rule or governance.
Regina, a queen. Regionatim, place by place, by every region or cost. Regio,
a region or country, also a cost, as east, weste, north, and southe.
Regium, a city beyond the mountains toward Italye. Regius, a, um, of a
king. Regius morbus, the iaundyse. Regno, are, to reign. Regnum, a realm,
and the governance. Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to govern. Regor, geris, to be
ruled or governed. Regrador, de^i, di, to goo back. No. Mar.
Regredo, dear, to revoke, or call again. Regredior, regredi, to go back.
Regressio, and regressus, us, a return back, a resort back. Regula, a rule.
Regularis, regulare, that which is under a rule. Regulo, are, to rule or
dyrecte. Regulus, a Prince or lord of a lyttelle countreye, proprely Reguli,
be the chylderne of kings. Also Regulus is a little bird, called a wrenne,
and a serpent called a Cockatryce, which sleeth a man with his syghte. It was
alsoo the name of a Consule, which for keeping of his promise, was put to
cruelle death by the Carthaginensis. Also a great Rhetorician in the time of
Plynie. Reieculae, uel reijculae o^es, sheep drawn out of the fold for aege
or syckenesse, kebbers, crones, or cullyars. Reiectanea, Vergil. in Bucolio.
of philosophers be taken for things to be abhorrid, as sycknesse, poverty,
and sorrow. Reiectio, parbrakynge. Reiectio sanguinis, the yssuynge out of
bloudde at the mouth, the noose, or the veins. Reiectus, ta, tum, cast
out, cast away, or put forth. Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast away, to
drive back. Tityre pascentes a flumine reiice capellas, Tityre drive thy
gotes, that do feed, away from the river. Also to refuse, to put away.
Apulcius.
Me uero tanquam inutilem reiecerunt, As for me they refused, as a person
unprofitable. Terent. in Phorin.
Si altera illa magis instabit, forsita^ nos reiiciat: If the other will be
importunate, perchance they will put me away. Reiicere iudices aut testes, to
refuse judges or witnesses. Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte. Se^tonius in
August.
Senos sextantes non excessit: aut si excessisset, reiiciebantur, He exceded
not twelve ounces, if he passed that, they were cast up again. Relatio, a
report, a respect: Among Logycians, it is the effect of the Relatyue, as
the father, the son, the master, the servant, the husband, the wife. For
without the oone, the other can not retain his name, for a son may not be
without a father: nor a wife without a husband, nor a servant without a
master. Relati in aerarios, were they, which for some defaute were by the
masters of manners, called Censores, put out of the number of Citisens, and did
only pay tribute, or heedsyluer, as strangers. Relative, having relacion to a
thing. Relatiuum, a relatife, which has relation to some thing. Relaxo,
are, to lowse. Relegatus, banysshed. Relegatio, a banysshemente out of his
countreye. Relego, relegare, to banysshe, to remove, to sever oone from an
another, to send away. Religatus, ta, tum, fast bound. Relego, legi, legere,
to read again. Relicinus, he that has a good busshe of hear, well trymmed
behind. Relicina frons, a fair large and high forheed, without hear.
Relictus, ta, tum, forsaken or left. Relictus sum mihi, I am left alone.
Religio, onis, relygion, a reverend dread. doubt lest be shall offend.
Plautus in C^rgal.
Also conscience, or as a man might say, a scruple of conscience. Religiose,
fearfully, doubtefully, daungerousely, scrupulously. Religiosus, sa, sum,
relygious, dredefulle, doubtefull. Liuius. 6.
In religionem uertere, to fear leeste god were displeased. Religionem
inducere, to bring in fear of goddis displeasure. ^^etonius i^ August.
Religio est, it is not lefull. Huc introire, nisi necessario, and cast,
religio est, To enter in there, but for necessity, and chastely, it is not
lefull. Religiosus, sa, sum, religious, also superstitious. Terent in Heauton.
Plautus in ^^y^.
Religiose, any s^dly, circu^spectly, curiously. Relino, releui, relinere, to
open that which is stopped. Releui omnia dolia, I have broched all the
vessels. Nolo ego nos pro summo bibere: nulli relerimus postea, I would not
that we drank all out: for I will for no man set any a broche afterward.
Religioni obstringere, which is commonly said to have conscience in a thing.
Religioni obstringi, to be bound in conscience. Religioni exoluere, to
discharge a man's conscience. Religo, are, to loose or unbind. Relimino, to
give light. Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leave. Relinquere animam, to dye.
Relinquit eum animus, His heart fails him. Reliquatores, they which been in
arrerage on their account. Also any other, which have in their hands some
part of that, which they ought to have paid. Reliqu^ae, that which is left.
Reliquium facere, to leave, to omytte. Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunt, that
which remains. Reliquum est, the rest is. Pli. in epis.
Reluceo, luxi, cere, to shine or be bright. Reluctor, tari, to contend or
strive again. Reluo, luere, to pay again that which is borrowed, to fetch
home a gage or pledge. Also to wash eftesoones. Remandere, to chewe the cudde.
Remaneo, si, nere, to abide stylle. Remano, are, to turn back to a place.
Remansio, an abiding. Remecull, little ships, which men of Lemnos used.
Remedium, remedy. Remeligo, a fysshe, which cleanynge to the keale of a
ship, causes him to tarry. Remendo, are, to amend or correct a faut. Remeo,
are, to return or go back ageyn. Remigatio, a rowing or saylynge. Remiges,
they which do row in a galaye or boot. Remigium, the rowing of a ship or
bote. Remigo, are, to row. Remigro, are, to go back, to return. Remillum, a
thing crooked and broad. Reminiscor, sceris, sci, to call again to
remembrance. Reminiscentia, the remembrance of that, which was ones in the
mind. Remiss, fayntly, without courage, humbly: Sometime meryly. Remissio,
remyssion, forgyuenesse, a recreatyng of mind after study or labor. Remissus,
a, um, glad, remytted or forgiven, sent again. Remitto, misi, remittere, to
send, to send again, to send back, to release or forgive, to grant, to
let down, to commytte, or remytte, to relinquishe or leave. Remittere
animum, to put away care, to vnbende or louse. Remittere, to cesse.
Remittere aliquid adolecentiae, pardon him somewhat for his youth. Remittere
nuntium. Gratiam habeo tibi, qum copiam istam mihi and potestatem facis,
Plautus in cap.
ut ego ad parents remittam nuntiu^: I thank the, that thou gyuest me this
leave, and also authority, that I may send to thy friends, to provide for
the else where. Remissio, a release, a losing, a withdrawyng. Oculorum
remissio, a withdrawing of the look. Remora, a little fyshe, which retayneth
a great ship under sail. Ci. de ora.
Remorbesco, to fall eftesones* into sickness. Remordeo, dear, to tourment the
mind, or make one heavy. Remores, birds, which by their flight or voice
sygnyfyed, that the thing purposed was not to be followed, Remoria, a place on
the top of the hyl called Auentinus, where Remus stood, and by the flight of
birds, aduysed the building of Rome. Remona, the dwelling house of Remus.
Remoueo, ere, to remove, to take away. Remouere moram, make ye have, speed
you. Remoror, aris, ari, to tarry or make to abide. Remugio, gini, gire, to
below or low again, to render a great sown. Remulco, care, and remulculo,
is proprely to draw a greatte ship or barge with a less vessel, by
translation it signifies to draw a thing easyly. Remulcus, a little bore or
bark. Remulinus ager, Remus field. Perottus.
Remuncopae, instruments, wherewith ships be driven on land. Remunero, are,
and remuneror, ari, to reward to recompense a good turn. Remunera^o,
recompense. Remus, the brother of Romulus, which builded Rome. Renauciscor,
sceris, sci, to get again. Renarro, are, to tell, to repete. Renato, tare,
to swym back, or swym again. Renes, the kydneyes. Renideo, d^re, to shine, to
savor or smell. Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or undo a knot. Renoues, garments
made of skynnes of wol^es or other beasts, wherein the anci-Almayns were wont
to lie in the wars. Renouo, are, to renew. Renouello, lare, to make new
again. Rentifolia, a kind of wild roses, which have neither good savor nor
facion. Renumero, rare, to pay again money, which is received. Renuntiata,
an I Will by Ethiope, so rich, that the inhabytantes do give for a horse by
exchange, a talent of gold. Renuntio, are, to report, to signify, to show
openly, to renounce, to refuse, to resign, sometime to restore. Renuntiare
uitae, to refuse to live. Renuntiatur Consul, he is declared consule.
Renuntiatio, a report, also a resignation of an office. also a summons by an
offycer. Plautus in ^^in.
Renunti^, they which do carye tidings from one to an other. Renuo, nuere, to
refuse, to despise. Renutus, nutus, a refusalle or denyar with countenance.
Reor, reris, ratus sum, I suppose. Repagulum, a door or wyndowe or other
thing that shuts or closes. Repages, idem. Repandus, a* um, bent or bowed,
and broad backwarde, as ores were in the old time. Repando, dear, to bend
back. Reparo, rare, to repair, to restore to the first astate. Reparamen,
and reparatio, a repayrynge or reparation. Reparco, parsi, sere, to spare.
Repastinatio, a new dyggynge about vynes. Also a bryngyng of ground to
temper with much labor and dyggynge. Repastinatus, ta, tu^, new dug or
brought in temper. Repastino, are, to dygge again about vynes, to alter land
or ground, with often dyggynge or labourynge. Repastinor, nari, to be eftesones
dygged, or brought into temper. Repauso, are, to take rest. Repedo, are, to go
away, to go back. Repello, puli, pellere, to put back, to repel. Rependo,
di, dear, to recompense. Repenso, are, to ponder, to ouersee, to judge. Repent,
sodaynely. Repentinus, a, um, sudden. Reperibitur, it shall be found.
Repertor, he that fyndeth. Repercutio, cussi, cutere, to stryke again, to
reuerberate. Repercussus, sus, a reuerberation or strykynge often. Reperio,
reperi, reperire, to find by adventure. sometime otherwise. Plautus.
Repetere, to call again. Hem repudiatus repetor, How now, being ones
refused, I am called again. Alta repetita, Ter. in A^.
rehearsed from the beginning, far sought, or far fette. Repetere poenas, ab
aliquo, to be auengyd on one. Repeto, I remember. Me quidem adolesce^tulo,
repeto quendam principem nomine alternis diebus declamare, alternis disputare,
I remember me, when I was a boy, that one, which was a prince of name, did
one day declame, an another day dispute. Repetenti memoria, to call to
remembrance. Repeto, tij, tere, to ask again, to ask often, or eftesoones, to
reherce again, or repete, to reuolue. Repetundarum accusari, is proprely where
a man sometime being in great authority and having the rule of a country, is
accused and called to a reckenynge, for all that he has received, being in his
office, above that which is his ordynarye allowaunce, also for all thing that
he took wrongefully from any person or town* which was the most
necessary action for a publyke weal, that might be devised, to be now put
in execution. Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth his gage or pledge.
Repignero, are, to quite or redeem a pledge or gage. It may be taken sometime
with us, that which in our law is called to repleuy: and repignoratio, a
repleuy: and repignoratitia actio, for a replegiare. Replaudo, dear, to make
noise with the hands beaten together. Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge
of a thing. Replico, care, to unfold. also to reply. Replumbo, are, to
vnsowlder. I^^eco^, (...) d* auro and argent^.
Repo, repsi, pere, to crepe, to run as roots do in the ground. Repoleo,
liui, lire, to polyshe again. Repolleo, lere, to be much able, to be of power
to do. Colum. 5.
Repollesco, scere, to be eftesoones strong or in force. Reponere fidem, to
trust. Horatius.
Reponere, ^s also to put in by writing. Scriptor honoratum si forte reponis
Achillem, Thou that writest, if peradventure thou put in Achylles. Repono,
sui, nere, to put or set again in his place, to lay up, to recite again,
to hyde, to redelyuer or restore, to revoke, to repress, to lay to more, or
exaggerate, to heap one on an other, to make to grow again, to bring again.
Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus, Vergeo. 2.
Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet: Look how much the sheep in the
long days shall byte. The cold dew in oone night with growing shall
requyte. Reporto, are, to bring back, or again. Reposco, poposci, scere, to
ask again that which is mine own, or is as it were dew to me.
Repositorium, a storehowse. Repositus, and repostus, ta, tum, laid up, to
hyde. Manet alta mente repostum, Iudicium Paridis, Deep in his mind, remained
the judgment, that Paris gave between the goddesses, of the which sprange the
occasyon of the destruction of Troy. Repotium, when the day after the marriage
friends do come and drink with the bride. Reprehendo, dear, to pluck back,
to reprove. Reprehensi, caught. Represento, tare, to represent, to render, to
bring in presence, or present a thing, to lay before one. Reprimo, mere, to
refrain, to let. Reprobo, are, to reprove. Reprobus, a man reproved.
Reproces, sharp. Reptile, all thing that crepeth. Repto, tare, to crepe much:
also to go softly like a snayle. Repudio, are, to forsake, as a man forsakes
his wife, also to refuse, to aba^don, or leave. Ter. in A^.
Repudio consilium, quod primum intenderam, I will now leave the counsel
that I first intended to follow. Repudium, a deuorce. Repudium remittere, to
be deuorced. Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce. Is me nunc repudium
renuntiare iussit tibi, Plautus in A^i^^.
He wylled me to declare to the, that he has forsaken the. Repudiosae nuptiae,
marriage, after the which follows sone after a deuorce, Plautus in Persa.
Necessitate me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me vbi uoles nuptum date, ne
hac fama faciat, repudosas nuptias, Thou compellest me to be naught, but take heed, that where thou will mary me, by that report he shall make such a
wedding as shall soon after be dissolved or broken. Repuerasco, scere, to be
eftesones a child. Repugno, are, to repugne or say contrary, to resyste.
Repugnanter, an aduerbe, which signyfyeth contrariously, displeasantly. Cicero
de amicitia.
Vt igitur monere and moneri, proprium est uerae amicitiae, and alterum libere
facere, non aspere: alterum pacienter accipere non repugnanter, sic habendu^
est nullam in amicitus pestem esse maiorem, quam adulatione^, blanditias,
assentationem, Like therefore as to give counsel, and to be counseled,
proprely belongs to very frendeshyp, also the tone to do every thing
frankely, the the other to take all thing pacientely, not displeasantly: So it is
to be considered, that in frendshyp there is no more pestilence, than
flatterye, fair words, and consenting to all things. Repugnantia,
repugna^cy, where one thing agrees not with an another. Repungo, gere, to
prycke again, or mutually displease or offend. Repulsa, a putting back of
him, which either demands or looks for authority or office. Repulsor,
oris, he that puts an another man back. Repulsus, he that is put back.
Reputo, tare, to think often, to consider much, to reuolue in the mind, to
count* Also to cut of eftesoones. Requies, rest. Requiesco, scere, to rest or
take rest. Requietus, ta, tum, that which rests. Requiro, requisiui,
requirere, to seek eftesones or often, to require. Res, occasion. Ere nata
melius fieri haud potuit, quam factum est, Terent. in Adelph.
Of the occasion begone it could not better have been done, than it is. Also it
sygnifieth mean. I am repperi rem, quo pacto nec fur, nec sotius sies: Plautus
in Ruden.
I have now found the mean, how thou shall be neither a thief, nor a
companion with him. Rem facere, to gain or win. Nunquam rem facies: abi,
nescis ine^care homines, Terent. in Adelph.
Thou shalt never gain penye: Get the hense, thou cannest no skylle to
angle men. Rem habere cum aliquo, to have to do with one, to meddell with
one. Ter. in Eu.
Res gerere, to have or make wars. Scipione Aemiliano res in Africa gerente,
Polybius annalium conditor, Plinius. lib. 5.
ab eo accepta class scrutandi orbis illius gratia circunuectus est: Scipion
Emilianus making wars in Affrike, Polybius the wrytar of Histories, with a
certain number of ships, was conuayed about that cost, to inserche that
part of the world. Plautus in Epidico.
Re iuuare, to help with deeds and not with words only. Is amicus, qui in
re dubia re iuuat, vbi re est opus, He is a friend, which in a case that is
doubteful, helps me with his deeds, where deeds are required. Quid isti
credam? Terent. in Eunucho.
res ipsa indicat: what shall I trust him? the deed self declares. Verba ad
rem confer, to do as he says. Vsque adeo ego illius far possum ineptias,
Terent. in Eunucho.
and magnifica verba, verba dum sint, veru^ enim, si ad rem conferentur,
vapulabit: Hitherto I can suffer his lewdenesse, and bragges, as long as they
are but words: but if he do as he says, he shall smart therefore. Re vera, in
deed, in very truth, matter in deed. Resalutatio, a courtayse speaking to
him that speaks to you, a resalutinge. Resaluto, salutare, to salute him that
saluteth you. Resarcio, si, cire, to amend, to refourme. Resarrio, iui, ire,
to weed eftsoon corn. Res, a thing, the thing, the matter: sometime
astate, condition, business, contention, cause, richesse or substance,
profit, weal, experience. Res est, it is matter in deed. Res ad manticam
redijt, it is all come to a bag and a staff, or a staff and a walet. Res
comperendinata, a matter adiourned or deferred until the third day. Res
iudicata, the matter or cause finally determined and adiuged. Res controuersa,
the matter in suit. Res forensis, a matter in law. Respublica, a public weal.
Rescindo, scidi, scindere, to cut or break in sunder, Vergil. ^eor. ^i. 1.
to take away, to destroy, to make void or repel an act or law, to break
up. Coelum rescindere fratres, Ter sunt conati: Thries the brethern assayed to
break up heaven, for to enter. Rescio, sciui, scire, to know a thing, which is
hid and kept secret: also to know a thing after that it is done, which
was not known before. Rescisco, scere, idem quod Rescio. Rescribo, psi, bear,
to write again, to redelyuer, to repay money. Reseco, are, to cut away that
which is superfluouse. Resecare ad vinum, to pare to the quick, to touch the
quick in a matter. Resecro, crare, to pray or desire eftsoon: also to assoyle
one of his auowe. Resegmen, the paringe of a man's nails. Resero, are, to open
a thing that is closed. Resero, tere, to sow or set again. Reseruatio, a
reservation, a keeping of some thing. Reseruo, uare, to keep a part from other
things, to reserve. Reses, idis, ydell from accustumed labor or occupacion.
Resex, secis, Col. lib. 3
that which is cut and springs again, and bears more fruit than it did
before. Resideo, resedi, residere, to rest, to sytte, to stand fast. Resido,
sedi, sidere, to sit down, also to abide. Plinius in Episto.
Nam Viennensium vitia inter ipsos residunt, nostra late vagantur, For the
faults of men of Vienne, do abide with them, ours run abroad, and be
every where known. Residet in vultu, there does rest or appiere in the
vysage. Cic. de (...)
Quorum non in sententia solum, sed etiam in nutu residebat autoritas, In whose
sentence not only, but also countenance, authority rested. Residuus, a, um,
the rest or remnaunt. Resigno, are, to open that which is sealed: sometime to
seal fast, also to shyt, sometime to restore again, also to resign or
surrendre. Resignatum aes, wages stopped for negligent service in wars.
Resilio, lij, iire, to lepe back, or step away quickly. Resimus, he that
has a camoysenose, that is to say, turned upward. Resina, rosyn, all like
gum which runs out of trees. Resinatus, sinata, tum, rased, or dressed
with rosyn. Resipio, pui, pere, idem quod Resipisco. Resipisco, resipui,
resipiscere, to return to perfect understanding, to be eftsoon wise, where
before he erred. Resisto, restiti, resistere, to resyste or withstand.
Resoluo, uere, to resolve, to destroy, to pay dettes, to remove, to undo or
vnlowse. Resolutio neruorum, the palsy. Resono, nare, to sown again, to make
an Echo. Resorbeo, bui, and psi, bear, to pour out or disgorge the licour
that was received. Respecto, are, to see often, to love, to help. Respectus,
tus, a look: also, respect or regard. Neque eo respectu commorus discesserat:
Plini.
Having no regard thereunto he departed. Respergo, si, gere, to cast water or
other licour about, to sprynkle. Respergimen, a sprynklynge or casting about
of licour. ^^r. in An.
Respicere, to help or socour. Age, me in tuis secundis rebus respice: Let se,
now in thy prosperity, socoure me. Respicit nos deus, god has pytie on us.
Tacemodo, Plautus in ^^cch.
deus respiciet nos aliquis, peace now, some god will have pity on us.
Respicere se, to take heed or have regard of him self. Plautus in ^^udo^o.
Non soles respicere te, cum dicas unjust alteri? Art thou not wont to take heed of thy self, when thou say wrong of another man? Terent. in ^^caut.
Non tu te cohibes? non te respicis? non tibi exempli satis sum? Will thou not
beware? will thou not take heed of thy self? am not I a good example unto the?
Respicio, exi, spicere, to look back, to have regard, to provide, to remedy,
to keep, to reserve, to love. Cice. Aul. ^orquato.
Respiro, are, to take brethe, also to take comfort, to return to the first
state. Si armis aut condition positis, aut fatigarione abiectis, aut victoria
detractis, ciuitas respirauerit: and dignitate tua tibi, and fortuna vti
licebit: If that harneyse, either by conditions of peace being laid away, or
by werynesse of both parts being thrown away, or pulled away by victory,
the city shall recover her first estimation, thou than shall enjoy thy
possessions and dignity. Resplendeo, dear, to shine. Respondeo, di, dear, to
answer, to appiere when one is called, to agree, to consent or be like or
equal, to be against, as one thing set or lyenge against another. Responsio,
an answer. Responsito, tare, to make or give answer: it pertayned proprely
to lawiars: and them which had the interpretation of ceremonies. Cice^ pro
C^^en.
Responso are, to answer. Responsum, an answer. Responsus, sus, sui, where
one thing does agree with another, a consent, a conueniencye. Respuo, ere, to
refuse, or reject. Restagno, restagnare, to contain or hold water. Restat,
Restare, to be or remain of that thing, that is left, to stand back, to
resyste. Hoc me restat, that remains or abides for me. Restauro, Restaurare,
to restore, or make again. Restibilis, that which is renewed, or sown again.
Restibilis ager, a feelde which is sown two years together. Restinguo, xi,
guere, to stint or put out, or cesse, as fire, light, and thurst. Restio,
onis, a roper: alsoo he that hangs him self. Restipulatio, a putting in of
pledges, Plautus.
put in gage or pledge, for to make answer to an action. Restipulor, aris,
ari, to make answer in the law. Restite, to be ready to be sown, ploughed,
or dygged. Restis, a halter or cord, a rope or bunche of of garlyke or onyons.
Restem ducere, when maidens and children daunse together hand in hand, or
with napkens, leadynge one another. Ad reftim res redijt, the matter is in
despair, or desperate. Restiro, tare, to abide or tarry. Restituo, ere, to
restore, to yield again. Restitutio, restitution. Resto, tare, to remain, to
tarry. Hic nunc me credit aliquam sibi fallaciam portare, Ter. in An.
and ea me hic restitisse gratia: He weeneth, that I warke him some falshede,
and that I tarry still therefore. Cicero de finibus.
Nullam querentes voluptatem Stoici restant. The Stoike Philosophers do resist
or stick to their opynion, sekinge for no pleasure. Restat mihi, it taryeth
for merit shall happen unto me. Restricte and Restrictim, straytely, or strayte.
Restringo, xi, stringere, to bind or strain backwarde, to bind again, to
restrain: sometime it signifies to lowse. Apulci. Iumentum restrinxit,
abireque stabulo liberum sinit: he lowsed his horse, and let him out of the
stable at liberty. Resulto, tare, to lepe against a thing, to rebounde, to
rebelle, to leap or step back. Resumo, psi, sumere, to take again, to
resume. Resuo, ere, to sow again, or make a double styche: also to ryppe or
undo that which is sown, to vnstytche. Suct. in an.
Sumenti virile^ togam, tunica laticlaui resuta ex vtraque part, ad pedes
decidit: When he came first to man's age, his Senators cote being rypte on
both sides, fell down to his feet. Resupinus, na, number, vpryght, the belly
upward. Resurgo, rexi, gere, to arise up. Resurrectio, resurrection.
Resupino, nare, to turn upward, or upright, to revoke or call back, to
differ, to peruerte. Retae, trees growyng on the banks of ryuers, or in the
ryuers. Retardatio, a taryenge. Retardo, dare, to make to tarry. Rete, it is, a
net. Retego, Retexi, tegere, to discover or disclose. Retento, entare, to
retain often, to tempte eftsoon. Retexo, ere, to vntwyste or untwine, or
vnwynde: sometime to twist or wind eftsoon, to dissolve. Retia culum, a little
net. Retiarius, he that casts a net, proprely in syghtynge to apprehende
his aduersarye. Retia, nets, sometime it signifies one net. Reticeo, cui,
ticere, to hold ones peace, to speak no word, to keep secret, to say
nothing. Reticentia, silence, when one holds his peace. Reticula, a little
net, wherein a man's hear or women's is trussed. Reticulatus, Reticulata,
culatum, made like a net. Reticulum, a cawle or coyfe: also a bag, wherein
meat is carried. Retinaculum, what so ever holds any other thing, a stay.
Retinere, to hold up, that a man fall not. Ab retine me obsecro. Terent in
Heauton,
B. obsecro quid tibi est^ An. Disperij. B. perij misera, quid stupes
Antiphila? Oh hold me up I pray the. B. alak what ayleth the? A. I am
undone. B. alas that ever I was borne, why does thy heart fail the Antiphila?
Retineo, nui, nere, to hold again, to retain, to keep in remembrance.
Terent. in Adelph.
Retinere, to restrain or let one from doing that, that he would. Pudore and
liberalitate liberos retinere satius esse credo, quam metu: I think it better
to restrain children from their wanton wills, by shame and liberality, than
with fear. Retinens, he that keeps still. Retiolum, a Cawle, or coyfe.
Retondeo, dear, to klyppe all over. Retorqueo, torsi, quere, to cast
backewarde, to throw or shute again. Retorresco, retorrescere, to be burnedde
with the sun. Retorridus, da, dum, burned or seryd. Retracto, ctare, to call
back, or revoke a thing that is done, to draw back, to excuse, to lay to
another man, to draw up. Retrahe, traxi, trahere, to pull or draw back, or to
draw to. Retribuo, buere, to recompense. Retrica, old writars called the
water, wherewith gardens are watered. Retrime^tum, the dragges of a thing:
sometime ordure or dung. Retro, behind. Retrocedo, cessi, cedere, to go back.
Retrorsum, bacwarde. Retrorsus, a, um, turned backewarde. Retrudo, si, dear, to
put back. Retundo, dear, to make blunt or dull, that which is sharp: also to
beat often on a thing. Retusus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to sharp. Aliae
agrorum parts, Cic. de D^
quae acuta ingenia gignant, aliae quae retusa: Some parts of co^trayes there
be, which do bring forth sharp wits, some bring forth dull. Reualesco,
scere, to be recovered from sickness. Reueho, uexi, here, to bring or carry
back, or again. Reuelatio, a revelling or a disclosynge of a thing. Reuello,
reuellere, to pluck back, to pull again. Reuelo, are, to discover. Reuenio,
nire, to come again. Reuerendus, worthy reverence. Reuerens, rentior,
rentissimus, he that does reverence. Reuerenter, reverently. Reuerentia,
reverence or honor done to one. Reuereor, retis, reri, to have in reverence.
Reuersio, a return. Budeus.
Reuertor, teris, ti, to return. Reuerto, idem. Reuincio, uinxi, uincere,
Verg^l. Gell.
to bind back or behind, as to bind ones hands behind him. Reuincere
paratus est, which the lawyars do say, Paratus est verificare, He is ready to
auerr^. Reuiso, sere, to return to see. Reuiuisco, scere, to be reuyued.
Reuoco, uocare, to call back, to revoke, to bring again, to draw back, to
raise from death. Reuocare pedem, to turn back, to recule. Reuocare, to
restore or renew. Item circa omnium ordinum statum domi, forisque, aut
correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam noua instituit: Moreover concerning
the state of al degrees, as well within his house as without, either he did
amend them, or renewed those things that were out of use, or else ordained
new. Reuocatio, a reuocation or calling back. ^^deus.
Reuocare restes, to reherce the deposicions of witnesses, Publication. Reuolo,
are, to flee back. Reuoluo, ui, uere, to turn up and down, to reuolue, to
turn back, to remove. Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be turned back, to be
removed. Reuolutio, a tournynge back to the first place or point: a
reuolucion or tournynge of celestial bodies or spheres. Reuorto, tere, old
wrytars used for Reuertor, to return. Reus, he that is sued or accused,
sometime he that is gyltye. Reus facti, gylty of an offense. Reus agitur, he is
sued or accused. Reus peragitur, he that is condemned. Reus stipulando, he that
bargayneth. Reus uoti, he that has auowed. Reum subdere, to accuse one of great
offense Rex regis, a king. Rex sacrificulus, was a chief minister of
sacrifices among the Romans only.
R, ANTE H.
RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouse root, medicinable to pourge coler. also to
corroborate the stomach and liver. Rachinon, a spyder, having a little black
heed, and is somewhat white, and has short feet, whose bytynge is as venymous
as the styngynge of a Scorpion. Rhadamanthus, was king of Licia, which was a
strayghte executour of justice: and therefore was supposed of the Paynyms to be
afterward one of the iuges in hell. Rhagades, and Rhagadiae, certain kleftes
or as it were Scrachis about the siege or fundament. Pli. li. 24. cap. 14.
Rhamnus, a kind of brembles, which is white, and bears more fruit than
other do, and also has flowers, and sends forth branches with straight
pricks, not crooked as other are, and has broad leaves. Rhamnusia, was called
goddess of vengeance. Rhamnusius, a man of a town called Rhamnus, by Athenes.
Rhampsinithus, the propre name of a king of Egypt. Rhaphanus, an herb called
Radysshe. Rhebanus, a river in the mouth of Bosphorus, a countraye in Thracia.
Rhea, was called the mother of gods, called also Cibele. Rhea Syluia, the
mother of Romulus and Rhemus. Rheda, a chariot. Rhedarius, a chariotman.
Rhegiam, a city on the bordure of Italy toward Sicile: also an other city
not far from Parma. Rheginus, a man of the city of Rhegium in Calabre.
Rhemi, people in France, called also Rhemenses. Rhenones, cotes made of the
skynnes of beasts. Rhenus, a noble river in Germania, called the Rheyne.
Rhenense vinum, Rheynisshe wine. Rhenenses, people dwelling on the river of
Rheyne. Rheon, Reubarbe. Rhesus, king of Thracia, which came to the aid of
the Troianes, and was slain of Diomedes: of whom a river about Troy was
called Rhesus. Rheti, a people in Italy. Rhetia, a countraye in Germany, which
some men do suppose to be Bauaria, or Beuer, called in Duche, Berue. Rhetor,
oris, he that teaches Rhetorike. Rhetorica, Rhetorike, or the craft of
eloquence. Rhetoricor, cari, to speak Rhetorike. Rhetorice, like a
Rhetorician. Rhetus, a gyaunt, whom Dionyse, being turned into a lion,
slew. Rhetoricus, an orator, or a man cunnyng in the craft of eloquence.
Rhetorisso, are, to speak in the form of Rhetorike. Rheuma, a rewme or
distillation of humors. Rheumatismus, the disease of rheum. Rhibis, a bremble
called Raspys. Rhinoceron, ontis, a best that has an horn in his nose, which
naturally is enemy to the Olyphant: it is also an oil vessel, out of the
which oil is dropped. Rhinocerotis nasum habere, is said of them that he
witty. Iuuenesque, senesque, Et pueri na sum, Rhinocerotis habent, Young men,
Horatius.
old men, And children, and all be witty. Rhodanus, a river in France, called
the Rone. Rhodia, a kind of vynes. Rhodites, a certain precyouse stone, of
the color of a rose. Rhodope, a mountain in Thracia. Rhodos, an I Will called
Rodes. Rhodius, of the Rodes. Plini.
Rhododaphne, and Rhododendros, a tree, having leaves like to an almonde tree,
but greatter and fatter seeds, open like a horn, which has in them wulle like
purple silk, a long root, salt in taste, it grows in watery places.
Rhodonia, a gardyn of roses. Rhodophone, that part of Syria, that goes over
the mountain of Taurus. Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaining to the mountain, of
Rhodope. Rhombus, a figure four square, having the sides equal, the corners
crooked. it is also a fysh called a Birt: also a spynnynge wheel or turn.
Rhoeas, when the corners of the eyes are open, so that there do still from
them continual dropes. Rhomphea, a sword. Rhoetus, a mountain of Troy,
where ^ax Thelamonius was buried. Rhoeton, wine made of pomegranettes.
Rhopalon, a water lyly, called communely Nenuphar. Rhoxia, a countraye by
Polonia. Rhoxalani, people on the north part, of the river of Danubius, or
Danowe. Rhureni, a people in France called Rhodes. Rhymnus, a river.
Rhyndacus, a river, which runs in to the sea called Pontus. Rhyparographus,
a paynter of tryfles, a Stayner. Rhytion, a vessel like to a moon. Rhythmus,
number or at meny in speakinge.
R, ANTE I.
RIca, a garment of purple, hemmed or purfled. also a kerchief, which women do
wear. Ricinus, and Ricinum, every garment that is four square. also it is a
kind of Cucumbres. also an herb like a fygge tree, but less, having leaves
like to a plane tree. Ricinium, and Ricinum, a cloak, whereof part was cast
over a man's sholder. Ricula, a handekerchief. Rictus, and Rictum, a grynnynge
or scorneful opening of the mouth: also the form of the vysage, when a man
grenneth, or a dog brawleth. Rideo, risi, ridere, to laughe: also to skorne
or mock. Ridibundus, da, dum, that lawgheth much. Ridica, a proppe, wherewith
a vine, or other like thing is holden up. Ridiculate, a thing to laughe at.
Ridiculum, idem. also a mock. Ridiculus, a man whom men do mock or lawghe
at. Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod Ridiculum. Ridicule, folyshly. Ridiculosus,
a, um, idem quod Ridiculus. Ridiculose, folyshly to be lawghed at. Rigeo, gui,
gere, to be fervently cold, alsoo to be hard or styffe. Rigesco, scere, idem
quod Rigeo. Rigide, styffely, sharply, cruelly. Rigidus, da, dum, cold,
hard, styffe, sharp or cruel. Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a garden
or field. Rigor, Rigoris, cold, hardenesse, styfenesse. Riguus, a, um, that
may be easyly weate or watered. Rima, a chynke, or kleft in wood or stone,
where it is not close joined. Rimula, a little chynke or cleft. Rimas agere, to
be clouyn or chynked, as timber or bourdes are with lyenge in the wind. Rima^
inuenire, to find an excuse, Plautus in Cur. and in Casina.
or mean to escape. Rimor, aris, ari, to search diligently, also to kleue as
timber does. Rimosus, a, um, full of kleftes or chynkes. Ringo, xi, gere, to
grynne or show the teeth, as a dog does when he will bark or byte. also to
be angry, to brawle, to bark. Ripa, a water bank. Riparia, a bird which
breeds in water banks. Ripae, seu Ripei, mountains in Archadia. Riphaei,
mountains in Scythia. Riscus, a cofer covered with lether: also a little
wyndowe. Risibilis, le, that which can lawghe. Risus, laughter. Risus
sardonius, a lawghter without mirth, as of them that be mad or cruel, such
as Irish men use when they be angry. Rite, dyrectely, truly, even as it should
be. Rituales, books, wherein the form of ceremonies, and old manners and
customs are written. Ritus, tus, an approved custom. Riuales, they which
equally do love one womanne, or be woars together. also they, whose lands be
divided by a river or brook: also they which dwell upon ryuers. Riualitas,
tatis, envy or obseruaunce betwixt the lovers of one woman. Plautus in Asinar.
Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis. Riuus, a river or broke. Riuulus, a
little broke. Riuo, are, is to go to watryng, as bestis do. Rixa, a braulynge
contention. Rixose, brawling. No. Mar.
Rixosus, a stryuer or brawler. Rixor, aris, ari, and rixo, to contend with
brawling.
R, ANTE O.
RObigalia, the Ceremonies pertaining to Robigus, the preseruatour of corn.
Robiginosus, a, um, much blasted. Robigo, was honored of the Romans for a
goddess, whom they supposed might preserve their corn from blastinge. it is
also that vice in corn called blasting. Robigus, whom the old Romans named
the god, that preserved corn from blastynge. Roboraria, places, which ar
paled about. Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken timber. Roboro, are, to fortify.
Roboses, the old writers used for robore, an oak. Robur, roboris, hard oak. It
is also strength and hardenes of the body. sommetyme the strength or hardness of
any thing generally Robus, old writers called read of color. Also al manner
of matter, which had many read veins, was called Robus. It is also a kind of
wheat, that yeldeth fair meal, which we now called red wheat. Robustus,
ta, tum, strong and hard. Rodo, si, dear, to gnawe as a mouse or other like
beast does. sometime to detracte or backbyte. Festus
Rodus, da, dum, a thing imperfect or rude, vnpolyshed, unwrought. Rogamen,
minis, a desire. Rogatarii, Notaryes, which required the parties, that each of
them should promise. Plautus.
Rogator, rogatoris, a beggar from door to door. Rogito, tare, to entreat
or demand, to inquyre often, to ask for a thing. Rogo, are, to require, to
pray, to inquyre, to ask of one, to inacte. Rogare populum, to treat with the
people. Quint Ilia.
Rogare sacramento, to swear oone, or to give to him an oath. Rogatio. was
among the Romans, when the Tribunes, which were the heed officers of the
people, were content that any act should pass, which was made by the
senate, or by the same Tribunes devised. Rogus, a great fire, wherein deed
bodies were bourned. Roma, the city of Rome. Romanensis, he that comes from
an another country, and dwells at Rome. Romania, is a country called
Thracia. Romanus, a Romayne. Romanus, na, number, of Rome. Romandui, Normandes.
Romula, a tree, under the which Romulus and Remus were found. Romuleus, a,
um, and Romulidus, da, dum, of Romulus. Romulus, the first king of Romans.
Ronchisso, are, to route or short. Ronchus, a routynge. sometime a scorn.
Ronchisonus, he that routeth or snorteth. Rorarii milites, men in the
vauntgarde, or a forward of a battle. Roratio, is a disease in vynes, by the
occasyon whereof the chief grapes do fall away. Roresco, scere, to be washed
with dew. Rorifacio, cere, to spryncle. Rores, dewes. Roro, are, to dew, or
drop down like dew. Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dew. Ros, roris, dew.
Rosa, a Rose. Rosaceus, a, um, of roses. Aqua Rosacea, Rosewater. Rosalia,
garlandes of Roses. Rosarium, a gardeyn or bed of Roses. Rosetum, a gardeyne
of Roses. Roseus, a, um, of a rose. Rosidus, da, dum, werte with dew.
Rosmarinum, Rosemary, or a lyttel snoute. Rostellum, a little beak or bylle
of a byrd. Rostra, rorum, rostris, was a place in Rome before the court callid
Hostilia, wherein was a pulpite, in which the orators of Rome were wont to
stand, when they preched to the people, or declared any matter, of the which
proceeded this word Pro rostris, in the pulpit, or at the bar. Rostrum, a
beak of a bird, a snowte of a beast or fyshe, also the stem of a ship or
boot. Rota, a wheel. Roto, tare, to turn a thing like a whele. Rotula, a
little whele. Rotella, idem. Rotunde, roundly, aptely, elegantly, handsomely,
proprely in words. Rotundus, tunda, dum, round, sommetyme well compacte or
facioned. Ore rotundo loqui, to express much in few words.
R, ANTE V.
RVbefacio, cere, to make read. Rubefio, fieri, to be made read. Rubellae,
read grapes. Rubellum vinum, clarette wine. Rubeo, bear, to be read. Ruber,
bra, brum, read. Rubesco, scere, to be read. Rubeta, a tode. Rubetum, a
busshy close. Rubeus, ea, eum, read. Rubens, idem. Rubi, borum, a town in
Campania. Rubia, mader, wherewith clothe is dyed. Rubicon, conis, a river in
Italye, which dyuideth Italy from Lombardy. Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy.
Rubidus, da, dum, a swarte read. Alsoo rowghe or course, as bredde, having
much branne. Rubigino, are, to ruste. Rubiginosus, a, um, rustye. Rubigo,
ginis, ruste. Rubor, oris, redness. Rubrica, red chalk, or ruddell, wherewith
sheep are marked. Rubricera, rosette color. Rubrus, a, um, read. Rubricatus,
ta, tum, colored with read, or ruddelyd, as sheep are. Rubus, a bremble.
Ructo, are, to belke or break wind up ward. Ructito, tare, to break wind
often. Ructuatio, idem quod ructus. Ructus, belkyng or breking wynd upward.
Rude donari, to be discharged of attenda^ce proprely in wars. Rude^ accipere,
has the same signification. Rudens, it is, a cabell of a ship. Ruderarium, a
rangynge syeue. Rudero, rare, to lay on old stoones and rubbell. Rudero, are,
to daube or lay on mortar. Ruderatus, ta, tum, where much rubbyshe lies.
Rudetum, a place, where lies much rubbyshe or rubbell. Also land, which
has lyen^ley, and is newly put in tylthe. Rudiarij, they which are dyscharged
of fighting with swords, as they which were calledde Gladiatores, that
openly faught, one with an other, to animate the Romans, with shedyng of
their blood. They be also bodgers or ame^ders of old garments, also seuiars,
or makers of sieues. Rudicula, a pot stycke. Rudiae, arum, a city in the
further part of Italy, ioynynge to Apulia. Rudimentum, the first teching of
children. Rudio, dire, to teache one, which is vnlernid. Rudis, a rod or
yerde, which was given to sword players, when they came to.lx. years old, in
token that they were set at liberty. sometime liberty from labor. Rudis,
de, rude, imperfect, new, unwrought Rudus, ruderis, shardes or pieces of stones
broken and scattered, rubbell or rubbyshe of old houses. Ruditas, rudenes,
lack of lernyng or wit. Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye like an ass. It is
sometime spoken of a man. sometime of a woman. Rufeo, and rufesco, scere, to be
sommewhat read. Rufo, fare, to make read. Rufuli, certain Captains made by
the consul, who afterward were called Rutuli. Rufus, a, um, somewhat read.
Ruga, a wrynkle, or playte. Rugio, giui, gire, to rore. Rugo, gare, to be
playted or wrynkled. Rugo, xi, gere, to belke. Ruina, ruin, extreme decay.
Ruinosus, a, um, ruinous, in decay. Rulla, the staff, wherewith the ploughman
cleanses his culter. Ruma, was of the old writers callydde a teate, also it is
the throat bolle. Rumen, the dewlappe of a beast. alsoo a place in the belly, a
panche. Rumentum, a brastynge out, an aposteme that brasteth out of the
flesh. Ruma, a goddess, whom the paynyms did suppose to be beneficial to
women's breasts, and to suckynge chylderne. Rumigare, to chewe the cudde.
Rumigero, rare, to carry tidings. Ruminatio, a chewynge of the cudde, as a
beast does. Ruminalis ficus, a fig tree, under the which it is supposed
that a wolf gave suck to Romulus and Remus. Rumino, minare, and Ruminor, ari,
to chewe the cudde. Also to call eftesones to remembrance. Rumex, icis, wild
sorell. also a weapon like to a spear. Rumifero, are, and rumigero, rare, to
bear or bring tidings. Rumis, a teate. Rumito, to bear tidings.
Rumigerulus, a teller of tidings. Rumo, are, to give the teate to a child.
Rumor, rumoris, tidings, a rumoure, a bruyte. Rumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break,
to make werye, Rumpere moras, to make haste. Rumpotinus, a busshe, which
grows in France, of whom Columella writes, that no corn should be sown
within twentye foot thereof. Rumpotinetum, the place where such bushes do
grow. Rumusculus, a little rumor or brute. Rumula, a little teate. Runa, a
weapon, sommetyme used in France. Runca, a saw, wherewith timber is sawen.
Runcatio, weedynge. Runcina, a whypsawe, wherewith timber is sawen, it is also a
bushesythe, or bylle, to cut busshes. Runcino, are, to saw timber. Runco,
care, to wede or pull up. Runsor, oris, oone of the names of Pluto, called god
of Hell. Vergil.
Ruere, is also to overthrow, to ru^ne forth heedlynge. Quo moriture ruis,
maioraque uiribus audes? Whyther runnest thou hedlynge to be slain, and
attemptest things above thy puissannces Also to lift up. Et ruit atram, ad
coelu^ picea crassus caligine nubem, Ver. geor.
And being thycke, it lyfted up to heaven a cloud, as black as pytche.
sometime it sygnyfieth to make a great noise. Ruit arduus aethey, The high
firmamente rumbled, or made a great noise. Ruo, rui, ruere, to fall, to pour
out, to be deceived, to subuerte, to make plain, to pluck up, to break a
sonder, to throw down. Rupes, be hills, banks, or rocks: so stepe down,
as no manne may clymme them. In leg.xii. tabularum
Rupicapra, a wild goote. Rupicias, for damnum dederis, thou shalt pay or
yield damages. Ruptus, rupta, ruptum, broken or braste, weryed, torn or rent.
Ruralis, le, rusticall, or of the vyllage. Rurestris, re, of the countreye, not
of the city or town. Ruricola, a husband man. Rurigena, borne in the
country, out of a city or great town. Ruro, rare, to do after the country
facion. Ruror, raris, rari, to dwell in the country, or out of the city.
Rursus, and Rursum, eftesones or bakwarde, on the other part. Rus, ruris, the
countreye, out of the City, where as housbandrye is used and exercysed.
Ruscum, a wande. Ruspor, ari, to search dilygently. It is proprely to shrape,
as an hen does, when she seeks for meat. Russus, and russeus, a, um,
read. Rustica, a bird like a partryche, but he has a longer byll.
Rusticanus, na, number, rustycall, of the country or vyllage. Rustice,
rustycally, vncourteysly, rudely. Rusticane, idem. Rusticarius, caria, carium,
pertaining to husbandrye. Rusticatim, for rustice, an Aduerbe, churlysshelye.
Rusticitas, tatis, carlysshenes, sommetyme fearfulness. Et si rusticitas non
vetat, Ouidius.
ipsa rogat, And if that foolyshe basshefulnesse let her not, she makethe
request. Rusticor, caris, cari, to dwell in the country, or exercise
husbandrye. Rusticus, ca, rusticum, rustycall, vplandyshe, homely, without
curteysye. Rusticus, is also the propre name of a man. Ruta, Rewe, callydde
alsoo herb Grace. It is among the lawyers all that is dygged out of the
ground, as stone, cole, leadde, and other mettalle. Ruta and caesa, All be it
Mutius does say, that in Rutis and caesis are those things, that be not fast
in the ground, nor are any part of the building or the covering of a house.
Perchance we might name them heir lomes. Rutabulum, a cool rake, to make
clean an oven. Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe. Pliniu^.
Rutatus, ta, tum, made of rewe. Rutatio, and rutus, for ructa^io, belkynge.
Rutellum, a little mattocke. Rutilo, lare, te shine. Ruto, tare, for ructo,
Fla^. Cicero.
to belke or break wind upward. Rutor, idem. Rutrum, a mattocke. Rutum, idem.
Rutuba, trouble. Id postea uiderimus, Varro.
nunc sumus in rutuba, We will afterward see, now be we in trouble.
Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes. Rutulus, la, lum, a brighte red like to coals that be kyndled. Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or elbowe of
land in England, lyenge into the sea, which I suppose is in Norfolk.
SABA, a city in Ethiope. Sabaei, people in Araby. Sabbatarius, he that keeps
the sabbath day. Sabbatu^, the day of rest from labor. Sabbath, in the
plurelle number, in the hebrewe tunge, signifies of hosts, or armies, or
powers. Sabath, a propre name, whereof comes Sabatheni, the name of a people.
Sabbatismus, a vacation after labors. Sabbatizare, to keep sabbat day. Sabe,
in the tunge of Siria, is the month of February. Sabelli, people, which dwell
in the mountains between the Sabines and Marsi, in Italye. Sabim, among the
Arrabiane does signifye god. Sabina, a weapon like a bore spear. Sabini,
people in Italy. Sabiusa, a gate at Rome, out of the which men went to the
Sabines. Sabora, a city of Araby. Sabucus, an elder tree. Sabuletum, a gravel
pytte. Sabulum, greatte gravel. Sabulosus, a, um, grauelly. Saburra, lastage,
or balese, wherewith ships are even poysed, to go vpryght, which is commonly
of gravel. Sabur^i, a ^ynde of sacrifice. Saburro, rare, to balese a ship.
Sacal, a kind of ambre found in Egypt. Saccarius, he that bears a sack.
Saccarum, sugar. Saccellare, to apparelle or amend wynes put into sackes.
Sacciperium, a powche. Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thing with. a napkyn, also
a territory. Sacculus, and saccellus, a little sack. Sacer mons, an hylle by
Rome, an other by Galatia, wherein gold is found. Sacerdoralis, le,
pertaining to a priest. Sacon, among the Indians, sygnifieth a bright purple
color. Sacondion, a precious, stoone of a bryghte purple color. Saccularius,
a crafty deceyuour, which in selling of grain out of sackes, will convey
away part. Saccus, a sack. Sacculus, a bag. Sacellum, a chapelle. Sacer,
cra, crum, holy: sommetyme cursed, detestable. Sacer ignis, a sycknes, wherein
is vehement inflammation and burning of the body. Sacer locus, a place
consecrate or dedicate. Sacer morbus, the falling syckenesse. Sacerdos, dotis,
a priest. Sacerdotium, priesthode. sometime a benefyce or spiritual
promotion. Sacra uia, a street in Rome, where peace was made between Romulus
and Tacius, and through the which the vanquyshers passed with their triu^ph
unto the capitol. Sacramenta, is taken for men of war. Iuuenall^
Sacramentum, an oath among us christen men, it signifies a sign, wherein is
contained a divine mystery, and is called a sacrament. Sacramento contendere,
to swear. Sacramento teneri, to be sworn. Sacrarium, a sextrie or vestrie,
wherein are kept things hallowed, and relykes. Sacratae leges, laws, in the
which it is enacted, that who so does offend against them, is accursed.
Sacratio, a consecration. Sacratius, more holy. Sacrator, he that does
consecrate. Sacrificium, sacrifyce. Sacrifico, care, to do sacrifice, to
consecrate to ask forgyuenes of god. Sacrificulus, a priest. Sacrilegium,
theft, or taking away of things hallowed, called Sacrilege. Sacrilegissimus, an
errant thief in stelynge of things hallowed. Sacrilegus, he that violently
takes away or steals things hallowed, or things unhallowed out of a holy
place. Sacrimum, must or new wine. Sacriscrinius, he that keeps the kings
letters or Records, concerning the Crown, or books of great affairs.
Sacrium, a kind of aumbre, which comes out of Scithia. Sacro, crare, to
dedicate or halowe. Sacrosanctus, ta, tum, consecrate or halowid with a solemn
oath taken. Sacrum, any thing dedicate to god. Also sacrifice. sometime a
temple or church. Paulus Iureconsultus. Sunt aurem sacrilegi, qui publica
sacra compilarint. Also sacra do signifye holy words. also charms. Sacrum
Promontorium, a great mountain or rock in the southwest part of Spain,
lyenge on the sea, called now, Capesainct Vincent. Sadducei, men of a special
seete among the Jews, that believed not of any resurrection, or that there be
any angels or spiritis. Saeculu^, is proprely the space of a hundred years: it
is commonly taken for a space of time, wherein one facion of the world has
continued. Saepe, oftentimes. Saepenumero, saepiuscule, saepicule, idem.
Saepius, more often. Saepissime, very often. Saeuio, uiui, ire, to be very
angrye, to do valyauntly, to be cruel, or exercise tyranny. Saeue, cruelly.
Saeuirer, rudely* Magis cogito, saeuiter, blanditer ue alloquar, I think more,
where I may speak to him rudely, or gentylly. Saeuitia, and saeuitudo,
cruelty. Saeuus, ua, um, cruelle, horrible. sometime angry, valyant, mighty.
Saga, a wise or subtle woman, also a witch. Sagaperium, a gum or rosyn, which
runs out of a kyxe or tree, called Ferula. Sagaris, a river. Sagaria, the
craft to make clokes to wear on harneyse. Sagarius, a seller of such clokes.
Sagatus, apparayled in a soldiers cloak. Sagax, acis, wyttye. Sagaces canes,
yernynge hounds. Sagacitas, wyttynesse or sharpenes of wit. Sagaciter,
wyttyly. Sagda, a grene stone, which the Caldees have made fast to their
hands. Sagena, a greatte net. Sagimen, and saginatio, nouryshynge.
Saginarius, a, um, that which is franked or made fat. Sagina, meat,
wherewith all thing is fatted. sometime superfluous fat. Saginarium, a place
wherein any thing is franked or made fat. Sagino, are, to make fat. Sagio,
ui, ire, to perceive quickly or sharply. Sagitta, an arow, also the top of a
twygge or rod. Sagittarius, an archer. It is also one of the xii. signs
among the sterres. Sagitto, tare, to shoot. Sagma, a pack saddell, or
sumpter saddell. also an heap. Sagmen, minis, grass, plucked up with the
earth, which in the old time the ambassadors of the Romans did, when they
denounced wars to other people. Sagum, a soldiers clooke. Sagulum, idem.
Saguntus, a city in Spayn, which for the constant fydelitie, kept to the
Romans, was distroyed by Hanniball. Saguntina fames, extreme famyne, a
proverb made of the famyne, which was in the city of Saguntus, when
Hanniball besyeged it. Sais, a city of Egypt, where is one of the entries
into the river of Nilus, the entry or port is called Saiticum. Sal, salis,
salt. sometime it is put for wisdom, mirth. Sales, quycke or sharp sentences,
iestynges. sometime it sygnifieth the sea. Sala, a river in Germanye. Salaces,
Vergilius.
water that ryseth out of a quycke spring. Salacia, was called goddess of
water. Salaconia, pride. Salacones, they which are proud. Salamandra, a
beast in figure like to a lysarde, full of spots, which being in the fire,
does extincte it, and is not burned. Salamin, Salamis, mina, an I Will by
Athenes. Salaminius, a, um, of that isle. Salamoniacus, a kind of salt found
under sand, which is like to alume, and is medicynable, in dissoluynge and
purging of fleume. Salanga, a very high hylle between great Brytayne and
Irelande, now callid our ladies hylle. Salapusius, may be callid a merry
jesting boy. It was a name given to Caluus an orator, which being of a childs
personage, used much jesting and tauntynge meryly. Salaria uia, an high way,
by the which salt was carried to Rome. Salarium, wages given to servants.
Salarius, a salter. Salarius, a, um, pertaynyng to salt. Salax, acis,
lecherouse. Salebrae, places which are not plain. Salebrosus, a, um,
vnplayne, where a man can not goo, except he do leap. Salentinum, a country
yt in Italy. Salentini, a people in Italye. Salgama, things condite or
conserved, as pears, figs, grapes, and other like. Sali, a kind of birds,
which be greatte breders: as partriches or hens, I suppose them to be
hethecockes. Saliares coena, a banquet or supper made by the priests of Mars.
Saliares uirgines, maidens, which were with the priests of Mars, and did
sacrifyce with the bishops, wearyng on them cote armures, and bysshoppes myters
on their heedes. Saliaris, re, pertaining to the pristis of Mars. Salicastrum,
a kind of wild vine, rounnynge upon wyllowe trees. Salicetum, and salictum, a
place where wyllowes grow. Salientes, the cocks or pipes of cundites, out of
the which water spouteth. Salignus, na, number, of wyllowe or wythy. Salii, the
priests of Mars. Salillum, a little salt seller. Salina, a place, where
salt is made. Salinae, narum, a city in Sicile. Salinator, the name of a
noble man of Rome. Salinacidus, and salnacidus, a, um, that which is salt in
taste. Salinum, a salt seller. Salio, iui, ire, to salt or powder. Salio,
iui, ij, ire, to leap. Salitura, powdrynge or saltynge. Salitus, ta, tum,
salted. Saliuo, are, to lay salve. Saliua, and saliuum, spettell. Saliunca, a
plant, having long leaves, somewhat yelowe, and a yelowe flower, and grows
short, and has many roots. It is taken for the Spikenarde, that grows in
France, and is commonly used. Salisi, people in the mountains of Alps,
confynes to the Swycers, and the people called Boii. Saliuarius, he that lays
salve. Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythye. Salmatis, a fountain in Caria.
Salmacia, a pray gotten without labor. Salmacidus, da, dum, that which
sauoureth of salt. Salmo, onis, a fyshe called Samond. Salmonius, the king of
Elides, which taking foolyshely upon him, to have divine honors done unto
him, and would seem to cast lyghtnynges, like unto Jupiter, being overthrown
with lyghtning, was cast into hell. Sal nitrum, salt peter, which is put
into gunne powder. Sallo, lere, to powder with salt. Salo, a river called also
Bibilis, wherewith iron is tempred, and made stronger. Solomon, and Solomon,
monis, is interpreted peasible, the name of a king of Jews, the son of
king David, who exceded all men in wisdom and knowledge, and never the less
was by dotage on women brought to ydolatrie. Salomonius, a, um, of Solomon.
Salon, a country of Bithinia, very commodious for the feeding of cattle.
Salone, a city in Liburnia between Dalmatiam and Illiriam. Salpa, a fyshe
which will not be sodden, except it be beaten, as stockefyshe is. Salpyga, a
kind of emotes or pysmeres. Salsamentatius, he that sells sauce.
Salsamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to sauce. Vas salsamentarium, a vesselle,
whereinto sauce is put. Salsamentum, sauce. Salsedo, saltenesse. Salsicortex,
a tree, that bears maste, which nothing will eat, except only swyne.
Salsilago, and salsugo, ginis, a salt lycour. Salsura, meresawce or bryne.
Salsus, a, um, salt in taste. Saltabundus, da, dum, that which leapeth or
daunseth. Saltatio, daunsynge. Saltator, and saltatrix, a daunser. Saltatorius,
a, um, pertaynyng to daunsyng. Ludus saltatorius, a scoole of daunsynge.
Saltatrix, and saltatricula, a daunsynge wench. Saltatus, tus, daunsynge.
Saltem, at the least way. Saltiae, people ioynynge to the sea called Pontus
Euxinus. Saltim, uel saltuatim, by leapes. Saltito, tare, to daunse, to leap
often. Salto, tare, to daunse. Saltuarius, a keeper of a wod, a wodwarde.
Saltuosus, a, um, full of woddes. Saltus, a thycke wodde, also a leap.
Saluator, toris, a savior, he that keeps or saves a thing from destruction
or loss. Saluber, bris, bre, wholesome, hole. Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a,
um, more wholesome, most wholesome. Salubriter, holsomely. Salubritas, health.
Salve, and Salueto, and saluete, god speed you. ye be welcome, sometime
contrary, farewell, God be with you. Salueo, ere, to be saufe, or speed well,
to be well at ease. Salve. S. satis est mihi tuae salutis, nihil moror non
salueo, God speed. S. Plautus i^ trucule^.
It suffyseth me that thou art in health: but in few words I am not well at
ease. Saluia, an herb called sauge. Saluiatu^, a drench for a horse or other
be. Saluifico, care, to make safe, or to save. Saluo, are, to save. Saluebis
a meo Cicerone, my son Cicero commends him unto you. Ci. ad A^
Salua res est, the matter gothe well. Salum, the sea. Salus, lutis, health.
Salutarius, the forefynger. Salutatio, a salutation. Salutator, toris, a
saluter. Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where men do stand and abide to
salute a prince or noble man in authority, called now a chamber of presence.
Salutem, in the old time was used for salte^. Salutem dicere, to salute or to
have recommendation to any man. Salutifer, ra, rum, wholesome. Salutaris, re,
wholesome. Salutaris digitus, the forefynger. Salutariter, in health. Salutiger,
he that brings recommendacions from another person. Saluto, tare, to salute,
as well at coming as at departinge: also to honor. Saluus, a, um, saulfe,
hole, sound, without damage or harm. ^^nius
Sam, for Eam, her. Samara, an hill in the east Ocea^ se, at the further end of
the mo^tayne called Caucasus. Samarobrinae, people in France, about Cambry.
Samaria, a countraye in Judea. Sambuca, an instrument of musyke, now called
doulcymers, an engyne of war, wherewith fortresses were assaulted. Sambucina,
a woman which plays on doulcymers. Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or Alder tree.
Sambucus, an Elder or alder tree. Sambucistria, idem quod Sambucina. Samia,
vessels made in the I Will of Samos. Samius, a, um, of the I Will of Samos: the
old wrytars did use it for sharp, and Samiare, to whette or make sharp.
Samites, people of Samnium a contraye in Italy called now Aprurium. ^o. Mar.
Plautus.
Samium, a shell. Samiolum, a little shell. Samos, the name of an I Will in the sea, called Icarium. Samothracia, an I Will by Thracia in Greece. Sampsuchus, and
Sampsuchum, an herb called Maioram. Sanates, people dwelling about Rome.
Sancio, xi, cire, to consecrate, to make firm. Sancire leges, is to constitute
laws. Festus
Sancus, one of the names of Hercules. Sancte, firmly. Sanctificatio,
halowynge. Sanctifico, care, to halowe. Sanctitas, holiness. Sanctitudo, idem.
Sanctio, a law, a thing decreed and stablysshed. Sanctus, ta, tum, holy,
inviolable by a law, pure and clean, uncorrupted. Vir sanctus, a blessed man.
Sanctimoniales, Nuns. Sanctimonium, the profession of religious persons.
Sanctimonia, and Sanctitas, holiness, perfection. Sanctuarium, a place
consecrate or hallowed. Sandalium, a slyppar. Sandala, a spice called saunders.
Sandaraca, a color found in mines of silver, or gold, yelow ocker.
Sandaliotis, an I Will called now Sardinia. Sandaracinus, color made with yelowe
Ocker. Sandastros, and Sandaphorion, and Sandarison, and Sandassites, a
preciouse stone, having in a bright color yelowe speckes, and is called also,
Garamandita. Sandyx, dicis, an herb of a delicate odor, having a short
stalk, in the residue like to fenell. it is also a color called a bright
yelowe. Sandicinus color, idem. Sane, an aduerbe, which signifies, ye, or
certaynely, on gods name. Bellum sane difficile gessit, he fought a very
daungerouse battle. Sane vt vis, be it as thou will. Sane quam vtile, suerly
very profitable. Gelli.
Sane quidem, ye hardely. Ter. in An.
Nempe ergo aperte uis, quae restant me loqui? D. Sane quidem. But will thou
than that I shall tell plainly all the rest? D. ye hardely. Sanesco, scere,
to be or wax hole. Sanga, a river in Portugal. Sangaris, a river of Galatia,
which runnynge through Phrygia, falls into Propontis, the sea. Sanguen,
guinis, and Sanguis, guinis, blood. alsoo a tree, the bark whereof is of the
color of blood. Sanguineus, a, um, full of blood. also cruel. sometime of
sanguyne or bloody color. Sanguinolentus, idem. Sanguiculum, the blood of a
kyd or swyne, wherewith pouddynges are made. Sanguino, are, to bleed.
Sanguinaria, and Sanguinalis, an herb that stops blood. Sanguinarius,
cruel, blody. Sanguinolentus, idem. Sanguis, guinis, blood. Sanguisuga, a
worm, which is in standinge waters, and does sowke the blood of men or
beasts that come in to it. it is alsoo called Hirudo. Sanies, matter, corrupted
blood. Sanna, a scorn or mock. Sannio, onis, a dysarde in a play or
disguysynge: also he which in countenance, gesture, and manners is a fool.
Sanitas, tatis, health. Saniter, like a hole man. Sannaus, a river in Asia.
Sano, are, to heal. Sansa, the stone of an olyue. Sansucus, Maioram.
Sansucinus, a, um, of Maioram. Sancae, the stones of Olyues. Sa^terna, souldre,
wherewith gold is soudred. Santones, people in France. Sanus, na, number, hole,
wholesome. Sanitas, tatis, health. Sapa, must or new wine sodden to the half
deal. Saperda, a dunge hylle. Sapide, sauourely. Sapidius, more sauourely.
Sapidus, da, dum, sauoury, well seasoned. Sapiens, it is, wise. Sapientia, the
kunnynge of things divine and humayne, wisdom. Sapio, sapui, sapere, to taste
or savor, to feel, to be wise, to have a right opinion. Plautus in P^eudo^o.
Plautus in Epidi^o.
Sapio rem, I know what I have to do. Sapiunt male, they be ill aduysed.
Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouse wise. Plautus in T^^n Plautus in
Persa.
Sapit plus, he has more wit. Sapit satis, he is wise enough. Sapis multum
ad geniu^, thou know how to make good chere. Sapor, ^ris, a savor, a
taste. Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of spots. Sapphirinus, na, number, of a
Sapphire. Sapphirus, a stone called a saphyre. Sappho, a woman poet. Sappinus,
the lower part of a fyrre tree, which is without knottes. Saprum, a drink,
made with salt and the fruit called Sorba, which helps men that have the
colyke. Sapros, vynewed. Sapsa, of old writers was used for ipsa. Sarcasmos, a
manner of jesting or scoffing bytyngely. Sarcimen, a seame. Sarcina, a trusse
or pack, or fardell. sometime it is taken for an unprofitable burden. Sarcinas
colligere, is proprely of men of war, when they remove or depart from
their camp. Plautus in Mostell.
Sarcinas, atis, for sarcina. Sarcinator, a taylour. Sarcinatrix, tricis, a
shepster, or seamester. Sarcinae, all stuff that is closed or shut up in
coffers. Sarcino, are, to lade. sometime to sow. Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make
hole again, to amend a thing decayed or appaired, to make amends. Sarcion,
a stone of carnacion color. Ser. Sulp.
Sarcito, pay the damages or costs. Sarcte, hole. Sarcophagus, a sepulcher.
Sarculo, are, to rake. Sarculum, a rake. Sarda, a red stone, wherein seals ar
graue^. Sardanapalus, a king of Assiria, monstruouse in all kinds of lechery,
and therefore was slain of one of his lords as he satte spynnynge among
harlottes. Sardinia, an Ild in the sea called Ligusticum, by Geane. Sardis, a
city in Lidia. Sardo, for intelligo, I understand. Sardoa, an herb like to
smallage, Neulu^.
which grows in Sardinia, whereof if a man eat, he shall grenne and make
countenance of laughing, and so dye. Sardonius risus, a grennynge or laughyng
without cause, a long laughter. Sardonychatus, having apparayle garnished
with the stone called Sardonix. Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx. Sardus, and
Sardinensis, and Sardous, a, um, of Sardinia. Sardonyx, onychis, a stone of the
color of a man's nail. Sarepta, a town in Siria, where Hely the prophet
was borne. Sargacae, people in the north part of the world, ioynynge to the
greatte mere of Meotis. Sargus, a fyshe being in the sea of Egypt. Sari, an
herb, growing in waters, having an hard root, and wounden, necessary for
smythes. Sarissa, a long spear. Saronicus, a bosom of the sea against
Isthmus. Sarmatia, all that great country, wherein is contained Russia,
Liuonia, and Tartaria. Sarmata, a man of that country. Sarmenta, twigges or
shroude of trees cut of. Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twigs or small
boughs. Sarnus, a river in Campania. Sarpa, a vine cut of, shradde.
Sarpedon, the king of Lisia, which came to the aid of the Troyanes against
the Greeks. Sarpo, pere, to cleanse or make clean. Sarra, an I Will called
sometime Tyrus: also the wife of Abraham. Sarra, a city in Epire. Sarranus,
na, number, of that city. Sarraballa, plurali numero, a word of Caldey,
signifienge breches. Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof the tone is in
Media, the the other in Felici Arrabia, or the rich Arrabie. Sarracum, a certain
carre, wherein wodde or stones be carried. Sarranae uestes, garments of purple.
Sarrastes, people in Campania. Sarrio, rire, to wede corn. Sarritor, and
sartor, toris, a weder of corn. Sarritura, and sartura, weedyng of corn.
Sarsina, an old city in Italy, where Plautus the writer of comedies was
borne. Sarta tecta, houses letten to certain persons to keep them always
repaired suffyciently, for a certain sum of money. Sarta tecta locare, to
set out houses at a price certain to be repaired. Ci. in Ver.
Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with reparations. Sartago, ginis, a
fryenge pan. Sarte, hole. Sarticum, an entry in to the river of Nilus.
Sartor, and sarritor, an harower or weder of corn. Sartum tectum habere, to
keep hoole and sound, or uncorrupted or hurt. Sartutillus, the bealye of a
swyne stuffed with meal. Sas, old writers used for suas. Saso, an isle five
miles from the city of Brundusium in the realm of Naples. Sason, a river.
Sat, for satis, enough. Quantum sat^est, asmoche as is sufficient. Sat habet,
it is sufficient. Sat scio, I know well enough. Satagitae, people in the
country now called Tartarie. Satago, gi, gere, to be dylygent, to do with
speed, to be busy about a thing. Satanas, is interpreted an adversary, by the
which name the devil was called, because that he was aduersarye to Christ.
Alsoo what so ever is contrary to peace, is called Satanas. Satarchae, people
in Scythia, which excluded from them the use of gold and silver. Satelles,
litis, one retained to guard a ma^s person. Also a catchepoll or baylyff, that
does attache men. Satellitium, a guard, the office of such a person or
offycer. Saterona, a beast, which does live some time in water, sometime on
land. Satias, sacietie, fulness or werynesse in much using of a thing,
sometime it signifies abundaunce. Hi, saltibus occupatis, externorum agros
inuasere, ^^^ustius.
frumentique ex inopia graui, satias facta, After that they had gotten the
woddes or forestes, they invaded the lands of them that were borderers, and
from scarsitie of corn, they happened to have their fylle or haboundaunce.
Satiabilis, le, that which may be easyly satisfied. Satietas, tatis, a
sacietie or fullness. Terentius.
Satin, for satisne, Satin sana es? Art thou not well at ease? Satin saluae?
Be all things well? Satio, tionis, the act of sowinge of corn. Satio, tiare,
to satiate or fylle, which has relation not only to the body and senses, but
also to the mind. Satis, enough, as much as does need. Satis acceptio, a
covenant, whereby a man is bounden, and sureties with him. Satisaccipere, to
take joint suertyes. Satisdatio, and satisdatum, dati, the suertie or bond,
whereby men are bounden for an another, for perfourmance of couenaunte, or the
couenantour and suerties with him. Satisdator, he that is bounden for
perfourmaunce of covenant Satisdo, dare, to put in sureties for perfourmance of
couenantes. also to be bounden with suerties for the performynge of
couenauntes. Satisfacio, cere, to satisfye. Satisfactio, satisfaction.
Satispraestatio, idem. Satis praesto, tare, idem quod satis dare, to find
surety. Satis, superque, enough and to much. Satius, the comparatiue degree
of satis, it sygnifyeth better. Satiuus, a, u^, that may be sown, or is sown.
Satnois, a river of Frigia. Sator, toris, he that sows corn. Satrapa, among
the Persians were as dukes and Earls be here. Satrapia, a province, Duchy, or
County. Satullo, are, idem quod saturare, to saciate or fill superfluousely.
Satur, turis, full fed, sometime abundant or plentuouse. Saturcia, an herb
called Sauery. Saturio, onis, he that has eaten enough, Plautus in Persa.
and to much. Saturitas, fertility, or plentuousnes. Alsoo abundance in
excess. Saturnalia, five days assigned to Saturn in December, wherein men
used to feast one an other, and to send mutual presents. Saturnalitium,
pertayninge to the ceremonies of Saturnus. Saturnia, was the name of a town.
Alsoo high places were called Saturnia. Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus.
Saturniniani, were heretics, which affyrmed, that only seven aungelles made
the world against the conscience of god the father. Saturninus, a mountain at
Rome, which was afterward called Tarpeius. Saturnus, one of the seven
planettes: alsoo a god of the paynyms. Saturo, are, to saturate or fyl with any
thing superfluousely, most commonly in eating. Saturum, and Satyrum, a city
of Calabria, not far from Tarentum. Satus, ta, tum, sown or begotten. Satus,
tus, the sowynge, also sede. Satyra, a matter or poesye made in the rebuke of
some astate or person. Florus.
Satyria, a crow. Satyricus, and satyrus, a maker of such mattiers.
Satyriacum, an image of Priapus. Satyriasis, a syckenes, whereby the membre of a
man stands always without appetite or dilectation. Satyrica, was a comedye,
wherein Satyrs were brought in. Satyrice, an aduerbe, which sygnyfyeth
sharply and with reproach. Satyrus, a beast having the heed of a man, and the
body of a got. Satyrion, an herb, having leaves like a lyllye, but smaller,
a knappe with many small purple flowers, and a root like the genytours of a
man. Saucio, are, to wound. Saucius, a, um, wounded, sometime werye. Savior,
aris, ari, to kiss swetely. Saura, a lysarde, which lies in hedges.
Saurites, a stoone, which is found in the bealye of a grene lysarde.
Sauromatae, people called also Sarmatae, Russes, Tartariens, Moscouites.
Saxatilis, le, stonye. Pisces saxatili, fysshes bredde among stones. Saxeus,
a, um, stonye, or of a stone. Saxlfragium, and Saxiphagos, an herb called
Saxiphrage. Saxonia, Saxony. Saxones, the people. Saxosus, a, u^, full of
great stones or rocks. Saxulum, a little rock. Saxum, a rock. sometime a
stone. Saxumferratum, a city in Italy. Saxum uoluere, to turn the stone. A
proverb applied to them that be fatygate or weryed with contynuall and
unprofitable labors.
S, ANTE C.
SCabellum, a footstool, or low settle. Scaber, bra, brum, rusty, rough,
sometime filthy. Scabies, scabiei, a scabbe. Scabiosus, a, um, scabbed. Scabo,
by, bear, to rub or scratche. Scabredo, dinis, a roughness of the skin, as
when it does wrynkle. Scabrae, roughely, not plain, or smothe. Scabrities,
and scabritia, rustynesse, filthiness, rowghnes. Scabro, onis, a worm, which is
engendered of the carrayne of a deed horse. Scaea, an haven at Troy. Scaei,
people in Thracia. Scaena, a place, which seruyth only for enterludes or
comedyes to be playde in, which was in the form of half a cerkle. It is
also where trees or busshes, are cut and laid over the heed, in such
form, a^ men may under them walk or sytte in the shadow. It is alsoo where
a vice or offense is openly detected, in such wise as me^ do cry out or wonder
at it. Scaenaticus, uel scaenatilis, for a player in comedies or enterludes.
Scaenicula, a diminutiue of scaena. Scaenicus, ca, cum, pertaining to
enterludes. Scaenicus, a player in enterludes. Scaenitae, people of Arabie,
which dwell always in tents, covered with the hears of gotes, among whom
if a swyne or hog be brought, it dies. Scaenoma, a tente, also a bag.
Scaenopegia, the feast of the tabernacles, wherein the Jews did set up
tabernacles or te^tes in similitude of them, wherein they dwelled when they came
out of Egipte. Scaenos, in greek, is a tent or shadow. Scaeua, the left
hand, also he that uses the left hand for the right. Scaeuus, a, um,
ylle, Fest^^.
sometime it sygnyfyeth good, as Scaeuu^ omen, good luck or chance. Scala, and
scalae, scalarum, a ladder. Alsoo a pair of stayres. Scalmus, a little piece
of wodde, whereunto shyppemen do bind their oores, to row the more easyly.
Scalpo, psi, pere, to scratche, also to grave in mettalle. Scalprum, and
scalpellu^, an instrument, wherewith any thing is scraped or rubbed, also a
surgeons instrument, wherewith he takes corrupt flesh from the bones. It is
also a grauynge iron. Scalptor, scalptoris, a grauer. Scalptura, grauynge in
metal. Scalpturatum, pauement made with stones, of diverse colors, joined
together. Scalpturio, riui, rire, to scrape as a Cock does, or other fowls.
Scalpurio, rire, to scrape as a hen does. Scamander, dri, a river, which
dyuydeth Europa from Asia. Scamandria, a town by the haven of Iliu^, not far
from Troy. Scamnum, a benche or form. Also a step or grise, whereby a man
gothe up unto a high bed. Also a balke untilled between two forowes.
Scamonea, an herb, the juice whereof is used in medicine to purge coler
vehemently. All be it that it is venomous, and leaves wars matter behynd, than
it does expel. Scandalides, a kind of dates. Scandalum, occasyon to sin,
given by an another to him that synneth. Scandinauia, an isle in the north occean
see, the quantity whereof was never found. Scandix, dicis, an herb like to
cheruyll, but it is sweter, and has a white flower, and a little root.
Scando, di, dear, to clymme. Scandulaca, an herb, which runs upon corn,
as iuye does on trees. Scandulae, shyngle, which be tyles of wod, wherewith
diverse churches be covered. Scandulum co^tectum, a house covered with shyngle,
or wooden tyles. Scansile, that which may be clymmed or gone upon. Scansio,
a clymmynge up. Scapha, a boot. Scaphiarius, a boteman. Scaphium, a basin or
vesselle to receive vryne or ordure. Scapilium, the space between the shulders.
Scaprum, a knyfe, wherewith vynes and other like things are cut. Scaptensula,
a place in Macedoni^, where silver was dygged. Scaptia, an old city in Italy,
whereof came Scaptia tribus. Scapulae, the hinder part of the shulders.
Scapularis, a boy or wenche, which is often beaten about the shulders.
Scapularis uestis, a garment, which covers only the shoulders. Scapus, the
head of popie or other like herbs, wherein be the seeds, likewise the husk of
grapes, wherein the graynes be contained. Scarabaeus, a fly with a black shell
or husk called a bytell: which breeds in cow shardes, and is black. Also
there is a kind of the^, which has horns like to an heart. Scarabaeus aquilam,
a proverb applied to such as endeavor them self to do displesure to those
that be more puissant thanne they are. Scarifico, care, to lance or open a
sore, that the matter corrupted may issue. Scarificario, launcynge. Scarus, a
fyshe, which does chewe like a beast. some men do suppose it to be a
Gylte heed. Scatebrae, the bollynge or rysynge up of water out of a spryng or
sourges of water. Scateo, tere, to run or brast out, as water does out of a
narowe or strayte place. Scaturigo, ginis, and scaturies, brastynge out of
water or other thing in like manner. Scatu^io, ire, to run out or abroad,
also to spring or grow abroode, as sum herbs done. Scaturitio, a runnynge
as water does. Scauri, they which have their toes swollen, or their ankley
crooked, that they may not goo fast, it was alsoo an honorable house of the
Romans. Scazon, it is, a kind of meter. Donatus. Vergil.
Scelerate, myscheuously. Scelerator, it is, he that polluteth or defiles.
Sceleratus, he unto whom a myscheuouse deed is done. sometime it signifies
him that does an ill deed. Sceleratus campus, a field at Rome, where the
nuns of Vesta were buried quick, if they were found to live incontinently.
Scelerose, ungraciously. Sceleste idem. Scelerosus, a, um, he that has done an
ungracious or myscheuous deed. Scelestus, ta, tum, ungracious, full of
unhappiness, myscheuous, vengeable. Scelerosus, full of ungraciousness.
Scelero, rare, to pollute. Scelus, sceleris, a myscheuous deed. also an
ungracious person. Scenoma, a pauyllyon, a sack. Scena, a pauyllyon or halle.
Also a scaffold. Sceparnon, a covering. Scepsis, a city in Phrigia. Sceptici,
were a sect of Philosophers, which affirmed nothing: the chief of that
sect was Pirrhus and Herillus. Sceptrum, a princis septre. Scheda, a leaf of
paper, a scrowe. Schedia, a thing like to a bridge with trees pynned together,
whereon things are carried in the water, in the steed of a barge, as it may be
seen on diverse great ryuers in high Germany. Schedion, any thing suddenly
made, and without much labor. Schedula, a lyttel scrowe or leaf of paper.
Schema, atis, and schemat^^, a figure. also an orname^t, specially in spech.
sometime a garment. Schesis, where a multitude of words are brought in together
vnioyned, as, Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, flumina, venti, Clouds, snow,
hayle, showers, flouddes, wyndes. Schilichi, among the Jews was a weight of
four ounces. Schisma, matis, a diuisyon, specially in the church. Schiston,
the milk that remains after that the milk is sodden, which is called well
courdes. Schoenobates, he that gothe on a cord. Scoeniculae, harlottes, which
dress them selfs with stynkynge oynementes. Schoenitae, people, which do
dwell in pauyllyons. Schoenoplocos, a roper. Schoenus, nuntis, a river by
Athenes, also an other in Archadia, and also a tree callid Lentiscus. Schoenus,
a space of ground contaynynge three score furlonges. Schola, a school. Also a
place in a bayne, where men did abide, whiles other were bained, likewise in a
porche, wherein men tarried for answers. Scholae, are taken for dysputations
between the master and his scholars. Scholaris, lare, pertaining to
schools. Scholasticus, a scholar. Scholasticus, ca, cum, scholasticall.
Terent. in ^^aut. Terent. in Eunucho.
Scibilis, le, that which may be easily known. Scibo, for sciam, I shall
know. Sci^e fidibus, to be perfytte in playenge on instruments. Sciens feci,
I did it wittingly. Scienter feci, I did it cunnyngly. Scientia, counnynge.
Scilicet, as who says. It is much, surely, moreover. Sommetyme it implies a
negatyue. Scilla, an herb, which has a rote like an oynyon. some call it
Squilla. Scincus, a kind of small cockodryls in the river of Nilus. Scindo,
scidi, scindere, to cut. Scinpodium, a little cowche or benche. Scintilla, a
spark. Scintillo, are, to sparkle. Scio, sciui, scire, to know. Scire
sciscereque, to ordeyne and inacte, as it is in our parlyament. Sciolus, he
that knows somewhat. Scio vti foro, I know what I have to do, also I can
accommodate my self to other men's manners, and to the condycions of the time
and place present. Sciomantia, a part of nygromancy wrought by shadows.
Sciopodes, people, which lyenge vpryght do shadow them selfs with their
feet: all be it every one man has but one leg: and yet be they wonderful
swifte. Sciotericon, a dyalle set upon a wall, to know by the son what
is a clock. Scipiadae, and Scipionidae, they which were of the progenye of
Scipyons, the noble captains of Romans. Scipio, the surname of a noble house
in Rome. Scironia saxa, rockis in the sea by Athenes. Scirpea, a dunge pot or
colne made with rods. Scirpicula, a little hook, wherewith russhes, or any
thing is cut of in bynding of things. Scirpita, howped vessels. Scirpo,
are, to bind. Scirpus, a rushe, or an osyar. Nodum in scirpo querere, To seek
for a knotte in a rushe is a proverb, whereby is signified, to seek to
diligently for a thing that may not be found, or to make doubt of a thing,
which is plain. Scirpeus, a, um, of rushes. Scirpiculum, a baskette. Scirron,
a thing grown in a man or woman's bealy, specially in them, which have the
dropsy, and causes the belly to be great. Scirophorion, the month of May.
Scirthosis, a disease in the eyes, coming of a long inflammation, flesh
growyng in them somewhat blue. Scirta, is a kind of oynyous, growyng in winter,
called scalyons. Sciscitor, taris, tari, and Scisco, sciscere, to demand.
Alsoo sciscere, is to ordeyne or inacte. Sciscito, give thou sentence or
judgment, give thy voice or consent in election. Scisco, sciui, sciscere, to
know, Also to decerne or give sentence. Scissilis, le, that which may be
cut. Scissio, scissura, and scissus, us, a cut. Plautus* Amph.
Scita, ordynaunces made by the people. Scitamenta, pleasant meats. Site,
cunnyngly, craftily. Scitor, aris, ari, to demand or inquire. Scitum, a
decree, or statute. Scitus, ta, tum, wise or wyttie, alsoo propre or feate.
Scytae, people in the north part of Asia, which were cruel, and hard to be
vanquyshed, they be now called Russyans, Moscouites, and Tartariens. Sciurus,
a squyrell. Scius, he that knows a thing. Scythia, the name of all the
countrayes together. Scleriasis, a swellynge of the eye lyddes, with pain and
redness. Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes ben hard, and wax heavy with
ache. Sclopus, a sown, which is made with puffynge of the chekes. Scobina, an
instrument, wherewith any thing is shaven. sometime the shauyng self. (...),
are, to wound, to shave of. S^obs, scobis, that which comith of the sha^yng or
boryng of wodde or metal* also grit of stones, wherewith metal is scoured.
Scoletia, a kind of ruste or canker. Scolopendra, a worm with many feet and
rough, called a palmer. Scolymos, the flower of a thystell. Scombrus, a fyshe.
Scomma, matis, a scoff, or sentence spoken in myrthe, which sowneth otherwise
tha^ is meant of him that speaks. Scopa, a brom or besome to swepe* houses.
Scoparius, and scoparia, he or she that does swepe. Scopei, men of little
stature. Cicero ad (...) c. Ci. de ora^^^^ per^^^.
Scopae, dyssolute men without wit or cou^cil. Scopas dissipare, to say or do a
thing without any purpose or reason. Scopo, pare, to swepe. Scopelon, an high
place, where men stand to behold or epsy. Scopulosus, a, um, rocky, or full
of rocks. Scopula, a brushe, such as payntours and pargettours do use.
Scopus, and scopulus, an high rock, also it is a mark, whereat men do shote.
sometime it sygnifieth any thing, whereunto that which is spoken, has a
principal respect. Scopi, be grapes, after that the wine is pressyd out.
Scoria, the refuse of metal tried out by fire. Sometime it signyfyeth care or
grefe. Scorodon, Garlyke. ^^bro^us.
Scorpena, a fyshe, which keeps her self to one make. Scorpionarii, they
which do shoot in crossebowes. Scorpites, a stone of the color of a
scorpio^. Scorpiuros, an herb and flower called ruddes or marygoldes. It is
also a worm like to that which is called Locusta. Scorpius, and scorpio,
onis, a venomous worm called a Scorpyon, which stryketh with his taylle, and
never ceasseth to search, where he may have occasyon to stryke. Also a sign
in the fyrmament. It is also a crossebowe. Some men take it to be an arkbushe.
Also a whyppe, having plummettis of lead at the ends of the cords. It is
also an herb, which has seeds like to Scorpyons. Scorte^, that which is of
lether: as Scortei numi, lether money. Scortes, the codde of a man or beast.
Scorteus, tea, eum, that which is made of skynnes. Scortor, aris, ari, to
haunt or company with harlottes. Scortum, an harlote or strumpette: it is also
the hyde of a beast. Scotia, Scotland. Scoti, Scotts, or Scottyshmen, of
whom sayncte Hierom writes in this wise. Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus,
quu^ ipse adulesceniulus, in Gallia ^^derim Scotos, gentem Britannicam, humanis
uesci carnibus: and quum per syluas porcorum greges and armentorum, pecudumque
reperiant, pastorum nates, and foeminarum papillas solere abscindere, and has
solas ciborum delitias arbitrari? Whatte shall I speak of other Nacyons, sens
that when I was a boy, I saw in France, Scotts, a people of Britayn, eat
men's flesh: and when they found in the forestes herdes of swyne,
beasts, and cattayle, they would cut of the buttockes of the boys, which
kept them, and alsoo the women's pappeo, and took that to be the most deyntie
and delycate meat. Scotos, in Greek, darkness: It is more aptly called in the
northern tunge, myrke. Scotoma, and scotomia, dymnesse of syghte. Scranteum, a
skin, wherein arrows are put: it may be called a sheafe. Scraptia, a worm,
which is founden in leaves. Also a vile and stynkyng harlotte, a driuelynge
queen. Screabile, that which may be spette or retched out of the lunges or
stomach. Screator, he that retcheth or spitteth. Screatus, tus, spettynge or
rechyng to spy. Screo, are, to reach in spettynge. Scriba, a Secretarye, a
Notarie, a Scribe, a Clerk. Scribello, late, the old writers used for Scribo.
Scriblita, a delycate meat made of paste stuffed and wounden like a rope. I
thynk it to be such as fartes of Portyngal are. Scribo, scripsi, scribere, to
write, also to make sometime to paynte. Scribligo, ginis, an untrue form of
speaking or writing, called also soloecismus. Scrinarius, the keeper of secret
letters. Scriniolum, a caskette or forsar. Scrinium, a coffer, or other like
place, wherein iewelles or secret things ar kept, as euydences and records
of judgments or inrollementes. Scriptio, an inscription, or any other writing
Scriptor, toris, a writer. Scriptorius, a, um, apt for writing. Scriptum, that
which is written. Scriptura, writynge. sometime style. Alsoo reckenynge of a
baylyffe, which byeth and sells cattle. Budeu^*
Scripturarius, he that writes things which be commonly done, or books of
reckenynge for baylyffes and reues. Scrobs, scrobis, a dyche or furrowe.
Scrobulus, a little dyche or furrowe. Scropha, a sow that has pigs.
Scro^um, the codde or skin, wherein be the stones of a man. Scrota, be also
lyttel images made of paste, which are wont to be given to children.
Scrupulosa res, a thing wherein there seems to be some difficulty.
Scrupulosus, a, um, scrupulous or doubtful in light things. sometime it
signifies dyffuse or difficulte. Scrupulatim, by small pieces. Scrupulu^
inijcere, to bring into a man's mind, doubt, carfulness, or thought.
Scrupulu^ eximere, to put away dout or care. Scrupulus, a little sharp
stoone, which sometime happens to fall into a man's show, and hurt his
heel. It is also taken for much solicitude, also for dyfficultie, or spiced
conscience. Also a poise, which is the third part of a dram: and than is
it also written with y, as Scrypulus. Scrupus a little stone or piece of a
stone. Scrupeus, a, um, stonye. Scruta, old garments, horseshoen, and such
other baggage, sold for necessite. also little images made in paste, sold to
the people. Scrutarius, he that sells old stuff, or makes such images.
Scrutinium, a search. Scrutor, aris, ari, to search. Scrutellus, the belly of a
swine farcid or stuffid Sculna, old writers used for sequester, an arbytrour.
Sculpo, psi, pere, to carue images in stoone. sometime to grave in metal.
Sculponeae, woollen sockes. Sculponeatus, he that does wear woullen sockes.
Sculptile, that which is carved or graven. Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer.
Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation. Sculptura, Ingrauynge or caruynge.
Scurra, a railer, a scoffer. Scurrilitas, railyng. Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to
raylynge. Scurriliter, in raylynge or scoffyng facion. Scutarius, a buckeler
maker, or a maker of tergates. Scutarius, ria, um, pertaining to shyeldes or
tergates. Scutatus, armyd with a shield or tergate. Scutella, a sawcer.
Scutuca, a skourge. Scutula, a round figure, such as spynners or spiders do
warke. also a vessel, which contains.viii. ounces. also a staff, wherewith
flax is beaten. Scutulatus, ta, tum, round and wroughte (...) the form of a
copwebbe. Scu^igerulus, a custrell* or page, which bears his masters shield
or bucklar. Scutriscum, a diminutiue of scutra, or scutula. Scutulata uestis, a
garment of sylk, wherein be wrought fygures like to round copwebbes. Scutulatus,
is a color, I suppose a wachet. Scutulum, a little shield. Scutum, a t^rgat
or shield, a buckelar. Palladius
Sylace, a city in Grecia. Scylla, a daungerouse Rock in the sea by Sycile.
Alsoo a lady, daughter of Nisus, king of Megarensis, which for love of
Minois, her fathers enemy, stale a pourple hear from her fathers heed,
which caused him to be vanquysshed: But she being forsaken of Minois, threw
her self into the Sea, and was transfourmed into a bird of her name. It is
also a kind of fyshe in the river of Liris in Campania. Scyllaceum, a town in
the furthermooste part of Italy, first builded and inhabyted by men of
Athenes. Scylleta, places wherein is taken the fysshe called Scilla. Scylleum,
a promontorie or hyl in the part of Grecia, now called Morea. Scyllis, the
name of a Greek, which swimmynge under water, did cutin sonder the Cables of
the ships of the Persyans. Scyllus, luntis, a town in Achaia. Scylurus, the
name of a man, which having four score sons, when he dyed, he callydde
them before him, and delyueryd to eueryche of them a sheafe of arrows,
commaundynge them to break the sheafes incontynente: which when they
moughte not do, he took out of the sheafes oone arowe after an another, and
brake them all lyghtely, declarynge thereby unto his sons, that if they
continued and agreed well together, they should be puyssaunt: and if they
varyed and were dysseuered, they should be feeble and shortly distroyed.
Scymnus, the whelpe of a lion. Scynifes, bytynge gnattes. Scyphus, a great
cruse or judge. Scyricum, a blonket color or light wachet. Scyros, an i will in
the sea callid Egeu^, where Achilles was hid in a maidens garment. Scytala, a
little beast called a shyrewe. Scyritae, people in India, which have no
noses, but in the stead of a nose they have two holes in their vysage. Scythia,
is a great countreye, which stretches into the east from the river of Tanais,
and has on the south part Sacos and Sogdianos, people under the king of
Persia, and on the southe part be countries unknown and deserte, and is now
under the dominion of the greatte Cane of Cataye. Scitha, a man or woman of
Scithia. Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia. Scython, a countraye now called
Thracia in Greece.
S ANTE E.
SE, is a pronowne, and sygnyfyeth him or her. Sebasta, uel Sebastapolis, a
city in Siria. Sebemytum, a city in Egipte. Sebethos, a fountayn at Naples,
which serves the city, running throughout the cite. Secale, a certain
grain, which serves only to put away hunger. Secedo, secessi, secedere,
to goo back, or to go out of company, to go away, to goo to play or sport
from labor. Secerno, secreui, secernere, to divide, or lay oone from an
another, to lay or put by it self. Secespita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherewith
the paynyms divided their sacrifice. Secessus, us, and secessio, a departing, a
vacation from business, a secret place. Secinium, a cake of breadde cut in
sacrifice. Secius, later. Nec eo secius, never the later. Secludo, si, dear, to
shut out. Seclum, for seculum, the space of one hundred years. Seclusa sacra,
ceremonies, that be secretly used, to be had in the more reverence. Seco,
cas, cui, care, to cut. Viam secare, to lead the way. Secare, is also to
follow. Secors, and socors, dis, hartelesse, apt to no purpose, profitable
neither to him self nor to any other. Secordes agni, lambs late enyd or
fallen. Secordia, and socordia, sluggardnesse, unaptness, luskysshenesse.
Secreta, things secret. A secretis, of the pryuie councyll. Secret, and
secreto, priuyly. Secta, a diverse consent in sondrye wylfulle opinions, a sect
of philosophers, a sect of heretics. Sectacula, the sequel. Sectarius ueruex,
the bell wether, that goth before the flock. Sectilis, le, that which may be
cut. Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a division, the partynge of a pray in taking
of a town. Sectio, Caes. in co^.
all that is taken in pray at the winning and sackynge of a town. Sectiuus,
ua, um, that is often cut. Sector, aris, ari, to follow, to rounne after one.
Also to follow in manners or form of speaking, or living. Also to hunte or
chase a beast. Sectores, buyers of forfayted goods. Also they that do take
profit by the condemnation of other. Sectura, a cutti^g, caves under earth, or
mines Secubo, bare, to lie aparte. Secula, a sithe, wherewith hey is mowen.
Seculum, some do suppose it to be the space of one hundred years, Plini.
some of one thousand years, other of.xxx. year. sometime it is taken for
time. Seculum sterile, a barrayne time. Secunda mensa, the last course,
wherein comes fruit and conserues. Secundae, darum, the after birth.
Secundarius, a, um, of the second sort. Secundo, the second time or place,
alsoo eftesoones. Secund^, are, to prosper or make prosperous. Secundo lumine,
the next day. Caesaris interdicta, si re secundo lumine hic offendero,
respuentur, If I find the here the next day, I will set little by Cesars
co^mandementis. Secundus panis, brown bread. Pasti siliquis, Horatius.
and pane secundo, Fed with bean husks, and brown breadde. Secundum, an
aduerbe, signifies nigh, or by. Secundum aurem, by the ear. Also next after.
Secundum patrem, next after my father. sometime for. Secundum te litem do, I
judge the matter for the* also in. Secundu^ quietem, in rest. also upon.
Secundum ea, thereupon. Secundum Platonem, After the saying of Plato. Secu^dum
Pythagora^ uino, I live like to Pythagoras. Secundum flumen, Alonge by the
ryuers side. Caes. in co^.
Secundus, da, dum, second or next to the first. Also prosperouse. Secunda
fortuna, Good or prosperous fortune. Res secund^, that which does follow our
desire or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flumine nauigat, He gothe, or
sayleth, or roweth with the streme. Secundus uentus, A good wynd. Secundum
praesentem, as if he were present. Et post edictum secundu^ praesente^
iudicabitur, And after the decre, judgment shall be given, as if he were
present. Vlp^anus.
Securis, an axe. sommetyme it is taken for an offycer, which has authority
to commytte men to thexecution of death. Secure, quietely, surely, in
saufegarde. Securus, ra, rum, sure quiet, without care. Securitas, quietenes,
lack of care, surety. Secus, by, or nighe to. Secus flumen, seruntur salices,
nyghe to the river, wyllowes are set. Also it sygnyfyeth otherwise, or other,
Non dixi secus ac sentiebam, I said none otherwise tha^ I thought* Quid
diximus tibi secus, quam uelles? What said we unto the, other thanne thou
would have us to say? Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but. Sedenim, all be it.
Sedentarius, ria, rium, that which is done sitting. Sedeo, sedi, sedere, to
sytte, to be ydelle, to content, to tarry or abide, to take council. Seeds, a
seat or place to sytte on, Alsoo a mansion house. sometime a sepulcher.
Sedicula, a setle. Sedile, idem. Seditio, a sedition or discord among the
people. Seditionarius, a seditious person. Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacify,
to assuage, to restrain, to extincte. Sedatio, a mitigation. Seduco, xi, cere,
to lead aside, or lead away sometime to deceive. Cicer. pro (...).
Seducere arrogantiam, to lay aparte pride. Seductilis, he which may be
deceived. Sedulo, in deed, dyligentely, without faynynge. Sedulitas,
dylygence, with much care. Sedulus, dylygente, he that plainly without craft
does a thing diligently. Sedum, an herb callydde Syngreene or howseleke.
Seges, segeris, corn, when it stands. some time the ground falowed, and
redye to receive corn. Segesta, a town in Italye. Segestria, was the straw
that was laid in a lyghter, wherein great men were borne by their servants.
Segmenta, be certain lines ymagyned, by the which Cosmographers do deuyde
the world into porcions, which be callid also Paralleli, whereby the distance
of places are founden. Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thing, sometime the
parts of the world diuyded by the son. also gardis, or other like things
sowed to garments. Segmentarius, he that makes cloth of gold Segmentum, a
piece cut of from any thing, be it metal or stone. It is alsoo a be or
colar, which is about womennes necks. Some do take it for the purfyll of a
womannes gown. It may as well be taken for a guard or border about any
garmente. Segmentatus, ta, tum, may be said of any thing, which has
borders or trayles synely wroughte, with small pieces fastened thereon, be it of
metal or timber. Segmentatae uestes, guarded or pourfylled garments. Segnis,
slow and bulle wytted, barayne. Segnitas pro segnitia, slothfulness.
Segniter, slowely. Segnities, slownesse, dullness, baraynnes. Segrego, are, to
sever or separate. Segobriga, a town in the part of Spain, which is now
called Byskay. Plautus i^ Trin. and i^ Asinar. Plautus i^ milite.
Segregare suspitiones, to put away suspicion Segregare sermonem, to speak no
words. Si quis ibi est odiosus, abeo domum, sermonem segrego: If any man be
there, whom I love not, I get me home, and speak never a word. Segrega
sermonem, taedet, Plautus i^ paenulo.
Hold thy peace, I am weary, or it irketh me to here the. Segullum, is a vain
of earth in mines, Plin. li. 33 cap. 4.
which declares, that therein gold may be found. Segor, a city, which
was preseruyd by the prayer of Loath, when Sodoma was dystroyed by the vengeance
of god. Seir, a mountain in the country of Edon, where Esau the brother of
Jacob the patriarche dwelled. Seiugi and seiuges, a teme of six horses.
Seiungo, xi, gere, to separate. Selectio, a chesynge out. Selectus, ta, tum,
chosen among other. also chief among other. Selecti Iudices, Cicero.
among the Romans were judges appointed of the state of gentylmen, called ordo
equestris. Selenetes, a stone, wherein is a white, which decreaseth and
increasethe, as the moon does. Seleucia, the principal city of Siria, which
is.xxx. furlonges from Babylonia. Seleucus, king of Siria, next after Alexander
the greatte. Selibra, half a pound. Seligo, legi, seligere, to gather a part,
or the chief things among many. Selinus, a river. Selinon, an herb called
also Apium, whereof be diverse kinds, as Hipposelinon, Petroselinon. Seek for
them in their places. Seliquastra, a stole to sytte on. Sella curulis, a
Chair, whereon the chief officers of Rome sat in a charyotte, and were so
carried, when they came from their houses. some do suppose that it was callid
curulis, because the fete were crokid the judgment thereof, I remit to the
reders. Sellaria, places, wherein were fourmes and stools for men to sytte on.
Sellularii, artificers, which wrought sittyng. Semel, ones, also at one time,
shortly, brefely, summaryly. Semele, the daughter of Cadmus. Semen, seminis,
sede, sommetyme settes of young trees, or nursgardeynes, sommetime the kind.
Sementicus, ca, cum, that may be sown. Sementis, the act of sowynge, sometime
sede, sede time. Sementa facere, to sow corn. Sementinae feriae, holy days
ordained to pray, that corn being sown, moughte come forth and increace.
Semento, tare, to bring forth sede. Semestris, tree, of six months.
Semesus, a, um, half eaten. Semet, him self. Semetra, half a measure.
Semianimis, half dead. Semianimus, half quycke. Semicadium, half a barelle.
Semicaecus, half blind. Semicinctum, a ierkyn or short iackette.
Semicirculus, half a cyrkle. Semicoctus, ta, tum, half sodden. Semicommestus,
ta, tum, half eaten. Semiconsumptus, ta, tum, half consumyd or wasted.
Semideus, half a god. Semidoctus, meanly learned. Semifera animalia, beasts
engendered between a wyld beast and a tame, as between a wolf and a dog, or
between a wild boore, and a tame swyne. Semiferus, somewhat wild. Semigro,
grare, to goo to dwell in an another place. Semihomo, half a man. Semihora, an
half hour. Cicer. pro ^^bi.
Semilissula, and semilixula, a little cake made with meal, chese, and water.
Semimadidus, da, dum, half wette. Semimares, they which are not perfytte men,
as those, which are gelded. Semimortuus, a, um, half deed. Seminatio,
sowynge. Seminarium, a place from whense settes and plants be translated or
removed. also a tree of the which settes are taken. Seminex, necis, half
slain. Seminium, sede, also the gain of sede. Semino, are, to sow.
Seminudus, da, dum, half naked. Semiobolus, the.xii. part of a greek dra^me.
Semipes, pedis, half a foot. Semipaganus, half an husbandeman, half a carle
of the country. Semipedalis, le, half a foot in quantity or heyghte.
Semipedaneus, a, um, idem. Semiplagium, a little net. Semiplenus, not full.
Semiplotia, were shows, which covered but half the foot: which the Romans
did wear on, when they went in hunting. Semiquinarius, a, um, that which is
half five in number. Semiramis, midis, the wife of king Ninus, and queen of
Babylon, a woman of incomparable power. Semirutus, partly decayed: Semi, half.
Semisenex, uel semiseneus, half old. Semisomnis, and semisomnus, half a
sleep. Semisopitus, he that is half slepynge, half waking. Semisoporatus,
idem. Semispathium, a short sword. Semissis, half a cubite. It was also a
certain coin or money, that was half a piece of gold, as the half noble or
half crown. Semissis homo, a vile person. Semissis vsura, the gayn of syx in
a hundred. Semita, a pathe, also a footeway. Semitatus, ta, tum, dyuided in
paths. Semitogium, a short gown. Semitogatus, and semitogatulus, he that
wears a short gown. Semitritaeon, uel hemitritaeon, a fever, which is a
tercian and a half, and of forty and eighte hours, and vexes one.xxxvi.
hours. Semiuir, an imperfect man. Semiuiuus, half a live. Semiuncia, half
an ounce. Semuntialis, le, of half an ounce. Semiustus, a, um, half burned.
Semimodius, half a busshell. Semoueo, uere, to move or go away. Semper, ever,
always. Semperlenitas, the accustomed gentyl^^sse or myldenesse. Terent. in
Andria. Donatus.
Semperuiuum, an herb called Singrene. Sempiterne, euerlastyngly.
Sempiternitas, the time everlasting. Sempiternus, a, um, everlasting.
Senaculum, a councylle house. Also a little Senate. Senarius, a, um, that
which is of the number of six. Senarij uersus, and senarioli, verses having
six fete. Senator, toris, a Senator. Senatorius, a, um, pertaining to
Senators. Senatus, us, a senate or councyll. Senatusconsultum, an act of
council, or an ordinance made by the senate. Senecio, onis, an herb, which
grows on walls, and tyles, and is hoar in summer, and has read stalks,
called grou^dswel. Senectus, senecta, senium, age. Seneo, and senesco,
senescere, to be old. Senex, senis, an old man or woman. Senio, onis, a syce,
or number of six marked in the dyse. Seni, nae, na, six. Sennaar, the field,
where the tower of Babylon was builded. Senogallia, a city in Italy. Senones,
people in France. Sensa, the senses, or those things, which we do mean.
Sensibilis, bile, that which may be felt. Sensiculi, the diminutiue of sensa.
Sensificus, ca, cu^, that which causes feling. Sensilis, le, that may be
felt. Sensim, little and little. Sensus, us, sense, or feelyng, or
perceiuyng. Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the good goddess. Sententia,
sentence, judgment, opinion, or council spoken or written concerning the life
of man. Sententiola, a little or short sentence. Sententiam dicere, to show
his opinion. Sententia^ far, to give sentence or judgment. Senticetum, a
place full of briars. Sentina, the pumpe of a ship, a place where all fylthe is
received. Sentinatia, a country in Italy. Sentino, are, to avoid peril: also
to pumpe up water out of a ship. Sentio, sensi, sentire, to perceive, to
understand, to feel, to judge, to suppose, to know. Sentio tecum, I am of thyn
opinion. Sentis, a bryar or bremble. Ter. in An.
Senticosus, a, um, sharp as a bryer. Sentus, hearye, roughe. Senum, the
syxte. Senumdenum, the syxtenthe. Seorsum, a part. also namely, or specially.
Omnibus gratiam habeo, and seorsum tibi praeterea Demea, Terent. in Ad^lph.
I thank you al, but namely the Demea. Seorsum a te sentio, I am of an another
opinion than thou art. Plautus in cap.
Seorsus, idem, Separatio, separation. Plautus in Ruden.
Separatus, ta, tum, separate or divided from an other thing. Separo, rare, to
put aparte, or depart one from an another. Separatim, aparte. Sepedes,
emotes. Sepelio, sepeliui, lire, to burye. Sepes, sepis, an hedge. Sepia, a
fyshe called a Cuttell. Sepimentum, an enclosure. Sepio, sepiui, sepite, to
hedge or enclose. Sepius, piuntis, and Sipus, puntis, and Sipontum, a city in
the royalme of Naples. Seplasiarius, a maker of soote oynementes. Seplasium,
uel seplasia, a shop, where sweet oynementes are sold. It was a street in the
city of Capua, wherein were diverse delicate oynementes. Sepono, posui, ponere,
to put or lay apart. Seps, a venymous worm, of whose stroke or bytynge the
flesh rotteth. Septa, the generalle name of all places inclosyd. Septangulus,
a figure, having four corners. Septem, the number of seven. September, bris,
the.viii. month. Septemdecim, seuentene. Septempedalis, le, of seven feet.
Septimus, ma, mum, the seventh. Septenus, na, number, idem. Septemuir, an officer,
having equal authority with seven other. Septennis, of seven years.
Septentrio, the north cost. Septentriones, the seven sterres, which are seen
by Charles wayne, or Vrsa mayor. Septemuiratus, the office, wherein be seven
ioyntely. Septennium, the space of seven years. Septicollis, by that name Rome
was called, because of the seven hills, which were in it, Palatinum,
Quirinalis, Auentinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Exquilium, and Ianiculum. Septies,
seven times. Septifariam, seven manner of facions or wais Septifarius, a, um,
seven diverse. Septimatrus, was a holyday kept the day following the sixth Idus
of every month. Septimana, a wieke. Septimontium, a place having seven hills.
Septingeni, and septingenti, seven hundred. Septingenties, seven hundred times.
Septingentenus, and septingentesimus, the seventh hundred. Septingentuplus,
seven hundred fold. Septuagies, three score and ten times. Septuaginta, three
score and ten. Septuose, darkely. Septum transuersum, the mydrefe, No. Mar.
which dyuydeth the stomach from the lower. bowelles. Septunx, uncis, a
poyse of seven ounces. Septus, ta, tum, enclosed. Sepulchrum, a sepulcher or
tomb. Sepultura, sepulture or burienge. Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hid.
also like as it were dead. Sepum, talowe. Sepatius, a, um, as it were of
talowe. Sequana, a river in France called Sein. Sequani, Burgonions of high
Burgoyne. Sequanque, for seorsum quanque, every woman aparte. Sequax, acis,
that which follows. Sequela, the act of following, sequel. Sequester, tris,
tree, indifferent to both partis. Sequester, an arbitrer. Also he, with whom
money is left. Sequestro, are, to lay or set a thing indifferently, or in
the keeping of an indifferent person. Terent. in Adelph.
Sequi lites, to sue at the law. Sequor, eris, sequi, to follow. Sera, a
lock. Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians, Serenitas, fayrenesse of wether,
drythe. Serenissimus, is a term appropried now adays to kings only, and is
usurped for most famous, or most renoumed. Sereno, are, to make fair and
clear. Serenus, a, um, fair, clear, without clouds. Seres, a people in Asia,
having great plenty of sylke. Sericae vestes, sylken garments. Seresco,
scere, to be fair and dry. also to be turned into whay. Seria, ernest
words, and grave or sad. Seria, an erthen vessel, which is long.
Sericarius, a weauer of sylke. Sericatus, apparayled in sylke, or he that
wears a garment of sylke. Sericeus, a, um, of sylke. Sericum, sylke. Sericus,
ca, cum, of sylke. Series, order. Festus.
Serilla, botes or ships calked with towe. Seriola, a diminutiue of seria.
Serio, in erneste. Seriphus, an I Will by Grecia in the sea called Aegeum. Serius,
a, um, erneste, grave, of importance. Sermo, monis, a speech, a form of
speaking: sommetyme an oration, also communication. Sermocinor, aris, ari, to
talk, to commyn. Sero, are, to shut or lock. Sero, seui, serere, satum, to
sow, to plant, to engender. Sero, an aduerbe, signifies late, to late, after
the time that it ought to be, Alsoo in the evening. Seropta, a city in
Phoenicia. Serotinus, a, um, that which is in the euennynge. sometime late or
latewarde. Serotini fructus, latewarde fruits. Serpens, pentis, a serpente.
Serperasta, a swathynge or swadlyng band. Serpillum, an herb, which growethe
on old walls about wells or pondes, and in some places it smells like
time, and in some places like to sauery. Serpo, psi, pere, to crepe. Serpula,
of old writers was used for serpens, a serpent. Serra, a saw. Serra
praeliari, is to sight in battle, sometime marchynge forward, sometime
reculinge, as a saw goth, wha^ it is drawn. Serrata, and serratula, an herb,
which is called Germander. Seruilis, le, of seruyle or bond condycion or
property. Serratus, ta, tum, like a saw. also sawed. Serro, are, to saw.
Serrula, a little saw. Sertor, he that sows seeds, or settethe herbs.
Serrum, a garlande of flowers. Sertus, ta, tum, set with flowers, as in a
garlande. Sertula campana, an herb callid Melylote. Seruo, are, to keep, to
preserve, to possede, Vergil.
or dwell in a place. Seruare fidem, to keep touch, to be faithful. Seruare de
coelo, to observe tokens or signs in the heaven or firmament. Seruaueris, take
good head what thou do. Plautus, in Amph.
Seruator, toris, he that preserves or delyuereth one from harm. Seruiliter,
like a bondsman or slave. Seruire auribus, to flatter. Seruio, uiui, uire, to
serve. Caes. in co^.
Seruitium, service. Seruitia, bondmenne. Seruitus, bondage. Serum, the last
part of the day, the even tide. It is also whay of milk. Serus, a, um, late,
sometime great. Serum bellum, great war. Seruus, a servant, proprely which
is compellyd to serve, as bondemen or apprentyses done. Seruum poecus, is a
proverb applied to him which in speaking or writing, dare not digress from
an other man's steps or form of writynge. Sesama, and sesamum, a white
grain, which growith in Inde, whereof oil is made which is called oleum
Sesaminum. Sescunx, cuncis, an ounce and a half. Sescuplum, the hole and the
half part. Seselis, an herb called also Siler. Sesqui, as much and half as
much. joined to an another word, sygnyfyeth half as much more. Sesquialtera,
so much and half so much, a proportion in musyke. Sesquihora, an hour and
an half. Sesquilibra, a pound and a half. Sesquimensis, a month and a
half. Sesquimodus, a busshell and a half. Sesquiopera, one iourneye in
tyllage and a hal^e. Sesquipes, a foot and a half. Sesquipedalia ue^ba, great
and stout words, as some noble men do speak to their inferiors, when they
are displeased. Sessio, a sitting. Sestans, et sexstans, that which is also
called obolus, the syxt part of a dram. Sestertius, was two pound weighte
and a half of copper, which among the ancient Romans was always esteemed to
the value of the fourth part of their silver coin called Denarius and Dragma,
of the which.viii. went to an ounce. Ses^ertium, contained.ii.li and a half
weight of silver, esteemed to two hundred and fyfty grotes, whereof.viii. went to
an ounce, that is to say iiii li.iii.s.iiii.d. Ses^ertius nummus, the fourth
part of the silver coin of the ancient Romans, called Denarius and Dragma,
among us it may be named a sterlynge penny. Set^, brystell hears. Setia, a
city in Campania. Se^igerum, a beast which has brystelles. Setinum uinum,
wine made about the city of Setia. Setim, a tree, like to white thorn,
which does never rotte: whereof much of the timber in the temple of Solomon
was. Setosus, sa, sum, full of brystels. Setuosus, a, um, old writers used for
obscurus, dark. Setuose, darkely. Seu, for sieve, either, or. Severe sharply,
cruelly. Seueriter, idem. Seueritas, tatis, gravity, constantnesse, proprelye
in mynystrynge Justice. Seueritudo, idem. Seuerus, ra, rum, grave, constaunt,
cruelle, sharp, dangerous to meddle with. Seuoco, care, to call aparte or
away, to call aside from other. Seuosus, a, um, like to talowe. Seuo, are, to
make candels of talowe. Seuum, talowe of beasts. Sex, sy^e in number.
Sexcenti, six hundred. Plautus in cap.
Sexcentoplagus, he that receives a hundred strypes. Sexcuplus, a, um, six
double, or six times so much. Sexennis, of six years old. Sexies, six
times. Sextans, it is, the syxte part of a pound. Sextarius, a vessel among
the old Romans, which contained.xx. ounces of water or wine. Sextilis, is
the monthe now callid August. Sextula, the syxte part of an ounce. Sextus,
ta, tum, the syxte. Sexus, us, a kind. sexus uirilis, the male kind, sexus
muliebris, the woman kind.
S ANTE I.
SI, if, although, I would god. Si dijs placet, If god will, or on goddis name:
a word spoken either in dysdayne, or in mockage, for any thing not well
done. Etiam latini, si dijs placet, Ci. in ^^^tore.
hoc biennio, magistri dicendi extiterunt, Ye and also the latins, on goddis
name, have been these two years masters of eloquence. Quinetiam, si diis
placet, nephas aiunt, Ti. Li^i^^
consulem plebeiu^ fieri, They say also, on goddis name, that it is unlawful for
a communer to be made Consul. Si sapis, if thou be wise. Siambis, an I Will in the
brytysshe occean see, on the north part. Sibaris, an old town.xii. miles
from Rome. Also a city in Calabria* sometime it is taken for delycate and
wanton living. Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate. Sibi, to him. Sibilo,
are, to whystell. Sibilus, a whystlynge. Sibilla, a woman prophet, of the
which were eight, as Varro writes. Sic, so, in likewise, accordyngly, so
lightly. Mirabar hoc, si sic abiret, Terent. i^ A^^ria.
I would have meruayled, if that it should have passed so lightly. Sibus, a
sharp wytted fellow. Sic ago, so am I wont to do. Sic sum, such a one am I.
Sica, a short sword. Sicambri, the people of Nasson, and Hessen in Germanye.
Sicani, a people in Spain. Sicania, a country in the I Will of Sicile. Sicarius,
a murdrer. Sica^eus, a, um, dry of nature. Siccesco, scere, to dry. Siccine,
of that facion, in such facion. Siccine tu illam? Plaut^^.
Siccine nos habes ludibrio omnes? Will thou handelle her of that fasshyon?
Will thou in such fasshyon moc^e us all. Siccitas and Siccitudo, drythe.
Sicco, care, to dry or be dried. Siccus, ca, cum, dry, wythered. Sicera, all
manner of drink made of corn or fruits. Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut again
that which was not well cut before, proprely grass in a medowe. Sicilia, the
I Will of Sicile. Siciliences, people dwelling in Sicile, which were borne else
where. Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile. Sicilides Musae, the Musis of Sicile.
Sicilisso, are, to speak the language of Sicile. Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a
poyse or wayght, wayinge two drammes: and is the fourth part of an ounce.
Sicilites, the heed of a Iauelyn. Siclus, the ounce of the jews, which is the
fourth part of our ounce. Sicinnium, a kind of daunsynge, wherein they that
daunsed did sing, as they do in Christmasse, when they sing Carolles: and as
maidens do now use to do in the streates. Sicubi, wheresoever. Siculi, men of
Sicile. Siculum mare, the se by Sicile. Sicunde, of any place. Sicut and
Sicuti, as, like as. Sicyonia, an I Will in the se of Aegeum. Sideratio, a
sickness, which in such wise takes some part of a man's body, that it
suddenly becomes dry, so that he felith it not, women do call it taking, or
benummynge. Sideratus, he that is so taken in any membre or part of his body,
that he can not feel it or stere-it, the homely people calls benumbed.
Siderites, an herb, which grows on tyles and old walls. Sidereus, a, um,
of the sterres. Sideror, ari, to be blasted, or taken, that a man may not
stere or move his members. Sido, dis, sedi, sidere, to settyll. Sidon, a city
in Phenicia. Sidonius, a, um, of that city. Sidus, a number of sterres
gathered, which do make a sign or celestial figure: sometime it is taken for
one sterre. Sifilare, to whystell. Sifilator, oris, a whystler. Sigaeum, a
great mountaygne in the sea by Troy. Sigillaria opera, warkes wherein were set
small images. Sigillatim, one after another. Sigillo, are, to seal, sometime
to close or shut. Sigillum, a little image. Sigma, it is, a little table.
Signaculum, a seal. Signatorius anulus, a signet. Signatus, ta, tum, notable.
Signa infesta, Standards and baners advanced in battle, in marchinge
against enemies. Signia, a city in Campania. Signa coelestia, the twelve
signs, by the which the son and other planettes do pass. Signifer, he
that bears standard or baner in a field. Significo, ficare, to signifye or
give knowledge. Signinum opus, a warke made with shelles and mortar, or tyles
and mortar. Signo, are, to make a sign, to sign or seal, to signify or
show by a sign or token, to write. Signum, a sign, token, or mark, a
miracle. Signa, be alsoo images of metal, stone, or wood. Silanius, an high
hill in Irlande. Silatum, brekefast. Sila, an helmet. Silenta loca, quiet
places, wherein is no noise. Silentium, silence, quietness. Silenus, the
foster father of Bacchus. Sileo, lui, lere, to keep silence, to speak
nothing. Siler, a kind of wythy growing in water: it is also a river in the
royaulme of Naples. Silesco, scere, to be in silence, or quyete. Silex,
silicis, a flynt stone. Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynt stones.
Silicernius, and Silicernium, a certain puddynge, eaten only at the time of
funeralles, some do take it for a feast or dinner made at the funeralles or
terme^t of a man or woman. Senem silicernium, is named of Terence for an old
Cryppel, ready to have such a dinner made for him. Siliceus, a, um, of a flynt
stone. Silicia, sieve Silicula, an herb called Fenugreke. Siligo, ginis, a
grain called Rye. Siligineus, a, um, of Rye. Siliqua, the husk or codde of
any thing, also a certain fruit in Italy, which is in length of a man's
fyngar, and broad, and somewhat hooked, the wayght of six of them made a poyse
called Scrupulus, a scruple: whereof three do make a dram. It is now called a
Characte, and is used among fynars of gold and silver, and also coyners in the
fynynge and alayinge thereof. Siliquastrum, an herb. Siliquor, quaris, quari,
to grow in husk or codde. Silura, a chuntraye in the more Britayne. Silo,
onis, he which has great brows. Silosontis chlamis, is spoken in a proverb
of him, which bostith him self of rich garments. Silus, a camoysed nose, or
a nose which is turned upward. Silphion, an herb. Silu^us, a fissh called a
Stourgeon. Simia, and Simius, an Ape. Simila, fine mele of corn. Similago,
ginis, idem. Simillimus, a, um, most like. Similitas, likeness. Similiter,
likewise, also. Similis, le, like. Simil^is habent labra lactucas, a proverb
applied to them, which being of like ill conditions, be matched together, as
a lewd servant with an ill master, an unruly people to a negligent governor,
a shrewde wife to a froward husbonde etc. Like master like man. Like will to
like. Similitudo, dinis, likeness. Similo, are, to be like. Simitu, pro simul,
together. Simiolus, a little ape. Simois, oentos, a river by Troy. Simonia,
Symony, that is to say, ambition in spiritual things. Simplariae, simple
things or of little value. Simplares, they which do wear hostinge harneyse.
Simplex, plicis, that is not double, sincere or plain, without deceit.
Simplicitas, playnesse. Simpliciter, plainly. Simplicitus for simpliciter.
Simplus, a, um, sengle in number, one only. Simpulum, a chalice or cup of earth,
wherewith they sacrifyced in the old time before that gold and silver were in
great estimacion It is of Varro taken for a cruet with a Pipe, out of the which
wine came droppynge by little and little. Simpuuium, a vessel of tree. Simul,
together with other, moreover also. Simul ac, simul atque, as soon as,
incontinent as. Simulachrum, an image of a man or woman. Simulo, are, to
endeavor, to be like to one, also to feign. Simultas, aris, pryuy displeasure
or hatered, with dissembling countenance. Simulatio, fantasye, also
dissimulation. Simulator, he that dissembleth. Simulter, for Similiter.
Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to hate one pryuyly. Simus, a, um,
flat. Sin, or else, if not. Sinapi, and Sinapis, Senuy sede, whereof mustarde is
made. Sinapium, mustarde. Sinapodes, people in Affrike, which do go as they
crept. Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyond the line equinoctial. Sinciput, the
forepart of the hedde. Sindo, donis, a fine lynen cloth. Sine, without. Sine
vt veniat, let him come. (...) Liui^^
Sine fraud mea, my right saved. Singillatim, to every one, or of every ouche,
one after another. Singularis, re, synguler, excellent, one without any mo.
Singulariter, singulerly, only. Singulatim, every thing by it self.
Singultio, tire, to yexe. Singultiens, he that has the yexe. Singultiens
gallina, a clockinge hen. Singultus, tus, yexinge. Singulus, a, um, euerych.
Sinistra, the lefthande, sometime it sygnifieth, contrary to prosperouse. Sino,
sini, sinere, to suffer. Sinope, pes, a cite in the contray of Pontus. Sinopis,
pidis, a red stone, communely called Sinoper. Sinistre, unhappily,
unfortunately. Sinistrorsum, on the lefthande. Sinuessa, a city in Campania.
Sinuo, are, to turn or wind in the form of a serpent, making holowe
bosoms or furrows: it is also applied to garments that are pleyghted or
gathered up: also to streams of Ryuers, which do in runnyng make diverse
tournynges. also to banks which have holow creekes or bosoms. Sinuosus, a,
um, that which has many turnynges and wyndynges. Sinus, us, a bosom. also the
tournynges or holownesse of water banks: sometime the holownesse of eyes:
sometime a sail. also a cup for wine: also nets. sometime a sail, when
the wind fylleth it. Siparium, a courtayne. Siphones, the pypes of a Cundyt.
Siqua, for si aliqua, if any. Sipontum, a city in Apulia. Sipontinus, a, um,
of that city. Siquide, for because. also if. Siremps, for similis res ipsa.
Siren, and Sirena, a meremayden. Siri, pittes, wherein corn was laid to be
preseruyd. Sirius, a Sterre, which ryseth the.viii. Calendis of June. Sirpea,
mattes, or other things made of russhes. Sirpices, were instruments made with
teeth like to a saw, which being drawn with oxen, plucked up by the roots
flagges and great weeds, which grew in meadows. Sirpiculae falces, hooks,
wherewith vynes are cut. Sirpo, are, to bind, or wind with russhes or osyars,
or other like thing. Sirpus, a russhe. Nodu^ in Sirpo quaeris, thou fyndest
difficulty or doubt, where there is none. Sirpi, be also warkes or verses,
which be very hard to be understand. Sirpiculum, a little basket. Sisamum, a
manner of poulce or corn. Siser, a delicate root to be eaten, which some men
do suppose to be read Carettes. Sisara, and Sisarum, an herb growing in
Euboea, the flower whereof is most pleasant to bees. it is also called Erica.
Sisto, ere, to make to tarry or stand still, to retain or keep back, to
appear, as a man does being sued in the law. Sistas te, appiere thou.
Plautus in Cap.
Ore sistere. Eminor, interminorque, ne quis mihi obstiterit obuiam, nam
qui-obstirerit, ore sistet. I threten, and I menace, that no man let me of my
way, for whosoever lets me, shall kiss the ground. Sistere uadimonium, to
bring in suerty. Sistrum, an instrument like a horn, which was used in
battle, in the stead of a trumpet. Sisyphus, was a great thief, which was
slain by Theseus, of whom it is feigned, that in hell he tourneth a stone up
to a great hill, but when it is at the top, it falls down again, and
remeueth his labor. Sitanius panis, bred of new wheat. Sitarchia, a bag,
or gardeuiandes, wherein meat is put. Sithonia, a countraye in Macedonia upon
the se side. Siticen, he that did blow in a trumpet wha^ men were buried.
Sitio, tire, to thyrst or be a thirst. Sitiens, he that is a thirst. Situlus
barbatus, a little skyllet. Sitella, a little pot, wherinto lottes were put.
Sitibundus, a, um, very thursty. Siticulosus, he that is allwaye a thirst.
Sitis, thirst, or desire to drink. Situla, and Sirella, a little cofer, wherein
lottes were put, at the chesinge of officers: also a buckat to draw water.
Situs, ta, tum, put or set. Situs, tus, fylthynesse gathered of moisture, by
lack of klensinge. also of sluttisshnesse. also the setting or standinge of a
place, which is now called the syte or situatio^ of a manner or countraye.
S, ANTE M.
SMaragdus, a preciouse stone called an Emeraude. Smigma, Soap, and all other
thing that does put away spottis or uncleanness. Smigticus, ca, cum, the
efficacy of klensing. Smilax, acis, a tree, which has leaves like an yuy, with
beryes, and a white flower, and smells like a lyly. Smyntheus, one of the
names of Apollo* Smyrna, a city in Asia.
S ANTE O.
SOana, a river of Asia. Soanes, people of Asia, dwelling about the extreme
part of the mountain, called Caucasus. Soboles, issue or succession of
children. Sobrie, sobrely, advisedly, prudently. Sobrini, susters childerne.
Sobrius, a, um, sobre, well aduysed. Soccus, and Socculus, a socke, which women
and players in Comedies only ware. Socer, cri, the wyfes father. Socrus, the
mother. Sociale bellum, that war, which is made with confederates. Sociare
sermonem, Qu. Curt. lib. 7.
to have familiar communication with one. Socienus, a companion, or fellow.
Societas, tatis, fellowship. Plautus.
Socio, are, to join or confederate. Socius, a fellow or companyon. also
Socij, be confederates, they which in all counsayles and acts do participate
one with another. Look for Comites and Sodales, in their places. Socors, for
Secors, luskysshe, apt to no goodness. Socordia, for Secordia,
luskisshenesse, sometime it signifies ydelnes. Socrus, my wyfes mother.
Socraticus, he that folowethe the doctrine of Socrates. Sodales, they that keep
company together, at meals or passetyme. they be also they, which be of one
fraternity or company, or gylde. Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternite or
brotherhode. Also a company incorporate of any mystery or craft, generally al
felowshyps privately assemblynge among the people. Sodalitium, idem. Sodes, If
thou dare. Sodoma, orum, and Sodomum, a city in Judea, which for sin, done
against nature, was by almighty god consumed by celestial fire. Sodomito,
tare, to commytte or use the syn of Sodoma, against nature. Sogdiana, a
country in Asia, extendyng to the north part of Scithia. Sol, solis, the
son. Soles, sygnifyeth sometime the day, sometime the beams of the son.
Solamen, minis, solace. Solanum, an herb called nyghtshade. Solanum
soporiferu^, an herb callid dwabe. Solaris, re, of the sun. Solarium, a
place where by the sun, hours are known. Also a soler of a house. Also a
pencion paid to the prince, to live out of commune business. Solati, they
which be dyseased or sick by the heat of the son. Solatium, solace or
comfort. Solea, a show, callydde a galage or paten, which has nothing on
the fete, but only lachettes. Also a fish, called a sole. also a ground soil,
whereon stands the wall of a house. It is also a shoe, wherewith horses and
oxen be shodde. Solearius, a paten maker. Soleatus, ta, tum, shodde. Suetonius
in August. Plautus in castle.
Solemn, accustomed. Solemnia, feasts or holidays. Solemniter, solemnly.
Solennis, ne, annual or yearly, that which is done every year. Soleo, solitus
sum, uel solui, solere, to be wo^t. Solere, to keep company. Solet, it was
wont, or the use has been. Plautus in epidico.
Solens, for ut soleo, Ego abcessi solens paulum ab illis, I went a little
from them, as I was wont. Solers, it is, wytty, cunnyng. Solertia, sharpenes or
quyckenes of wit, craftynesse or subtlety in practysynge, or wyttynesse.
Solicito, tare, to show both hope and fear. Also to inquiete, or make sorye,
to solicit or procure by means: sommetyme to labor the earth. Solicitudo,
dinis, care. Solicitus, ta, tum, careful. Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to
consolidate. Solidesco, scere, to close together, as a wou^d does, when it
heals. Solid, hole, perfytely. Solidarij, they which do selle in gross.
Solidipes, that has fete hole without toes. Solidus, da, dum, hole,
contynuall, not holowe, not broken or cut. Solifuga, he that keeps him out
of the son, or flees from the heat of the son. Solipunga, a fly, which in
the heat of the son prycketh most sharply. Soliloquus, he that talks
being alone. Soliloquium, communication, which a man being alone, has with
god in contemplation. Solinunt, for solent, they are wont. Solitarius,
solitary, alone without company Solitas, solytarynesse. Solitaurilia, an
offryng of three things of sondrye kinds, as a bulle, a ram, and a boore.
Solito, tare, to be wont often. Solitudo, deserte, where no man dwells.
Solitus sum, I was wont. Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone. Solium, a place of
astate, where a king sytteth: it is also a great vessel, which serves to
diverse uses, as to translate lycour from one to an other, to wash linen
clothes, and for men and women to be bathed in. It sygnyfyeth also a coffin,
where deed bodies are put. Soloecismus, a vice in speaking, wherein the true
congruitie and right speech is perverted. Solo, all in the oske tunge. Solon,
lonis, one of the seven wise men of Grecia, which made laws for the
Athenienses. Solor, aris, ari, to recreate. Solox, course woulle, or locks.
Solstitialis herba, an herb, which does bear flowers only at the time,
when the son is at the highest, or as some men suppose but one day.
Solstitium, the stay of the son, when he can not be either higher or lower,
which is twyse in the year, that is in winter, the eight calendes of January,
and is called Solstitium hyemale, and in summer, the.viii. calendis of Iulye,
and is callid Solstitium aestiuale. Solstitialis uita, a life which dureth but
a little space. Plautus.
Solstitialis morbus, a sycknesse which kylleth men shortly. Solstitialis
aegritudo, is of sum men taken for the burning fever* which happens about
the canicular days, of exceeding heat of the air. Soluendo non est, he i^
not able to pay. Solum, the soil or ground, generally it signifies all
thing, which does sustain or bear any other things on it. It is also the
sole of the foot, also the sole of a shoe. Natale solum, a man's natural
country. Soluo, ui, uere, to lowse, to pay, to recompense, to put a way, to
delyueres, to resolve or melte. Soluere fidem, to break promise. Soluere
uenas, to open the veins. Soluere uotum, to perform an auowe. Soluere uita,
to slay one. Solummodo, only. Solute, wantonly, incontynently. Solutus risus,
a great laughter. Solus, alone, one only, solytarie. Solutilis, le, that
which will be soon lowsed or undone. Solutus, ta, tum, loused or louse, also
paid. Somniator, a dreamer. Somnorinum, a dream. Somniculosus, slepy, a
sluggarde. Somniculosus, a, um, that which causes one to sleep. Somnifer,
feri, that which induces or brings sleep. Somnisicus, idem. Somnio,
somniare, to dream. Somnolentus, disposed to sleep. Somnus, sleep. ^^ Mar.
Sonere, to sound or make a sound. Sonito, to sound often. Sonipes, pedis, a
light or swyfte horse. Sonitus, tus, a sound. Soniuit, for sonuit. Sono,
sonare, to sound or make a noise. Sonor, noris, a great sound or noise.
Sonore, shyll or loud. Sonoritas, a shyllenesse, or lowdenesse. Sonorus, ra,
norum, loud, or making a great sound. Sons, it is, gyltye. ^^^^mus in (...).
Sontica causa, a great cause. Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull. Sonticus morbus, a
contynuall syckenesse* or wherewith all the body is grieved. Sonus, all that may
be hard. Sophaci, people of Africa. Sophistice, ces, the part of logyke,
which is capciouse and subtylle. Sophia, wisdom. Sophisma, sophismatis, a
craftye and deceytefull sentence, ^n Oracyon or invention, which seems to be
true, when (...) false. Sophista, and sophistes, a dissemble^ of wisdom, a
deceyuer under an eloquente or crafty speaking. Sophocles, a writer of
tragedies. Sophron, in Greek, is Temperance in english, whereby carnal
appetites and lusts be refrayned. Sophos, aut sophus, a wise man. Sopio, piui,
pire, and sopior, to set at rest, to bring aslepe. Sopitus, brought aslepe,
or to rests, or into a sown with a sudden stroke. Sopor, oris, deed sleep.
Soporifer, soporiferi, and soporiferum, that brings sleep. Soporo, rare, to
bring or induce sleep. Soporatus, fast aslepe. Sora, an hill in Italy.
Sorbeo, bus, bear, and sorbo, psi, bear, to suppe, as one suppeth potage.
Sorbici uncula, a thynne brothe. Sorbitio, onis, suppyage. Sorbities, idem.
Sorbillo, lare, to syppe. Sorbillum, a cawdell. Sorbum, an harryshe pere.
Sordeo, and sordesco, dui, dear, to be foul, Plautus in Penulo.
or vnkleanly. Sordes, fylthe, or uncleanness. Sordesco, sordescere, to be
unclean or sluttysshe. Sordide, uncleanly, sluttyshely. Sordidior, dius,
vnclenlyer. Sordidissime, most vnkleanly. Sordidissimus, ma, mum, vnclenlyest.
Sorditudo, fylthynes, sluttyshenes. Sordido, dare, to make foul. Sordidus, da,
dum, fylthy, uncleanly, sluttishe. Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a field mo^^.
Sorech, the Jews do call vynes, which contynually do bring forth most
pleasant and dilectable fruit. Soriantes, sworn brethren. Soriceus, a, um,
of a ratte. Soricinus, of a mouse. Soriculata uestis, Plaut.
a garmente of chaungeable sylke. Sorita, a subtle and captious form of
arguing. Soritae, people which are diuyded from Inde by the river called
Arabis. Sorilla, ships which are calked or stopped with hemp or flax.
Sororiari, is proprely of may dens breasts, when they begin to be imbosed.
Soror, ris, a sister. Sororiae, maidens pappes. Sororius, my systers husband.
Sorracus, a cofer or baskette wherein are carried the instruments or apparayle
serving for comedies or interludes. Sors, sortis, chance, lotte, portion in
enherytaunce: the hole sum in a commune bank or stock, wherein many have
part. It is also destyny, judgment. Sorts, were also the aunsweres of Idols.
Sorticula, the scrowe, wherein the lotte is written. Sortilegium, dyuynation by
lottes. Sortilegi, ben they, which do tell men's destenies by rakynge of
lottes or verses of holy scripture. Sortior, tiris, tiri, and sortio, tire, to
make lottes, to take or have any thing by lotte or chance. Also to dispose or
order. Sortiri prouinciam, to receive the rule of a countray by lottes. It is
usurped to have authority by election. Sortito, an aduerbe, sygnyfyenge by
lotte or chance. Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. also chaungynge to have a
thing. Sospes, hole or saulfe. also he that gives health. Sospitalis, le,
cause of health. Sospito, tare, to keep in health. Sos, old writers vsyd for
eos. Sosia, a man's name. Sos^ratus, a man's name. So^adicum carmen, meter
having.vii. fete. Soticena, one of the names of Juno. Soter, a saluyour.
S ANTE P.
SPadicus, ca, cum, of scarlette color. Spad^^, dicis, a date with the
branch plucked from the palm tree. It is also scarlette color. Spado,
donis, a geldyng, be it man or be. Spadonia, a kind of laurel. Spargo, si,
gere, to scatter or cast abroad. Cor. Tacitus lib. 3.
Spargere bellum, to make war in sondrye parts of a country. Spartam nactus
es, hanc orna, a proverb signifienge the astate or office, which thou haste,
order or apply it well. Sparganon, the root of an herb called cynquefoyle.
Spargapises, the son of Thomiris the queen of Massagetes. Sparta, the chief
city of Lacedemonia. Spartacus, was a famous sword player, which gathered
an host of slaves, and made battle against the Romans, and was vanquyshed
by Crassus. Sparteum, a money bag. Spartiata, and Spartanus, na, number, of
Sparta. Spartum, and Spartus, an herb called brom. Spara, be called
caltroppes, sown in time of batayl, to wou^d the fete of men and horsis.
Sparus, a clubbe. Sparum, a little darte. Spastici, out of the which any
thing is plucked. Spatha, a two handed or bastard sword. it is alsoo an
instrumente of the kytchen, to turn meat that is fried. Spathalion, an
ornamente, pertaining to women. Spaticus, vexed with an ill spirit.
Spatiator, a wanderer. Spatiosus, a, um, large, spacious. Spatiose, and
spatiosius, largely, more large. Spatior, aris, ari, to walk. Spatium, a space
as well in time, as in place. Specere, among old writers was taken for
Inspicere, to look in. Specialis, le, special, peculiar, propre. Cicero de
reditu su^
Speciatim, specially, peculyarly, proprely. Species, ei, a figure or image, a
form, kind, beauty, favor. It is defyned by Logicyens, to be that, which is
said of many things varienge in noumbre: as Homo, which is spoken of Plato,
Socrates, Cicero, which do not varye in figure but in noumbre. Sommetyme
species, do sygnyfye spyces. Alsoo it is apparaunce. alsoo a syghte or thing
seen, spices. Per speciem legationis in Asiam ablegatus est. Under the color
of ambassade, Plin. de (...) ri^ illustr.
he was banyshed into Asia. Plautus.
In Speciem esse, to be to the honor. Specificus, ca, cum, partycular.
Specifice, particularly. Specillum, a small Instrumente, wherewith Sourgeons
do search the deepenesse of wounds and soores. Alsoo to annoint sore eyes. It
is also a Spectakle to look with. also an ear pycker. Specimen, speciminis, an
example, a proof, also beauty. Specimen aedere, to show a proof of a man's
counnynge. Speciosus, a, um, beautyfull. Spectabilis, le, worthy to be seen.
Spectaculum, Bude^^.
a thing to be seen or looked on. Sometime the self beholdynge. alsoo the
place from whens men do behold things. Spectamen, a Sign or token.
Plautus in Men^.
Spectame^ bono seruo, id est qui rem l^erilem procurat, uidet, collocat, It is
a token of a good servant, that is to say, which attends about his
masters business, and does survey all thing, and set it in order.
Spectatores, beholders, triers of money: Spectatus, ta, tum, approved. Specto,
tare, to behold, to approve, to tend to some conclusion, to compare.
Spectatio, a trial or proof of money. Spectrum, an image or figure in a
man's ymagynation. Specula, an high hylle or tower, whereon things be espied
far of. also lyttel hope, a diminutiue of spes. Specularia, spectakles.
Specularis, re, any thing, whereby a man may see the better. Speculatio, a
beholdynge. Speculator, an espyall in wars. Speculor, aris, ari, to see
far, to consider, to espy, to search out. Speculum, a lookynge glass.
Specus, cus, and specoris, a den. Speluncha, idem. Spelaeum, idem. Spepondi,
for spopondi, I have promised. Sperchius, a river of Thessalia. Speres, old
writers used for spes, hope. Sperma, spermatis, seed, most commonly used for
the natural humor, whereof all living things be engendered and fourmed.
Sperno, spreui, spernere, to despise. Spero, rare, to hope. Sperata uirgo, a
maiden asked in marriage. Spes, spei, hope. Speutici panes, looues of breadde
made in haaste. Speusippus, a noble philosopher cousyne to Plato. Sphaeca, a
waspe. Sphaera, a figure in all parts equally round a speere. Sphaeristerium, a
round place in a bayne, where men are exercysed, a tenyse play. Sphaeromachia,
playenge at tenyse. Sphennida, a balle made of lether or cloth, greatter than a
tenyse balle. Sphragide, a stone which printeth perfitly. Sphinx, gis, a
monster, which had the heed and hands of a maiden, the body of a dog,
wings like a bird, nails like a lion, a tail like a dragon, the voice of a
man, which purposed to men subtyl questions. It is also a beast like an ape,
but more rough, and with a longer tail, I suppose it to be a munkay or babyon.
Sphondilium, a joint or knotte of the back bone.xii. of them do make the
chyne, and the.v. resydue do make the loins. Spica, and spicus, the ear of
corn. also a spice called Spikenarde. Spica mantica, an ear of corn, having
no berde. Spicatus, ta, tu^, eared, or in care, as corn is. Spiceus, ca, cum,
that which has ears like to corn. Spicifera, the surname of Ceres callid
goddess of corn. Spicilegium, glemynge of corn. Spicilegium facere, to
gleme. Spicio, cire, to shute out in ear. Spiculatores, they which be called
of the kings guard. Some men do take Spiculator, to be a hangeman, or other
person, which puts men to death by execution of the laws. Spiculo, culare,
to make any thing sharp^ at the point. Spiculum, a darte, also an arrowe.
Spilumenes, a sluttyshe drabbe. Spina, a thorn, also the backebone. Spineus,
a, um, of thorn. Spineoli, a wild fruit called Sloes. Spinosus, a, um, full
of thorns. Spinther, a pynne, also a tache, sometime a braselette. Spinturnix,
a bird which was wont to comme to the aulters, and carye away a burning
cole, which was taken for an unlucky bird. Spinus, a plumme tree or damsyn
tree. Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha. Spirabilis, le, lively, or that whereby we
live. Spiritabile, idem. Spiraculum, and spiramentum, Cicero.
out of which the air or brethe passes. Sprarchus, a captain in the fore
ward. Spirae, things which do turn and wind in diverse cerkles like a
trendell, or an adder lyeng round. Also spira, is an ornament of a woman's
heed. also the turning of cables or ropis, wha^ they be wou^d up. also the band
or lace, wherewith a cappe or hat is made fast under a man's chyn. also the base
of a pyllar. Also a cake made like a trendell. also a multitude of people.
Ennius.
Spirillum, a gotes berde. Spiritus, spirit, brethe, wind. Spirituale, and
spiritale, idem quod spiritus. Spiro, spitare, to blow as wind does, to
send forth odoure. Spisse, an aduerbe, signifienge thick. Spissigradior,
gradi, to go thycke, or make many feet. Spissigradus, he that gothe thycke.
Spissitas, thyckenesse. Spisso, are, to make thycke. Spissus, a, um, thycke,
slow. Spissitudo, thyckenesse. Spithama, a measure of.xii. fyngers broad.
Splen, splenis, the spleen. Splendeo, dui, dear, to shine. Splendesco, scere,
to shine often. Splendide, an aduerbe sygnifienge clear or bryghte. also
rychely. Splendidus, da, dum, bright, clear. Also he which uses to have his
house rychelye decked with abundaunce of all things, is called Splendidus,
contrary to Sordidus and auarus. Splendour, oris, light, bryghtnesse, sometime
honor or nobleness in living. Spleneticus, he that is sick in the spleen.
Splenium, a plaster of cloth or lether made to lay to the body of him, which
is sick. Spoletium, a city in Italy. Spoletini, people of the city
Spoletium. Spolio, are, to rob or dispoyle. Spolior, ari, to be robbed.
Spoliarius, ria, um, that which receives spoil or things taken by robbery.
Sponda, the side of a bed. Spondeo, spopondi, spondere, to promise. Spondeus,
a foot in meeter of two long syllables. Spondilus, a whe^ue, which is a
round thing of stone, or wodde, or leadde, put on a spyndell to make it run
round. It is also a white hard thing in an oyster, which is covered with
the fyshe. Spondium, that which comes of lead like to soote, which is about
vessels of brass, that do hang over the fire. Spongia, a spounge, or that
wherewith any thing is wyped. Spongiare, to wype clean a sponge. Spongioli,
mousherons. Spongiosus, a, um, light, and full of holes like a spounge.
Spongites, a stone like a sponge. Sponsa, a woman despoused or affianced.
Sponsalis, le, pertaynyng to spousage. Sponsalia, the spousage, or betrouthyng
of a man and womanne, before that they be wedded. Sponsio, onis, a promise, a
bargayne. Sponsus, us, idem. Sponso, sare, to affyance or betrouthe. Sponsor,
oris, he that promyseth or bargaineth. Sometime a surety, which undertakes
an other man's act. Sponsus, sa, sum, promised. Sponte, naturally, willingly,
of his free will. Spontalis, le, voluntaryly. Spontaneus, ea, eum, that which
does, or is done willyngly, naturally, without constraynt or help. Spopondi,
I have promised. Sporades, yl^s nygh to Crete or Candy. Sporta, and sportula, a
basket or maunde, sometime money or meat distributed by pryncis unto the
people. Sportula, and sportella, a littell gift or alms, also lyuerey of
court, callydde bowge of court, was called Sportule. Spretus, refused. Spuma,
the foam or frothe of any thing lyquyde. Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothye.
Spumo, are, to foam or gather unto foam. Spumosus, a, u^, that whereof comes a
foam. Spuo, spui, spuere, to spytte. Spurce, vnkleanly, fylthyly. Spurcidicus,
ca, cum, that which speaks dishonestly or uncleanly. Spurcificus, ca, cum,
that makes things unclean or fylthy. Spurcitia, and spurcities,
uncleanness. Spurco, care, to defyle or make unclean. Spurcum uinum, wine
myngled with water. Spurcus, ca, cum, unclean, filthy, vnpure, stynkynge,
blouddy. Spurij versus, verses feigned, the author being false named or
unknown. Spurius, a bastard. also it was the surname of diverse Romans.
Sputo, tare, to spytte. Sputor, tari, to be spytte on. Sputum, spyttell.
S ANTE Q.
SQualla, old writers used for squalida. Squalleo, lui, lere, to be filthy,
shuttishe, soiled or stainid with some unclean thing Squallidus, da, dum,
sluttishe, filthy, causing one to abhor the sight thereof. Sometime it
signyfieth spotted. also carrayne lean. Squallidus ager, ground out of
tylthe. also shynynge. Squalor, loris, sluttyshenes, fylthynes. Squalido,
dinis, and squalliditas, the same. Squalus, a fyshe. Squama, the scale of a
fyshe. Squammosus, skaly. Squatina, a sole fyshe with a rough skin, wherewith
fletchers do make their arrows smothe. Squarosus, a, um, rough and sharp,
like to a thing which is skalye. Squilla, a certain herb, growing in the sea, also a fyshe. Squinitij, people in Italy callydde Sabelli and Samnites.
S ANTE T.
ST, a voice of him that commands silence, as we say in english, busht, wha^
we would have one to hold his peace. Stabilimentum, that which keeps a thing
steadfast. Sabilio, l^^i, lire, to make steadfast or stable. Stabilis, le,
stable or steadfast. Stabularae mulieres, women which keep vyttaylynge
houses, for to refresshe wayfarynge men. Stabularius, an inholder. Also he that
has the charge of the house, where cattayle is kept. Stabulari damas aut
ceruos, falowe deree or read dear to be lodged or harborowed. ^udeus.
Stabulo, bulare, to stand as cattayle does in a stable. Stabulatio,
standing or lyenge of cattelle, also harborowynge or lodging of d^re.
Stabulum, an inn, where men do lodge or bayte. Also it is the generalle name
of the place, where cattelle do abide, when they come from their pasture.
also a stable wherein horses or mules are kept. Stactis, and stacte, the flower
of myrre, or fatness, which first distilleth out of it. Stadium, a place,
wherein runnynge is exercysed, as well of men as of horses. It is also a
furlonge or the eight part of a mile. Stacteus, a, um, gummye. Stadiodromos,
the place ordained to run in. Stadiodromas, he that rounneth in a course of
rounnynge. Stagma, an oyntement. Stagno, are, proprely of water is to stand
and not to flow. Stagnum, a standing water, a poole. alsoo a certain metal
called tynne. Staloginum, a thing to hang at ones care, as Egyptians have.
Stamen, clothe, when it is in the lome or frame. Also slaxe or woulle, when
it is on the dystaffe. also stamyne or worstede. Stanneus, a, um, of tynne.
Stannum, metal called tynne. Stapedes, styroppes. Staphyle, a vine.
Staphylus, he that did first myngle water with wine. Staphis, a kind of
vynes, which has a black stem and strayt, and has a fruit more like to
a lyttelle bladder, than to a grape, which be grene, within the which is a
kernelle three cornerde. Staphilinus, wild parshyppe. Staphis agria,
Stafesagre. Stata sacrificia, sacrifyce customably done at certain days of an
old ordynance. Statae matris simulachrum, an image, which was set up by the
people in every street at Rome. State, sometime sygnyfieth to abide. Stat
mihi, I am determined. Status, ta, tum, fyrme, or stable, alsoo ordained or
decreed. Statarius, a, um, ordynarie. Stater, teris, a certain coin, which
was in value four drammes. Statera, a beam to way without the bala^cis.
Staticulum, a certain wanton meuynge in daunsynge. sometime a little cart.
Stati dies, days ordynarie, days in bank, for appearance, or for the parties
to plede. Statilinus, was called a private god, which men supposed to be always
with them. Statina, an I Will. Staticulum, a little image. Statiuncula, idem, or
a little restyng place. Statius, a noble poet. Statim, anon, constantly,
contynually. Statio, onis, a place, where either men of war or ships do
abide or rest for a certain time. Stationalis, le, that which stands fast
or abides. Stationarij milites, soldiers, which are assigned to abide
stylle in one place, or to keep a town or fortress, or the marches of a
country. Statiua, and statiuum, a certain place fortyfyed, where men of war
lay at the siege of a fortress. Stator, toris, a sernaunt, which is always
redye attendynge about an offycer, to be at commandment. wherefore in that
word be included pursyuantes, posts, sergeantes, baylyffes, and catchepolles.
Also Jupiter, was called Jupiter stator of Romulus, because he supposed that he
made the Romans to tarry when they fled, the Samnites pursuynge them.
Statua, an image of mettalle, yuorie, stone, or timber. Statuaria, the craft
of caruynge or yetting of images. Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth
images. Statuarius, a, um, pertaining to images. Statuere ex aequo and bono,
to judge or determyne. according to equity, less than the rygour of the law
would require. Statuere pretium, to set a price on things vendible.
Statumen, minis, that which is set up to sustain or bear a thing, a
proppe. Statumino, nare, to proppe up, to underset, to make sure. Statuo, tui,
tuere, to ordain, to determyne, to set fast, to stable a thing, to dedicate,
to beat one thing to an another. Sublim^ illum arriperem, and caput primum in
terram statuerem, ut cerebro dispergam uiam, I would lift him on high, and
beat his heed to the ground, that I might scatter his brain abroad in the
high way. Statura, the stature of a man. Statu^us, a, um, the particyple
future of sto, stas, stare, to stand. Status, tus, state, it is among
orators and lawyers the case, which rysethe in contention, wherein the matter
rests, which must be replied unto, and either be denied, confessed, or
trauersed: of Tullie it is called Constitutio causae. Status, stata, statum,
firm. Stati dies, days appointed. Steatoma, a gatherynge of grease or fat
in some place against nature. Stechades, three little yles by Marsiles. Stega,
a cabyn of a ship. alsoo a cote or cotage. Stegnae febres, fevers in the
which a man may have neither syege, nor vryne, nor sweat, nor none other
euacuation. Stelae, little pyllars. Stella, a sterre, also a sterrefysshe,
also the name of a poet. Stella crinita, a blasynge sterre. Stellatus, ta,
tum, full of sterres. Stellatura, was an extorcion of capytaynes in taking
from the soldiers the porcions of vyttayle appointed unto them by the
Emperor. Stellio, a beast like a lysarde, having on his back spots like
sterres. Stellionatus crimen, a dysceyte in dyssemblynge a thing, to take
profit of an other iniustely. Stellis, a kind of byrdlyme made in Euboea.
Stello, are, to shine or glysten like sterres, or be made like sterres. St^mma,
matis, a garlande of flowers, alsoo the stock or bloudde of a gentylle house.
sometime the degrees in kynrede. Alsoo an inscription graven in a stone. Stemo,
was sister to Medusa. Stenoboea, the wife of Pretus king of Ephyri, which
loved Bellorophon, that vanquysshed the monster called Chimaera. Stentor,
toris, was a man, which had a voice as loud as.xx. men. Stephanoma, every
herb that seruethe for garlandes. Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes.
Stephanus, in greek is a crown. Stercoratio, dungynge. Stercorarius, ria,
rium, pertaynyng to dunge or mucke. Stercoratus, ta, tum, dunged or mucked, or
compassed. Stercoro, are, to dunge or compass. Stercus, stercoris, dunge,
mucke, compass. Stercutius, the surname of Saturnus, because he first found
and used doungynge of ground. Steresis, privation. Sterila, old writers used
for steril^s. Sterilesco, rilescere, to be barrayne or wax barrayne. Sterilia
for sterilitas. Sterilis, le, barrayne. Sterilis amator, a lover, which
lacketh^ money. Sterilitas, barraynes, sterilytie. Steriliter, barraynely.
Sternax, nacis, a steerynge or ploungynge horse. Sterno, straui, sternere, to
throw down, to spread, to cover, to lay the table, to make plain or smothe,
to lie down to rest. Sternere lectum, to make a bed. Sernunt se somno, They
laid them down to sleep. Sternuto, tare, to snese often. Vergi^ius
Sternuo, nuere, to snese. Sternutamentum, sneesynge. Sternutatio, idem.
Sterquilinium, a dungehylle or myxen. Sterogonia, a kind of frankincense
called commonly olibanu^, or in latin thus masculus. Sterto, tui, tere, to
route when one slepeth. Stesichorites, is the number of eight in dise, so
called of the sepulcher of Stesichorus the poet, which was made in figure
like to eight dyse. Stesichorus, a famous poet, of whom it is written, that
when he was an infant in his cradelle, a Nyghtyngale satte on his mouth, and
did sing, sygnyfienge that he should be the sweetest poet, that ever was
before him. Also he found first singing of songs in a daunse. Stibadium, a
chair or couche made of herbs wound together: sum do call it an herber
or summer parler. Stibium, a white stone found in silver mines, which stops
the runnyng of eyes, and does make them seem very fair. Stichos, a verse or
an order in a thing. Stigo, are, to prick forth. Stigma, matis, a mark made
with fire, or with a hot iron. Sometime it sygnyfieth infamy and reproach
objected openly. Stigmatici, persons infamed. Stilla, a drop. Stilbo, was a
philosopher. Vide stilpo. Stilbon, the sterre of Mercury. Stillicidium, the
droppynge of a house. Stillo, are, to drop. Stilpo, a philosopher borne in
the city of Megara in Greece, which his countreye being burned, and his wife
and childern lost in the fire, escaped, and departing alone, when the king
Demetrius asked of him, if he had lost any thing, he answered, I have lost
nothing: for all that is mine, I carry with me, meaning thereby, that virtue,
which is only the propre goods of a wise man, and may not be taken from him,
he took away with him. Stilpones, dwarfes. Stimulo, are, to prycke. Stimulatio,
a pryckynge or fervent moving to do a thing. Stimulator, he that prycketh.
Stimuleus, a, um, that which is done with pryckynge. Stimulus, a good,
wherewith oxen ar driven. Stingo, and stinguo, guere, to put out light. Stipa,
for stupa, towe. Stiparius, ia, ium, pertaining to stoppyng or beatynge hard
together. Stipatores, they which do frayte the ship, or lay in such fardelles
or burdeynes as are to be carried. Also they which be of the kings guard, always
about his person. Stipatus, enuyronned with men, to be defended, as princis are
with their guard. Stipendialis, le, pertaining to wages. Stipendiarius, a, um,
which pays tribute, of some called contributarie, to the fyndyng of an army,
or defense of a contray. Stipendiatus, he that takes wages. Stipendiosus, he
that has been oftentimes hired or retained in wars. Stipendior, diari, to be
hired or retained in wars. Stipendium, wages proprely given to soldiers,
Also subsidy paid to princis. Stipes, pitis, a stake, also a stycke. Stipo,
are, to stop chynkes or clyftes, proprely in ships or botes, with towe and
pytche. also to enuyronne to the intent to defend one. Stipendia facere, to
serve in wars, as a soldier. (...) Liuius. (...). 34.
Stips, uel stipis, pis, wages to men hired: also money given to beggars.
Stiptica medicamenta, medycines that do bind or restrain. Stipula, holme,
erige, or straw, apt to thatch houses. it is of some taken for the husk that
closes in the straw. Stipulatus, tus, and stipulatio, a bargayne or promise,
or obligation to pay money, or to perform a thing, which is required.
Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayn, to promise effectually that which he
is required to do. It has both the active and passive signification. Stipulor
abs te, I require of the, or I am required of the. Stiria, an ysykle or drop
of yse. Stiricidiu^, and stillicidiu^, the droppi^g of a house Stirpices,
w^eders in gardeynes. Stirpitus, up by the rote. Stirpo, are, to pull up by the
rote. Stirps, stiripis, in the femynyne gender sygnyfyeth a stock in kynrede,
being the masculyne gender it sygnifieth the stem of a tree or herb.
Stitisse vadimonium, Gell. li. 2.
to have brought forth surety or pledges. Stiua, is that in a plough, which
the plough man holds, when he does ear. Stlata, a broad ship or bote,
callid an hulke. Stlembus, slow and heuye. Stlatariu^, any thing that is borne
on the sea. Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes. Stlitem, old writers used
for litem, variance. Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis. Stlopus, a
sown made with the mouth, wha^ the chekes are blown. Stlotium, for lotum.
Sto, steri, stare, to stand, to endure or abide. Stare promisso, to abide by
his promise. To be full. Stat ager sentibus, Caecilius. Vergil.
the field is full of brembles. Iam puluere coelum stare uident, Now saw they
the sky fulle of duste. To bose out. Lucilius.
Hic corpus solidum inuenies, hic stare papillas Pictor marmoreo, Here in this
marble stone shall thou find painted, the body sound, and the pappes imbosed.
Also to be immouable, or always certain. Sic stat sententia, so the sentence
abides immouable, or is determined. Also Stat, my mind is. Vergilius.
Stat confer manum Aeneae, my mind is to fight with Aeneas Stat, is set.
Omnis in Ascanio chari stat cura parentis, Vergilius.
All the care of the render loving father was set on Ascanius. Also stare,
to cost, Neque ipse hoc periculum ignoro, expertus non leui documento, quanti
steterit mihi, quod semel imperata non feci, Nor I am ignorant of that danger,
having experience of no light warnyng, how much it cost me, that I did not
those things, that I was commanded. Stare firmum, to stand fast. Stat per
me, per te, per illum, when I, or any other is the cause, that a thing is
not done. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me sterisse credat, quo minus hae
fierent nuptiae, uolo. I would if it may be, that my father should think, that
it was not long of me, that this marriage took none effect. Stara me, he is of
mine opinion. Plautus in pseudo. Ter. in E^.
Stat apud te fides parum, Thou art of a small credence. Statur, I stand
here. Stoecades, four Isles in the french see against Languedocke. Stoici, a
sect of philosophers, which affirmed, that no grief moughte happen to a wise
man: and that felicity was only in virtue. Stola, a woman's gown, It was also
a long garment, which the princes of Persia did use, and was the only garment
of honor, as we do call such apparel a robe. Stolatus, he that wears such
a robe. also it may be called honorable. Stolide, foolyshely, lewdely.
Stoliditas, foolyshenes, lewdenes. Stolidius, more foolyshely. Stolidus, da,
dum, foolyshe, lewd of conditions, odyouse. Stolones, branches which do
spryng out of the stemmes or roots of trees. Stomachicus, he that is sick in
his stomach. Stomachor, aris, ari, to have indignation, to be vexed in mind.
Stomachose, angerly, hatefully, disdainously Stomachosus, dysdaynous.
Stomachus, is the pipe, whereby meat goth down. It is also that which is
called Ve^triculus, whereunto we have none other name but the stomach.
sometime it sygnifyeth indignation, vehemente wrath, hatrede, and abhorrynge
of a thing that lyketh not us, Sommetyme facylytie or gentylnesse. Plinius.
Storax, racis, a sweet incense or gum, which is also called styrax, whereof
be two kinds, the one is called Storax calamita, the other is called Storax
liquida. Storea, any thing that is spredde on the ground. It is also a matte.
Strabo, he that looks a squynte, or gogle eyed. Strages, a slaughter of me^,
or a discomfiture. Stragulum, every ouermoste garment. Also a counterpoynte or
couerlyd. Stramen, minis, straw, lytter. Stramentum, idem. Stramentitius, a,
um, that which is made of straw. Stramineus, a, um, of straw. Strangulo,
ar^, to strangle. Stranguria, dyffycultie to pysse. Stratagema, a polycie or
wise councille in wars. Strategus, a general captain of an army. Stratia,
an host or army. Stratiotes, a man of war. Stratiotes, an herb, which
grows on waters without any root. Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke,
pertainynge to wars. Stratius, idem. Also the name of one of the sons of
Nestor. Stratumino, are, to paue. Strator, toris, he that helps his master
to horseback, yeman of the styrope. Stratum, any thing that is strawed, Also
a bed. Strata, all that is laid on the bed. Stratum, a horse harneyse, a
streate or caulsey, paued with stone. Strebula, in the old tunge of Vmbri was
a piece of the flesh that was offered in sacrifyce. Strena, a new years
gift, or present. Strenue, valyantly, quyckely, boldly. Strenuitas, tatis,
actiuitie. Strenuus, a, um, valiant, prompt, actife, bold. Strepito, tare, to
make a noise often. Strepitus, tus, a noise made with the hands or fete.
Strepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noise, proprely in goinge or clappynge of
handrs, sometime generally. Strepsiceroti, certain beasts in Affryke, having
crooked horns. Stria, a rabat or small furrowe made in stone or timber. Striata,
be also creuyses or small lines, which are seen in herbs. Stribligo, ginis, a
viciouse form in speking where the words agree not, and the parts of speech
be out of order. Striblita, bread made like to ropes or cords wounden.
Stricte, straightly. Strictim, shortly touched one after an other Strictim
refer, to report much in few words. Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at
ones. Strictior, ^ius, more strayte* Strictissimus, a, um, most strayte.
Strictiuella, a foul ill favored hoore. Strictiuae, olyues gathered with ma^e
hand. Stricturae, sparks which do issue from metal when it is taken out
of the fire, and beaten with hammers. Strideo, dui, dear, and strido, dis,
dear, to crashe or make a noise like to cords, when they be drawn. Stridon, a
town in Dalmacia, where saynct Hierome was borne. Striga, a rewe of things
when they be laid in length. Alsoo a ridge of land, whereof comes
strigatus ager. Striges, shrycheoules, also women which are supposed to come
by night into houses, and suck the bloudde of chylderne, some call them
hegges. Strigia, wide garments made of lether used in wars. Strigil, gilis,
an horsecombe, alsoo a thing wherewith wrastelers bound their bodies, when
they had wrasteled. Alsoo a certain vessel. Strigiles, were rubbing combs
made of sweet wodde, wherewith in India the men were rubbed for an exercise.
Also kerchifes, wherewith wrastelers after their labors wyped their bodies.
also certain vessels. Budeus.
also pieces of fine gold found in mines, vnmyxt with any other matter. also
little fyshes most commonly taken in winter time. Strigilecula, a diminutiue
of strigil. Strigillo, are, to strain hard. Strigium, a spanyshe garment.
Strigmenta, fylthynesse, which commethe from a man's body, when he is washed.
also the corruption of oil. Strigo, gonis, a well pightman, or well compacte
or strong. Strigosus, a, um, carrayn lean, it is proprely spoken of horses or
routher beasts. Strimon, onis, a river in Thracia. Stringo, xi, gere, to
strain or wrynge. Also to stryke, to make thynne in curtynge, to gather, to
shave, to wound. Stringere ensem, to draw a sword. Strio, striare, to make
rabattes in stoone or timber. Alsoo to make furrows. It is proprely when
beasts in carynge at the end of a furrowe tournethe to make a new furrowe.
Sum do call hit, to wend. Striare, is also to plane or to polyshe.
Stritare, to abide or tarry with an ill will, or with much pain. Stritauum,
old writers used for Tritauo, my grandfathers grandfather. Stritomellus, a
sparowe, which hauntethe the sea costs. Strix, strigis, a shryche oule, a
wytche that changes the favor of chylderne. Striges, gross herbs or
wortes. Strobilus, a pyne apple tree. sometime the kernels, or fruit. Strobus,
a tree, whereof perfumes were made, myxte with the wine of dates, which perfume
was sweet, but it made the heed heavy, all be it without any pain. Stroma, it is,
tapisry. Strombon, a kind of Labdanum. Strombus, a shelle fyshe of the sea,
which has a king, whom they follow. It was thought sommetyme that he which
had seen that fysshe, should have good luck in his affairs. Strongyle, and
Strongylos, an I Will in the sea called Aegeum, now called Axos, sometime it was
called Dia. Stropha, subtyltie in arguing. Strophas, a whirlynge or sudden
turnyng. Strophades, two Isles in the grekysshe see. Strophia, garlandes which
priests were wont to wear. Strophiolum, a little garlande. Strophos,
frettynge in the bowelles. Strophium, a maidens neckerchefe or lynnen
partlette. Structiles columnae, pyllars made of diverse pieces. Structilis, le,
made of many pieces, or of diverse things. Structor, to^is, a caruer of meat
at a table. Structura, buylding, setting of things in good order. Strues, a
pyle of wodde, also a cake. Struices, an ordinance of many things together.
Strufectarij, they which did carye cakes to the temple to be offered, as they
do now carry the holy lofe on the sunday. Struferarii, they which did
sacrifyce at the trees that were burned with lyghtninge. Strufetani, they
which brought meal to be offered. Struma, a swellynge within the throat,
which is gathered matter and blood. some think it to be that, which is
called the kings evil. Strumosus, he that has the kings euylle. Struo,
struxi, struere, to set in order. Strumum, a medycyne or plaster for the
kings evil. Strupearia, holidays among the people called falisci, at the
which day, the people do go with garlandes on their heedis. Struppum, is a
like holydaye among the people called Tusculani. Struppi, were little wrethes
made of leaves put on the heedes of images in the temples, as now
superstitious sooles do set on images heedes in the churches. Strutheus, the
priuye membre of a man. Struthia, a certain kind of quynces. Struthiocamelus,
an ostryche. Struthio, idem. Struthopus, a round foot like a sparowe.
Struthopedes, they which have lyttelle round fecte. Strychius, an herb,
which makes him mad that eats of it. Strychium bibit, a proverb
sygnyfyenge the man is mad. Studeo, dui, dear, to study, or to apply the
mind, or care for a thing, to endeavor. Studiosus, studious, dylygent,
constant, addicte or fervently disposed. Studiose, studiousely. Studium,
study. sometime exercise, will, or appetite, desire. Stultitia, folly, it is
known by four things, or if he has not in remembrance that he should have,
or if he has, he does not retayn it, or does not follow good council, or does
approve ill council or affections. Stultior moricho, he that neglects his
own business at home, and applies other men's abroad, It is alsoo a proverb
touching them, which do things, that cause them to be laughed to scorn.
Stultior Choroebo, a proverb applied to fools, which will assaye to do a
thing that is above their wit or learning: for Choroebus, was a fellow, that
assayed to number the wawes of the sea, wha^ he him self could not tell any
number above five. Stulte, folyshely. Stultiloquentia, and stultilo quium, a
foolysshe babblynge. Stultiloquus, he that talks or speakethe foolyshely.
Stultior, stultius, more foolyshe. Stultissimus, ma, mum, most folyshely.
Stultius, more folyshely. Stultorum feriae, was a time in the monethe of
February, that fools kept holy, fools holy day. Stultus, he that does a
thing unadvisedly or without discretion. Stupa, towe, the course part of flax.
Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherewith calkers do beat towe into shyps or
botes Stupefactus, astonyed. Stupefio, I am astonyed or abashed. Stupeo, and
stupesco, pui, pere, to be astonyed or dismayde. sometime to marvel at.
Stupefacio, cere, to make astonid, or to cause to marvel or be abashed.
Stupentia, uel stupida membra, the members which have lost all their sense or
feling. Stupiditas, an abashement. Stupidus, dysmayed, abashed, also he that
feleth nothing, or lacks his senses. Stupor, poris, abashement, the sudden
privation of sense or feeling. Stupre, dishonestly, shamefully. Stupro, prare,
to commit auoultrie or rape or to defloure a virgin. Stuprum, auoutrie, or
defloration of a virgin Stura, an isle again the mouth of Tyber. Styga, a
senne in Egypt not far from the city of Memphis. Stygeus, ea, um,
pertaining to Styx, the great fenne, which is feigned of poets to be by the
field called Elysius, which the paynyms did suppose to be a place of
pleasure, wherein rested the souls of good men. Stylobata, a trowgh of timber,
wherein water rounnethe, or is conuayed into a cesterne. Stylus, a style,
which quality of words in speaking, sometime hard, sometime easy, sometime
in a mean. also an elegant form or order in writynge or speakinge.
Stymphalus, a river in Arcadia. Stymphalide, a coppe of feathers, which
stands on the heed of a bird, as of a lark, an heron, a pecocke, and other.
Stipticus, ca, cum, that which stops or binds, or straineth, if it be
eaten or dronken. Also that which in tastynge seems to strain the tunge, as
a quynce or red wine. Styrax, racis, a soote gum called storax, whereof be
two kinds, the one is called storax calamita, the other storax liquida. Styx,
sygnifieth sorrow or heaviness, poets do feign, that it is a fenne, which is
in hell.
S ANTE V.
SVada, called in greek Pitho, was callid the goddess of eloquence or
dylectable speech. Suadela, persuasion, fair speech. Suadeo, si, dear, to
speak fair, to entreat with fair words, to endeavor, to induce a man into
our opinyon, or to believe us. Suadibilis, le, that which may be persuaded.
Suasibilis, idem. Sualternicum, a kind of ambre, which is yelowe, whereof
beads be made, and is called Laumbre. Suapte, of his own nature. Suarius, a
swyne herd. Suasibiliter, an aduerbe signifyenge, in manner to persuade.
Suasio, an exhortation, a mocyon or persuasyon. Suasor, soris, he that does
exhort. Suasum, every color that may turn into an another color. Suauiatio,
a sweet kissing. Suauiator, he that kysseth swetely. Suauilo quium, a sweet
speech. Suauiloquus, he that speaks swetely. Suasorius, a, um, that wherewith
a man is or may be persuaded. Suatim, like a sow. Suauior, aris, ari, and
suauio, to kiss sweetly or for joy. Suauis, suau^, sweet in taste, soote in
odor or smelle. Suauita^, and sua^^tudo, sweetness. Suauiter, sweetly.
Suauium sumere, to kiss. Suauium facere, idem. Suauium, and sauium, swear
heart. Sub, under, by, or about. Sub lucem, by day light. Sub idem tempus, In
the same time, or about the same time. Sub horam pugnae. About the time of the
battayl. Sub eas autem redditae sunt, for they were delivered after them. Sub
sarcinis, with the trussis or carriage. Cicer. pro Planco.
Sub uesperum, in the twye light. Subuesperum Caesar portas claudi, militesque
ex oppido exire iussit, Caes. in co^.
In the twie light Caesar commanded the gates to be shut, and the me^ of
war to depart out of the city. Subacidus, eida, cidum, somewhat eygre, or
sour. Subacidulus, a, um, a little sour. Subactus, ta, tum, constrained,
subdewed, driven under, kneaded or wrought with hands, as dowe is, labored,
exercised. Subaeratus, ta, tum, that which is brass with in, and other metal
without. Subaero, rare, to myngle with brass. Subagito, tare, to solycite.
Subagito blandis, and benedicis uerbis, Plautus in ^^ell.
I solicited with fair and well spoken words. It is also to company with a
woman carnally. Subalaris, subalare, that which is under the wings.
Subalpini, people under the Mountains called Alps, called Peemountaynes.
Subalternatio, a succession by turn. Subalterno, nare, to succeed by turn.
Subaquaneus, a, um, and subaqueus, a, um, that which lies under the water.
Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of color. Subare, is spoken of women, which are
as filthy as swyne in the act of lechery. Subire, idem. Subareo, and
subaresco, rescere, to be or wax somewhat dry. Subasper, somewhat sharp.
Subaudio, dire, to here or perceive a lyttel. Subausculto, tare, to harken a
little. Subbasilicanus, he that walkethe under the place, where iugementes are
practysed. Subbibo, bibere, to drink a little. Subblandior, diri, to flatter.
Subcalidus, da, dum, somewhat hot, warm. Subcernicula, a line bulter, wherewith
the flower is severed from the branne. Subcerniculum, a rangynge sleue.
Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell. Subcineritius, a, um, roasted or baken under
the ashes, or axen. Subcisiua tempora, times borrowed or spared from seryous
^^^ynesse. Subcisiua opera, warkes cone at times stole^ from ordinary basines
or labors necessary. Subcollo, lare, to lay a thing on ones neck Subcrispus,
he that has a curlyd heed. Plautus in milite.
Subcu^^os, an under keeper. Subcutaneus, a, um, that which is within the
skin, between the skin and the flesh. Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an
another any matter, which is committed unto us by the king or prince.
Subdialia, things which do stand or be set abroad out of the house.
Subdiali^s, ale, abroad in the air without the house. Sub dio, that is not in
a house, or under a covering. Subdititius, ia, ium, which is not proprelye
his or hirs, whose it is fained to be. Partus subdititius, a birth feigned of
an another man's child. Libri subdititij, books with falls titles or
counterfaite auctours. Subditiuus, a counterfayte child. Subditus, a subject.
Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod subdititius. also put in the place of an other.
Subditus iudex, a judge which is set in the place of a judge departed.
Plautus in mostell. Plautus in epistol. and Plin. in epi.
Sub diu, in the day time. Subdo, dear, to put under, to add to, to put in
the place of an another, to put in danger or ieoperdie. Subdolus, he that
deceyueth craftily, cantelouse. Subdole, craftily cantelously. Subdubie,
somewhat doubtefully. Subdubitanter, idem. Subdubito, tare, I doubt somewhat.
Subdubius, somewhat in doubt. Subdubitatio, a little doubt. Terent. in
Andria.
Subducere, to deceive. Etiam nunc me subducere istis dictis postulas? And yet
now will thou goo about with these words to deceive me? Subducere, to
steal. Plautus in Curcu.
Proximo magnum poculum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiscit, ei sub duco
anulum, At the last he drank a great draught, and laid down his heed, whiles
he slepte, I st^le his ring from him. Subduco, xi, cere, to take away, to
remove, to lift up, or draw up. Subducere rations, to make account, to go or
steal away privily. Subductum omnibus uentis aedificiu^, a house in the
danger of every wind. Subeo, iui, ire, to go under or in, to take. Subire
mortem, to receive death. Subductio, a drawing up of a ship out of the
water. Subdulcis, ce, somewhat sweet. Subduro, rare, to make somewhat hard*
Subduror, ra^i, to be made somewhat hard. Suber, cork. Subiaceo, cere, to lie
under, also to be subject Subiacto, tare, and subiecto, to cast up, as corn
when it is fanned. Subices, subjects. Subiecto, tare, to cast under often.
Subiector, toris, a forger of testamentes, or he that brings forth one
testament for an another. Subicito, tare, to company often with a woman. Plautus
in persa.
Subiculum flagri, a beatynge stock. Subigo, egi, igere, to constrayne, to
subdue, to drive under, to whet, to beat or sta^pe, sometime to ear or tylle
truly, to dig, to meddyll with a womanne, Vergil.
sommetyme to lift up. Subi^cio, ieci, ijcere, to put under, to make subject.
sometime to cast up, to rehearse. Si meministi quod olim dictum est, subijce, If
thou do remember, what was ones spoken, rehearse it. Subinde, more over,
forthwith or anon, often times. Subin, idem. Fe^tus.
Subingere arietem, to deliver a sheep to be killed for him that does
sacrifyce. Ci. A^t. 2.
Subinnanis, ne, somewhat vayneglorious. Subire aleam, to be in danger or
peril, to enter into peril. Subire periculum, to enter into peril. Subijt
mihi, it comes to my remembrance. also to succeed, to resist, to clymme.
Plinius in p^m^gy^i.
Subire, to take charge of any thing. Quis enim curae tuae molem sponte
subeat? Who would wyllyngly take on him the great weight of thy charge. Cicer.
off.
Subire, to suffer or sustain. Qui retinendi officij causa, cruciatus subierit
vitro, He that will for the accomplyshement of his duty suffer tourmentes
wyllyngly. Alsoo to grow or spring up. Vergil.
Also to come to remembrance. Sera poenitentia subijt regem, Late repentance
came to the kings remembrance. Cogitationi nostrae nunquam subijt, It came
never to our thought. Subit recordatio, I or he remembered. Vergi. Atnei. x.
Subire, to put under. Aeneas subijt mucronem, ipsumque morando sustinuit,
Eneas put under his sword, and tarieng, lyfted him up. Subire, to succeed or
come in place. In quarum Iocu^ subierunt inquilinae, impietas, perfidia
impudicitia, In whose place succeeded new inhabytauntes, contempt of virtue,
disloyalty, lechery. Cic. in diuinatione.
Subire, to answer or resyste. Poteris ne orationem eius subire? Moughtest
not thou make answer to his oration? Subire, to clymme or mount up. Hemi
excelcitas, sex millibus passuu^ subitur, the height of the mountain of Hemus
is clymmed or mounted in six thousand paces. Subliasto, tare, to sell any
thing in time of wars that was praised. Hasta, a yerde, which was delivered
to him that was appointed to selle any thing taken in wars. Subfibulum, was
a white ornamente, four square and long, which the nuns, callid Vestales,
ware on their hodes, when they did sacrifyce. Subito, suddenly. Subitaneus, and
subitarius, a, um, and subitus, ta, tum, sudden. Subiugalis, le, used to the
yoke. Subiugo, gare, to make subject. Sub iugum mittere, to bring in
subjection. Subiungo, gere, to add or join to. Sublabor, beris, lapsus sum,
labi, to slyppe away. Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouth. Sublatior,
tius, higher. Sublatus, ta, tu^, lifted up, mounted, adua^ced. Sublegere
sermonem, Clam nostrum hu^c illae sublegerunt sermonem, Plautus in milite.
Privily they harkned, and bare away all that we co^muned. Sublego, are, to
substitute. Sublego, legi, legere, to steal. also to chese an other into the
place of him that is deed. Sublestus, ta, tum, feeble, faint, light, of no
force or value. Subleuo, are, to help, or aid, to defend, to lift up, to
sustain. Sublica, a proppe, a shore, a post, or other like thing, to sustayn
or keep a thing up. Sublicius, a briege at Rome. Subligaculum, a nether coyfe
or brieche. Subligar, garis, idem. Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde. Sublimis, me,
high, that which is above us. Sublimitas, heyght. Sublimiter, highly, on
height. Sublimo, mare, to set on high. Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoint or
touch, to paynt or stayne. Sublinitio, the first color that is laid or
dyed. also staynynge with colors. Sublitio, onis, the ground color, whereon
the perfyte color is laid, in cloth dyed, it is called grasynge. Subluceo,
cere, to shine sommewhat, or to give a little light. Sublucide, somewhat
light. Sublucidus, da, dum, somewhat light. Subluco, care, to vndershrede
boughs, that that the light may come under the tree. Subdialia, places without
the house to walk in without couerynges. Subducere, to go away by stelthe, that
no man do perceive. Sub iugum mitti, to be subdued, it was proprely when a
battle was vanquished, the vanquishers caused three spears to be set up lykes
galowes, and constrained them that were vanquyshed to go underneath it, in token
that they were subdued, which was the greattest reproach that moughte be
devised. Subluere, to vnderwashe, as water, which runs low under a bank
or hylle, Caesar de ^ell. galli. lib. 2.
and washes the foot thereof. Also to wash somewhat clean. Sublustris, tree,
that has some light. Subluines, a disease of cattle, which is betwixt the
cleys of their fete. Cice. pro Planco.
Sub manu habere, to have at hand. Sub manu esse, to be at hand or ready. Sub
manu, after hand, forthewith. Sub manus, easily, handsomely. Bono animo es,
Plautus in melite.
negotium omne iam succedit submanus, Be of good chere, all the matter is come
to pass handsomely. Lepide hoc succedit sub manus negotium, This mattier
comes well and easily to pass. Sub merum, almost pure. Subminia, a woman's
garment. Subministro, are, to do service under one, to give or deliver any
thing that is asked for. Subministrator, he that serves under an other man, he
that delyuereth any thing that is called for. Submissim, and submisse,
softely, proprely in speaking. also humbly. Submissus, a, um, humble.
Submitto, tere, to send privily or by stelth. Cae. de bell. gall. lib. 5.
Submittere, to send or bring in the mean time. Also to put or set under
proprely, as a calfe, a lamb, or a fool, is set under the damme to suck.
Submittere se, to humble him self. Submittere capillum, to let hear to grow.
Submoneo, nere, to warn one priuyly. Submordeo, dear, to bite softely, or
privily. Colum. 5. Plin.
Submoueo, uere, to remove or carry a thing far of. also to drive out of a
place. alsoo to discharge a man of his office. Subnecto, tere, to bind to, or
hang to, also to subscribe. Subnego, gare, to deny somewhat. Subneruo, are,
to cut synewes. Subnexio, a byndynge or hangyng to. Subniger, gra, grum,
somewhat black. Subnitor, nixus, niti, to lean against a thing to be
sustained up. Subnodo, are, to make a knot under a thing. Subnoto, tare, to
note or mark. Subo, are, to brymme as a bore does when he gets pigs.
Suboffendo, dear, to offend sommewhat, Cic. ad. Q. stratrem.
or a lyttelle. Suboleo, lere, to savor or smelle a little. Subopto, tare, to
desire a little. Subordior, dire, to begin. Suborno, nare, to praise or
honor. also to suborne or bring in a false. witness, or messanger, or feign
one person for an other, to deceive with. Suborior, riris, riri, to begin to
spring or arise, as the son does, to praise or honor one with words. also
to deceive pryuylye. Suppudeo, dear, to be somewhat ashamed. Subremigo, are, to
row under. Subrepo, psi, pefe, to steal away or run away priuyly.
Subrepere animo, to enter suddenly or pryuyly into the mind. Subreptio, theft,
or a falls suggestion. Subreptitiae literae, letters stolen out by a falls
suggestion. Subreptitius, a, um, stolen or falsely come by. Subrideo, tisi,
dear, to smyle or laugh privily Subripeo, to steal, to take away secretly.
sometime to lift up hastily. Subrisio, and subrisus, a smylyng. Subrogo, gare,
to substitute or subrogate, to make a deputy in an office, to put in an another
man's room. Subrufus, a, um, and subrubeus, a, um, somewhat read. Subrumi,
lambs that do suck. Subrumor, ari, to be souckeled, or put to suck as
calfes, lambs, etc. Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or privily by little and
little. also to dygge the earth. Subsanno, are, to scorn or mock. Subsannatio,
a mock with bendynge the brows, and snuffynge up of the nose. Subsannator, a
mocker. Subsarcinis, with trusses or burdeyns. Subscribo, scripsi, scribere, to
write under, to subscribe, to favor a matter, Ci. in Ver. Asco. Ped.
to assynge a cause why, to affirm. Subscriptores, they which in causes
iudyciall do favor the part of the accuser or playntyfe. Subscudes, the utter
table, whereunto other tables are fastened. Subseco, care, to cut under or cut
a little. Subsellia, be^ches, which were under higher seats, they were also
benches, on the which Judges bid sytte. Subsentio, sensi, sentire, to perceive
somewhat Subsequor, queris, sequi, to follow forthwith. Subsero, serere, to sow
or set under a thing Subseuio, seuire, to serve, to accord, or agree. Subsessae,
scoutwatches, whereby hosts of men are intrapped as they pass. Subsideo, sedi,
subsedere, to sytte under, to say in awayte for one. Subsidium, aid. Subsido,
dear, to fall down, to auale. Subsigno, nare, to subscribe or write under.
Subsilio, liui, lire, and subsulto, sultare, to leap a lyttelle. Subsilles,
little plates belonging to sacrifice. Subsimus, he that has a camyse nose.
Subsipere, to savor somewhat. Subsisiuum, that which follows or is next.
Subsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste, to abide, to be by him self. Subsolanus,
the east wind. Subsono, are, to sown a little, to make a little noise.
Subsortido, a deputation, when one makes an other his deputy. Subsortitus, a
substytute. Substantia, substance. also matter. sometime goods, which is also
commonly called substance. Substerno, straui, sternere, to straw or lay
under any thing, as russhes, carpettes, and flowers. Substillum, a ryme or
falling myste, or a droppynge before and after rain. It ^s also a sickness,
wha^ a man may not piss well Substituo, tui, tuere, to substitute in the place
of an another. Substo, stiti, are, to sustain or abide consta^tly. Substratus,
a, u^, strawed under, or laid under Substrepo, pere, to make a little noise.
Substringo, xi, gere, to shrink underneath. Substruo, truere, to vnderpynne a
house. Substructio, vnderpynnynge or groundyng of a house. Substupeo, and
substupesco, scere, to be some what dismayde. Substupidus, somewhat dismayde or
abashed. Subsulto, tare, to ioumpe. Subsultim, by iumpes. Subsuo, suere, to
sow underneath. Subsum, subesse, to be under, or within. Subtal, the holownes
of the foot. also the paulme of the hand. Subtegmen, minis, the threede,
which in weauynge is called the woufe. Subtegulanea, places under the eueyse
of howses. Subtendo, dear, to purpose or diuyse any thing, to deceive an
another manne, or to lay any thing in a man's way for the same purpose.
Subtento, tare, to espy. Subtepeo, pere, to be somewhat warm. Subtepidus, da,
dum, somewhat warm. Subter, under. Subterraneus, ea, eum, that which is under
the ground. Subtercludo, dear, to shut under. Subterduco, cere, to wtdrawe,
to escape away. Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to run or flow under a thing, as
water under a bridge. Subterfugio, gere, to escape. Subtergredior, di, to go
underneath. Subtero, riui, terere, to broyse, or wear. Plaut.
Subticeo, cui, cere, to answer nothing to that which is spoken. Subtice
sco, scere, ide^ Subtondeo, dear, to clyppe under. Subtralio, xi, trahere, to
take away, to steal, Pli^.
Subtrahere se, to draw unto quietness. Subtrahere famae, to withdraw from
bruyte. Subtrahere inuidiae, to eschew envy. Subtristis, te, somewhat heavy or
sorye. Subturpis, pe, somewhat foul, in part foul or dishoneste, the matter
or thing dishoneste, covered with clean words. Subucula, a shyrte. also a
cake. Subueho, uexi, uehere, to bear. Subuecto, tare, to bear or carry often.
Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to help. Subuerbusta, meat burned on the spytte.
Festus
Subuerto, tere, to turn up so down. alsoo to distroy, to subuerte.
Subuerso, sare, to subuerte often. Subueteribus, was a place in Rome. Subula,
an aulle, that cordyners do use for a bodkyn. Subulcus, a swyneherde. Subulo,
an heart having horns without tynes, called as I suppose, a spyttarde.
Subuolo, lare, to flee away. Suburbanum, a manner or ferme without the walls of
the city. Suburbia, the suburbs of a city or town. Suburrana regio, the
street in Rome where the brothell houses were. Subuulturius, a, um, that which
apprehends men like as rauynes do carrayne. Succedaneus, a, um, that which
succedeth. Succedere, to enter. Et nostris succeed penatibus hospes, And enter
thou my friend into my house. Succedere, to go under a thing. Succedere, to
speed well, to be at a good point. Hac no^ successit, alia aggrediamur uia, This
way it spedeth not, let us go to an other way. Succedo, cessi, cedere, to
succeed. Succendo, dear, to inflame to burn. Succe^seo, ui, ere, to be a^gry
for a good cause. Succento, tonis, was a certain garmente, which only hoores
did wear. Succento, tare, to sing a base. Succentor, toris, he that syngeth a
base. Succenturiatus, he that made up the number of the bend of men that
lacked. Succenturio, are, to make up the number of a hundred soldiers, or of
that company that was called Centuria. Succerda, swynes dunge. Succerno, creui,
cernere, to raunge meal in a syeue. Successio, succession. Successor, soris, a
successor. Successore^ dare, to depose a man of his office. Successus, a, um,
that which prosperouslye happens, or spedeth well. Successus, us, success,
be it good or ill. Succida, woulle unwashed. Succidaneae hostiae, beasts for
sacrifice, which were killed in the second place, or next to the first.
Succidaneus, a, um, that which folowethe the first. Succidia, a piece or
flyche of bakon salted. also larde. Succido, cidi, cidere, to fell or cut
down. also to fall under. Plautus in Curcu.
Succiduus, a, um, that which does succeed or follow. also low, ready to
fall down. Succidusda, dum, moist, or full of iuyse. Succingo, xi, gere, to
gyrde. Also to enuyron or compass. Frustra se terrore succinxerit, qui septus
charitate non fuerit, armis, n. arma irritantur, In vain shall he enuyron him
self with terriblenesse, which is not wallyd about with the love of his
countreye. For with vyolence, vyolence is styred. Succingulum, a swordegyrdell.
Succino, cinere, to make a soft noise, to singe a base or tenor. Succincta
oration, a compendiouse or short Oracyon. Succincte, compendiousely.
Succinctorium, a short iackette or ierkyn. Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte.
Succinum, aumbre, whereof sum beade stones are made. Succinus, na, number, of
aumbre. Succisiuum tempus, time of leisure, vacant from business. Succlamo,
are, to cry softely. Succollo, are, to put under the neck or shulders, to
bear a thing. Succortrila, a small voice and a shryll. Succresco, scere, to
grow under, or low, or a little and little. Succubo, bare, to lie under.
Succubonium, idem quod succuba, she that lies under. Succubi, deuylles, which
in the form of women, do company with men. Succulentus, ta, tum, full of
iuyse. Succiplenus, idem. Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be subdued, to be joined
to, to fall down under an heavy burdeyn, to fail for feblenesse. Succurro,
ere, to help, to com to remembrance. Suctus, tus, suckynge. Succus, cus, cui,
the suckynge of milk. Succus, juice or humor, which the body receives of
meat and drink, also generally all manner of iuyse. Succussarius, and
succussor, a trottyng horse. Succuso, nis, idem. Succusso, are, to shake as a
horse does when he trotteth. also to trotte. Succussatio, succussura, and
succussatura, the trottynge or shaking of a horse. Succutio, cussi, tere, to
shake a thing. Succula, a sow pygge, also a certain inner garment. also a
certain company of sterres, called the.vii. sterres, which do appiere
the.xii. Calendes of June, and be called succulae and Hiades. Sudarium, a
napkynne. Sudes, a certain spear, which is burned at the end. Sudo, dare,
to sweat, to labor soore, to have much to do. Sudor, doris, sweat. Sudum,
the clear part of the firmamente between clouds. Also the clear fyrmame^t
without clouds. Suefacio, and suefio, fieri, to be wont. Suere aliquid capiti,
to get a shrewde turn. Metuo lenonem, ne quid suo suat capiti, I am aferde of
the bawd, lest he get a shrewde turn. Suesco, sueui, suescere, to be
wont. Sueui, a people in high Germany. Sueuia, a country in Germanye.
Suffarcinatus, nata, natum, laded, trussed. Suffarcino, nare, to lade or
bourdeyne, to trusse up. Suffarrancus, he that carries meal or flower to any
place to selle in little quantytie. Suffectus, is he, which an offycer being
deed, or removed, is set in his place. Suffes, was among the Carthaginensis,
as the Consul was at Rome. Suffibulum, was an attire, which the nuns of
Vesta did wear on their heedes, when they did sacrifice, and was like to
the tyres, which wives of London did wear, and becamme them much better
than bonettes of veluette do now, wherewith they mock ladies and
gentyllwomenne, and thereby only do get the name to be callydde Maskynge
ladies. Suffero, sufferre, to sustain, to put under, to suffer. Sufficio,
feci, sufficere, to suffyse, to endure, to minister, to substitute, to stayne.
Sufficit, it suffyseth. Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation. Suffio, fiui,
fire, to perfume. Suffiscus, the codde of a ram, which was made for a purse,
to conteyne money. Suffitio, and suffitus, tus, a perfume or fumigacyon.
Suffitor, toris, he that blows the fire. Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed.
Sufflamen, that wherewith a whiele is retained or stopped of his course.
Sufflatio, a blowynge. Sufflator, toris, he that blows Sufflatus, ta, tum,
blown. Sufflo, are, to blow. Suffocatio, a stranglynge. Suffocator, he that
strangleth. Suffoco, care, to stop the breath, to strangle. Suffodio, fossi,
dear, to dygge under. Suffossus equus, a stumblynge horse. Suffragator, toris,
a supporter or maintener. Suffragium, the voice of people assemblyd in gyuyng
their consent. also help or succor. also a wrecke in the sea. Suffragines,
the iointes of the hinder leg of a beast, called the how^, sometime it does
signify the pasternes, they be alsoo the young sprynges of vynes. Suffraginosi
equi, horses, which have the pains or scratches. Suffragor, gatis, gari, to
bear savor. Suffulcio, ^^, cire, to proppe up. Suffulcior, cire, to be
proppid up or underset Suffundatum, vnderlayde. Suffundo, dear, to cast down
or pour lycour on a thing, to cast abroad. Suffundo, dare, to build or
set upon a foundation. Suffuror, rari, to steal privily. Suffusio, a web
in the eye. Suffusus, a, um, sprynkled, indewed. Suggero, gessi, gerere, to
mynyster or give a thing, to send sorthe things, whereof are plenty.
Suggerere sumptus, to allow expenses. Suggestus, uel suggestum, a pulpitte or
high place, out of the which Orators or Capytaynes made proposytions unto
the people. Suggrundia, the euyse of a house, which defends the walls from
rain. Suggrundaria, buryals of young infantes. Suggrundario, the eueysynge of
a house. Suggillo, lare, to make a black spotte in the skin with beatynge.
It is alsoo to scorn, to detracte, or infame, to reprove, to condemn.
Suggillatus, spotted, mocked, detracted, infamed, condemned. Suggillatio, is a
a mark in the visage black or blue, made by some stroke, a mock, a
detraction, an infamation behind one, a condemnation. Sugo, and sugeo, suxi,
sugere, to souke. Suinus, a, um, and suillus, a, um, of a sow. Sulcatim, in
furrows. Sulco, care, to falowe. Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto
quinto sulco, To sow in the third, the fourth, the fyfthe falowe. Sometime
it is put of a dyche. Also any manner of cuttynge of the earth. proprely it
signifies any thing that is long and sharp edged. Bisulcum animal, A beast
that has the fete cloven with two talons. Sulla, was a cruel tyrant of the
Romans called also Sylla. Sulmo, monis, a town in the countraye of Peligna,
where Ouidius the poet was borne. Sulmonensis, a man or woman of the city
of Sulmo. Sulphuraria, a place where brymstone is boiled. Sulphur, phuris,
brymstone. Sulphur eus, ea, eum, of brymstone. Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dressed
with brimstone. Sultanus, a sowdane, which was the name of the king of Egipte
and Siria. Sum, I am, es, thou art, est, he is. Sumanus, he that always takes.
Su^ Amphitrionis, I am Amphitrions servant. Plaut.
Sum mihi bis septem praestanti corpore nymphae, I have fouretene maidens of
excellent beauty. Sum in mora illi, I make him to tarry. Terentius
Sum in moetu, I am aferde. Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame. Sum, old
writers used for eum, him. No. Mar. Plautus in milite.
Sit uestra benignitas ad audiendum? Pleasith you to here? Sum septem dies, It
is seven days agone. How this verb Sum, should be set and construed, read
Calepines vocabuler, also look for Est, fuit, and such other parts of sum, in
their letters before. Sumanalia, a great cake made like a whele, such as is
made at brydales and church goinges. Summam facere, to sum a book of
account. Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a sow, cut from her the day
after that she has varowed, ad is powdered with salt. Cicero.
Sumere, to hyre. Quoad enim peruentum, quo sumpta nauis est, non domini nauis
est, sed nauigantium, Until they come to the place whither the ship was
hired, the ship is not the owners but theyrs, which are passagers. Terent.
in phormi.
Sumere, to borowe. Sumere, to spend or bestow on one. In mala vxore, atque
inimico, si quid sumas, sumptus est, On a shrewd wife, and an ennemy, what so
ever thou bestowest, is waste. Plautus in milite. Plautus in cap. Plautus in
Bacch. Terentius
Sumere aquam e puteo, to draw water out of the well. Sumere confidentia^, to
trust, to take courage. Sumere mutuum, to borowe. Sumere obsequium animo, to
rejoice, to take comfort. Sumere operam frustra, to labor in vain. Sumere
optionem, to choose. Sumere personam, to counterfaite an other. Sumere
supplicium, to punyshe. Summa, is a collection of things or words. also the
principal point of a matter. Su^mates, the chief persons of a realm or cite.
Summatim, and summate, compendiousely by every part of the matter, summarily.
Ad summum duo, two at the most. Sum, excellently, chiefly. Summenianae
uxores, hoores kept in the stead of wives. Summenium, a place where bawdrye
was kept without the walls of a town. Summissi, murmurers. Summissim, and
summisse, softly, not loud. Summissus, a, um, base, low. Summitas, heyght, or
hyghenesse. Summitudo, dinis, the height of a thing. Summitto, misi, mittere,
to convey in privily, also to suffer to grow. Summittere barbam, to let the
berde grow, to let to depart. Summoenius, nia, um, that which is under the
walls. Summo, are, to make highest. Summo iure agere, to take the rigor or
extremity of the law in suite. Cice. pro. A. Caesina.
Su^mum fastigiu^ imponere, to finishe a thing perfitely, to bring a mattier
to a point. Summam manum addere, idem significat. Summus, a, um, highest,
extreme, greattest, or very commendable. Summum, at the most. Sumo, sumpsi,
sumere, to take upon one, to take generally, Varro de ^e rust.
to hyre, to consume. Sumptifacio, cere, to spend. Sumpti, for sumptus,
plurali numero. Sumptuariae leges, laws made for restraining of outrageous
expenses. Sumptuarius, a, um, that which does pertayne to expenses.
Sumptuose, sumptuously, chargeably. Sumptuosus, a, um, sumptuouse. Sumptus, ta,
tum, taken, or chosen. Sumptus, tus, expense. Sunium, a promontorie or elbowe
of the country of Attica. Suo, sui, suere, to sow, to join or make fast
together. Suopte ingenio, of his own propre wit. Sup, for super, above.
Supellectilis, le, and supellex, household stuff, all things mouable within
the house. Supellecticarius, a bondsman or slave, which is accounted for
chatell. Super, and supra, upon above. Super Garamantas and Indos proferet
imperium, Vergil.
He shall advance his empire beyond the Garamantians and Indianes. Super
Euclionis filia^, of Eucliones daughter Super coenam, at supper. Plautus in
Aulularia^ Plinius epist. 87. Epist. 91. Vergilius.
Super haec, more over than this. Super Priamus, super Hectore, of Priamus of
Hector. Hac super re scriba^ ad te Rhegio, Of that matter I will write unto you
from Regiu^. Super for propter. Nec super ipse sua molitur laud laborem, Nor
he takethe the pain for his praise. Super, for valde, His accensa super,
Vergilius.
with those words she being kendlyd or styred. Superaddo, dear, to put or
add to. Superbe, proudely. Superbiter, idem. Superbia, pride. Superbio, ire,
to be proud. Superbiloquens, and superbiloquus, he that speaks proudely, or
hautely. Superbiloquentia, proud or haute words. Superbos, old writers used
for mortuos, Plautus in Amphi.
deed, because of the pomp, which was at their burienge. Faciam ego hodie te
superbum, nisi hinc abis, I will kyl the, if thou get the not hens. Superbum
bellum, unjust or unhappy war. Vergil.
Superbus, proud, sometime magnifyke or noble, also high, ornate, or
garnysshed, rich, wicked. Supercido, dear, to fall on. Superciliosus, sour
in countenance. Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. sommetyme it sygnifyeth pride,
gravity. It is alsoo the haunce, which is over the door. Superciliu^
attollere, to be stately or proud. Supercilium ponere, to lay aparte pride or
stately countenance. Supercresco, scere, to ouergrowe. Supercubo, bare, to lie
over. Superduco, cere, to put or lay on. Superedo, dear, to eat after a
thing. Superessit, for supererit, shall live, or be left on live. Superest, he
lives, or is on live. Superest, there is plenty or more thanne enough. Aliis
quia defit, quod amant, aegre est: Terent. in pho^m.
tibi quia superest, dolet, Some because they lack the thing that they love,
be discontent: and thou art sorye that thou haste more than thou nedest.
Terent. in Heart.
Superesse, to be the rest or resydue. Porro ausculta quod superest fallatiae,
But yet here what was the resydue of that craft or deceyte. To defend or
plead for one. Cu^ctarise, ne si superesset, eriperet legibus reu^, He would
tarry, lest if he came and spoke for him, he should deliver an offender.
Superexto, tare, to remain over. Superficiariae aedes, houses builded on the
land of an another man than builded them. Superficiarius, he that has a house
of his own builded on an other man's ground, and pays therefore a quyte rent.
Superficies, the ouermost part of any thing. Superfoetatio, oone conception of
a child after an other. Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abound, or be
superfluouse. Superflue, superfluousely. Superfluo, idem. Superfluus, a, um,
superfluous. ^^^onius.
Superforaneus, a, um, idem. Superfundo, dear, to pour upon. Supergredior,
gredi, to go above. Supera, for supra. Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to cast on or
lay on. Superiiceo, superieci, iicere, to cast upon, to lay upon. Superi,
they which ben in heaven. Superincido, dear, to fall on. Superior, higher.
Superior aetas, the time or age passed. Superlachrimo, to weep or drop upon.
Supermeo, are, to go over, or slyppe over. Supernato, natare, to swymme over.
Supernati, they which have the hinder part of the thighs next the buttockes
cut away Superne, a high, above. Supernia, the inward part and hindermost
part of the thyghes next the buttockes cut of. Supernus, na, number, high, or
over. Superna regio, the high country. Supernumerarius, that which is in
surplusage, above the true number. Supero, rare, to go over. Also to vanquishe
or overcome. also to ouerlyue. sometime to kylle. Quod superat, which is more,
or is left in a surplusage. Superpondium, ouerweight, that which is added to
the just weight. Supersedeo, dear, to omytte or leave to do a thing. Ci.
Seruio
Supersedeas hoc labor itineris, take not the pain to come now, or forbear
the peyn taking in this journey. Supersede istis rebus, Plautus in Epidico.
Plautus in persa. Plin. epist. 102.
let these things alone Supersede istis uerbis, let these wordis pass, hold
thy runge. Supersedi scribere, I forbear to write, I left unwritten. Superstes,
stitis, he that ouerliueth or remaianeth alive afterthat other be deed, also
alive. sometime present, old writers called Superstites, witnesses. Superstes,
he that is saulfe. Deos quaeso, ut sis superstes, I beseech god save you, long
might you live. also present. Superstitem utrunque monui, ne inuisi abeant, I
aduysed them both, that they should not depart with dyspleasure. Superstitio,
a superfluous or vain religion or devotion, an honoring of that which ought
not to be honored, a vain reverence or fear toward that thing, wherein is no
efficacye or power, but by the illusyon of the dyuelle: as divination by the
cryenge or fleinge of birds, observation of times, and dreams, and other like
vanites. Superstitiosi, they which be tymorous without cause, fearinge that god
is displeased, where there is none offense done: They were at the first so
called, because they contynually prayid and offered to the goddis, to preserve
their chyldern, that they might ouerlyue them. Finally every indiscreet or
unreasonable devotion or religion, may be called Superstition. Superstito,
stirare, to make hoole or recover from death. Supersto, stare, to stand
upon. Superstruo, struxi, struere, to build on. Supersum, Superesse, to
abound, to remain, to vanquishe, to be superfluous, to endure. Superuacaneus,
a, um, superfluous. Superuacuus, a, um, not necessary. Superuaganea auis, was
of the diuinours or sothsayers called that bird, which cried from the top of
any thing. Superuenio, nire, to com unlooked for, to com upon or after an other
thing. Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recover from peril of death, or when a man
seems to be dead. Superus, a, um, the highest or ouermost. Superum mare, the sea, which is callid Mare Hadtiaticum, wherein stands the City of Venyce.
Supinus, na, number, vpryghte, Horation.
the bealye vpvpwarde. sometime it sygnifieth on an hill or high place. Suppar,
almost even. Supparasitor, taris, tari, to follow and flatter for a man's
dinner. Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged up where interludes were playde.
Supparus, uel supparum, a smock. it is also a topsayle of a ship.
Suppedaneum, a foot stool. Suppedito, tare, to subdue, to minyster
sufficiently, also to oppress. Plautus in Asinar.
Suppedito, tare, to endure. Ac stomacho no^ queo labori suppeditare, My
stomach will not let me endure the labor. Alsoo to furnyshe expenses, to
give as much as a man would have. Terent. in Brautont.
Nam si illi pergam, suppeditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uero ad
rastros res redit, Surely Menedemus, if I would give him as much as he would
spend, that thing would bring me to the point to rake for my living.
Suppeditare, to subdewe or tread under. Nunc, uideo, in iudicio mecum
contendere non uis, ubi suppeditari turpissimum, superare pulcherrimum est,
Now I perceive thou will not contend with me before judges, where it were a
great shame to be subdued, and very much honesty to have the better.
Suppetiae, and suppetias, aid or succors. Suppeto, tii, tere, to ask privily
or craftily. Suppetit, it is in a redynesse. Supperior, ari, to succor or
aid. Plautus in Asinar.
Suppetunt dictis data, aut facta. Non suppetunt dictis data, He perfourmeth
not that, that he promised. Vtinam quae dicis dictis facta suppetant, would god
thou would do as thou say, or would god thy deeds did agree with thy
words. Plautus in Ruden. Plautus in Amphit.
Suppetit lucrum, there is gain sufficient. Res ita supperit, the matter so
requires. Suppetias mihi, Bring to me succoures, aid me. Suppetias adueni,
come and help me. Suppetias far, to aid or succor. Suppilo, are, to steal
underhand or craftily. Supplanto, tare, to put under the foot, to
overthrow, to supplant or deceive, in preventing one to his hynderance or
damage, to vnderplante or set a tree or vine. Supplaudo, si, dear, to rejoice
privily. Supplementum, that which supplyethe or makes up that which lacks
in quantity or number. Suppleo, plere, to make up that which lacks, to make
even. Supplex, plicis, he that desires any thing knelynge or prostrate.
Supplicatio, a prayer, a request. Supplicassis pro supplicaueris. Supplicans,
it is, he that desires a thing. Suppliciter, humbly knelynge. Supplicium,
pain, tourmente, Salust. in bell. ca^. Iugurt.
or execution of death. sometime supplicia, are prayers. Supplitia pendere, to
be put to execution. Supplico, care, to beseech humbly. Supplimentum, a making
up of a number, which lacks or is minished. Supplodo, plosi, ere, Cor.
Tacitus lib. 13.
to stamp or make noise with the fete. also to reiecte or cast away.
Supplosio, a stampynge or noise made with the feet. Suppono, sui, nere, to put
under, to put into the place of an another, to set a false or feigned thing in
the place of that which is the very true thing. Supportare, to bring or
carry privily. Caesar de bell. Gall. lib. 7.
Suppositio, the puttinge or setting of a fained or falls thing in the place of
the thing self, as one child for an another. Suppostrix, she that co^mytteth
that falshod. Suppositus parius, when the child of one woman is laid with an
another womanne, which is not the very mother, as though she had borne it.
Subpraedes, countersureties, they which are bounden to the sureties, to save
them harmless. Suppressus, sa, sum, drowned, beaten under. Justinius.
Victi Persi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus multae suppressae, multae captae,
The Persians fled unto their ships, whereof many were drowned, and many
taken. Also hyd or concyled. Supprimo, pressi, supprimere, to keep down to
keep secret, to keep in silence. Supprimere iter, to stay or omit a journey.
Caes. in co^. de bello civilly. li. 1. Plautus in milite.
Suppromo, psi, mere, to draw out drink. Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella
suppromo credita, The cellar or buttrie was committed to a good butlar.
Suppudet, I am half ashamed, thou art half ashamed, or he is half ashamed.
Suppurantia, and suppuratio, matterynge of a soore. Suppuratorius, ria, um,
that which pertaynethe to impostumes, or to make a soore to matter. Suppuro,
are, to matter or be an impostume. Suppuratio, an impostume or sore that has
matter. Supra, above, or over. Supra quam, for supra id quod. Supreme, highest
of all, or above all. Supremus, ma, mum, the highest or greatest of all other.
Supus, old writers used for supinus. Sura, the cause of the leg. sometime
the hole shanke or leg from the kne down. Surculaceus, and surcularis, re,
that which brings forth young settes or springes of trees Surculus, a young
set or slyppe, a nursegarden, also a slyppe of a tree or young greffe. Surcus, a
stake. Surculosus, a, um, full of slyppes. Surdaster, he that is somewhat deaf
and can not here. Surde, deafely. Surdeo, dui, dear, to be deaf. Surdesco,
scere, to wax deaf or be deaf. Surditas, deafness. Surdo, dare, to make
deaf. Surdus, da, dum, deaf, also that which has no savor. Surrentum, a
town in Campania. Surrentinus, na, number, of that town. Surregit, old writers
used for surgit, whereof comes surrectio, a rysynge. Surrepo, pere, to crepe
under. Surreptitius, a, um, that which is done by stelthe that none other man
knows it. Surgo, surrexi, surgere, to rise, also to grow or spring. Vergil.
Surrigo, surrexi, surrigere, to lift up. Plautus in Amphit.
Surrigere aures, to lay his ear to a thing, to harken. Surripere operam,
Clanculum abij a legione, operam hanc surripui tibi, I departed pryuyly from
the host, Plautus in (...).
this time have I borrowed to do you pleasure. Surripere se, to steal his away.
Vt surripuisti te mihi dudu^ de foro? O, how did thou steal away from me
late out of the market? Surripio, ripui, pere, to steal or take away privily.
also to lift up on high, to prevent. Surpiculus, a baskette or hamper. Surrogo,
gare, to substitute, or put in an another man's place. Ci in par^^tio^e
oratoria.
Surrogatio, a substitution. Sursum, above. Sursum uersum, upward. Sursum
deorsum, up and down. Sus, for sursum. Suscio, scire, for scio, scire, to
know. Suscipere fidem, to promise. Quas parts impleturum te, secundum
susceptam fidem confido, Which part I trust thou will perform, according
to the promise that thou made. Plautus in milite. in Ruden.
Suscito, tare, to awake one out of his sleep, to call one to his warke. Sus,
suis, a sow. Sus Mineruam, a proverb applied unto him, which presumes to
teach or correct one, of whom he rather ought to be taught or corrected.
Suillus, la, lum, of a sow. Susque deque fero, and susque deque habeo, I force
not, I recke not, I care not. Susa, a great city in Persi^. Suscipio, scepi,
scipere, to take. Suscipere liberos, to get chylderne. Suscitabulum, a
provocation or sterynge. Suscito, tare, to styre or provoke. Suspecto, tare, to
behold above. Mart.
sometime to see benethe, or to look down. Suspendeo, dear, Columel. Cicero.
to be hanged over or an high, also to appear a little. Suspendiosus, he that
is hanged. Suspensus, a, um, hanged up. Suspensus, he that douteth to speak or
do. Suspensa manu, timorously, doubtefully. Plin. epi^^ 98. li. 6. Terent. in
phor^.
Suspenso gradu, Haec ubi ego audiui, ad fores supenso gradu, placide ire
perrexi. When I hard those words, I went to the door fair and softly.
Suspendium, hanging. suspensio idem. Suspendo, dear, to hang up, to be
doubteful or sorowefull. Suspensus animo, having doubt, or being adradde.
Suspenso gradu incedere, to go softely without making noise. Suspicio, spexi,
spicere, to look up, also to honor, to answer. Suspicans, he that has
suspicion, suspecting Suspicor, cari, to have suspicion, to suspecte. also to
suppose. Suspectus, ta, tum, suspected. Suspicio, onis, suspicyon. Suspiciosus,
suspecyouse. Suspiratus, tus, a syghe. Suspiriosus, short wynded, or he which
fetches his brethe paynfully. Suspirium, a syghe. Suspiro, are, to sygh. also
to desire ferue^tly. Sussilio, lire, for subsilio. Sustendere insidias, to lay
watch. Sustentaculum, that which sustayneth or bears up a thing. Sustento,
tare, to sustain or bear up. Sustineo, nui, nere, to hold up, to suffer, to
forbear, to feed, to refrain. Sustollo, tuli, tollere, to lift up.
Sustollere animos, to be proud, or to have an high courage. Sustollere aes
alienum, to pay dettes. Plin. de ^ris illu^^r.
Sustollere puerum, to bring up a child. Sustulit, is proprely of the father,
as peperit, is of the mother. Sustuli, I have had, I have brought up. I have
lift up. Susurratio, a whysterynge. Susurro, are, to whyster. Susurro, ronis,
a whysterer. also he which with falls and secret report makes dissencyon
between men. Susurrus, and susurrium, a whystrynge, or soft murmuring, or
such noise as trees do make with the wind, or a river when it runs, or
birds when they chatter. Sutatis, a seamster or shepster. Sutela, a subtyltie
or crafty warkynge. Suterna, showemakers craft. Sutilis, le, that which is
sown. Suitor, toris, a showemaker. Sutorium attramentum, soutars bleche.
Sutorius, a, um, pertaining to a showmaker. Sutrina, a showemakers shop.
Sutura, a seame. Suturnium, an ewer or lauour. Suum, his own, his propre
goods. Suus, a, um, his or hirs. But how this word shall be most aptely and
conuenie^tly vsyd, read Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For it is more
abundantly and proprely declared of the^, than can be expressid in english.
S ANTE Y.
SYades, sterres callid also Hyades, seven in number. Syagros, a wild bore.
Sybaris, a city in Grecia. Sybarita, a man of that city. Sybaritica mensa, a
proverb applied to feasts and bankettes, which do excede in delycatenesse.
Sybaritici libelli, wanton books. Sybaritici ludi, plays which are wanton and
costly. Sybariticum carmen, a verse or poem contaynynge wanton matter. Syboti,
people in the north part of the world. Sychaeus, a man's name. Sycion, he that
first found garlandes. Sycomorus, a great tree like a fygge tree, which has
abundance of milk, whose fruit comes not out of the tops of the bowghes,
as fygges do, but out of the same boughs, and sweet like to a wild fygge:
the graynes thereof be les than the grains of figgis, and they be never ripe,
except they be scrapid with an instrument of yro^. Sycophanta, he that falily
accuses an innocent. Also a bearer of tales, or a co^playner. Sycophantia, a
falls accusation, deceit. Sycophantias struere, to deuyse, or inuente
falsehoode. Sycophantor, tari, idem. Sycophantisso, are, idem. Sycophantiose,
deceytefully by craft. Sycon, old writers called a fygge. Sycosis, a disease
in the fundement, which makes a warte like to a fygge. Sycosis, where within
the eye lyd grows a little wart or other like thing. Sydera, the plurell
number of sydus. Syderatio, a spyce of the falling evil in men, but in trees
it is taken for blastynge. Sydus, syderis, a sterre. Syene, a city in the
confynes of Egypt and Ethiope. Sygeum, a promontorie of Troy. Syla, a
mountain in Lucania, and a wod in it. Sylla, a great tyrant of Rome, which
was of an insatiable cruelty. Syllaba, a syllable. Syllabarim, by syllables.
Syllabicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to sillables. Syllanion, a famous maker of
images, which was never taught. Syllepsis, a figure, where the plurell number
and the synguler are joined together, as socijs and rege recepto. Syllogismus,
a perfyte argument, which has a necessary conclusion. Sylua, a wodde or
place ouergrowen with wedes, also any matter hastily written with out study.
Syluanus, was called the god of woddes. Syluaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to
woddes. Syluecula, and syluula, a little forest or wod. Syluesco, scere, to
wax or grow into woddes or bushes. Syluester, syluestris, tree, of a wodde or
forest, woddy, wild. Syluicola, he that dwells in a foreste or wodde.
Syluius, a man's name, which was borne in a foreste. Syma, a city in Asia.
Symbolum, a collation. also a token given by one to an other upon certain
appointmentes, generally a sign or mark to know a thing by. Symbolus, a
signet or sele, or a sign manuel. Symbulus, a wise and good counsailour.
Symmachia, aid in battle, or leage made among men of sundry countries, to
fight against the other part. Symmachus, a man's name. Symmetria, a concord
in measure, where sundry things be of equal proporcion. Sympathia, a mutual
combination of things natural in the operation of their powers and qualities,
as water in coldenesse does participate with earth, in moisture with the air,
the air with the fire in heat, with water in moisture. Symphitum petreium, an
herb called bugle Symphitum magnum, comfrey. Symphonia, a consent in tune,
also harmony. Symphoniacus, a singing boy. Symphonio, are, to agree or accord
in one. Symphonesis, colysion of vowelles. Sympinaticae, women addicte to
ceremonies or devotion. Sympiniu^, a cup serui^g for wine in sacrifice.
Symplator, a friend of him that is married, which accompanies him to feasts.
Symplega, warkes, in the which wrastlers, and they which contend in
fighting, are beholden. Symplegades, two yles in the grekyshe see. Symplegma,
an imbracynge together. Sympos^astes, he that makith a fest or ba^ket
Symposium, a bankette. Sympot^^a, a woman which keeps company at drinking.
Symnisia, a secretary, or one of the pryuye councylle. Sympsalma, a concord in
singing. Sympudcaria, funerals or plays, wherein plays were made. Synada, a
city in Asya. Synaeresis, a contraction of two words, as Bigae, for b^iugae.
Synagoga, a congregation, specially of jews. Synalephe, a collision of vowels.
Synanche, a syckenesse in the throat, called the squynce. Sincere, purely,
incorruptly. Syncerus, ra, rum, sincere, pure, uncorrupted simple without
dissimulation. Synchronos, of one time. Synciput, syncipitis, the forepart of
the heed Also a swynes heed soweyd. Syncopa, a figure, where a letter or
syllable is taken away, as co^postus, for co^positus. Sync^doche, a figure,
where part is vsyd ^^r the hole, or the hole for part. Syndicus, an advocate.
Syndipnium, a soupynge together. Synechon, contynent. Synephites, a stone,
which is called alsoo Leucongia. Syngraplia, syngraphus, and syngraplium, the
wrytinge or deed, made or signed with the hand of him that makes a bargayne
or couenaunte. Synochitides, a stone, wherewith nygromancers do call up dyuels.
Synodus, an asse^bly of me^, or general cou^cil. Synonimum, which in diverse
words sygnifieth one thing, as Eusis, Gladius, both do sygnifie a sword.
Occidit, interfecit, necanit, do signify, he killed. Synopis, synoper or read
lead. Synstratiotes, companio^s together in war. Syntagma, a treaty, an
ordinance. Syntaxis, order in construction. Syntexis, lack, or weakness,
which happens by long syckenes. Synteresis, the pure part of conscience.
Synthema, a token given to soldiers. Synthesis, a short cote or ierkyn. also
a vessel made of many vessels. Syntomon, for circu^cisum. Sypharium, a
curtayne hanged before minstrels when they sing. Syphax, was the king of
Numidia. Syracusae, a famous city in Sycile. Syracusius, and Syracusanus, of
that city. Syria, a great realm in Asia, which has on the east the river
of Euphrates, on the weste the myddell see, and the realm of Egipte, on the
north Cilicia and Cappadocia, on the south Arabia. Syriacum, a kind of sweet
radyshe. Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria. Syrictae, people which receive their
meat in oten redes. Syricum, a color mixed with sinoper and ruddel Syrium, wine
boiled to the third part. Syrinx, a pype or recorder. Syris, corn kept in
holes in the ground, and covered with chafe. Syrisca, a woman of Syria.
Syrissus, a, um, of Syria. Syrma, it is, the train of a woman's gown. Syrnia, a
shryche oule. Syrophoenix, the sea cost of Syria. Syrtes, quycke sands or
shelpes in the water made by the dryfte of sand or grauel. Syrtites, a little
stoone found in the bladder of a wolf. Syrupus, a syrup. Syrus, a man of
Siria, also an Island belonging to Greece. Syssitia, feasts, and companyes
assembled at feasts. Sysymbrium, an herb callid winter sauery. Syzigiae,
synewes, which do come from the brain to the eyes, so that he, which comes
from the left side, gothe to the right eye, and that which comes from the
right side, goth to the left eye, so that the synewes do cross each other.
T ANTE A.
TABANVS, a fly, which has four wingis, and byteth a man or be.
Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt Tabella, a little table. Tabellarius, a caryer of
letters, an auditour. Tabellio, lionis, a scriuener that writes commune
instruments and deeds. Taberna, every vile habytation, also a shop or tavern,
where wares be sold, and all thing that is vendible, as wine, oil, or any
other thing. Taberna meritoria, an ynne. Tabernaria fabula, a comedia or
Interlude, wherein are base nor sonages, and no persons of dignity or state.
Tabernaculum, a pauyllyon or halle. Tabernarius, he that sellethe any manner of
wares also a tauerner. Taber, his, corruption in the body, also extreme
leanness, by a long consumynge syckenesse. It is also matter and corrupt
blood myxte together. Also the impostume of the lunges, procedynge of humors
descendynge from the heed into the stomach, and so woundynge and corruptyng
the lounges. Tabesco, bui, scere, to languishe or consume, to be extremely
lean, to be corruptid. Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, consumed. Tabisicabilis,
le, that which may be corrupted, or fall into a consumption. Tabificus, ca,
cum, that which makes one corrupted, or consumes the body. Tablinum, was a
winter parlour, wherein were painted tables and books of stories. Tabo, a
consumption, wasting, or putrefaction of things. Tabor, a mountain in the
country of Galiles, where Chaiste was transfigurate. Tabula, a table. In the
plurell number tabulae, does signify a testament, or any commune instrument
or writynge. Also tabula is a table to play on with dise or chesse me^. Tabulae
nouae, were when detters were not constrained to pay their dettes, that they
did owe, and the old oblygations were dissolved, and new were to be made for
that which should newely be borrowed. Tabularia, ar places, where evidences and
writings be laid. Tabularium, a cheste, in the which evidences and records
are put. Tabulata, walls made of square stones, as if they were bourded. They
be also the boughs of trees and bushes, which do grow straight forth and not
upward. Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes. Also tabulata, are walls sylded
with bourdes. or made of stone plain like to bourdes. They be also the boughs
of trees, which do lean plain outward, and do not grow upward: Tabulo,
are, to make a thing with bourdes, or to join bourdes together. Tabulatio, a
ioynynge or closing of bourdes together. Taburnus, an hill in Campania, wherein
do grow many olyue trees. Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipsum, Let aloone, I my
self will commune now with him. Tacan^a, those things which are not to be
spoken. Taceo, ta, tui, tacere, to keep silence, to be in rest, to be quycke,
to be sure. Tacito pede, softely, by stel^he. Tacitum ^st, not a word is
spoken of it. Terent. in Adelph.
Taciturnitas, tatis, silence. Tacitus, he that holdethe his peace, and is
secret. Tacitus, citius audies, be still, thou shall here the sooner. Tacit,
without speaking one word. Tactus, fulmine, somewhat burned or blasted with
lyghtnynge. Tactus, tus, feelynge. Taedet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am
werye of it. Taedium, werynes, or heaviness of mind. Taedulus, an old dotarde,
of whom al men are wearye. Taenarus, a dark place at the foot of the hill
called Malea, by the city of Sparta, which was supposed to be an entry into
hell. Taenia, the edge of a fyllette. also a womans fyllette, or that which
now they call rolls: proprely it is a kerchiefe, which maidens do wear on
their heedes. Also a white stoone, which in the water shows long like a
kerchiefe. It is alsoo a vyllage between Mirenas and Corinthum. Taenon, a cite
in Laconia, an other i^ Arcadia Tagasta, a city in Affrike. Tagax, acis, a
felon, which happens on a man's finger. Tages, was he, which taught
first the Thuscanes the craft of diuynation, called Aruspicium. Tago^gere,
old writers used for tango. Tagrus, an hylle in Portyngale, where, as it is
written, that mares do conceive of the wind. Tagus, a river in Spain, wherein
has been found gravel of gold. Taigete, is the name of oone of the seven
sterres, which so appiereth, as it may scantly be perceived, which sterre is
also called Maia, and Electra. Talaria, were shows, which Mercurius did
wear, whereon were set whynges. Talaris, re, that which comes down to the
ancley, as Toga talaris, a long gown to the ancley. Talarius, ria, rium,
pertaining to dyse, as Lex talatia, a law against dyse playenge. Talassio,
was a song contained in certain verses, sungen at weddynges. It was also a
certain exclamation or cry used at marriages, the beginning whereof began,
when Romulus and the Romans reuysshed the maidens of the Sabines, among whom
was one of excellent beauty, whom when many of the Sabines would have reskued,
they which carried her toward Romulus, to the intent that she should not be taken
from them, cried Talassio, which was the name of a noble prince of the
Sabinee, as if they would have brought her to him, and by that mean they
escaped, and brought her to Romulus. And afterward they used at marriages to
cry Talassio. Talea, a stock set in the earth, whereon men do graffe. Also
a truncheon, a staff, a byllette. Talentum, was a poyse, which after the
countreye, wherein it was, it was diverse. One was called talentum Atticum,
which contained.lx. pounds of Athenes, called Minas, or Mnas, and, lxxii.
pou^des of Rome called libras: and this was also called talentum minus, the
other was called Talentum maius, and Euboicum, which contained.lxxx. pounds of
Athenes, callid Minas, and.lxxxiii. pounds and four ounces of Rome weight.
Look before in Libra, et Pondo. Talentu^ Atticum, uel minus, was in value after
the rate of old poyse grotes. Clxvi.li.xiii. s. iiii. d. after.lx. to the
pound, after the new grotes, ten to the once.CCviii.li.vi. s. viii. d.
Talentum maius, of old grotes. Clxxxx.li.xiii. s. iiii. d. of new grotes.
CCxvii.li.x. s. Talgae, an I Will in the sea called Hircanum, where grows
plenty of corn and fruits without culture. Talia, the blade of an any on or
chyboll. Talio, onis, an equal pain in recompense of a hurt, as for the
cuttynge of a man's hand, to lose a hand, or for puttinge out of an eye, to
lose an eye. Talior, ari, to be cut: it is proprely spoken of wodde, which
we now call tallynge of wodde. Talipedo, dare, to go on the pasternes. Talis,
tale, such. Taliter, in such wise. Talitrum, a fyllyppe given with ones
finger or nail. Talpa, a molle or want. Talpa caecior, blynder than a molle, a
proverb applied to them, which lack judgment in things that are plain.
Talum reponere, to refourme that, which was negligently done, with more
diligence. Talus, the ankle above the foot. It is also the pasterne bone of a
beast, Also a dye, or dyce. Tam, as well, also, as, so. Tam bonus, as good.
Ta^ sum amicus republicae, quam qui maxi me, I am so frendely, or as much
friend to the publyke weal, as he that is most. Tama, when with much
trauelle the blood comes down to the leg, and causes it to swelle. Tam
magis, for tanto magis. Tamarindi, a fruit growing in India, Vergil.
the tree whereof is like to a palm or date tree, the fruit sower, like grene
damsins, which is medicinable in asswagyng the heat of cholere. Tamaritae,
people in Asia, not far from the sea called Caspium. Tamarix, ricis, an
herb, which bearethe flowers twyse in one year. Tamen, not withstandyng. also
yet. Tamen a malicia non discedis, Yet will thou not depart from thy malice.
Sommetyme it signifies forthewith, at the last, so that. Quod potero,
faciam, tame^ ut pietatem eolam, I will do that I may: so that not
withstanding I omytte not my duty to my father. Tametsi, all be it, always.
Taminia, a wild grape, growing in woddes. Tam ne, old writers used for
eousque, until that. Tanager, a river in Lucania, between Campania and
Calabria. Tanagra, a town in Perside. Tanais, a great river in the north
part of the world, which dyuydeth Europa from Asia. Tanaquil, was wife to
Tarquinius Priscus, the king of Romans. Tanaus, was king of Siria. Tandem,
at the last, sometime at the least way, also uneath, not withstanding.
Tandiu, so long. Tango, retigi, tangere, to touthe, to meue, to understand,
or perceive, to come to. Tangere ulcirs, to rub on the gaide place, Turp^ilius
to speak to one of a thing, which greueth him to here it. Tangere, to
deceive. Tetigit aures meas, It came to mine ears. Plautus i^ Ruden.
Tanis, the principal city of Egypt, where Moses did show meruayles.
Tanos, a stone of the kind of Emeralde, grene and black. Tanquam, as it were,
like. Tantalides, the progeme of Tantalus. Tantali horti, a proverb
sygnifienge good things to be at hand, which not withstanding a man may not
use. Tantalus, a king, whom poets do feign to be turmented in hell with
hunger and thyrste. Tanti, for so much. This word does pertayne to byenge and
selling. Tantidem, at that price. Tandidem idem. Tanti aestimo, tantifacio,
tanti pendo, I set so much by, or I so much esteem i^. Tantillus, la, lum,
and tantulus, a, um, the diminutiue of tantus. Tantisper, so long. Tantopere,
so much, so vehemently. Tantum, only. Tantum non, almooste. Terent. in
Heautont.
Tantum sat habes? art thou content? Tantummodo, all only. Tantundem
periculum, so great dangier. Tanuina, a wild vine called also Labrusca. Tanto,
an aduerbe, sygnyfienge so much, as tanto magis, so much more, tanto peior,
so much worse. Tantum abest, it is so far from, or so much unlike.
Plautus in paenulo.
Tantundem, even so much. Tantumnum, also, ye also. Tantus, ta, tum, such,
sometime so much, or so greatte. Taos, a stone of the color of a pecoke.
Tapetia, hangynges of houses, or clothes wherewith pauementes are covered.
Tapetum, tapes, peris, tapisrye, or clothes, wherein are wrought diverse pictures
with thredes of sundry colors. Taphiae, and taphus, an I Will by Grecia, where
dwelled the people called Telebois. Taphius, a city in Egypt, the people
whereof were called Taphnii. Taphos, in greek, is a sepulcher or tumbe.
Tapinosis, a figure, whereby a great thing is basely described. Taposiris, a
city in Egipte. Taprobana, a noble I Will in the Indiane see, which isle is
dyrectly against this part of the world, and there is abundance of all manner
of spyces. And the people there lives above an hundred years. Tapsus, an I Will
by Sycile not far from Syracuse. Tapulla, a law made for feasts. I^st. pom.
Tapyri, people in Parthia, which use to give their wives in marriage to other
me^, after that they have had four or five children by them. Taracina, a
town in Campania. Taraconia, a countraye callydde now Aragon. Taracon, the
chief city thereof. Tarandrus, a beast in body like to a great ox, having a
heed like to a heart, and horns full of branches, the hear rough, of the
color of a bear, I suppose it to be a rain dear. Tarantula, a kind of the
beasts callydde Stelliones, like to a lysarde, of whose bytynge no man dies,
only it stonieth him that is bytten. Taras, the son of Neptunus, who builded
Tarentum. Taraxis, when the eyes do bolne out much, and be read. Tarchesius,
was a myscheuous king of the people called Albani. Tarchon, a duke in
Hethruria, which was also a great diuinour or southsayer. Tardatio, a
tarienge. Tardigradus, that which has a slow pase, or gothe slowely.
Tardatio, a tarienge. Tarde, slow, late. Tardiloquentia, a slow speech.
Tardiloquus, he that draws his speech in length. Tardior, slower.
Tardissimus, most slow, or slowest. Tarditas, and tarditudo, and tardicies,
slownesse. Tardius, more slowely. Tardiuscule, somewhat slowely. Tardiusculus,
somewhat slow. Tardo, dare, to tarry, to be slow. Tardus, slow, rude, sometime
well during* also thycke or gross. Tarentinus, a, um, of the city of Tarent
in Calabria. Tarentum, a noble city in Calabria. Tarentu^, a city within the
realm of Naples. Tarmes, a wourme, which eareth flesh, a magotte. Tarpeius,
an hylle at Rome. Tarquinus superbus, was the last king of Romans, which
was expellyd out of Rome for his pride and cruelty. Tarracina, a town in
Campania callydde also Anxur. Tarsus, the chief city of Cilicia, where saint
Paul was borne. Tarsis, a region in Judea. Tartaria, a great countray in the
northeste part of the world. Tartarus, a place in hell. also a man of
Tartarie. Tartarum, the lies of wine. Tartareus, ea, eum, of hell. Tartarious,
rina, number, old writers used for horrible or terrible. Tartesii, a people in
Iberi^, among whom be cattes of exceeding greatness. Tartessus, a city in
the vttermoste part of Spain, on the sea side by Gades, now called Cales,
where Columella the most ^^^quent and perfyte husband, was borne. Tastaneum, a
white claye or marle. Tas^menes, seu tasmenes, one of the sons of duke
Nestor. Tata, dady, which children call their father. Tatoe, a wanton word,
wherewith one answers to an another. Tateus, a kind of salt which comes out
of Phrigia, and is medicinable for the eyes. Taura, a barrayne cow. Tatianus,
a man's name. Tatius, a ma^s name. Tautarij, people in Scythia. Tauria, a
scourge made of neates lether. Taurica Chersonesus, a contray in the north
part of Europa. Taurici, people of cruel manners that offered strangers in
sacrifyce. Taurilia, were plays made in the honor of infernal goddis.
Taurinus, na, number, of a bulle. Taurius, one of the gods of the sea.
Taurominium, a mountain in Sicile, so called for the plenty of neat, which
fed thereon. Also ther^ was by it a city of the same name. Tauromitutanus, na,
number, of the city of Taurominium. Tauroscythae, people of Scithia, dwelling by
the mountain called Taurus. Taurus, a bulle, sometime a strong ox, It is
also one of the.xii. celestial signs, also a great mountain toward India.
Tautologia, a figure, where one thing is twyse spoken. Pl^^^ in (...)
Tax, a stroke. Taxa, a kind of bays or laurel, wherewith herbars are made.
Taxario, a setting of a tax or subsidy. Taxarores, they which do rebuke
oone an another. Taxim, softely, scantly touched. Taxis, old writers used for
tetigeris, thou shalt touch. Taxilli, a small dyse. Taxo, nis, a gray or
brocke, or badger. Taxo, are, to touch often. alsoo to tax, or cesse a thing
at a certain value. also to reprove one an other. Taxus, a tree like to fyrre,
which bears bearyes, wherein is mortalle poison. It is also called owe,
whereof bows be made. Taygetus, a hylle, under the which is set the cities
of Sparta and Amycle.
T ANTE E.
TEarus, a river of Thracia, at the heed whereof Darius king of Persia, wha^ he
went into Scithia, pighte his pauyllyons, and there abode three days. And
delytynge at the most pleasant water of that river, he set in the same
place a pillar graue^ with letters of greek, declaryng his being there, with
co^mendatio^ of the water. Techna, a craft, also a wyle, or subtyl mean
Techines, were they, which also were called Corybantes, and were feined to be
the sons of Minerua and Sol. Technicus, ca, cum, artificial, inuentiue.
Technides, a crafts man. Technophyon, a setting forth of craft. Tectorius,
a, um, pertaynyng to covering. Tecum, with the. Tector, toris, a periettour.
Tectorium, the playstrynge or pariettynge of a house. Tectoriu^ opus,
perietting or plastring wark Tectum, the roufe of a house. sommetyme all the
house. Tecum oro and quaeso, I pray and byseche the. Plaut. in milite.
Tecum sentio, I am of thyn opinyon. Teda, a tree, out of the which sweateth a
lycour, when it is hette. Taedulus, of whom al men be weary. sometime it
signifies him, which is weary of some thing. F^st. pom.
Tegaeum, a city in Archadia. Tegaeates, men of that city. Teges, gitis, a
course blanket or couerlyd, Varro.
which lies on poor men's beds. It is alsoo a matte. Tegeticula, the
diminutiue of teges. Tegillum, a little covering. Tegmen, and tegimen, and
tegmentum, a covering or cover. Tego, texi, tegere, to cover, to hyde, to
defend or keep. Tegula, a tyle. Tegulum, a covering. Teium, a city in
Paphlagonia, where Anacreon the poet was borne. Tela, the clothe, which is
spoken as well of sylke as of lynnen clothe or woollen. Tellanae, a certain
kind of fygges. Telamones, images, which do bear up pyllers or posts.
Telemachus, the son of Ulysses and Penelope. Teleboae, people in Greece.
Telephium, an herb called Orpyn. Telephus, the son, which was nourished
with an hynde. Telina, a certain garment. Telonarius, and telo, lonis, a
collectour or gatherer of tributes. Telonium, the place where taskes or
tributes are paid. Telos, in greek is an end, honor, a legion, a tribute or
pe^cion, it is also the name of an i will, where the ointment callid telina is
made Telpussa, a city in Arcadia. Tellus, li, a ma^s name whom the wise Solon
iuged to be more fortunate tha^ the rich king Cresus. Tellus, luris, the earth.
Telum, al thing which may be thrown or cast with the hand, be it stone,
wod, or iro^ it is also the general name of all that, wherewith a man does
fight, called weapon. some time it is taken for a sword. Temerarius, a, um,
more hardy than need, or wisdom requires, folehardy. sometime dredefull, or
to be dradde. Temeritas, atis, and temeritudo, folehardines Temere,
unadvisedly, foolyshely, aduenturously, sometime it sygnifieth almost. also
without cause. Temerius, more folyshe, or unadvisedly, Temero, rare, to
vyolate. Temetum, wine. Temulentus, ta, tum, drunkes of wine. Temulentia,
drunkenness. Temno, tempsi, temnere, to set little by. Temo, monis, the
beam, which contains the yoke. Tempe, a place in Thessalia wonderful
plesaunt, having trees and meadows meruaylous delectable, wherein birds of
diverse kinds, do sing contynually with excellent melody. Thereof al pleasant
woddes have the name of Tempe. Temperamentum, a moderacion. Temperanter,
temperately. Temperantia, temperance, which is a firm and moderate governance
of reason against sensuality and other vycyouse affections of the mind.
Temperantior, te^perantius, more temperate. Temperatura, a temperance or
moderation, in the mynglynge of things together. Temperies, temperatenes,
proprely in heat or cold* sometime it is usurped for temperamentum, and for
temperantia. Temperior, oris, more tymely. Tempero, are, to temper or moderate
in order or measure. Temperamus stylum, calamum, appetitum, when we keep in
cure writing a mean form, or do eat no more than is needful. Tempsa, a
city in the country called now Calabria. Tempestas, tatis, sygnifyeth
sometime the same time, sometime tempest, sommetyme wether, sometime a fair
wether. Tempestiuus, ua, um, that which is done in conuenyent time.
Tempestiuitas, tatis, season or time convenient, opportunity. Tempestiue, in
season or time convenient. Tempestu^, old writers used for tempestiuu^.
Tempestuosum, tempestuous or stormy. Templum, a temple or church. sometime it
sygnifyeth heaven. Alsoo the principal beam of a house, also a sepulcher.
Temporalis, le, that which duryth until a certain time. Temporaneus, a, um,
that which is done suddenly, and at a time. Temporary, temporanie, and
temporaliter, until a time. Temporarius, ria, rium, that which dureth or
contynueth for a time. also that which pertayneth to time. Temporius, an
aduerbe sygnifieth in time, or by time. Tempus, poris, time, also the state of
time. sometime the temples of the heed. Tenatia, and tenacitas, hardenes in
sparynge of expenses, nygardshyp, perseueraunce, retaynynge, or keeping.
Tenatior, and tenacissimus, the comparatiue and superlatiue degree of tenax.
Tenacissimae memoriae, Colum. 1.
of most sure remembrance. Tenaciter, fastly, surely. Tenasmus and tenesmus,
a desire to go often to the stool, and may do nothing, with a burning and
sometime a bloody siege. Tenax, nacis, that which holds fast, as glue.
sometime sparyng or nygarde, to much constant, hard to be moved. Tendere, to
assay, to hold up. Paruumque patri tendebat Iulum, He held up little Iulus
unto his father. Also to prepare, to go toward a place. Tendicula, a net or
snare to take birds or beasts. Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extend or
stretche, to lay a snare, to dwell, to go. Tendere infidias, to lay in wait.
Tendutes, old writers called them, which had great teethe. Tenebrae, the lack
of light, darkness. Tenebresco, scere, to be dark. Tenebricor, caris, cari, to
make dark. Tenebricosus, a, um, that makes dark. Tenebriones, liars and
crafty knaves. Also they which will not be seen abroad by day time.
Tenebrosus, a, um, dark. Tenedos, an I Will in the sea called Aegeum, between
Mitelene and Hellespontum, not far from Troy. Tenedia bipe^nis aut securis,
a quick or sharp axe: a proverb applied to judges, which be hasty and cruel
in their sentences. Tenellus, a, um, tender. Teneo, nui, nuere, to hold, to
apprehende, to possede, to hold or keep in, to cover, to understand, to keep
back, to perform. Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be beholden to one.
Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyful. Also a geldyd manne. Teneritas, and
teneritudo, tenderness. Tenerasco, scere, to be tender or merciful. Tenere
consilium, to do by council Praecipe, Plautus in milite.
ut teneat consilia nostra, Give him advise that he may do by our counsel.
Tene, tene, tarry, tarry. Redi, quo iugis nunc? tene, tene, Turn again,
whither runnnest thou now? tarry, tarry. Plinius in p^negyri. Terent. in H^cyra.
Plautus in cap.
Tenere consensum, to agree or consent unto other. Tenet me amor, love meueth
me much. Tenere insaniam. Sed hoc primum expurgare tibi uolo, me insania^
neque tenere, neque mi esse ullum morbum, nisi quod seruio, But first I will
declare my self unto the, that I am neither out of my wit, nor have any
sycknes, but that I am bond. Plautus in Amphit and Epidico. Terent. in Adelph.
Plautus in mereatore Plautus in truculen. In Mere^. Sueton in domi^ian^
Tenere ius, to know the law, Tenere legem, to be under a law. Tenere
memoria, to remember. Tenere medium, to keep a mean. Tenere modum, to keep a
measure. Tenere se, to take heed of him self. Tenere aliquem mendarij, to take
oone with a lie. Tene tibi, take it as thine own. Tenere causam, to vanquyshe
or recover against one in a matter. Plin. epist. ^3.
Teneri desyderio, to desire much or ferue^tly Teneri ludo, to take pleasure in
game. Tenerisur^i, to be guilty of felonye. Tenera aetas, youth. Teneris
annis, in young years. Tenere, and teneriter, tenderly, louyngly. Tenni, old
writers used for tenui. Tenitae, were called goddesses of lottes. Tenontes, the
great and strong synewes, which do keep the neck vpryght. Also a brood
synewe, which gothe from the hamme down to the heel. Tenor, noris, an
order, a contynuaunce of a thing. Tenos, an isle in the greek see, one of them,
which is called Cyclades. Lucretius.
Tenta, stretched. Tentamentum, temptation. Tentigo, tiginis, a styffenesse.
Tentipellium, a show with an iron soole, whereon the over lether is stretched.
Tento, tare, to attempt, to assay or prove, to tempte one to do evil.
Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon. Tentum, a man's priuye membre. Tentyra, a city
in Egypt. Tentyri, uel tynteritae, a venymous beast in an I Will on the river of
Nilus, whose voice the cokodryll does fear. Tenue, and tenuiter, poorly,
symply. Tenunculus, la, lum, very simple, or lyttelle in estimation. Tenui
filo, with a small threde, applied to style in writing, which is not elegant,
but plain. Tenuis, nue, little or simple in estimation, small in quantity,
poor. Tenuitas, tatis, smallenesse, poverty. Tenuo, are, to make small, to
make lean, or feeble. Tenus, ni, a share. Being an aduerbe, hit sygnyfyeth
unto. Tenus urbem tendit, It extends unto the city, or no further than the
city. Tenus, a preposition, sygnifieth nyghnesse, or until a thing.
Tepifacio, cere, to make warm. Tepefio, fieri, to be warm. Tepeo, and
tepesco, tepui, poscere, to be warm or hot. Tepidarium, a vesselle, wherein
water is made temperate, also a chaumber, whereinto men do go out of a bayne.
Tepidus, tepida, tepidum, mean between hot and cold, warm. Also kolyd
from heat Sometime noyfull or unprofitable. Tephrites, a stoone, which has
the figure of a new moon, in color black, (...) asshe color. Tepidior,
colder. Tepidissimus, a, um, most warm. Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a
dymynutyue of tepidus. Tepocon, a form of writing downwarde. Tepor, oris, and
tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or warmenesse. Ter, thryse. Terapne, a contray in
Lacedemonia, where the fair Helene was borne. also an Island now called
Corsica. Terebinthus, a tree, the wodde whereof is black and hard like box,
out of this tree rounneth a gum, called commonly Turpentyne. All be it the
common turpentyne is not it, but an another, which is as clear as glass, and
is a soueraygne medycyne to cleanse the stomach of putryfyed humors. Ternarius,
and ternus, terna, number, the third in number. Tertius, tia, um, the third.
Tertio, and tertium, the third time. Terdenus, na, number, the thyrdtenth.
Terebellum, a wymble or percer. Terebratio, a borynge with a wymble. Terebrae,
sieve terebrum, an awgour, wherewith holes are boored. Terebro, brare, to bore
or make an hole. Teredo, dinis, a little worm that eteth wod. Terentius, the
most eloquente writer of comedyes. Terentianus, of Terence. Terentum, a place
in the fyelde by Rome, called Campus Martius, wherein was an altar of Pluto
and Proserpyne. Teres, teretis, long and round, like a tree or a pyller.
Teretrum, an instrument, wherewith a thing is made round. Terga dare, to run
away, proprely in barasle. Tergemini, three chylderne borne at oone bourdeyne.
Tergestes, a city in Italye. Terginus, na, number, that which is made of a
beasts hyde. Tergiuersatio, a nonsuite in the law, when the pleintife gives
over his suite. Tergiuersor, aris, ari, to turn back, to deny, in the law it
sygnifieth to be nonsuite. Tergo, and tergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype or make
clean. Tergum, the back of man or beast, or of any other thing. sommetyme
it sygnifyeth a hyde. Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beast. Terma, matis, the
extremity, the end of a thing, also the sole of the foot. Termentarium, a
lynnen clothe, wherewith the body is covered. Plaut. (...) Pom.
Termentum, for detrimentum. Terms, a branch plucked of a tree with the
fruit on it. also a worm, which eats the flesh. Termile, a mountain in
Lycia, called also Chimaera. Ter milies, three thousand times. Termillum, a
pot for wine, which was always set on the table, that every manne might
take as much wine as he would. Terminalia, was a certain holy day, at the
latter end of the year. Terminalis lapis, a mere stone, laid or pight at the
end of sundry men's lands. Termino, nare, to end or fynyshe. Terminus, a
sign which declares oone man's land from an other, or one country or
territory from an other. also it signifies the buttynge. Terminus deus, was
an ydoll, which was supposed to have preemynence over the bounds of land,
whose temple had ever an hole in the roufe, for as much as they thought it to
be vnlefulle that bounds of land should be covered or hid. Termo, onis, old
writers used for terminus. Ternarius numerus, the number of three. Ternus, na,
number, the third. Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe. ^ide com.
Tero, triui, rere, to rub, to break or broise. Terere iter, to go his way.
Terere tempus, to consume time. Terere otiu^, to live idelly. Terpander, dri,
an old musytian, which added.vii. strings to the harp. Terpfi^hore, one of
the nine musis. Terra, earth: sometime all the world, also a prouynce, a
territory, a country, land. Terraceus, a, um, of earth. Terraneola, a bird
like to a lark, which we call a hunting. Terrefacio, facere, to make
aferde. Terrae fillus, he that is come up of naught, and no man knows his
kynrede. Terraemorus, erthequake. Terrenum, a field. Terrenus, na, number, of
earth, or living on earth, erthely. Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde. Vide
com.
Terrestris, tree, erthely. Terreus, rea, reum, of earth. Vas terreum, an erthen
vesselle. Terribilis, bile, terryble, that which is to be feared. Terricola,
he that dwells in the land. Terricrepus, he that rebukes one terribly.
Terriculamentu^, a fear, or a fearful thing. Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble,
or that which induces fear. Terrigena, begotten on the earth. Varro de ling.
latin.
Terriones, ploughmenne. Terripauium, and terripudium, for tripudium,
daunsynge. Territo, tare, to make aferde. Territorium, the fyeldes or countraye
lyenge within the jurisdiction and bounds of a city, a territory. Terror,
roris, fear. Tersus, sa, sum, clean, pure. Tersus dies, of old writers was
taken for a fair day. Tertiata uerba, words not perfytely pronounced: as
when one is in fear or dread of him, to whom he speaks, he trembling in
speech, vnethe pronounces the third word that he would say. Tertiarum, is a
mixed metal, wherein are two parts of lead, and one of tynne. Tertio, are, to
do a thing the third time, or to make the third tylth in earynge. Tertio
Consul, where two have been Consules before him. Tertium Consul, he that has been thryse Consul. So that Tertio signifies the third in order, and place, two
going before. Tertiu^ sygnifieth the time, where twyse gothe before. The like is
of Secundo, quarto, and other numbres. Tertio pedato, Cato.
at the third return or coming again. Tertius, a, u^, the third. Tertius
decimus, the thyrtenthe. Tertullianus, a famous and eloquent author. which for
dyspleasure and malice fell into heresye. Teruncium, a poyse or coin of three
ounces. Tesca, Varro.
a place where misticalle ceremonies were exercysed. Tesqua, places hard or
difficile to come up to, where the Romans did practice their diuinatio^s by
fleing of dirdis, callid auguria Tessellatus, ta, tum, that which is wrought
with small pieces of stone, wodde, or bone, as in playenge tables or
counterbourdes. Tessella, a greffe. Tessera, that which is in every part
square as a dye. also it is a dye. more over a watch word or privy toke^
given to soldiers. Also a token of war and peace, a token given to people
to receive corn of the kings alms. Also a tail, whereon is scored or marked
the number of things received, which is also called Tesserula. Tesseradecas,
fouretene. Tesserarius, he that gives the watcheword Tesserulae, little
pauynge tyles. Tesso, tessi, tessere, to dispoyle or pulle of a garment or
harncis by vyolence. Testa, a sharde of a pot or tyle. also an erthen pot.
also all manner of shellfyshe. Testaceus, a, um, that which has a shelle.
Testeus, idem. Testaceam flagellum, a proverb applied to sodayn alteration of
things, or of banishment unlooked for. Testamentatius, a forger of
testamentes. Testamentarius, ria, ium, pertaining to testamentes. Testamentum,
a testament. Testaum, in pieces or shardes. Testatio, and testimonium,
witness. Testator, toris, he that makes a testament. Testatus, he that is
deed, and has made a will also openly known of all men. Testiculor, cularis,
lari, to put the male to the female. Testillor, idem. Testiculus, of a known
sygnification. Testificatio, a witness bearing. Testificator, and
testificatrix, he or she that bears witness. Testificor, caris, cari, to
bear witness. Testimonium, and testatio, witness borne of a ioynge done.
Testis, he that bears wytnes. Testes, be also a man's genitours. Testor,
aris, ari, to bear wytnes, to call to wytnes, Co^testor. Protestor Varro.
to pray god. Testu, old writers used for testa. Testuaceum, that which is
boiled in an erthen pot. Testudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is holowe in
four parts. Testudo, dinis, a snayle. Also an engyne of war to beat down
walls, which was made of bourdes, and couerid with lether or other things,
which would not bourne. within it was a piece of timber, that had a great hoke
of iron at the end, which piece might be plucked back, and put forth
with the strength of men, and therewith pluck stoones out of the walls of
towns besyeged, It is alsoo the roufe or vaulte of a house. Testus, tus, is a
pan, wherein tartes, and other like things of paste are baken. Tetanicus
morbus, idem quod Tetanos. Tetanothra, a medycine, wherewith the face of a man
or woman is made smothe without wrynkles. Tetanos, when the sins are slyffe,
so that a man can not bow some part of his body Tetarmorton, the fourth part
of the zodiake cirkle, wherein are the.xii. signs. It is also that, which
astronomers do call the quadrate aspecte of planettes. Te te, thy self.
Teter, tetra, tetrum, foul, stynkyng, cruel. Teterrimus, a, um, most foul
or stynkyng, or cruelle. Teterrime, most abhomynably. Fest. Po^.
Tethys, the wife of Neptunus, callid goddess of the sea. Tetinierit, for
tenuerit. Tetinus, for tenus. Fest. Pom.
Tettigoniae, little grassehoppes. Tettigometrae, the mother of grasshoppes.
Tetracinus, a coin, which was in value four dragmas, or old poyse grootes,
of viii. to an ounce. Tetracolon, a sentence having.iiii. me^bres. Tetradoron,
of four handdbreth. Tetragonus, a, um, a thing having four corners.
Tetragrammaton, the name of god, which the Jews do call Ineffabile, that is to
say, unspeakable. Tetragrammaton, in greek, sygnifyeth of four letters.
Tetrametrum, a kind of meter, having but four fete. Tetrarcha, the rule of
the fourth part of a royalme. Tetrasyllabum, of four syllables, as, Im pe ra
tor. Tetre, sharply, cruelly, wyckedly. Tetrices, water, wherewith gardeynes
are wateryd. Tetricus, a sour fellow, and always unpleasant. Tetrinno, are, to
swymme like a ducke. Tetritudo, cruelty or sharpenes. Tetrius, more sharp or
cruel. Tetro, trare, to make foul, to pollute, to make bitter. Tetulit, for
tulit. Teucer, and Teuerus, the name of a king of Troianes. also of the son
of Telamone the valyant Greek. Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus. of
Troy. Teumesus, a little hylle in Boeotia. Teumesus leo, a Lion, which
Hercules did slay, when he was a child, and of his skin made him a cote.
Teurion, the herb which is also callydde Tripolium. Teuta, a queen of
Illiria, which lived ever chaste, and vanquyshed many noble capitaynes, and
diverse hosts of the Romans Teurates, was in old time amc^g the french men
taken for Mercurius. Teuthania, a piece of the country of Troy. Teutones,
people now called Almayns. Vide com.
Texo, texui, texere, to weaue or wind threde, Also to make to build, to
write, to gather, to ornate. Texta, an hearelace, wherewith the hear is bounden
up. Textilis, le, that which is weaued or wounde^ Textim, an aduerbe,
sygnifieng in weauing or wyndynge up. Textor, toris, and textrix, tricis, he or
she that weaueth or wyndeth. Textrina, and textrinum, the place where things
be weaued or wounden. also the craft of weauynge. Textrix, and textricula, a
woman, which warketh in a frame or stole. Textura, the weauynge. Textus, and
textum, the text.
T ANTE H.
THalamus, a chamber where the husband and the wise do lie together.
Thalassicus, chamblette. Thalassio, uide Talassio. Thassus bonorum, a proverb
applied to them that promise great things, as a man would say, a world, a
countray of welthe. Thalasso meli, is a lycour made of honye, salt water, and
rain water, and is put into a vessel rased with pytche. Thales, a
philosopher, which was one of the seven wise men of Grecia. Thalestris, was a
queen of Amasones, which came to king Alexander with three hunderde womenne
with her, to the intent to have issue by him and his men: and when she
perceived, that she and her ladies were spedde, they departed home again.
Thali, are in lyekes, garlyke, and oynyons, when they do grow, the myddell
s^alke between the blade and the heed or rote. Thalia, one of the graces,
which the auncent poets did suppose to be one of the daughters of Jupiter,
and gyuers of dilectable speech, and pleasant pronunctatio^. Thamaras, was he,
which first played on a harp, without singing thereto. Thamnos, in latin
arbustum. Thanatos, mors in latyne. Thapsus, an isle by Sicile. Thapsia, an
herb like to senell, and has a yelowe flower, and a flat round sede.
Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fysshe is salted, and kept. Tharsos, a city in
Cilicia. Thasia, an almonde. Thasia nux, called also graeca. Thasij, men of
the I Will called Thasus in Egypt. Thasium, a certain wine, which is in Egypt.
Thauma, in greek is a marvel or miracle. Theatralis, le, and theatricus, ca,
cum, that which pertayneth to theatrum. Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum.
Theatrum, a place made half round, wherein the people assembled to behold
plays and sondrye sbate mentes, sometime it sygnifieth the multitude that
beholds. Theboe, arum, Theba, be, and Thebe, bes, the name of cities, whereof
one was in Egipte, buildid by Busirides, an other in Boeotia, builded by
Cadmus: an another in Cilicia, where Andromaches, the wife of Hector was borne.
Thebaicae, and thebaides, dates of the best forte. Thebais, idis, and idos, a
countraye of Egypt, it is also the name of a book made by Statius the poet.
Thebanus, na, number, a man of Thebes. Theca, a case, a shethe or scaberde, a
box. Theleboae, people of an isle callid Capreae, which lies against Naples.
Theleboij, people of the I Will Capreas. Thelephus, a king, which camme in the
aid of the Troyanes, and was slain by Achylles. Theligonium, an herb, which
has beries like to an olyue. Thelphusa, a city in Arcadia. Thelphussiu^, uel
thelphossion, a cite in Boeotia, where Pyndarus praised Bacchus, Thelypteris,
sheferne, or the female fern. Thema, matis, a thing purposed to be disputed
or resoned. it is also a figure, wherein astronomers do write the state of
heaven, in placinge or setting the planettes in such signs and degrees, as
they be in at the time of a man's nativity, or when any thing shall happen
that they search for. Thembinacha, a country called also Nemia. Themes, an old
town in the i will of Lipres where brass was first found. Themis, one of the
systers of Iupyter, she was callid the goddess, which commanded men to ask
that which was leful. There was an other woman called Themis, which was
called also Carmentis, it was sometime taken for fas, lefull. Themiscyra, a cite
in Capadocia, afterward called Caesaria. Themisones, people by Licia.
Themistius, a philosopher which wrate commentaries on Aristotels warkes.
Themistocles, a noble capitain of the Athemensis, which being expelled out of
his country, and commen to Xerxes king of Persia, was sent by him with a great
army against the Athenienses, but when he perceived his country in peril to
be distroyed, he drank poison, and chase rather to dye, than either to be
vnfeythfull to Xerxes, or else to distroy his country, although it were unkind
toward him. Thensa, a hallowed carte or chariot. Theocritus, a poet of Grecia,
which wrate Bucolica, or the contention of herd men. Theologia, diuynitie.
Theomenia, the wrath of god. Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a man
shamefullye. Theophrastus, a noble philosopher, and of excellent eloquence.
Theos, in greek is god. Theotochos, the mother of god. Theorema, speculation.
Theoria, speculation, understanding. Theopolis, the chief city of Syria,
called also Antiochia. Thera, a city by Athenes. Theramnum, a city in
Thessalia. Theriace, ces, seu theriaca, tryacle. Thereotrophion, a place where
wild beasts are kept, as a forest, or park. Therioma, a soore of the priuye
members, whereby all the parts therabout, are corrupted, and thereof issues
black and stinkynge humor. Theristrum, a thynne veil, which the women of
Palestina did wear. Thermae, are bathes of hot water. Thermefacio, cere, to
chaufe or make oone hot with outrageous eating and drinking of hot
things. Thermopolium, a place where meats and drynkes were sold, wherewith
men were made hot or warm in cold wether. Thermodoon, a river in Cappadocia.
Thermodontiacus, ca, cum, pertaining to that river. Thermopoto, tare, to
drink hot or warm drink. Thermopylae, a mountain in Greece, having a
narowe entry or passage, where two thousand Lacedemoniens, with their
capytayne Leonidas, faught against five hundred and.xxviii. thousand Persyans*
and resysted them two days, until the said Lacedemoniens were all slain.
Thersites, was a prince that came with the greeks to the syege of Troy, which
in person and condicyons was of all other most defourmed. Thesaurizo, are, to
gather treasure. Thesaurus, and thesaurum, treasure. Theseus, a noble and
valyant king of Athenes, companyon to Hercules. Thesis, a clause in writing or
spekyng, which contains a sentence. Thesmophoria, the ceremonies of Ceres,
the goddess of grain. Thesmophoros, was a name of Ceres. Thespia, a free
town in Boeotia. Thessalia, a region in Greece. Thessalicus, ca, cum, of
Thessalia. Thessalonica, a city in Macedonia. Thetis, tidis, the mother of
Achilles. Theucitis, a rushe growing in Nabachis, which has the taste of
sharp wine. Theositas, for sodalitas. Fest. Pom.
Theutones, and theutonici, people in Germanye, called Duchemen. Thirromachus,
one of the sons of Hercules by Megara. Thiasias, he that is burste or broken
in his stoones. Thideus, was the name of the father of Diomedes. Thieum, for
succinum, aumbre. Thita praefigere, for condemnare. Thymelici, mynstrelles
retained with noble men. Thoa, one of the nymphs. Thoas, the name of two
kings, oone of Taurica, the other of Lemnos. Thoes, be wolfes in Ethiope,
Arrianus does call them tygres in India. Tholos, a scochen or small tergate.
also the the syldynge of a house, or a round house. Thomices, lyches of hemp,
wherewith halters are made, they be also lyttel bolsters, which men do wear
when they carye burdeynes, for frettynge of their necks and shulders with
cords or ropes. Thon, nis, he that first brought phisyke in the form of a
science, among the Egyptians. Thoota, the daughter of Phorcus, on whom
Neptunus gate Polyphemus. Thoracatus, he that wearethe curettys or breast
plates. Thorax, racis, is proprelye the hole boulke of a man from the neck to
the myddelle, it is also curettes or breast plates. sometime it signifies a
tower. Thous, a duke of Troy. Thracia, a region of Europa, wherein is the city
of Constantinople. Thraceas, uel Thrassias, a northwest wynd. Thrasimedes, the
son of Nestor. Thrasomenus, a river in Italye nyghe to Perusia. Thrax, acis,
a man of Thracia. Threces, idem quod gladiatores. Threnodia, a mournyng song.
Threnos, a lamentacyon, which was vsyd a^ buryenge. Thressa, a woman of
Thracia. Throni, be one of the.ix. orders of angels. Thronus, the seat or
chair of an Emperor or king. Thrulla, a trewell, which masons, tylers, and
pargettours do use for layenge of mortar. Thrullisso, are, to lay on mortar.
Thryallis, an herb called in Italye Strella and Bipinella. Thryps, a mowthe.
Thule, an I Will beyond Scotland. Thunnus, a fyshe, called Tuny. Thuribulum, a
sensar. Thuringia, Thuryn in France. Thurini, a people in Italye. Thuriferus,
ra, rum, that which bearethe Frankynsence. Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to
sense. Thurius, ria, rium, of incense. Thus, thuris, frankyncense. Thuscana, a
city in Italye. Tusculani, a people by Rome. Thusculum, a diminutiue of thus.
Also a cite in Latium. Thyas, a sacrifyce made to Bacchus. Thyasus, a dance
dedycate to Bacchus. Thiella, a storm. Thyestes, whom his own brother Atreus
caused to eat his propre chylderne. Thymbra, an herb called sanerye. Thymele,
es, a woman, which first taught daunsynge in open places. Thymelici, may be
callydde daunsers of Morysdaunces. Thymiama, matis, a sweet perfume. Thymus, an
herb called time. Thymu^, a wart, which is as great as a bean. Thynnus, a
fyshe called Tuny. Thyridion, a wycket or little door. Thyrsus, the stalk of
letyse and of other herbs, which may be eaten. sum do take it for a spear
with a sharp head, which had boughs and leaves of yuy wrapped about
them: such spears did Bacchus and his flock of drunken harlottes, bear in
their hands. Lucretius the poet takes thyrsum, for furye or an ardent
mocyon. Thysus, the stalk of every herb, specially of letyse* It is also a
staff wound about with yuy, which was borne of them that did sacrifyce to
Bacchus.
T ANTE I.
TIara, an ornament, which the women of Persia did wear on their heedes,
which was round, and covered only the hinder part of their heedes. Princis
and pristis used also to wear it. Tiatura, a city in the countray of Mis^a.
Tibareni, people in Scithia, being in Asia. Tibia, the leg, proprely the shanke
or shinne bone, it is also an instrument callid a shalme. Tibialis, le,
pertaynyng to shaulmes. Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, geiues or leg
harneys. Tibicen, and tibicina, he or she that blowethe a trumpette or shalme.
Tibicen, is alsoo any thing, whereby any thing in building is sustained, as
a shore or proppe. Tibi, to the. Tibicis, a river in Scythia. Tibin, a baskette
or coffyn made of wickers or bulle rushes, or bark of a tree: Origenes super
Ex.
such one was Moses put into by the daughter of Pharao. Tibilustria, Fest.
Pom.
were days when men went with trumpettes, as it were in processyon about
their lambs. Tibini, tunes made with shalmes. Fest. Pom.
Tiburtes, people in Italy nigh to Rome. Ticinum, a city in Lumbardye now
called Pauia. Tigillus, a rafter. Tignarius, faber, a Carpentar that makes a
house of timber. Tignus, and tignum, a rafter of a house, which bears the
roufe. It is also generally all the timber, which serves to a house. Tigrane, a
river in the countray of Media. Tigranes, the propre name of a king of Media,
of the greatter Armeny. Tigris, a beast of a wonderful swyftenes, it is also
one of the four ryuers, which comes out of Paradyse. Tigurini, people of
Germanye, which do inhabyte the fourth part of Heluetia, or Swyzerlande.
Tile, an I Will beyond Scotland, callydde also Thule. Tilia, a tree, which some
do think is called quyckebeame. Tilium, a city in the weste part of
Sardinia, on the sea side. Tilos, an isle in the Indian see, wherein is plenty
of perle, and trees of diverse fruits, and the leaves of trees there growing
do never fall. also wolle grows on trees there, which do bear goardes of
the greatness of quynces, and being type do open, in the which do appiere the
wolle, whereof are made fine and precious clothes. About that place does
begin the mountain of Caucasus, which does pass through a great part of
the world. Timalos, an herb and flower growyng in waters, called commonly of
potycaries Nenufer. Timaeus, a noble philosopher of Pythagoras sect. Timanus,
a river in Italy besides Aquileia. Timens* he that fears for a time. Timidus,
he that always fears, called tymorouse. Timeo, mui, mere, to fear or dread.
Timeo te, I fear the as mine ennemy, lest thou shallt do me harm. Timeo tibi,
I am af^rd of the as my friend, lest thou should have any harm. Timeo mihi
abs te* I am afraid that thou will do me harm. ^
Timeo finem pomis, I am afraid that one will seal mine appulles. Timeo
mo^i^tur, I am aferd that he will die Timide, fearfully. Timidi^as, fear.
Timiopilae, ingi ossers or regraters of markettes, which do bye much corn or
vitayle together, to make it scarce and dear. Timor, moris, and timos, fear of
some evil coming. Timotheus, was the name of a noble capytayn of the
Atheme^fes, who for the good fortune that he had in battle, was painted
lyenge aslepe, and having by him a net pytched, wherein fortune was taken.
Also a cunning musician, which vsyd to take of his scholars, which had learned
before* double salarie, that he took of other, which never learned, saying,
that he took with them double labors, that is to say, to make them to
forgette that which they had lernyd before, and thanne to teach them
perfytely. Tin, old writers used for Eum. Tina, and Tinia, a greatte bolle,
which being full of wine, every man might drink thereof as much as he lysted.
Tinctor, ctoris, a dyer. Tinctilis, le, that which is dyed. Tinctura, dyenge.
Tinea, a mothe, they be also worms in the bealye, also worms breding in be
stalles. Tineosus, a, um, full of mothes* Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of
Africa. Tingitana, a part of Mauritania or Barbaria against Spain. Tingo,
xi, gere, to deep a thing into lycour, to dye colors. Tinnio, nire, to ring
or make a sound as metal does, sometime as in a ma^s ear. Tinnimentu^, a
ryngyng in the ear of a man. Plaut. in ruden.
Tinnunculus, a byrd, which makes a sharp ryngynge noise, and is of the kind
of hawks, and in some place does bread in houses, which with his voice
dryueth away other hawks, and therefore the birds of him are kept in erthen
pottes covered with claye, and hanged up in doue-houses, which causes culuers
meruaylousely to love their house. Tinnulus, la, lum, sharp in sound, as that
which is made by beatinge on metal. Tintinaculus, he that beats with rods,
a transgressour of a law. Tintinabulum, a little bell. Tintino, nare, to ringe
like a bell. Tiphernum, a town in Italy. Tiphis, an excellent carpentar, the
which found first the mean to govern a ship, a rother. Tipula, a wurme,
which runs on the water as other wurmes do on the land, and has six
fete. Tiresias, was king of Thebes, who had the knowledge of things which
should happen, and was blind. Tirius, a river in Grecia: also the contray
where Hercules was borne in Peloponesso, now called Morea. Tirinthius, was a
surname of Hercules. Tirinthis, a famous old city in Grecia. It Is, for tui,
the genitive case of Tu. Tisiphone, one of the furies of hell, which was
supposed to tourment homycydes, or s^eers of men. Titan, and Titanus, was the
brother of Saturn, and is taken for the son, and Titanis, for the moon.
Tithimallus, an herb called werte worte, whereof the milk woll take away
wartes. Tithymalus, an herb which is commonly called Spurge. Titillo, are, to
tyckle, to provoke or meeue pleasantly. Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wodde,
which has been in the fire. Titiuillitium, sygnifyeth nothing. Titubantia,
stammmerynge. Titubo, are, to stacker in speking or going, as a man being
drunk or sick. Titulotenus, no further than his title. Titulus, the title or
inscription of a warke or act. sometime dignity, also a monument or other
remembrance. Titus, the name of a man. Titus Liuius, the most excellent
hystorien or writer of stories, in whom was the fou^tayne of the milk of pure
eloquence. Tiepolemus, was the king of the Rhodes, which camme to the battle
of Troy, with nine ships. Tityus, the son of Jupiter, whom poets feigned
to be slain by Apollo, because he would have rauysshed Latona his sister. And
therefore lies in hell, having an egle always eating his liver. And it is
alsoo said, that his body was in length nine furlonge. witness Tibulle,
which was a poet, and also a great lover, and therefore could not lie.
T, ANTE M.
TMolus, a mountain in Lidia, whereon did grow great plenty of saffron and
vynes. It is also a little busshe, which bears flowers of saffron color.
T ANTE O.
TOdi, little birds, I suppose it be the bird, which is called a tytmous.
Toga, the common garmente of men and women, called a gown. And because the
Romans specially did wear that garment in the time of peace, toga was
taken for peace, as arma was for war. Toga praetexta, a garment which the
Romans did wear before that they were of the age of.xvi. years. Afterward it
was worn of them, which were in authority. Toga polymita, a garment made
with thredes of sondrye colors, as motleye or bauldekyn. Togata Comoedia, a
comedye or interlude, wherein the manners of the Romans, were expressed.
Togata Gallia, the country now callydde Lumbardy. Toga candida, was a
garment, which they did wear, that sued for any great office in the city of
Rome. Togari, apparayled in gowns. Togatus, he that wears a gown.
Tolerantia, sufferance. Toleranter, patiently. Tolles, a waxynge kernel. ^*
Liuius.
Tolleno, nonis, that wherein any thing is put or laid to be drawn up.
Vegetius. Budeus.
sometime a buckette wherewith water is drawn up. Tollenon, an engyne to draw
up water, which has a great poise at the one end Tolero, rare, to suffer,
to endure, to bear, to live poorly, or nyghly. Tolerare uitam, to live, or to
maynteyne his life. Tolerabilis, rabile, that which may suffer or bear.
Tollo, sustuli, seu tetuli, tollere, to lift up, or set up. Tollere
clamorem, to cry out. Tollere cristas, to set up the crest, applied to them
that be proud or arrogante, and do stretche up their brows with a dysdaynfull
countenance. Toll digitum, hold up thy finger, confess thy self vanquyshed.
Tollere gradum, to set forth, or to march forth. Tollere, to take away.
Toll hanc patinam, Plautus in milite.
take away this dyshe. Tollere, to have a child by a woman. Tollere, to
nouryshe. Verum quod erit natu^, Plautus in Amphit.
^ollito, What so ever is borne, put it to nouryshynge. Tollere, to defer
or prolonge, Plautus.
Omnes tollo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all of from one day to an
other. Tollere minas, to thretten or menace. Tolutarius, and tolutaris equus,
an aumblynge horse. Tolutiloquentia, a swyfte or fast speech. Tolutim, an
amblynge pace. Tolutim loqui, to speak fast oone word after an another.
Tomaculae, Tomacula, and tomacla, a certain sort of pouddynges, proprelye
swynes pouddynges. Tomentum, floxe, which is shorn of woollen cloth. also
locks clypped of white wolle. Tomices, hempen cords, also colers, which are
put on carthorses, for hurtynge of their necks. Tomos, a piece of a book, or a
warke vnperperfyte. Alsoo a city in the countraye of Ponthus. Tomyris, was a
noble queen of Massagetis in Scithia, against whom when Cirus the great king
of Persia came, and had slain her son, she pytchynge a fylde against him,
and of purpose having great plenty of vytayles in her pauyllyone, after a
little skyrmyshe she and her host fled. And when Cirus had a while followed the
chase, and blown to the retraicte, he came to her camp, and finding great
plenty of vytayle, he and his people did so much fill them selfee therewith,
that falling aslepe, they were all taken by the queen, and slain, and she
causynge a great vessel to be filled with the bloudde of Cirus, and the
Persyans, did cast his heed therinto, saying, Blood thou haste thyrsted, and
now drink thereof thy fylle. Tonarion, a certain shaulme with a soft sound,
on the which in the old time some orators used to have, to play by them,
when they pleaded, that by the tunes of the shalme, the orator might moderate
and order his pronunciation. Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or sheare.
Tonesco, tonui, tonescere, to thunder. Ennius.
Tonimus, for tonamus. Tonitrus, and tonitru, and tonitruum, thunder. Tonitruo,
are, to thunder. Tonitus, thunder. Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a greatte
sound or noise, to speak loud. Tonsae, sheep, which be shorn or clypped.
also ores of botes or ships. Tonsilis, le, that which is shorn or clipped.
Tonsilla, a post, having the one end armed with iron, which is pitched into
the earth, to the end that ships or botes may be tied thereat. Tonsillae
plurali, a dysese within the chekes and mouth like to great kernels. Tonsi
montes, hills without woddes. Tonsor, et tonstrix, tricis, he or she which
clyppeth or sheareth. Tonsorius, ria, rium, pertaining to clyppynge. Tonstrix,
tricis, a woman barbar. Tonstricula, idem. Tonstrina, a place where they do use
to clip or a barbers shop. Tonsus, a, um, shorn or clypped. Tonus, a tune or
accent. alsoo the space or distance, which is between the earth and the moon.
Toparcha, he that has the governance and charge of one only country.
Toparchia, the rule of one countray. Topazion, and topazius, a preciouse stone
of the color of gold. Tophus, a kind of stone, which is soon resolved into
sand. Topiarium, a warke made of trees, bushes, briars, or herbs, for
pleasure, and contained places to sytte or walk in, as it is used now with
box, eglantine, iacymine, and other like trees or thorns, that be flexible,
or will be wounden. Topiarius, he that makes such warkes. Topiaria, the
warke. Topica, warkes in that part of logike, which declares the places, out
of the which arguments may be invented, that most proprely pertayneth to
orators. Topographia, the description of a place, as of a country or city.
Topper, the old writers used for soon, Festus.
shortly, or quyckely. Toral, and toralium, in plurali numero, toralia, every
thing that lies on a bed, as shatis blankettes and couerlyds. In the old time
it were certain flowers and sweet herbs wounden together in ropes, and hanged
before the place, where men did lie. Like as now they use in London at
Mydsommer to hang before their doors. Torcular, aris, and torculare, and
torculu^, a press for wine, syder, or vertiuyce. Torcularius, a, um,
bylongynge to a press. Toreuma, matis, and tereumatum, graven or polyshed
warke. Toreutis, a grauer. Toreutice, ces, the craft of grauynge. Tormen,
minis, frettynge or tourmente in the bealy and guts. Tormina, idem.
Tormentum, tourment, or an engyn to turment men, generally all ordinance
pertaining to war. Torminosus, he that has tourmentes or frettynge in his
guts. Tornacum, a town called Tornay. Tornatilis, le, that which is turned
with a whele. Torniamen, may be now taken for a tournayment or iustes. Torno,
are, to torn or warke with a whele, as tourners done. Tornus, the instrument
or whele. Torpedo, dinis, slouthefulnes. also a fysshe, which in the taking
makes the hands of them that do draw, to be stonyed or deed for the time.
Torpeo, and torpesco, pui, torpere, uel torpescere, to be astonyed, or slow.
Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblynge of mind, an unaptness to do any
thing. Torporo, rare, to astonye, or make astonished. Torquatus, a ring dove,
or stock dove. it is he also that wears a colar or chain. Torqueo, torfi,
quere, to wind in, Vide^^^
to whirle about like a whiele, to sustain or bear up, to tourment. Torquere
telum, to throw a darte or iauelyn, that he run round. Vergilius
Torquere saxa, to turn great stones. Vergilius
Torquere, to spynne. Torques, a colar, chain, or bye of gold or silver, such
as is worn by knights or esquiers about their necks. Torrefacio, cere, to
broyle or roast at the fire, or by the heat of the son. Torrens, it is, a
stream, that comes down of hills, which is caused by much rain or snow.
Torrens, a particyple, sygnifieth flowynge with a great swepe. Torrentior, more
flowing, with a greatter violence. Torreo, riri, rere, idem quod torrefacio.
Torresco, re, to be broilid or roasted, or dried. Torridae zonae, are two
girdels imagined in the firmament on every side of the equinoctial line, under
which gyrdels the people which inhabyte there, are burned with the fervent
heat of the son, because the son abides lo^gest in those.ii. places and ar
also named Tropicus cancri, and tropicus Capricorni, Torridus, da, dum, dried
or burned. Tortilis, le, that which is bent or bowed. Torris, a stycke of
fire. Tortiuum vinum, wine of the last press. Torto, tare, to tourment
vehemently. ^
Tortor, toris, a tourmentour, or he that casts a stone with a slynge.
Tortu^, an engine, to throw great stones with. Tortuosus, a, u^, wou^de^ or
turned many wais. Tortus, ta, tum, crooked. Torue, toruu^, torua, toruiter,
proprely in beholding sowerly or grymly. Toruinus, an apparel of a woman's
heed. Torus, a bed, it was sometime made with herbs wounden together. Tori,
the brawnes of the arms and leggis, or the flesh myxte with synewes. Torosus,
a, um, mighty or strong in brawnes of the legs and arms. Torsio, sionis,
Theodorus, Gaza, and Longolius supposed to be a sturgion. Paulus Iouius is of a
contrary opinion. Torulus, a little bed. Torue, sturdyly in look. Toruitas,
tatia, sturdynes. Toruus, ua, uum, cruel and sturdy in loking. Tostus, a, um,
tosted or roasted. Totidem, verily so many, even as many. Tot, as many. Toties,
so many times. Totus, ta, tum, all, the hole, every whyt. Toxicum, venym or
poison.
T ANTE R.
TRabales, a certain tourment. Trabalis, le, pertaining to a beam. Trabalis
clauus, a iron pin or great nail wherewith bemis ar made fast to the rafters
Trabea, a cerklet or kyrtell worn by kings under their mantell. Trabiea nauit,
a ship made with great bemes Trabs, and trabes, a beam of a house. Trachale,
the over part of a fish callid Mutex, of whom purple color is made. Trachea,
the weson or pype of the lunges. Trachelu^, the middle part of tho fast of a
ship Trachelus, the chine of a man or beast, from the heed to the haunche.
Trachida, Trachina, and Trachurus, I suppose is a banstykle. Trachinia, a kind
of roses, not perfytelyted, like to them, that we call french roses. Traconia,
a roughnes within the eye liddes. Traconitidis, a part of Judea. Tractabilis,
treatable, that may be intreatid. Tractare, to handell. Tractim, on length, a
long time or space. Tracto, tare, to entreat. Haec art tractabat uirum, She
handlid the man craftily, or of that sort. alsoo to use or exercise, to order
or govern. Tractoriu^, a windlas to draw up heavy thi^gis Tractus, us, a space,
a country. Trado, didi, dear, to deliver, also to teach, to commytte in trust
to an other man. Traditio, a tradition. Traduco, duxi, ducere, to bring from
oone place to an other, to bring over, to translate out of one language into
an another. Traducere tempus, to pass the time, to bring up or nouryshe.
Traduces, vynes or trees translated from place to place. Tragelaphus, a beast
in part like a heart, in part like a got. Tragemata, that which are
commonly called bankettynge dyshes. Tragite, cruelly, in the manner of a
tragedy. Tragicum tueri, to look grymly. Tragicus, a writer of tragedyes.
Tragoedia, a tragedye, which is an interlude, wherein the personages do
represent sum history or fable lamentable, for the cruelty and myserye
therein expressed. Tragoedus, Plin. 38. cap. 13.
he that exercyseth some part in a tragedye. Tragonis, sieve Tragion, a tree
growing in Candy, like to Iunyper, the juice whereof is like to milk, and
waxethe thycke like gum. Tragum, is like a tyzan made of wheat, it is also a
fyshers net called a dragge. Tragonia, an herb now callid Taragon, late
seen in this realm, which has a taste like gynger: which herb laid to the
left side, consumes the spleen. Tragopa, a bird in Ethiopia, greatter tha^
an egle, and has on his head horn like a got. Tragopogus, a fyshe called a
barbyll. Tragoriganon, an herb which I suppose, is called Penny royalle,
growyng wild. Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd heed. Traguriu^, an i will in the sea called Hadriaticu^* Trigon, is a fyshe called a thornebacke. Tragulam
inijcere, to practice deceyte. Traha, a dray or slyd drawn without wheles.
Trahax, acis, a covetous person, the which draws all thing unto him.
Vergilius.
Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to pass the day, the night, or the time.
Plautus in trinammo Cic ^^teque ir^t in exilium.
Trahere, to tarry. Atque egomet me adeo cumillis una ibidem traho, And I my
self tarried as long with them. Trahere, to live. Et uosut tura^
tranquilla^que fortuna^ traheretis, mea perfeci uigilantia^. And by my
vygilancy I brought to pass, that ye should live in a sure and quiet
prosperity. Traho, xi, here, to draw, to lead, to defer, or delay, to
extend, to remove, to prolong. Traiicto, reci, ijcete, to lead over, to carye
over, to bring over, to stryke through. Traiectitia pecunia, money carried over
ye see Tra^ectus, tus, a passage. Traiectio, idem. Trallis, a city in Lidis,
an other in Phrigia. Trallianus, a man of that city. Tralucidus, da, dum,
clear, that a man may look through. Trama, an under garment. Trames, mitis, a
cross way. Trano, nare, to swymme over. Tranato, tare, to swymme over.
Tranquille, softely without noise. Tranquillitas, tranquillity, rest,
quyetenes. Tranquillo, lare, to make quiet. Tranquillus, la, lum, quiet, in
rest, peasible. Tranquillum est, it is fair wether. ^
Tranquillus locus, a good place to rest in, a place of quietenes. Trans,
over, from one place to an other. Transactio, an agreement upon ce^municatio^.
Transactus, a, u^, passed, long agone, achiued. Transalpina Gallia, France on
this side the mountains. Tra^salpinus, a, u^, over the mou^tains of alps
Transcendo, dear, to go over, to excede. Transcindo, scidi, scindere, to cut on
sonder. Vergilius.
Transcribere, is to give or deliver. Turn tot incassum fusos patiere labores,
Et tua Dardaneis tra^scribi sceptra colonis? Will thou Turnus suffer thy
labors to be lost, and thy realm to be given to the inhabytantes of Troy?
Agretius.
Transcribere, the transposition of a possession from one to an other.
Transcribo, psi, bear, to write out of a copy, sometime to translate.
Transcurro, rere, to run forth. Transcurrit aestas, the summer is passed.
Transcursus, us, a course. In transcursu, In passing forth. Transenna, a
loupe to look out at. also a window, or casement. alsoo a rope stretched out,
a snare or trappe. Transeo, siui, and sii, sire, to go forth, to pass ever,
to pass. Transire domum, to go home. Transeunter, passing by or over.
Transfero, tuli, far, to carry or bring from one place to an other, to
translate from one langage to an other, or from ones possession to an others.
Translatus, a, u^, the participle. Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruste through.
Transfuga, he that departs from his own people or capytayne unto the part of
the ennemies, or of them that are suspected in time of truce. Transfodio,
dear, to dygge through. Transfossus, a, u^, dug or stricken through.
Transfiguro, rare, to transfourme, to turn into an another figure.
Transfretatio, a passage over the sea. Transfreto, tare, to pass over the sea.
Transfugere ad hosts, is to goo and yield him to the contrary part.
Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies. Transfulgeo, re, to shine through.
Transfundere, to translate from one to an other. Libentius omnes meas lauds
(si modo sint aliquae meae lauds) ad te transfuderim, Ci. Dol^.
I have more wyllyngly turned my praise, (if I have any praise) unto you.
Transfugio, gere, to fle from place to place. Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to
pour out of one vessel into an another. Transgredior, deris, di, to pass or
go over or beyond, to excede, to transgress a law or commandment.
Transgressio, is a figure of retorike, where a man leaves the principal
matter, and enters into an other thing, and after returns to his matter. We
commonly call it, a digression. Transgressus, us, a passing over the sea.
Transigere uiram, to pass his or their life. Salust. Plaut. in Amphit Terent.
in Andria.
Transigere, is also to perform. Transigo, egi, igere, to drive forth, to
treat a matter, to agree or condescende, or come to a point: as happens between
men, which do contend for somewhat. Transilio, siliui, and silii, ire, to leap
over. Transitio, situs, a passing over, a going forth. Transitorius, a, u^,
that which shortly passes. Translatio, a translation, or brynging from one
place to another. Tra^sle go, ere, to read over Transluceo, cere, to shine
through. Transmarinus, na, um, that which comes from beyond the se.
Transmigratio, a departinge or going from one place to dwell in another.
Transmigro, grare, to go further, to dwell further of, to transpose my
dwelling. Tra^smissio, a going or se^ding further or over Transmittere mare,
to pass over the sea. Plin. ep^^ 173. Epist. 183. Epist. 16
Transmittere tempus, to pass the time. Transmittere discrimen, to escape a
danger. Transmitto, misi, mittere, to send from one place to an other, to go
or run quickly, to send shortly or quickly to pass over a water Transmoueo,
ere, to remove from one place to an other. Transnato, are, to swym over.
Sueton. de claris gra^maticis.
Transnomino, nare, to change his name. Transpareo, rere, to be seen through a
thing. Transpicio, spexi, spicere, to look through. Plautus in mercator.
Tra^squietus, a, u^, in quiet or rest from he^sforth Transtra, transoms which
do go ouerwhart a house* also the seats, whereon they do sit, which do row in
a ship or bote. Transtyberinus, rina, number, that which is or dwells beyond
the river of Tyber. Transuado, are, and trausuador, ari, to waade over a
shalowe place of a river. Transueho, uexi, uehere, to carye over. Transuerbero,
are, to stryke through. Transuersum agere, to turn hastily away from the
purpose which a man went about. Transuersum unguem non discedere, not to go a
nail breadth from it. A proverb signifieng a little distance. Tra^suersu^
digitu^, ide^. Transuersus, a, um, overthwart, not straight or direct.
Transuerto, tere, to turn away, or out of the right facion or way. Transuideo,
dear, to se through a clear thing. Plautus in ^pt.
Transulto, tare, to leap over. Transumptu^, that which is written out of a
record, and approved under the kings seal, or the sygnynge of the judge. In
the common law they call it an exemplifycation. Some do also call it a
Transumpte. Transumptio, a figure callid also Metalepsis, whereby one
signification is gathered of an other: as of Nox atra, a black night, is
gathered Nox tenebricosa, a dark night. Transuolo, are, to fly over, or leap
over. or to go or run beyond a place. Transumo, umpsi, sumere, to take of or
from an another, to remeue from one to an other Transuo, ere, to sow through.
Trapetes, petum, a myl wherein oil is made Trapeza, a table, whereon an
excha^ger does tell money. Trapezita, an excha^ger or ba^ker Trapezus, zuntis, a
city in the country of Pontus, Trapezuntius, a man of that city. Festus
Trapit, old writers used for vertit. Traston, a certain rosine or gum, the
best of that which is called gummihamoniacum. Traulius, he that spekith with
great difficulti Trebellicu^ vinum, seu Trebulanu^ uinum, wine growing about the
river of Trebia, in Lu^bardye, the Italions do call it Trebiana. Trebula, an
old town nygh to Rome. Trebulani, men of that town. Treceni, three hundred.
Trece^ti, and trecentu^, ide^ Trecentenus, na, number, the three hundredth.
Trecentesimus, ma, mum, idem. Trecenties, three hundred times. Tredecim,
thyrtene. Tremebundus, he that trembles much. Tremefacio, feci, cere, to make
to tremble or quake. Tremisco, scere, to tremble. Tremo, ere, to quake as one
does in a fever. also to fear. Tremulus, he that quaketh for fear. Tremor,
oris, quakyng, also fear. Trepidatio, tremblyng, fear. Trepidanter,
fearfully, tremblyng. Trepido, dare, to fear, to make haste. Trepidus, da,
dum, fearful, also he that does a thing hastily. Trepo^do, three pound weight.
Tres, three. Tressis, three pound. Treueris, a city in Germany callid Tryre.
Treueri, people called Treues. Triambi, were three which spoke together in a
tragedy. Triangularis, re, having.iii. corners Triangulus, la, lum, three
cornerde, Triarchus, a master of a ship with.iii. tops. Triarij, soudiors that
be set always in the rere ward, which were the strongest men, they faught
standing, bowing their knies, as they would rather die tha^ remeue from their
places Triatrus, a festival day kept after the third Idus of every month.
Tribaces, they which be worn with stripes Tribrachus, a foot in meter of.iii.
short sillables. Tribula, and tribulum, a flayle or other like thing, wherewith
corn is threshed. Tribulis, a kynnesman that comes of the same stock that I
do. Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heaviness of mind. Tribulus, a
bremble. Tribunal, the place where a Judge sytteth in judgment. Tribunatus,
the office or dignite of a tribune Tribunus, was an offycer among the Romans,
having chief jurisdiction among the communes, also a capytaine in wars,
having authority over soudiours, to view and see that they were well armed
and exercysed. Tribunitius, a, um, pertaining to the Tribunes. Tribuo, buere,
to give, sommetyme to set much by. Also to favor. Tribus, bus, a part of
the people, sometime divided into three partis. It seems that it was sometime
taken for a family or particular jurisdiction among the people, and thereof
comes tribulis. And therefore the partition of the people of Israel were
into.xii. Tribus. hereof be sundry opinions. read Calepine. Tributarius, he
that pays tribute. Tributim, by sondrye families or parts of the people.
Tributum, tribute. Tricae, feathers in the fete of chykens and pygeons, which
do let them to go, and therefore all things which do let a man ar callid
Tricae. Vide extrico, and intrico. Tricaptum, a garment, which was so fine,
that it seemed to be made of small hears. Tricenus, na, number, comes of
triginta, thirty. it is sometime taken for tricentenum. Tricentuplus, a, um,
three hundred fold. Triceps, cipitis, having three heedes. Tricerbe^us, a great
hell hounde. Trichiae, be fyshes called Sardynes. Trichila, a vessel having
three lauers, out of the which water is poured. Trichomanes, an herb callid
Maidenhear. Triclinium, a parlor to sup in, wherein were three tables and three
beds. For in the old time they used to lie, when the^ did eat. Triclinarius,
the servant, which does serve in the parlour. Triclinarius, a, um, pertaining
to the parlour or dynynge chaumber. Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium.
Tricolon, having three members. Tricones, men having sour couuntenances, and
that be never or seldom seen to laugh. Also pykers of quarrels. Tricongius, was
oone which drank or he rested, three mesures of wine, callid congii, which as
I suppose, was three galons and a pynt of our wine mesure. wherefore Tiberius the
Emperor promoted him to honor, and at the last made him Consul of Rome.
Tricornium, that which has three horns. Tricubitalis, le, of three cubytes in
measure. Tricubitus, ta, tum, idem. Tricus, a stone, which although it be black
yet shows he at the root black, in the myddell sanguyne, at the top
white. Tridacna, an oyster so great, that a man must make of him three
morsels. Tridens, ^is, every instrument, tool, or wepon, having three tethe.
Triduanus, a, um, of three days continuance. Triduum, the space of three days.
Triennalis, le, of three years. Triennium, the space of three years. Triennis,
ne, three years old. Triens, it is, a coin which is the third part of a pound,
it is also a cup cuntaynyng that poyse. Trientalis herba, an herb, which
has leaves as great as the coin called triens. Triental, a vessel containing
the third part of that mesure, which was named Sextariu^. Trierarclius, the
capytain of a ship, which is called trieris. Trieris, a great ship,
which has in it three orders of seats for the rowers. Trietericus, ca, cum,
for triennalis, that which happens to be done every third year Trieteris, the
space of three years. Trifaria^, in.iii. parts, or three manner of wais.
Trifarius, a, um, of the same signification. Trifaux, faucis, having three
chekes. Trifax, and triforum, a weapon of three cubytes long. Trifer, fera,
rum, that which brings fruit thryse. Triferus, a, um, idem. Trifera, is a
medycyne and other delycate spyces, to expulse easily corrupt humors Trifidus,
da, dum, dyuided into three parts. Trifinium, the buttyng of three feldes,
which join together. Trifolium, may be taken for the generalle name of all
herbs having three leaves. Al be it there is one herb callid so proprely.
Trifur, furis, more than a thief, three times wars than a thief. Semblably tri,
joined with any thing, signifies more. Triga, a carte drawn with three horses.
Trigarium, a certain course with such cartis Trigamus, he which has or has
had three wives. Trigarius, a place by campu^ Martiu^, at Rome Trigemini,
three chyldern at one birth. Trigeminus, na, number, idem quod tres, three.
Columel. 3. cap. 19.
Trigemmis, a plant or slyppe having three joints and three buddes. Trigesimus,
ma, mum, the thirtieth. Trigesies, thyrty times. Triginta, thirty. Trigla, a
fyshe, I suppose it to be a sore mullette, such as are taken in Deuonshyre and
in Cornwall. Trigles, a stone which is of the color of a soore Mullet. Trigo
gare, to bind or to draw a thing clo^e together. Trigon, gonis, a balle.
also a turtyll. Trigonia, the third age. Trigonalis, le, that which is three
cornerde, having three lines. Trigonus, na, number, three cornerde. Trilinguis, he
that speaks three langages. Trilix, licis, a garment with three diverse thredis.
Trimatus, tus, the time of three years. Trimembris, bre, having three members.
Trimestris, tree, of three months. Trimetrum, a verse of three fete. Trimma, a
wine made with spices, as that which is called ypocras. Trimorion, is named
of.iii. signs in heaven, which contain.lxxxx. degrees or porcions. wherefore
Timorion, is in calculation of natiuities from the time of the birth or
co^ception, the.lxxx. and tenth part or degree. Trimus, ma, mum, of three years.
Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus. Trimyxos, a lamp or candellstycke,
bearing three lyghtes. Trinacris, and trinacria, the country of Sicile.
Trinepos, potis, he which is three discentes lyneall from my chyldes child.
Trineptis, a woman in like degree of blood as trinepos is. Trinitas, trinity,
the number of three. Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes. Trinundinum, the third
fair or markette, which was wont to be proclaimed, to the intent that it
should be the better reme^brid. Trinus, na, number, three. Trioboli homo, and
triobolaris, a man worth three half pens, of little value. Triobolus, three
half pens, or worth three half pens. Triones, plough oxen. Alsoo they be
seven sterres being in the north. Triophthalmus, a little stone, having in
him the figure of three eyes. Triorchis, a kind of hawks, having three
stoones. Triparcus, a greatte nygarde. Tripartior, tiri, to dyuide into three
parts. Tripartito, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in three partis. Tripartitus, ta,
tum, dyuided in three partis. Tripedaneus, a, um, having three fete. Tripes,
pedis, with three feet. Trifoliu^, three leaued grass. Triphillon, ide^.
Triplaris, thryse as much. Triplex, plicis, three fold, treble, a table with
three leaves. Triplicitas, treble. Tripliciter, three folde^ Triplico, are, to
do or fold a thing.iii. times. Triplium, a vessel like a baskette. Triplus, a,
um, treble. Tripolis, a countray in Africa, an other in Syria, the third in
Phenicia. Tripolium, an herb. Tripondium, three pound weight. Tripontium, a
town in Vmbria in Italy, so called because it has three brydges. Triptolemus,
a man which found the use of grain in the countray of Athenes. Tripudium,
daunsynge. Tripus, podis, every thing that has three feet. Tripodes, were
alsoo tables in the temple of Apollo, of gold. Triquetra, a figure three
cornerde. It was also a name of the I Will of Sicile. Triquetrus, tra, trum,
having three corners. Triremis, a galeye. Tris, three or thryse. Trismegistus,
the name of Mercurius, in latin Ter maximus. Tristegum, a chamber in the third
storye or floor of a house. ^irtius in co^mentar^
Tristimonia, heaviness or sorrow. Trissis, three pound weight. Tristis, is
also taken for doctus, Iudex tristis and integer, A judge well learned and of a
good conscience. Tristis, against his will, not well content. Terent. in
Eunucho.
Tristitia, sorrow, or heaviness. Tristis, sorrowful, heavy, also cruelle, of
much gravity, bitter, more difficile or hard* sometime angry. Tristo, tare,
to make heavy or sorrowful. Trisulcus, ca, cum, having three edges. Trisulcu^
telu^, a weapon having three edges. Trisyllabus, ba, bum, having three sillables.
Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother. Tritauus, my great grandfathers father.
Tritheles, an herb which has thryse in the year flowers. Triticeus, a, um,
of wheat. Triticum, wheat. Trito, tare, to break or beat small. Triton,
one called god of the sea. Tritonia, the name of Minerua. Trituro, rare, to
threshe corn. Tritura, threshynge. Trituratio, idem. Tritus, ta, tum, worn.
Triuenesica, a great sorceresse. Triuia, a name of Diana. Triuialis, le,
commune or of small estimation used or taught in high ways, alsoo rude, not
elegant. Triuialis lingua, a homely form of speech. Triuium, where ways do
mete, also a place where commune recourse of people is. Triuialiter, communely,
in the vulgar or homely facyon. Trium literarum homo, was spoken in scorn of
him, that would seem to be a gentylle man, where he was none, which word was
made by this occasyon, that among the old Romans gentylle men vsyd to write
their names with three letters, as Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Also
this proverb was spoken of them, which were thieves, because that Fur,
contained but three letters. Triumphalis, le, belongyyng to triumphs.
Triumphator, he that tryumpheth or has triumphed for vaynquishyng his enmyes.
Triumphalis uir, he that has triumphed. Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the which
oone has tryumphed. Triumphatus, tus, a triumph. Triu^phatio, ide^. Triu^pho,
are, to triu^ph, to rejoice excedi^gly Triumphus, a triumph, which is a
solemn pomp or ceremony, where a prince, a co^sul or principal capitayn of
an army, has had vyctorie of the ennemies of his countray, and therefore is
brought home and received with all rejoicing and honor that may be devised of
the people. The order and form thereof ye may se in Titus Liuius, Apianus, and
Julius Capitolinus. Triumuir, one of them which is in any office, whereof be
three in like auctorite. Trium uiralis, le, pertaining to an office or
authority, wherein be three persons. Triumuiratus, is an office in the publyque
weal, wherein three men have equal jurisdiction together. Triumuiratus, the
office or authority of triumuit. Triuncis, and triuncium, three ounce weight.
Trixalis, a worm like to that which is called Locusta, but he has no wings.
Troas, adis, the city of Troy, and the country about it called the less
Phrigia. Trochaeus, a foot in meter, which is of two long syllables, and one
short. Trochilos, a little bird, which is called king of birds.
Trochiscus, a little whele. Alsoo trochisci, be of physicians called, little
balls flat at both ends, which be made of sundry poulders. Trochum, a
certain stool or chair, which will be turned about. Trochus, a top,
wherewith childern do play. Troclea, and trochalea, a poley wherein ye cord
runs, whereby any thing is drawn up. it is also the gyn, which is callid a
crane. Troezene, a city in the part of Greece, called Peloponesus. It is also
a countraye in the less Asia. Troglotidae, people in Ethiopia. Troia, the
city of Troy. also the country wherein Troy stood. Troianus, na, number, of
Troy. Troianus ludus, was a play of chylderne on horseback. Troicus, ca,
cum, for troianus. Troiugena, idem. Troius, a, um, of Troy. Tropeus, he that
does a shrewde turn, and runs away when he has done. Trophaeum, was a
mark or token of timber or stone, set in the place where enemies were
vanquyshed or put to flyghte, sometime it is taken for vyctorie. Tropice,
fyguratiuely. Tropice, ces, a kind of bulle russhes, the sede whereof will make
one to sleep. Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue. Tropei uenti, wyndes, which do
comme from the sea. Tropologia, a figurative speaking. Tropus, a figure, a
manner or facion, an alteracion of a word or sentence from his propre
signification. Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyane. alsoo the name of a king of
Troianes. Trossulum, a city in Italye. Trossulus, in the old time was taken
for a horsman or man of arms. It is also a person delycate, well fed or
fleshy. Troximi, grapes to be eaten. Trua, idem quod trulla. Trucido, dare, to
slay cruelly. Trucidatrix, she that kylleth one. Truciter, cruelly. Truculente,
idem. Trucitas, cruelty. Truculentia, cruelty. Truculentius, more cruelly.
Truculentissime, most cruelly. Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia.
Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or menaces. Trudo, trusi, trudere, to
thruste out with vyolence. Truella, a vessel wherewith water is throwe^ into
the synke. Trulla, wherein meat is put when it is roste or sodden. It is alsoo
a pyssepotte, of sum it is taken for a great cup, broad and deep, such as
greatte masers were wont to be. Trulla, a trewell, wherewith masons, tylers,
and pariettours do lay mortar. Trulleum, a bolle. Truncatio, a cuttynge in
pieces. Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces. Truncator, and truncatrix, he or she
that cutteth in pieces. Trunco, are, to cut of. Truncus, a piece cut of
from the resydue specially of a tree. Truncus, a, um, cut of. Truo, onis, a
bird called also Onacratalus, and is like to a swanne. Trusatilis, le, that
which may be turned and driven about with a man's hand. Trusatiles molae, a
querne, such as malte is ground in, or mustarde is made in, and is turned
with ones hand. Trutina, a wayenge balance. sometime it is taken for
judgment. Trutino, nare, to way or examyne. Trux, trucis, cruel, horrible.
T ANTE V.
TV, tui, it is, tibi, thou, of the, to the. Tuatim, after thy facyon or custom.
Tuba ductilis, a brason trumpette. Tuba, a trumpette. Tuber, beris, a puff
growyng on the ground like a musheron or sponge. It is alsoo generally every
swellynge in a man's body or vysage. It is alsoo in a tree like to a greatte
knotte. Tubercula, a little swellynge or pushe. Tubero, are, to swelle.
Tubicen, cinis, a trumpettour. Tubulus, a little pype, wherein water runs
from a spring. it is also a riede. Tubus, a pype, wherein water is conuayed to
a cundyte. Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eat hastily. Tubus, and tubulus, the pype
of a cundyte. it was also a thing, wherewith they made walls hot, before
there were chymneis. Tucetum, a meat made with choppid flesh like to a gigot
or allow. Tudertum, a city in Italye. Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntynge iron,
wherewith vessel is marked. Tudiculo, are, to steer, to prynte a mark.
Tuditantes, they that travail in business. Tuditanus, the name of a man, so
called because he had a heed as bygge as a betyll. Tuditis, a mallette. Tudito,
tare, to labor for advantage. Tuor, eris, eri, to defend. alsoo Tueor,
tueris, to see. Tugurium, a house of husbandry. Tuguriolum, a cotage. ^^st. pom.
Tu ipse, thou thy self. Tulit, he brought. Festus.
Tullii, some suppose them to be ryuers, some flowinges of bloudde out of sundry
members or joints. Salust.
Tullianum, a dungeon within the common prison of Rome. Tum, than, when he
gothe before cum, it sygnifieth as well. Tumba, a holowe place in the ground,
a sepulcher. Tumdemum, finally. Tumefacio, feci, to make to swelle. Tumeo, and
tumesco, scere, to swelle. Tumet, thou thy self. Tumidus, da, dum, swollen.
Tumor, ris, swellynge. Tumulo, are, to make the ground holowe, to burye.
Tumulor, ari, to be buried. Tumultuare, in haste, without much aduysemente.
Tumultuarius, a, um, that which is done without aduysement, or in haste.
Tumultuo, are, to make rumor. Tumultuose, troublously, or without study.
Tumultuosus, a, um, troublous, or making rumoure. Tumultus, tus, a rumor.
Tumulus, a little hylle or barowe, sommetyme a tomb. Tunc, thanne. Tunc
temporis, at that time. Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to smite, to braye or beat as
in a mortar. Tunetu^, a city in Africa callid now Tunise. Tungo, gere, old
writers used for Nosco, nosce, to know. Tunica, a iackette. Tunica pallia
propior, my iackette is nerer than my gown. a proverb applied where we will
signify that all friends are not to be like esteemed or made of. Tunico, care,
to put on a iackette. Tunicatus, he that wears a iackette. Tuopte ingenio, of
thine own wit. Tuor, eri, to behold, all be hit that word is not in use.
Turarius, a street at Rome. Turbatio, trouble. Turba, a multitude or assemblye
of people. Quid illec turba est? nu^nam ego perij? Terent. in Eunucho. Terent.
in Heautont,
What a multitude is yonder? am not I undone for ever? Also it signifies
trouble. Propter eam haec turba atque abitio euenit, For her sake is all this
trouble or dissension. Turbasis, sterche. Turbella, a little trouble. Turbide,
troublousely. Turbidus, troublous, not clear. Turbinatus, ta, tum, round and
sharp, like a top. Turbino, nare, to make sharp at the end. Turbistum, is
a thing myxte with the lycour, wherewith woulle is dyed, which makes the dye
to synke into the woull, whereby the color is made perfyte. Turbo, bare, to
trouble, to stere. Vide com.
Turbo, binis, a boystouse wind, which does blow down trees and houses,
also a top, wherewith chyldern do play. It is generally all thing, which is
round and broad above, and sharp benethe. Turbulentia, trouble. Turbulentus,
troublous, angry, full of contention. Turdetania, a contray now callid Granado.
Turdetani, and turduli, people of that contray. Turdus, a bird, which is
delycate in eating, a thrustell or black bird, alsoo a fyshe called an
hadocke. Turgeo, ere, and turgesco, scere, to be swollen. Turgidilus, la, lum,
sommewhat swollen or bollyd out. Turgidus, da, dum, swollen. Turiones, the
tendrelles of trees. Turma, a company of soldiers, contaynynge.xxxii.
horsemen. Turmatim, in order of battle. Turpis, pe, foul, dishoneste,
cruelle. Vergilius.
Alsoo greatte. Turpiter, shamefully, dishonestly. Turpissime, most shamefully
or dishonestly. Turpitudo, dishonestie, vyllany, deformity, sometime rebuke.
Turpo, pare, to defyle, dyshonest, or bring out of good facyon. Turreus, rea,
reum, like a tower. Turrisico, care, to ^ense. Turris, a toure or any thing
made like to it. Turricula, a little town. also a box, out of the which
dyse are thrown. Turriger, that which bears a tower, as an Elyphaunt.
Turritus, ta, tum, high, also towred, or fulle of towers. also the name of the
ydol, which was called mother of gods. Turtu^, turis, a bird called a
turtelle. It is also a fyshe. Turundae, pellettes of bread or past, wherewith
capons or other fowls ar crammed. Also a tente which surgeons do put into a
wound. Tu^, tutis, frankyncense, it is alsoo written which (...), as thus.
Tusc^a, a country in Italye, wherein be the cities of Florence, Seen, Luca, and
Pise. Tuscalum, a lyttelle piece of frankincense. also a city by Rome.
Tusculanus, na, number, of that city. T^^^^s, ca, cum, of the country of Tuscia.
Tu^^^^o, dinis, the cowghe. Tu^sicula, a little coughe. Tussilago, ginis, an
herb, which puttethe away the cough. some men suppose it to be coltes foot.
Tussio, siui, sire, to cough. Tussis, the coughe. Tu^anus, was supposed to be a
god, which had the custody of men. Tute, thou thy self. Tutela, the wardshyp
or custody of infa^tes. Tutelaris diuus, the saint whom we do take for our
special advocate to god. Tutelina, was callydde a Goddess, under whose
custodye was corn, which was in barnes or rykes. Tutissime, most sure.
Tutius, more sure. Tuto, without peril. Tuto, tare, to defend. Tutor, taris,
tari, idem. Tutor, a garden, he that has the ward of an infant. Tutorius, a,
um, pertaining to a gardeyn. Tutulus, a top of the hear wounden with a purple
lace on the crown of a woman's heed, which was only worn of her that was wife
to the great priest at Rome, called Flamen Dialis. Tutus, ta, tum, sure,
defended from peril, out of danger. Tuus, a, um, thine.
T, ANTE Y.
TYber, a great river, which is by Rome Tyberinus, of Tyber. Tyberius, the name
of an emperor of Rome. Tybur and tyburtum, a city by Rome. Tyburtinus, na,
number, of the cite of Tyburtu^. Tyburs, burtis, and tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of
Tyber. Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble capytayne, whom Venus did
wound at the battle of Troy. Tyle, called also Thule, an i will within one
days journey of the frosen see. Tylus, a worm, which lies under stones and
tyles, which have lain long on the ground, and is somewhat black and
scalyd, and has many legs, which being touched, closes him self round as
a pease, and is most commonly called a cheselyppe. Tymbra, a great field in
the countreye of Troy, through which the river of Timber runs into the river
of Scamander. Tymoetes, one of the sons of king Prtamus. Tymolus, idem quod
Tmolus. Tympanista, he that plays on a drumslade or tymbrell. Tympanis^ria, a
woman that plays on a tymbrell. Tympanites, a kind of dropsy, wherein the
bealy swells great, a tympany, whereof wind is the chief occasyon.
Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour, or drumslade. Tympanotriba, idem quod
tympanista. Tympanu^, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumslade. Seruius calls it a
covered charyotte or carte, other do suppose it to be the struck of a carte
whele. I suppose that it may be taken for that, which is called the corse of a
charyotte or horselytter, made with bayles or bourdes joined, which is not
much from the opinion of Seruius. Tympanum, is also a great whele, wherein men
do goo and draw up water. It is also a platter, which serves for meat.
Tymphei, people in Etholia, which is in Grecia. Tyndarus, the father of the
fair Helene, for whom Troy was destroyed, and alsoo of Castor and Pollux.
Typhon, and Typhos, was a great giant, the son of Tytan. It is also a great
puyssaunt wind. Typhonae, be certain impressyons in the air like globes of
fire or darts. Typhis, was a carpenter, which first did find the way to
govern a ship. Typus, a figure, an example, or a form, a lykenes or
shadow of a thing. Tyrannice, cruelly, tyrannousely. Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a
tyrant. Tyrannis, nidis, a cruelle or violente rule or governance for a private
commodity, and not for a publyke weal. Tyrannicida, he that sleeth a tyrant.
Tyrannicidium, the killing of a tyrant. Tyrannus, a tyrant. Tyranthina, a
garment of purple color. Tyranthinus color, purple color. Tyrius, a, um, of
the isle called Tyrus, Also vyolette or purple color. Tyro, ronis, a young
soldier or manne of arms. Also he that first enters into the experience of
any science, art, or exercise. Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a young soldier or
lerner. Tyrocinium, the first exercise in any thing. Tyros, a cite in Phenicia.
also an isle, where the color of purple was first founden. Tyrunculus, a
veraye young sowldiour or young lerner. Tyrotarichus, a sauce made with chese.
Tyrrheni, the people of Thuscane. Tyrsis, the circuit without the walls of a
town, wherein me^ may walk for their solace.
V ANTE A.
VACCA, a cow. Also a city in Numidia. Salust^ in ^^gurt.
Vaccinus, vaccina, cinum, of a cow. Vacerra, mad, without wit, percloses
or railes, made of timber, within the which some thing is inclosyd. Vacillo,
are, to move inconstantly, to wagge or wave, to be unstable, or unsure.
Vacinium, the flower, which is also called Hyacinthus, and has long leaves,
a round root, a stalk of a spanne long and more, having on it many purple
flowers, wherewith in some places they do dye pourple. I doubt whither it be
the flower which is called Hartis ease, or Sweet wyllyam. Vacillatio, a
waggynge or wauerynge and inconstant meuynge. Cl. Tyro.
Vacillantes literae, letters written crokedly or out of order. Vacillans
testis, a witness, which inconstantly does varye in report or deposition.
Vacat, it serves to no purpose, it is superfluous. Also it sygnyfyeth, I am at
good leisure, or without busynes. sometime it sygnifyeth to care or force. Et
cui esse deserto vacat, And who cares to be well spoken or eloquent. Vacatio,
vacation, or time when a man is out of his common busynes. Vaco, care, to
apply wit or study. Vaco sapientiae, I apply my study to wisdom. Vaco
rei diuinae, I apply my wit to gods service. Also to be emptye or void.
Fac uacent aedes, cause the house to be voided. Vacat occupatione, He is
without occupation or ydell. Sometime it signifies to be superfluous, or
unprofitable. Vacuae aures, Date mihi vacuas aures, dum eloquor, Give your
ears oonely to me, while I speak, or here nothing else. Vacuefacio, cere, to
empty or avoid. Vacuo, are, idem. Vacuus, a, um, void, emptye, or without a
thing. Vacuus animus, a mind without care or solycitude. Vacuna, was called
a goddess, unto whom husbandmen after that harvest was clean done, did
sacrifyce, as to the goddess of quyetenes after labor. Vacuitas, emptynesse.
Vadimonium, surety to appiere at a day^ assygned. Vadis, and uas, uadis, he
that undertakes for an another. Vadium, surety. Vado, dear, to go forth. also
to find surety. Vado, dare, to wade. Vador, aris, ari, to find sureties.
Vadimonio obstrictus, let to bail or mainpryse, when a man is bounden to
appear at a day assigned by a justice. Vadimonium obire, to appiere at the day
assygned. Vadimonium deserere, to make defaute at the day, and not to appiere.
Vadimoniu^ missum facere, to discharge the recognisance or sureties that were
bounden. Vadimonium differ, to give a longer day of apparaunce. Vadosus, a,
u^, full of fordes or shalow places. Vadum, and vadus, a fourde or shalow place
in a water, where men and beasts may goo over. Vaeh, an interiection,
wherewith we do curs. Vafellus, he that is somewhat crafty. Vafer, fra, frum,
subtle, crafty, fly. Vaframentum, subtyltie or craft, slynesse. Vafre,
craftily, fynely in deceyuyng. Vagabundus, a wanderer about. Vadigabar, an
hebrewe word, which in latyne is Numeri, one of the five books of Moses.
Vageni, a people dwelling among the mountains called Alps. Vagina, a shethe
or scaberde. Vaginula, a little shethe. Vagio, gire, to cry as a child.
Vagitus, tus, the crienge of a child. Plaut. in milite.
Vago, gare, for vagor, to wander. Vagor, aris, ari, idem. Vagus, ga, gum,
wandrynge and abiding in no place. Vah, an interiection, wherewith we wonder
^r a thing, also of reioysynge. Plautus in casina.
Vaha, an Interiection of reioysynge or lawghynge. Valacchia, a country
beyond Hungary. Valde, very much. Valdius, for validius. Vale, farewelle.
Valens, puissaunt, hole, strong. Valentia, puissance, ability. Valentior,
ualentius, more puissant or strong. Valentissimus, most puissant, or strong.
(...) in (...)*
Valentulus, somewhat strong. Valeo, lui, lere, to be able, to be hoole. Male
ua^eo, I fare ill, I am ill at ease. Valere, to be strong or puyssant, to may
do, or be of force or power. Neque tam imperita, ut quid amor ualeat, ne sciam,
I am not such a fool, but I know what love may do, or of what power love is.
Valere a morbo, to be recouerid fro sickness Valere, also signifies to be
worth. Terent. in Andria.
Valeat, farewell he, I care not for him. Imo habeat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa,
well let him wedde her, I care not for him, much good do it him with her: or
let him have her, god be with him, let him make merye with her. Cicero.
Si deus talis est, ut nulla gratia, nulla hominum charitate teneatur ualeat,
If god be such oone, that he has neither favor nor love to mankind, I care
not for him. Terent. in Andria.
Valiant, qui inter nos dissidium uolunt, They that will have us at variance let
them get them hense. Valesco, scere, idem quod ualeo. Valeria, the sister of
Messala, wife to a noble man called Seruius, who being deed, when she was
asked, why she did not marye again, she answered, that she always lived by
Seruius her husband. Valerius, a man's name. Valesius, for Valerius.
Valetudinarium, a place where men do lie, when they be sick, as the fermerye
in a monasterye. Valgiu^, an instrument to make flores smoth. Plinius.
Valgulatio, a question in rebuke of one. Valgustus, a crooked staff. Fest. Po^
Valgus, he that has his legs or feet bowed inward. Valetudinarius, a,
um, now and than sick, oftentimes sick. Valitudo, and valetudo, dinis,
sometime signifies sickness, sometime health. Valide, valyantly, myghtyly.
Validus, da, dum, valyant, mighty. Validior, validius, more mighty.
Validissimus, most mighty. Validitas, tatis, might. Vallecula, a little
valey. Vallaris, re, pertaining to a trench in a feld. Vallaris corona, a
garlande given to him* which first entered into the trenche of the enemies
camp. Vallescit, old writers used for perierit, he is lost or peryshed.
Vallis, a valey or dale. Vallo, are, to enclose, to fortifye. Valonia, was
called the goddess of valeis. Vallum, and vallus, a trenche, which is made in
a field to defend an hooste, within the which pauilions are pytched. Also a
post whereunto vynes are bound. Valor, oris, value or price. Valuae, dorc^
which be shut on two partis. Valuulus, the codde of a bean or pease, or other
like thing. Vanans, old writers used for fallens, No. Mar.
deceyuynge. Vandalia, a countray in the north part of the world. Vane,
vaynely, foolyshely, lyengly. Vanesco, scere, to vanysshe, to be brought unto
naught. Vanidicus, a liar or teller of folyshe tales. Vaniloquus, idem,
Vaniloquidorus, idem. Vaniloquentia, vain speech. Plautus (...) Persa.
Vanitas, tatis, vanity, lyghtnes, lesyng, folly. Vanitudo, vanity. Vanno,
are, to vanne corn. Vannus, a vanne. Vanus, a, um, void or empty. Also
folisshe or enuyous, a maker of lies. Vapor, oris, and vapos, a vapor, or hot
breath issuynge out of a thing. Vaporarium, a place made hot to sytte in in
the winter time. Vaporo, rare, to hete or make warm a place Vappa, wine, which
has lost his verdure. It is sometime taken for a man, in whom is no wit
or perfyte reason. Vapo, onis, a beast that flees. Vapularis, he that is
beaten. Vapulo, lare, to be beaten. Variabilis, le, variable. Variantia,
varietas, and variatio, variety, dyuersitie in things. Varices, and varicae,
variculae, ar veins which do swelle excedyngly. Varicosus, he that has such
veins swolle^. Varicor, aut varico, to transgress, to pass over a thing
neglygently. Varicus, an aduerbe, which sygnyfyethe strydynge. Varae manus,
crooked hands. Vari, spots in the face. Vary, dyuersely. Variae, for
Pantherae, bestes of diverse colors. Variegatus, a, um, painted or garnished
with sondrye colors. Varius, a fyshe called a troute. Vario, are, to make
diverse. Variolae, measylles. Varius, a, um, diverse, unlike, inconstaunt,
varyable. Varolus, a deuourer, also a pycker. Varro, ronis, was a noble
Romayne, of all other most excellently learned. Varus, whose legs are crooked
inward. Varus, a river, which dyuydeth that part of France, that is callydde
Narbonensis, from Italy. Also it was the name of a poet Vas, vadis, a surety,
he that vndertakethe for an other man. also a pledge. Vas, vasis, a vesselle.
Vascones, Gascoynes. Vascularius, a potter. Vascularius, a goldsmythe, the
which makes plaate. Vasa conclamare, to cry to trusse up caryage and
baggage, as when an army does remove. Vasculum, and vascillum, a small
vessel. Vastatio, destruction. Vasterna, a horselytter, or any thing borne by
two horses. Vastescant, old writers vsid for inhorrescant. Vasto, are, to waste
or distroye. Vastus, a, um, great, huge, sometime desolate. Vastitas, tatis,
vastitudo, and vastities, greattenes, also destruction. Vasum, a vesselle.
Vates, a prophet, a poet. Vatesco, scere, to be distroyed, to be dried up,
to be forsaken. Vaticanus collis, a hylle by Rome. Vaticinor, aris, ari, to
prophecy, or tell what shall happen, to coniecte. Vaticinium, a prophecye, a
conjecture. Vaticinatio, idem. Vatidicum, for propheticum, that which is
spoken in a prophecye. Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that has crooked legs
outward. Vatrax, and vatricosus, he that has ylle legs from the knee
downewarde.
V, ANTE B.
VBer, and huber, a womannes breaste. Vide Huber. Vbi, where* in what place,
sometime when, after. Vbiloci, idem. Vbique gentium, in all countrayes. Vbique,
in all places, every where, in all. Vbique loci, in every place. Vbilibet,
where ye will. Vbicunque, in every place. Vbicubi, idem.
V ANTE D.
Vdus, da, dum, moist. Vuidus, da, dum, moist inward.
V ANTE E.
VE, idem quod Vaeh, Alsoo it is put for uel, or que. Vecors, dis, mad.
Vecordia, madness. Vectabulum, wherein any thing is carried. Vecticularia, ui
ta, to have much to day, and nothing to morrow, suddenly rich, and as
sodaynely poor. Vectigal, a tribute, a pencion, a rent, a yearly reuenewe.
Vectigalis, le, he that pays trybute, pencyon, or rent. Vectis, a bar.
also a leauer, wherewith things be lift, or borne by men. Vecto, are, to
carye. Vectito, idem Vectatio, caryage. Vector, toris, he that is carried,
sometime he that caryeth. Vectorius, a, um, apt to carye. Vectura, caryage,
also the hyre or money given for caryage. Vegeo, gere, to be in health. Veget,
for uegetat. Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marciall doctrine. Vegeto,
uegetare, to recreate, to quycken, to conserve. Vegetus, ta, tu^, hole, strong
in health, quick. Vegrandis, little. Vehea, for via. Vediouis, and veiouis, was
callid a god which had no power to do good, but only harm. Veheare, old
writers used for vehere. Vehemens, it is, vehemente, great, vrgente, fyers,
sharp. Vehementis, vehemence, might. Vehementer, vehemently, sharply,
mightily. Vehementior, tius, more vehement or sharp. Vehementissimus, ma, mum,
most vehemente or sharp. Vehes, a carte or wayne. Vehia, in the old Tuscane
tongue was a cart. Vehiatura, for vectura, caryage. Vehiculatius, a carter.
Vehicularis equus, a cartehorse. Vehiculum, a general name to all things,
which serves for caryage. Veho, uexi, uehere, to carye. Veios, a city in
Hetruria. Veientes, people, with whom the Romans had long time wars.
Veientanus, na, number, of the city of Veios. Veij, the people of Veios. Veiouis,
uide ante Vedionis. Vel, or, sommetyme also, chiefly, namely, at the least.
Velabrum, a place in Rome. It may be also called a tent, which crafts men do
set up, where they have no howses, to be instead of their shoppes. Velamen,
minis, a covering. Velaria, clothes, wherewith tentis ar made. also the same
tents. Velatura, a frayte. Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled. Veles, velitis, a
soldier that wears light harneyse. Velia, a f^nne in Italy, in the
countreye of Calabria. Velifico, care, to sail. Velina, a street in Rome, by
the hill called Mons Palatinus. Velis equisque, by see and by land. Velitaris
pugna, battle done by them that are light harneysed. Velitatim, by leapes or
skyppes. Velitor, aris, ari, and uelito, uelitare, to strive, to brawle.
Velitatio, brawling. Velittae, plurali numero, a city in Italy. Veliuolus, a,
um, that which gothe with a sail, or is occupied with sails. Vella, old
writers used for villa. Vellaturam facere, to live by carriage from one town
to an another. Vellicarim, by pluckes. Vellico, care, to pynche, sometime to
rebuke, to byte, to rent. Vello, lere, to pluck up, or pull a thing. Vellus,
velleris, a flyse. Velo, lare, to cover or hyde, to bind, to apparayle.
Velocitas, swyftenesse. Velocior, velocius, swyfter. Velocissimus, ma, mum,
swyftest. Velocissime, most swyftely^. Velociter, swyftely. Velox, locis,
swyfte. Velum, a sail, a curtayne. Velut, veluti, as, like as. Vena, a vain.
Venabulum, a hunting staff. Venalitiarius, he that sells slaves. Venalis,
le, that which is set to sale. Venalitium, a place where any thing is sold.
Venalitius, he that sells, Venaphrum, a city in Campania. Venaria, an I Will,
wherein be many veins of mettalle. Venaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to huntyng,
Venatorius, a, um, idem. Venaticus canis, a hounde. Venator, a hunter.
Venatrix, a woman hunter. Venatura, idem quod venatio. Venatus, tus, hunting.
Venatio, idem. Vendax, acis, he that gladly sells. Vendibilis, le, easy or
ready to be sold. Vendicatio, a claim. Vendico, care, to vendicate, to claim.
Venditarius, a, um, ready to be sold. Venditatio, an auaunt. Venditio, a saale.
Vendito, tare, to selle often, to auaunt. Vendo, didi, dear, to selle.
Veneficium; the act and craft of poisoning. Veneficus, and venefica, a maker of
poison, a vser of sorcerie. Venenariae mulieres, women that do sell poison
Venenatus, ta, tum, poisoned. Veneno, nare, to poison. Venenosus, a, um, that
has poison, Venenum, poison, it is the general name of all that does alter
the nature or color of that thing, wherewith it is myxte. Veneo, niui, nire,
to be sold. Venerabilis, worthy to be honored. Venerabundus, he that does
wourshyppe any thing. Venerandus, idem. Veneranter, reuerentely. Veneratus,
ta, tum, humblye prayed unto. Sometime reverend. Veneror, aris, ari, to
honor. Veneratio, honor, reverence. Venereus, a man disposed to lechery.
Venetiae, arum, the city of Venyce. Veneti, values in Brytayne. Also the
people of Venyce. Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Alsoo the color of light blewe
or blunkat. Venia, pardon, forgyuenesse. Tua venia, by your license. Venibo,
ancient writers used for veniam. Venio, nire, to come, to spring. Venire in
mentem, to come to remembrance. Venit in mentem, it comes to my mind. Venitur
ad me, they came to me. Venila, for vnda, water in a river. Venor, aris, ari,
to hunte, to get a thing craftylye. Ventanea, things that seem to be
dangerous, and yet therein is no danger. Venture, tris, the bealy or panche.
sometime it is taken for the stomach. Ventilabrum, a fan or f^abelle,
wherewith wind is made. Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynn^wynge. Ventilator, a
vanner or wynnower of corn. Ventilo, are, to gather wind, to vanne or wynowe
corn, to turn out of one hand into an another. Ventito, tare, to come often.
Ventosus, a, um, wyndy, also light. Ventositas, wyndynesse^ Vento uiuere, to
live by the wind. A proverb applied to them, which have no substance to
live on. Ventus, wind. Ventulus, a little wind. Ventus operam dat, the wind
blowethe a good cool. Ventus popularis, vayneglorie. Ventrale, a stomacher.
Ventricosus, a gorbealy. Ventriculus, the stomach. Venum ire, to be sold.
Venundo, dare, to selle. Venundatio, byenge and selling. Venus, veneris,
called goddess of love, sometime lechery, also carnal appetite, alsoo beauty,
by which a man is styred to love. Venustas, tatis, beauty, proprely of women.
sometime a dilectable pronu^ciatio^ or speech Venuste, proprely, pleasantly,
amyably. Venustulus, a, um, somewhat fair. Venustus, ta, tum, fair,
dylectable. Venusto, are, to ornate or make beautiful. Veprecula, a little
bramble. Vepres, briars. Vepretum, a place full of briars. Ver, ueris, the
spryng of the year. Veratru^, an herb called also Helleborus. Verax, racis, he
or she that says truth. Veracitas, tatis, truth in speech. Verba dare, to
deceive. Verba mortuo dare, to speak to a deed man, a proverb when a man
loses his labor. Verbascu^, an herb whereof be.ii. kinds: of which one is
supposed to be Molin or long wort, the other is supposed to be that which is
called primerose, not withstanding other men redynge the description, let
them judge at their liberty. Verbena, and uerbenaca, an herb called veruyn.
sometime Verbenae, are all leaves sodeinly plucked up, to garnyshe howses or
churches, or to make garlandes. Verber, a small long stycke or yard.
Verberalis, worthy to be beaten. Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge.
Verbereus, ea, eum, worthy to be beaten. Verbero, rare, to beat, to punyshe.
Verbero, ronis, a person worthy punyshement, the reproach of all servants.
Verberito, tare, to beat often. Verbigero, rare, for verba facere, to talk.
Verbenarius, was one of the ambassadors sent fro the Romans unto their enmies,
which ware on his heed a garland of veruyn. Verbose, an aduerbe, signifienge
with many words. Verbositas, much talking or speking. Verbis meis salutem
dicito, salute him in my name. Verbosus, full of words. Verbulum, a little
word. Verbi causa, as by example. Verbi gratia, ide^. Verbum, a word, also a
sentence comprised in one word, a proverb. Vercellae, was a city in Liguria,
nigh to the mountayns called Alps. Vere, truly. Verecundanter, and
verecunditer, shamefastly. Verecundia, shamefastness. Verecunde, shamefastly.
Verecundor, aris, ari, to be ashamed. Verecundus, da, dum, shamefaste.
Veredarius, a messanger that rides by post. Veredus, a light horse, a hunting
nagge, or swyfte geldynge. Verenda, places in a man and woman, which without
shame may not be named. Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde. Vereor,
reris, reri, to fear as the child does the father. Timere, to fear, as the
slave or boy does his master. Vereor dicere, I dare not tell. Vereor abs te,
I am aferde of the, lest thou wylt do me dyspleasure. Vergiliae, the.vii.
sterres, callid also Pleiades Vergo, uersi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or bow
down. Veridicentia, truth in speakinge a true tale. Veridicus, ca, u^, he or
she that tells truth. Verifico, are, to verify as lawyers do say, to auerre
Veriloque^tia, ide^ quod ueridice^tia. Veriloquus, and ueriloquax, he ye
speaks truth. Verisimile, likely. Verisimiliter, idem. Verisimilis, le, like
to be true. Verisimilitudo, lykelyhode. Veritanus ager, a field divided among
the people, so that every man may have a porcio^. Veritas, troth.
Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in small pieces. Vermiculus, a little
worm. Veriuerbium, a true tale. Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be fulle of vermyne
or wourmes. Vermiculata opera, warkes which are of small pieces of diverse
colors, wherein ar set out sondrye pyctures, like as we see in spruse tables
or counters. Vermina, pryckinges in the body, that it seems worms were cut
asonder. Vermino, nare, to have worms. Verminatio, the disease of the wourmes,
proprely in cattle. Verminosus, a, um, full of worms, or that wherein worms
are. Vermis, a worm. Also it is a fish in the river of Ganges, which is in
length.lx. cubytes, and is blue in color, which has such strength, that
when oliphantes com to the water and do drink, he will take one of them by
the nose, and pluck him into him. Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne in
the house of the lord, or in his own countreye. Vernaculus, la, lum, all that
takes beginning in our own country, as Vernacula lingua, the country
language, the common speech, peculyar or propre to country or house.
Vernaculi, be also men of ylle manners and language, which use to flatter or to
speak in rebuke. Vernacula putatio, cuttynge of vynee in the spring of the
year. Vernalis, le, pertaining to the spring of the year. also seruyle.
Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly. Vernatio, the old skin of an adder. It is
sometime taken for age. Vernilis, le, seruyle. Coecilius.
Vernilitas, flatterye. Vernilitus, old writers used for a flatterer.
Verniliter, flatterye. Verno, are, to spring, as herbs done, also to sing as
birds done. Vernula, a dyminutiue of verna. Vernus, a, u^, lusty, fresh, as
the spring time. Vero, truly, verily. sometime it does affirm that which
follows. also but yet. Vero, is also a river in Byskay. Vero, are, to say
truth. Verona, a city in Italy. Verones, people dwelling nyghe to the river
of Vero. Veronensis, and Veronius, a man of Verona. Verpus, pa, pum, that
which has no skyn. It is also the myddell finger. Verpi, be alsoo Jews.
Verra, an altar at Rome, whereat they prayid that children should not be wrong
borne. Verres, a hog vngelded, a tame bore. as aper may be called a wild
bore. Verricula, old writers used for articulus. Verriculum, a net called a
dragge. Verrinco, care, to turn or change a thing unto better. Verrinus, a,
um of a bore. Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hylle. also a warte.
Verrucaria herba, warteworte. Verrucosus, he that has wartes. Verrucula, a
little warte. Verrunca, old writers took for a hye place. Versatilia, thingis
that are turned or wounden one about the other, as two cords or two styckes
wou^den together. also pillars made of the same facion. Versatilis, le, that
which tourneth or may be turned. Versicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that
which changes color. also of sundry colors. Versicolorius, a, um, any thing
turned out of his natural color. also that which is of diverse colors mixed
together. Versiculus, a little verse. Versipellis, a crafty person that will
turn often as he lysteth. Verso, are, to turn. Versoria, the needell in a
ship, to know the costs. Versor, aris, ari, to be occupied in a thing or
matter. Versura, a tournynge. it is also when a man boroweth of oone to pay his
dettes to an other. and to borow in such wise is Versuram face^e. Versuram
soluere, is to change creditours, as to borowe of one man to pay an other.
Versus, sa, sum, turned. Versus, us, a verse. sometime an order. also a song.
Versus, toward. Versute, craftyly. Versutus, mutable, often tournynge, wylye,
expert. Versutia, wylynesse. Versutiloquus, a crafty speaker. Vertagus, a
hounde which will hunte by him self. Vertat tibi been, God give the thereof
good luck. Di been uertant, I pray god turn it to good. Vertebrae, places in
the body, where the boones do not meet: but are knytte together in such
wise with synewes, that they may turn the more lightly. Vertere terga, to
rounne away, or fly in battle. Vertere solum, to goo and dwell out of a
man's propre country. Vertere, for versuram facere. Vertere stultitiae, to
repute folly in a thing. Plautus in Epidic.
Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one. Quis erit, uitio qui id non uerta^
tibis? Who is it, that will not put the blame in the? Vertere, to translate* or
interpret out of one tunge into an another. Verrex, and vortex, ticis, a
whyrlewynde. also a whyrlepoole in a water. also the crown or top of the
heed. also the top of every thing. Vertibulum, idem quod vertebra.
Vertibula, a fyshe called also vrtica. Verticulum, a wherue, which is a round
thing set on a spyndel, to cause it to turn. Verticillum, a little wherue.
Vertigo, ginis, a sickness of the heed, wherein it seems to a man, that he sees
things tournynge. Vertigus, a whyrlynge about. Vertius, a man of great
strength. Verto, ti, tere, to turn, to draw, to translate, to consider.
Vertunalia, the solemnity of Vertunus, which was kept in Octobre. Vertunus,
was called the god of bieng and selling it is sometime taken for the year. Veru,
a spytte or broche. Veruetius, a, um, like a sheep. Festus.
Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether. Veruat, for circundat, it compasses. Verutum,
a casting darte with a string. Veruactum, the summer tylthe. Veruculum, an
instrument of goldesmithes like a little broche. Veruex, uecis, a wether
sheep. Verus, ra, rum, true, substanciall, uncorrupted, good, just,
profitable. Veritas, tatis, truth. Verum, an aduerbe, signifies truly. also
but. Verumtamen, yet not withstanding. Vesanus, a, um, cruel, furious, wood.
Vesania, furye, woodnesse. Vescor, sceris, vesci, to eat, to use. Actius used
it to see. Vescus, ca, cum, every thing that may be eaten, also little or
lean. Vesca, browse, leaves, whereon beasts do feeds in winter. Vesculus, a,
um, very lean. Vesicaria, an herb, which potycaries do call Alkakengi.
Vesica, a bladder. Vesuuius, and veseuus, a mountayn by Naples which sends
out continually smoke and fire. Vespae, they which do burye deed cors^s.
Vespa, a waspe. Vesper, the evening, or euentyde, also the evening sterre.
Vesper, ra, rum, of the evening. Vesperi, an aduerbe, signifienge late, at the
end of the day. Vespero, tare, to be evening. Vesperasco, scere, idem.
Vesperna, old writers used for coena, supp. Vespertilio, onis, a reremous or
back. Vespertinus, na, number, that which is done in the evening. Vesperugo,
ginis, idem quod uesper. Vespices, places thycke of bushes. Vespillo, onis, he
that burieth men in the night time. Vesta, the daughter of Saturnus, which
for her chastity was honored for a goddess. sometime it is taken for pure
fire. Vestales, were virg^ns, which mynistred to Vesta. Vester, tra, trum,
your. Vestiarium, a warderobe, wherein garments are laid. Vestiarius, the
yoma^ of the robes, or he that hepeth the warderobe. Vestibulum, a void place
without the door, where men do tarry whiles they do knock and until the door
be opened. Vesticeps, ^ipis, a young man, which begins to have a berde.
Vestigabundus, he that seeks much. Vestigator, he that seeks for a thing.
Vestigium, the prynt of a man's foot in the ground. It is taken also for a
sign or token of any thing that is done. Vestigo, gare, to seek. Vide com.
Vestimenta, a vesture or garment. Vestini, people in Italye. Vestio, iui, ire,
to apparel, to adorn, to ke^er Vestiplica, a maiden which lays up her
maystresse garments. Vestis, a vesture, a garment, sometime it is put for a
bearde. Vestispicus, and vestispica, he or she which keeps their master or
maistres apparayle. Vestissimus, a, um, best apparailed, best clad. Vestitus,
ta, tum, apparayled. Vestitus, tus, apparayle. Vestrapte, and uestropte, of
your own. Vestras, stratis, yours. Vesulus, a mountain in Liguria by Alps,
at the rote whereof the river called Padus or Po, spryngeth out. Veter, old.
Venerior, ueterius, elder. Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldest. Veteramentarius, a
coblar or botcher. Veteraneus, a, um, ancient. Veteranus, sometime signifies
old. Also he that had served a hol^ year in the city. sometime he that has
long continued in wars, an old soudiour. Veterator, oris, u^teratrix, a
crafty begyler. Veteres, men of old time passed. Veterina, beasts which do
serve for burdeyne, as horses, mulettes, and asses. Ve, vide in Veli. Ve uobis,
out upon you, sorrow come to you. Veterinarius, he that lets to hyre
horses or mules. Veterinarius medicus, a horsleche, or ferror Veterinarius, a,
u^, belonging to horsis and mules Veternus, sleep without waking, also sloth
or sluggyshenes. also to much sleep. Cato.
Veternosus, he that slepeth to much, sluggish, slouthful. also he that has
the dropsy. Veteresco, and veterasco, scere, to be old. Vetero, rare, to make
old. Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibit. Vetulonia, a place in Tuscia.
Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of vetus. Vetus, teris, old, ancient.
Vetustas, age. Vetuste, agedly. Vetustesco, scere, to be old, to be the war^
for age. Veteresco, scere, to be the better for age. Vetustus, ta, tum, old.
F^stus*
Veuina, a long darte. Vexillarrius, and vexillifer, the baner bearer.
Vexillum, a baner. Vexo, are, to vex or trouble. Vexabundus, he that troubles
or vexith other. Vexatio, vexation. Vexator, and vexatrix, he or she that
vexethe. other.
V ANTE I.
VIa, a way, a, iourneye, the manner, or mean, custom. Viam munire, to make
or repair a way Viatica coena, a banquet given to a man at his departing.
Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles necessary for iourneye. Viaticu^,
necessaries for journey, be it in vitaile or other thing, preparation for
journey. Viator, toris, a trauayler by the way, a way farynge man, which
warns men to assemble to counsel, and serves officers, to call men unto
them. Viatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to the way. Viatoria vasa, vessels which
do serve for iourneye. Vibex, bicis, a spotte remayninge in the skin after
beatynge. Vibratio, a brandyshynge. Vibrissae, hears in a man's nose. Vibrisso,
are, to quauer in singing. Vibro, brate, to shake a thing, or to make a
thing to shake or quauer. Viburnum, the spring which commethe out of the
root of a tree. Vicani, men of the vyllage. Vicarius, a, um, that which is in
the steed or place of an other. Also the servant of him, which is a
servant. Vicatim, in vyllages or streets. also street by street, or vyllage by
vyllage. Vice^, vice, plurali, uices, uicibus, time and times. p^multas inces,
multis uicibus, many times. Vnica uice, Horatius. Vergilius. Horatius.
ones. Sometime it sygnyfyeth pains. Also peril. sommetyme place or stead.
Fungar uice cotis, I will use it in the stead of a whetstone. Vicenarius, a, um,
the twentieth. Vicenus, a, um, twenty. Vicia, a certain grain, which like to
a vine, runs upon the stalks of herbs. which do grow hye. Viciarium, the
sowynge of such grain. Vicies, twenty times. Vicinia, the neyghbourheed,
which corruptely we call vicinetum. Vicinitas, tatis, nyghnesse. sometime the
multitude of neighbors. Vicinus, a neighbor. Vicissatim, by times, by
tournes. Vicissim, by turn, now one, now an another, sometime it sygnifyeth,
on the other part. sometime semblably. Vicissitas, idem quod vicissitudo.
Vicissitudo, dinis, the turn, now oone, now an another. Victima, the beast
that is killed in sacrifice. Victimarius, the mynister, which serves to the
sacrifice. Also he which boughte the sacrifice to selle it. Victito, tare, to
live by eating certain meat. Victor, toris, he that vanquysheth. Victoria,
vyctorie. Victoriatus, a certain coin, wherein was the image of vyctorie,
Victoriosus, accustomed to have vyctorye. Victricus, a fader in law, my moders
husband Victrix, plurali victricia, pertaining to victory. Victrix, a woman
that vanquysheth. Victurus, the participle of the future tense, as well of
Viuo, as of Vinco. Victus, tus, and victuis, sustinance or fedynge. Also a
kind or form of living. Victus, ta, tum, vanquyshed. Vicus, a street in a
town. also a vyllage. Viculus, a little street or vyllage. Videlicet, as who
says. sometime it signyfieth surely. Video, di, d^re, to see. It is sometime
applied to other senses, as, Vide qualis est sonus, Here what a noise it is.
Vide quid oleat, Smell whereof it sauoureth. Vide quam durum sit, Feel how
hard it is. Also it signyfieth to take heed or consider, to provide. Vide tibi
provide for thy self. Tu uideris, look thereto well, take good head, for I care
not for it. Videro, I will provide. Videor, I remember me well. Videre uideor,
me thinks I see. Videtur mihi, me seems. Viden, for Vides ne? do thou not
see? Vidua, a wydowe. Viduertas, calamytie or myserye. Viduitas, widowhed, lack
of things necessary Vidulum, wherein any thing is kept. Viduo, duare, to
dyuide or take away, to leave alone. Viduus, a, um, dyuyded, alone. Vie^na, a
cite in Austria, an other i^ Dolpheni Vieo, ere, to bend, to bind. Vietor,
toris, a couper, which with howpes byndeth vessels. Vietus, ta, tum, soft,
weak, bendynge. Vietus, a howpe, or struck of a carte. Vigeo, gui, gere, to
live, to be strong, to thryue in growing. Vigesimae, as decimae, Vigesimariu^
auru^, ide^. Liuius.
Vigesimus, ma, mum, the twentieth. Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilant. also a
watchma^. Vigilans, it is, vigilant, watchefull, dylygent, circumspecte.
Vigilanter, watchefully, dylygently, vygilantely, cyrcumspectly. Vigilantia,
vygilancy, dylygence. Vigiliae, watches, as well by day as by night. sometime the
men which do watch. Vide com.
Vigilo, lare, to wake, or watch, to be vigylant, or very dilygente. Also to
here diligently. ^^uenalis. Plautus in ^uden.
Also to take pain. Vigilare decet hominem, qui uult sua tempori conficere
officia, a man must take pain, that will finyshe his busynes in time
comuenient. Vigisonus, a broke by the city of Padua. Viginti, twenty. Vigor,
goris, strength, force. Vigorosus, a, um, strong, firm. Vilis, le, vile, of
no value. also good cheap, of little price. Vileo, and vilesco, scere, to be
vile, or of small or none estimation or price. Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to
derthe. Viliter, an aduerbe, sygnyfienge cheap. Vilito, tate, to make cheap.
Villa, a manor out of a city or town. also a vyllage. Villanus, a man of the
vyllage. Villaris, re, and Villaticus, ca, cum, pertaining to the vyllage.
Villico, and villicor, aris, ari, to be occupied about husba^dry, to have the
rule of husba^dry Villicatio, occupation about husbandry. also the rule of
husbandry under the owner. Villicus, and villico, a baylyffe of husbandry.
Villula, a little vyllage. Villum, small wine. Villus, hear. Vimen, minis,
rods, which will wind lightly, whereof baskettes are made. Vimineus, a, um,
wyckers, wyndynge rods, or osyars. Viminalis, le, apt to wind. Viminalis
coslis, a little hylle at Rome. Vinacea, kernels of grapes. Vinaceus, a, um,
of wine. Vinago, ginis, a kind of stockedoues. Vinale, the vyntage. Vinarius,
a vyntener. Vinarius, a, um, pertaining to wine. Vinca, an herb, which
wyndeth about every thing. some do call it Perwynke. Vincia, old writers used
for Continens. Vincibilis, le, easy to be vanquyshed. Vincio, vinxi, vincere,
to bind. Vide com. Vide com*
Vinco, vinxi, cere, to vanquyshe. Vinctus, ta, tum, bounden. sometime it
signifies a prisoner. Vinculum, and uinclum, a bond. also vincula pluraliter,
is taken for a prison. Vindelicia, a countray in Germany, wherein is the city
of Augusta, called Ausburgh. Vindemia, the time of gatherynge grapes to make
wine. it sommetyme sygnyfyeth the gatheringe of other things, as honey and
syder. Vindemialis, le, and vindemiatorius, a, u^, pertainyng to gatherynge of
grapes or fruit. Vindemiatio, a gatherynge of grapes, to make wine, also a
making of honey. Vindemiator, toris, he that does gather grapes to make wine.
Vin demio, are, Salust* in Catal.
to gather grapes or ripe fruit Vindex rerum capitaliu^, the mynister of
execution, commonly called the hangeman. Vindex, dicis, a revenger of wrongs.
some time it sygnyfyeth a proctour or attorney, which prosecuteth an another
man's cause. Also he that delyuereth him self out of bondage. Vindiciae,
assercyon of liberty or fredome. Vindicias secundum libertatem dare, Ti.
Liuius lib. 3.
to put in pledges to prove him or her to be free and not bond. Vindico, care,
to revenge, to defend or deliver a man from injury or damage. Vindicta,
vengeance. sometime liberty. Vinditia, a rod, which the lord delivered to
his bondeman, when he infraunchysed him. Vinea, a vyneyarde. It is also an
ordynance of war made of timber and hardelles, under the which men went
surely to the walls of a town that was besieged. Vinealis, le, apt or
pertaining to a vineyard. Vinearius, a, um, idem. Vineaticus, ca, cum,
pertaynyng to vynes. Vineolus, he that behaueth him self wantonly or tenderly.
Vinetum, a vyneyarde. Vinitor, he that ordreth the vyneyarde. Vinolentus,
drunk with wine. Vinosus, he that loves to drink wine. Vinosus, a, um, full
of wine. Vinulus, a, um, delycate. Vinum, wine. Vio, are, to go a iourneye.
Viola, a vyolette. Violabilis, le, which is apt to be violated. Violaceus, a,
um, of violette color. Violaris, are, idem. Violarius, he that dies vyolette
color. Violenter, violentelye, parforce, maugre his hedde. Violentia,
vyolence. Violentior, tius, more vyolente. Violentissimus, ma, mum, most
vyolent. Violentus, ta, tum, vyolent, forcible. Violo, lare, to vyolate, to
corrupt, to defile. Vipera, a kind of adders. Viperinus, na, number, of an adder.
Vipiones, young cranes. Vir, uiri, a man, it is also a husband, it signifies
also one of a good courage. Virago, a woman having the courage of a man. N^
Mar.
Viratium, of much strength. Virbius, twyse a man, which name was given to
Hippolitus, the son of Theseus after that Aesculapius had brought him
eftesoones to life. Vireo, es, rere, and viresco, scere, to be green, to be
more lusty. Viretum, a grene place. Viretus, ta, tum, green. Virga, a rod or
yard. Plautus.
Virgator, he that beats with rods. Virgeus, a, um, of rods. Virginalis,
le, and virginarius, a, um, of a virgin Virgindemia, a gatherynge of rods.
Virgineus, a, um, idem quod virginalis. Virgo, virginis, a vyrgyn or maiden.
Virginitas, vyrginitie. Virgulata, seu virgata vestis, a ray gown. Virgula, a
little rod or yard. Virgultum, a place full of young rods. Virguncula, a
young maiden. Viriatus, a strong manne. Viriculae, little strength.
Viriculum, a wymble or percer. Viridans, that which is grene. Viridarium, a
grene place enclosed, wherein beasts or fowls are kept. Viridia, a grove or
place set with green trees for pleasure. Viridicatus, ta, tum, made grene.
Viridis, de, grene. Virido, dare, to make grene. Virilia, the members of a man.
Virilis, le, of a man, also manlyke or valiant. Virilis toga, was a garment of
the Romans which they began to wear at the age of.xvi. years. Virilitas,
manlynesse. Viriliter, manly. Viripotens, it is, a maiden maryageable. Viritaneus
ager, a field dyuyded among the people. Viritim, of every man, also oone man
with an another, man by man. Viriditas, and viror, roris, grenenesse. Viro,
rare, to fortifye. Virosa mulier, a womanne desirous of the compayne of man.
Virosus, a, um, of ylle savor or taste, sometime strong. Virtus, tutis,
virtue, strength, sommetyme power, also help, merit or deserte. Virulentus,
venymouse. Virus, venyme, greuousenes of sauoure or taste, lyghtnesse in
color. sometime the humor of generation proprely in beastis. Also natural
virtue or power. Vis, power, strength, possibility, Liuius.
abundance, vyolence, multitude. Viscatus, ta, tum, dressed with byrd lyme,
also lymed or taken with bird lyme. Viscera plurali, bowelles. Visceratio, a
dystrybution of flesh. Visceratim, by the bowelles. Visceror, rati, to
distribute meat, which is boiled or roasted. Viscidum, clammy, or cleuing to
the fingers. Viscosus, clammy or cleauynge. Viscum, Myscelden or Myscelto,
which communely grows on crabbe trees, and wyld pear trees. Viscus, sci,
bird lyme. Viscus, sceris, all that is between the bones and the flesh.
Visenda, things worthy to be seen. Visibilis, le, that which may be seen.
Visitatio, vysitynge or visitation. Visito, tare, to vysite, to see often.
Viso, sere, to go to see, also to see. Visum, a dream. Visum, for videre, to
see. Visiones, vysyons, fantasyes. Visus, us, sight. Visa, dreams. Vita, life.
Vita functus, dead. Vitabundus, he that escheweth a thing. Vitalis, le, that
lives. Vitellus, the yolke of an egg. Vitex, a kind of wythy called osyar.
Vitiarium, a place, wherein young vines ar set. Vitiata mulier, a woman ravished
or deflored. Vitiatio, a r^uysshemente, a corruption, or defourmynge. Viticula,
a little vine. Viticulus, the shore of a vine. Vitigineus, a, um, of a vine.
Vitilia, things which may be wounden like an osyar. Vitiligator, toris, a
detracter or backebiter. Vitiligo, ginis, a foulness of all the body,
having spots of sundry colors. Vitiligo, are, to backebyte or detracte a
man or womanne. Vitio, are, to corrupt or viciate, to defyle, to distroye, to
defourme. Vitiositas, vice, corruption, an inconstaunte affection. Vitio dare,
to blame or reprove. Vitio uerrere, to dysprayse, to lack. Vitiosi
magistratus, officers not right constitute or made. Vitiosus, sa, sum, vicious,
or full of errors. Vitis, a vine. Also a thing, which a capytayne in wars
did bear in his hand. Vitis alba, an herb, which runs up in hedges, and
wyndeth about the settes, having a leaf like a vine leaf, but rougher and a red berye. It is called also Brionia, and in english Vitis nigra, a like
wiede, which commonly grows among herbs, and byndeth them together,
having a leaf in facyon like to yuy, and little tendrynges with knappes, and
is called of some men Vitisator, he that sells vynes. Vitisco, scere, to
spring unto a vine. Vitium, vice, contrary to virtue. Alsoo a faut or error.
also sycknes, an impediment. Terent. in ^ecyra.
Vitium offerre virgini, to defloure a virgin. Vito, tare, to eschew, or
beware. Vitreus, a, um, of glass. Vitrinus, na, number, idem. Vitrearius, a
glassemaker, or a glasyer. Vitreolum, an herb growing on walls, wherewith
vesselle being scoured, becomes wonderful bright. Vitricus, a father in
law, or steppefather. Vitriolum, a dyminutiue of vitrum. Vitrosus, a, um,
which has plenty of glass. Vitrum, glass. Vitra, a fyllette or heedbande.
Vitula, an he^^a^, or young cow. Vitulati, to rejoice. Vitulatio, reioycynge.
Vitulinus, (...), of a calfe. Vitulinu^, (...), veale. Vitulus, a calfe, not
only of a cow, but also of an olyphant, and of great fysshes. It is also a
fyshe called a seal. Vituperium, a rebuke. Vitupero, rare, to rebuke.
Vituperatio, a rebuke given. Vituperator, he that rebukes or blamethe an
another. Vituperones, rebukers. Viuacitas, and uiua^^a, among old writers
bodyly strength. Viuacissimus, most lively or strong of nature. Viuaciter,
strongely. Viuarium, a place, where wild beasts. birds, or fyshes be kept.
It may be called as well a ponde, as a park, a counnyngar, a walk for
birds. Viuatior, more lively. Viuatus, and viuidus, full of life or naturalle
strength. Viuax, nacis, lively, strong of nature. Viuere diem, to live
without any prouysion or stoore. Viuerra, a ferette. Viuidus, da, dum, lively,
quycke. Viuior, and viuissimus, old writers used for more living or most
living. Viuiradix, icis, a young vine set with the rote. Viuitur. Quid agitur?
T. Viuitur, How is the mattier? T. I live as well as I may. Viuo, uixi, viuere,
to live, to have a merry life. Viuus, ua, uum, that which lyuethe, alsoo quyck,
natural, strong, vehement, or great. Vix, vnethe, scantly, hardily. Vix dum,
idem. Vix tandem, in conclusyon. Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti, Ouidius
epistola Penelopes.
toraque Troia fuit, King Priamus and all Troy was not so much worth. Vix,
with much a do. Si idem istuc imitamur, ita tamenuix viuimus, Although we do
the like. yet with much a do we live.
V. ANTE L.
VLcero, rare, to make a scabbe. also to exasperate or make grefe. Vlceratiae
herbae, herbs that make blysters. Vlciscor, sceris, sci, to avenge. Vlcus,
ceris, a hid myschiefe. It is alsoo corrupt matter gathered within the skyn,
and covered with a scabbe. Vlex, an herb like to rosemarie, which breweth to
ti gold. Vliginosus, sa, sum, soked with long abode of water. Vligo, ginis,
moisture of the earth always remaining. Vlius, a name of Apollo. Vlio, old
writers used for vitus fuero, I shall be revenged. Vlius, la, lum, any. Vlmus, a
tree called an elm. Vlmeus, mea, eum, of elm. Vlmarium, a grove of elmes.
Vlna, a fathom, also an elle. Vlpicum, great garlyke. Vls, of whom comes
vltra. Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyond. Plautus in milite. Terent. in
Heautont. V^^^^ne. 8
Vltima platea, at the end of the street. Vltimis aedibus, on the back side of
the house Vltimus, ma, mum, last. sometime it signifies first. Vltio,
vengeance. Terentius
Vltor, and vltrix, he or she that takith ve^gea^ce Vltra, beyond, more,
moreover, sometime shrewdely or frowardely. Vltro, willingly, without desire or
cohercio^ Vltro citroque, hither and thither. Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a
fre will. Vlubrae, a city in Italye. Vlula, a shryche oule. Vlulatus, a
barkyng. Vlulo, lare, to howl as a dog or a wolf. Vlysbona, a cite in
Portugal, callid Lushbon Ulysses, the most eloquent and wise prince of the
Greeks, which came against Troy
V ANTE M.
VMbella, a lyttel shadow. also a skrine to keep away the light of the son.
Vmber, of the country of Vmbria. Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll.
Vmbilicatus, ta, tu^, made like a nauill. Vmbilicus, the mids of every thing.
also the nauyll. also a lyttelle cerkle made in the ground, to know which
way the wind stands. Also it is a little smothe stone, or pyppell stone, a
bose, such as is set on the back of a book. Ad umbilicu^ adducere, to
bring to a point. Vmbo, bonis, the bose of a buckler or shield Vmbra, a
shadow. It was also that, which was callid a ghost of a man being deed, which
not only paynims but also christen men supposed did appear visibly unto me^.
Vmbraculum, a place, where men moughte be out of the son, or that which made
shadow. Vmbraticus, ca, cum, like a shadow. Vmbraticus homo, a man living at
ease, and out of all labor or business. Vmbraticae arts, crafts exercysed
in the shadow, as the more part of handy crafts. Vmbratilis, le, that which is
done in the shadow, or as it were with ease, and without any sweat or pain.
Vmbratiles res, tryflyng things or trifles. Vmbratilis pugna, exercyses of
feats of war out of battle as in a house. Vmbria, a part of Italy.
Vmbrifer, fera, ferum, making shadow, as a greatte wodde does. Vmbrina, and
vmbra, a fysshe, which by the description of* Paulus Iouiue, seems to me to
be an halybut, for the greattenesse and delycacie of the heed, and similitude
to a sturgion. Vmbro, brare, to shadow. Vmbrosus, a, um, having much
shadow. Vmbro, bronis, a river in Lumbardye, called also Lamber.
V ANTE N.
VNa, together. Vna cum Cicerone, together with Cicero. Vnanims, and vnanimus,
of one mind and will. Vnanimus consensus, one hole consent. Vnanimitas,
tatis, concord. Vncia, an ounce. also an ynche. Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce.
Vnciatim, ynche by ynche. Vncinatus, a, um, hoked or crooked. Vncinus, a little
club or bat crokid at the end. Vnciola, an ynche. Vnctio, an anoyntynge.
Vnctuarium, a place nigh to a stoufe or hot house, where men be anointed
after that they have swette. Vnctum, the leaf of a hog, which is the fat
that lies by the back and the rybbes, which husbands use to roll up, and
keep for to make saulues, or else to fry meat, as fritowes and pancakes.
Vnctura, an annoyntynge. Vnctus, ta, tum, anointed or greased. Vncus, a batte
or crooked clubbe. Also any thing crooked at the end. Vncus, a, um, crooked.
Vnda, water, proprely a wawe. Vndabundus, da, dum, making greatte or many
wawes. Vndans, wawyng or moving like to wawes. Vndatim, like to wawes of the sea. Vndeunde, of what place so ever it be, or from whence so ever it comes.
Vndecunque, idem. Vnde, from whense, whereto, whereby, whereof, wherefore, what to
do. Vndegentiu^, idem Vndecim, eleven. Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleventh.
Vndenus, na, number, idem. Vndelibet, from whens thou will. Vndeuigesimus, a, um,
the one and twenteth. Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lacking one of.xx. the like
signification is, where Vnde is joined to any great number. Vndeuis, idem quod
vndelibe^. Vndique, on every side. Vndicola, he that dwells on the water.
Vndisonus, na, um, that makes a noise like to wawes when they rise and fall in
the water, or does rore as the water does at a great floode. Vndiuomus, a,
um, that which casts water out from him. Vnedo, a kind of wild fruit like
apples, which is bitter, and hurts both the heed, and the stomak. Undo, are,
to rise in wawes. Vndosum mare, a troublouse see, and full of of wawes.
Vndulata vestis, Chamlet, or a garment wrought as it were with rings. Vndula,
a little wawe. Vnguentum, and vngentum, a sweet oyneme^t. it is usurped for
every oynement. Vngues, muskyls. Vngo, unxi, ungere, to enoynt. Vnguen, nis,
oynement, or any thing that is fatty. Vnguentarius, a maker of sweet
oyneme^tes. Vnguentaria, the craft to make oynmentes. ^ra^m. in ^^ilia.
Vngues arrodere, to gnawe on his nails, a proverb applied to them, which are
in a study, how they may alter such things as they do repent them of.
Vnguis, a nail of the fyngars or toes. it is also a disease which at length
covers all the eye with flesh in the corner of the eye. Vnguicula, a little
soft nail. A teneris vnguiculis, from his tender youth or infancye. Vngula,
a house of a horse or other beast. Omnibus vngulis, with all might and powar.
Vngulatus, he that has foul great nails. Vngulum, of old writers was taken
for a ring. Cato. Non. Mar.
Vngularius, a great nail and ragged. Vngustus, a crooked staff, or such as
commonly men do call a croke, wherewith they draw to them any thing. Vnicalamum
frumentum, wheat, which has but one read growing out of the rote. Vnicallis,
an herb which has but oone stalk without any branches. Vnic^, only.
Vnicolor, otis, of one color. Vnicornis, Vnicornius, and vnicornium, a be
called an unicorn. Vnicuba, a woman which lies or companyeth but with one
man. Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone. Vnigenitus, one child without moo. Vniiugae
uineae, vines in the which upon the proppes being set up, sundry rayles are
laid on the one side. Vnio, iui, ire, to join together. Vnio, onis, concord,
sometime a perle. Vnioculus, he that has but one eye. Vnipes, pedis, having
but one foot. Vnitas, tatis, unity. Vnitio, a ioynynge together. Vnitus, ta,
tum, joined together in one. Vniuersalis, le, universal. Vniuersipotens, he
that has power over al. Vniuersipotentia, power over all. Vniuersitas,
university or generaltie. Vniuersus, a, um, universal, sometime it signifies
all, or the hole. Vniuira, a woman having but one husband. Vninocum, that
which sygnifyeth but one thing. Vniuoce, of the same sygnifycation. Vnose,
old writers used for simul, together Vnni, Hungariens. Vnquam, any time. Vnus,
na, number, one, also alone. Vnus and alter, both, now one, now an other.
Vnusquilibet, Vnusquisque, Vna queque, Vnum quodque, eueryche. Vnis aedibus, in
the same house. Terent. in Eunucho.
Vno animo, of one accord. Vnus quiuis, who so ever thou will. Vni sex dies,
six days contynuall. Plautus in trinummo
Vno ictu, at one stroke. Vno uerbo, at one word. Vnum, one thing. Vnus ex
multis, Vnus ex omnibus, oone alone, only.
V ANTE O.
VOberca, a town by Bilbo in Spain. Vocabulum, the denomination of any thing.
Vocalis, le, loud, als that which has a voice, also a vowell. Vocalitas, a
tune or sound of a voice. Vocatio, a calling. Vocator, a caller. Vociferatio,
a cryenge out. Vociferator, he that cries out. Vociferor, aris, ari, to cry
out, to cry loud. Vocifero, idem. Vocito, to call often. Voco, care, to call,
to bid, to ask. Voconia, a kind of pears. Vocula, a little voice, sometime
obloquie. Voculatio, an accent in speech. Vola, the mids of the hand or the
foot. It is taken for the soole of the foot. Volaticus, ca, cum, that which
flies or goth away suddenly, flittinge. Volatilis, le, that which can fly.
Volatus, and volatura, a flight. Volema, a great pear, a wardyn. Volens,
willing. Volenter, wyllyngly. Volentia, will. Volito, tare, to fly often.
Vide com.
Volo, are, to fly, to run or go quycklye, or fast. Volo, uis, nolui, uelle,
to will. Volo tuam gratiam, I desire your favor. Volo te, I would speak with
the. Volones, were bondemen at Rome, which in the wars of Cartage when there
lacked Romans, offered them selfs to fight for their masters, and because they
did it willyngly without constraynt or called, therefore they were called
Volones. Volsella, an instrument to pluck hears from the body or face. Volua,
for Vulua. Volubilis, le, that which is easyly turned. Volucer, cri, swift,
light Volucra, a beast which eats the tender vines. Volueres, birds,
fowls. Volucrior, more swyfte. Voluctis, ere, all thing that does fly.
Volucrum, the after birth in a woman. Volumen, minis, a book: sometime part
of a book, called a volume. Voluntas, tatis, will. Voluntarius, a, um,
voluntary, willing. Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to turn. Voluox, and Voluola,
idem quod Conuoluolus, a little wurme with many legs, which eats the leuys
of vynes, and of other trees. Volup, for Voluptas. Volupe, delectable. Volupia,
and voluptia, goddess of voluptie or delectation. Voluptabilis, le, that which
rejoices. Sal. in Ca.
Voluptaria loca, placis of pleasure. Voluptas, tatis, an inordinate reioycinge
or delectation in things worldly, or carnal. Voluptuarius, and voluptarius,
he that is given to carnal delectation. Voluptuosus, a, um, voluptuouse,
insatiable in carnal pleasure or delectation. Volutabru^, a place where swyne
do walow. Volutabundus, walowynge, tournynge, tossynge in the mind. Volutatim,
an aduerbe signifienge, eftsoon tossinge in the mind. Voluto, tare, to turn
lyinge, to walow, to reuolue and toss in the mind. Vomer, meris, the culter
of a plowghe. Vomica, a rotten impostume, wherout runs matter. Vomitus,
vomit. Vomitio, idem. Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbrake. Vide com.
Vopiscus, where two children are conceived, and one of them is abort, he that
comes to perfyte birth is called Vopiscus. it was also the name of one that
wrate the lives of Emperors. Festus.
Vopte, for Vosipsi. Voraciter, like a glutton. Vorago, ginis, a swolowe or
gulf. Voro, rare, to swolowe down meat ere it be chewyd. also to eat
gredily. Vorax, racis, a glutton. Voracitas, gluttony. Vorsura, for versura.
Vorsura^ soluere, a proverb applied to them that so discharge them selves of
one business, that they enter into another more paynefull or dangerouse.
Vortex, for vertex. Vortu^nalia, a solemn feast to the god Vortumnus. Vos,
you. Votiuus, ua, um, that which is vowed. also desired. Votiua verba, votiuae
praeces, words and prayers, wherein we desire somewhat. Votum, a vow, sometime
a desire. Votiuae aures, ears which desire to here. Votitum, old wrytars
used for Vetitum. Voto, and Votito, to make auowe. Voti compos, he that has
that which he desired. Voueo, ui, uere, to vow, or make auowe. Vide com
Vox, uocis, a voice. Voce assa, with the voice only of a man without any
instrument of musyke.
V, ANTE P.
Vpupa, a lapwynk or black plouer.
V, ANTE R.
Urania, one of the Musis, which is president of Astronomy. Vragus, of old
writars was used for Orcus, death. Vrbanatim, and vrbane, like a gentyl manne,
courteysely, gratiousely. Vrbanicani milites, souldyours of the city.
Vrbanitas, courtesye, good manner, gentilnesse in speech, ciuilitye. Vrbanus, a,
um, civil, courtaise, gentle in speech and gesture. Vrbicula, a little city.
Vrbicus, ca, cum, of the city. Vrbo, are, to cast a mere with a plough. Vrbs,
bis, a wallyd town. also a city. Vrceolaris, an herb which is called
Pelitory of the wall. Vrceolus, a little water pitchar. Vrceus, a pytcher pot,
wherein water is carried. Vredo, dinis, the fault in corn or trees, when they
are blastyd. it signifies also an yche and burning in the skin. Vergilius
Georg.
Vrgeo, ursi, urgere, to provoke, to haste forth. sometime to cover. Vriculum,
any thing that is holow. Vri, wild beastis like oxen, called Bugles or
buffes. Vrina, vryne or piss. Lucanus Verg.
Vrere, is also to byte as froste does the grass. Ter. in Eu.
Vro hominem. Non malum hercle. G. vro hominem. P. vt falsus animi est. It is
no harm. G. I have given him a corsy. P. Se how falsharted he is. Vrere, to
tourment or vex. Plautus in Most.
Vrito, tare, to burn sore or fervently. Vropigium, is the lowest and narowest
part of the chyne next to the fundement. Vrsulus, and vrsellus, a little or
young bear. Vruat, Ennius used for Circundat. Vruare, is also to draw a
furrowe with a plowgh about a place. Vruum, a plowghe beam, or crooked part
of a plowghe. Vrinum, an adell egg. Vrino, are, and Vrinor, ari, to dyue under
the water. Vrinator, toris, a dyuar. Leo. Por. and Men.
Vrna, a waterpot: it is proprely a vessel, which contains as much water as
does way fourtye pound waighte: and two of them do make Amphoram. Vrnarium, a
bourde whereon pottes where set. Vrnula, a little pot. Vro, ussi, urere, to
burn, to be turmented, or vexed. Vror, reris, uri, to be bourned. Vrsa, two
figures of sterres, the one called Vrsa mayor, and the other Vrsa minor. Vrsus,
a bear. Vrsa, a she bear. Vrsinus, na, um, of a bear. Vrtica, a nettyl.
also a fisshe, which as Paulus Iouius writes, is of the quantity of a
wallnutte, and the keuerynge of him is between a shell and a hard skin, and
is somewhat read, and the fysshe of him is hard.
V, ANTE S.
VSia for essentia. Vsitatio, an usage. Vsitor, taris, tari, to use often.
Vspiam, in any place, to some place, any where. Vsquam, any where, in any wise
or manner. Vsque gentium, any where. Vsque, until, well nygh, diligently,
continuelly, so long, allwaye. Vsque dum, until. Vsque adeo, as long. Vsque
eo, in so much. Vsquequaque, all about, every where, allwaye. Vsquequo,
until when, or what. Vstrigo, ginis, blast of corn. Vstrina, the meltinge
house, or place where metal is molten or het. Vstulo, are, to burn or sere a
thing. Vstus, ta, tum, bourned. Vsucapio, and Vsucaptio, a possession by
prescription of a long time. Vsuarius, he that is in possession, the pernour of
the profytes, the occupyar. Vsura, the occupation. Vsurarius, a, um, that which
is occupied. Leo. Port. de Pond.
Vsura semissium, where they give six for the yearly lone of one hundred, As
if I borowe of one a hundred pounds, and pay to him every month ten
shillynges, during the time of the lone: this yeldeth every year.vi. lb. for
the hundred. Vsurpo, pare, to usurp, to use often and much. Vsus, us, use,
sometime the occupation or exercise of a thing, also profit or fruit.
Vsurpatio, an usurping or usurpation. Vsus fructus, the use of an other man's
goods by the consent of the owner, the substance of the thing being saved.
Vsuuenit, it happens often.
V, ANTE T.
VT, as, that, as soon, how, like as, would to god, how much, all be it,
sometime for quippe and i^a, lest not. Caes. in c^.
Vt satis commode supportari posset, uaereri dicebant, They said, that they
feared, that it mowght not be. Vt, as well as. Vt uales? R. vt queo, Plautus in
Persa.
How farest thou? R. as well as I may. Vt, behold how. Vt saepe summa
ingenia in occulto latent, Behold how that most exellent wits do lie hyd in
a corner. Vt, admit it, or set the case, or put the case. Legem illam appellare
fas non est, Ci. in Phs.
and ut sit lex, non debemus illam Hircij legem putare, It is not convenient,
that we call it a law, and admit that it be a law, we should not yet suppose
it to be Hircius law. Etenim vt circumspiciamus omnia, quae populo grata,
arque iucunda sunt: nihil tam populare quam pacem, quam concordiam, quam otium
reperiemus, for put the case that we might se perfitely all things that were
plesaunte and delectable unto the people, we should nothing find, that they
so much desire, as peace, as concord, as vacacion from labor. Te. in Ad.
Vt est dementia, Se the man's folly. Vt istum dij deaeque perdant, I beseech god
and all halowes send him a myschief. Ci. in Bru.
Vt, for postquam. Nam vt illos de Republica libros edidisti, nihil a te sane
postea accepimus, for sense ye set forth your books of the weal public, I
never after received any thing from you. Pli. in ^^i.
Vt in limme auditur, he was as well herd, as if he had been within. Plautus
in poena.
Vt, so that. Olent, salsa sunt, tangere vt non velis, They be so salt and
stinkinge, that thou will wish, that thou had not touched them. Plautus in
(...).
Vt, se that. Operam vt det, See that he do his endeavor. Vt ad pauta redeam,
To make a short tale. Vt ne addam, To be short. Vtcunque, In what manner or
facyon. Sed nostrum est intelligere, v^cunque, and vbicunque opus e^t obsequi.
But it is our part to know, in what facyon, and where soever we shall give
our attendaunce. Vtcunque, how so ever. ^
Vtcunque erit, how so ever it shall happen. Vten^ile, necessary to be used.
Vter, tris, a botell. Vter, teri, a womb, a bealy. Vterum gerere, to be great
with child. Vter, tra, trum, which of the two. Pli^.
Vter alteri dixerit nescio, which of them told it to the the other, I can not
tell. Cicer. pro Milo.
Vter vtri insidias fecerit, which of them laid awayte for the the other.
Terentius in Phorm.
Vterque utrique est cord^, They do like well the one the other. Vterque alterum
uerberauit, the tone beete the the other, each did beat other. Vterculus, a little
bealy. Vterlibet, which ye will. Vterque, both, the one and the other.
Vteruis, which of them thou will. Vti, for vt. Vtica, a city in Affrike, where
Cato did sle him self, and therefore was afterward called Cato Vticensis.
Plautus in Trinu^mo. Plautus in Mercator. Plautus in Aul.
Vtibilis, le, for vtilis, profitable. Vtibilitas, for vtilitas, profit. Vti,
sometime sygnifyeth to have. Et te vtar iniquiore, and men's me ordo irrideat,
that I may have the, the warse toward me, and that my company may mock me.
Ter. in (...)
Mihi si vnquam silius erit, vt ille facili me vtetur patre, It ever I have a
son, he shall have me a gentle father. Vti amore, to love. Vti amicitia, to
sauoure, or be in amytye. Plaut. in Asi.
Vti eadem disciplina, to be of the same learning. Vti oculis, to see
perfytely, or well. Maris caussa hercle hoc ego oculo vtor minime, Plautus in
Mili.
In good faith the se makes that I se not well with this eye, or I se not a
whit with this eye. Vti officio, to do the office or part. Vtilis, le,
profitable, convenient. Vtilitas, profit. Vtiliter, profytably. Vtinam, would
to god. Vtique, like as, verily. Vti valitudine, to be in health. Plin.
Vti foro, to take the market as it comes, a proverb applied to them, which
can take the state of every time and chance, as it comes. also it may
signify, to apply him self to the facions and conditions present. Vtor, teris,
ti, to use, to be conuersaunt with one, to occupye. Vtere vt vis mea opera,
Plautus i^ Per. Plautus i^ Aul.
Take my service at your commandment. Da mihi operam amabo. M. tua est,
vtere, atque impera si quid uis, A good fellowship lend me thy help. M. It is
redye for the, have here, command what thou will. Vtpote, because that he
was, as. Vt puta, for quemadmodum, as. Vtquid, for quamobrem, for what cause,
wherefore. Vtraque, by both places, by the tone place and the the other.
Vtricularius, he that pypeth in a botell. Vtriculus, the place in a woman
wherein the child lies. Vtrinque, of the one part and the other, Plautus in
Amphitri
of the one and the other. Vtris, a skin blown full of wind, also a ball filled
only with wind. Vtrobique, in the one place and the other, Plautus in Mili.
on the one side and the other. Vtroque, to the one place and the other. Vtroque
versum, on both parts, on the one part and the other, on every part. Vtrum,
whyther. Vtut, how so ever it be, in what facyon. Haec adeo mea culpa fateor
fieri, non me hanc re^ patri, vtut erat gesta, indicasse, I confess, all this
happened by my defaulte, that I showed not to my father the matter, in what
facyon it was done.
V ANTE V.
VVa, a grape, it is alsoo that, which is in the roufe of a man's mouth,
which sometime will swelle, and is also called Vuula. It is alsoo a swarm of
bees hanging round. Vua passa, a greatte reason. Vueu^, a, um, of a grape.
Vueus succus, wine. Vuidus, da, dum, moist. Vulcanus, called Iupyters smythe.
Also it is taken for fire. Vulcanius, a, um, of Vulcane. Vulga, a skryppe or
sachelle, sommetyme a womannes bealy. Vulgaris, re, commune, much used. Non.
Mar.
Vulgaria, for vulgaris. Vulgatus, ta, tu^, commonly known or used. Vulgo,
abroad among all men. Vulgo conceptus, whose father is not certain. Vide com.
Vulgo, gare, to publyshe, to manyfeste, to make commune. Vulgus, uulgi, the
common people. Vulnerarius, a surgeon. Vulnerarius, a, um, belonging to
wou^des. Vulnero, rare, to wound. Vulnus, a wound, sometime grief. Vulpes, a
Fox. Vulpecula, a cubbe or a young fox. Vulpinus, na, number, of a fox.
sometime subtle and crafty. Vulpinor, naris, nari, to be wyly. Vulsinus, a
river in Italye. Vulsinienses, people dwelling about the river of Vulsinus.
Vultorij, certain dyse. Vultuosus, sa, sum, heuye, sorowfulle of countenance.
Vultuose, dysdaynfully, heuyly, with frowning countenance, with gesture
agreeable unto the matter. Vultur, turis, and vulturius, a rauyn. Vulturinus,
na, number, of a rauyn. Vulturnum, a town in Campania. Vulturnus, the northeaste
wind. Vulta, Lucretius used for the plurell number of Vultus. Vulticulus, a
little vysage. Vultus, of old writers is taken for will, a Volendo. Vultus,
vultus, and vultum, countynaunce or ch^ere. Vulua, the womb or mother of any
female kind. It is alsoo a meat vsyd of the Romans, made of the bealye of a
sow, either that has farowed, or is greatte with farowe.
V ANTE X.
VXor, vxoris, a wife. Vxorius, he that doteth on his wife. Vxorius, a, um, of
the wife.
X ANTE A.
XANTHA, a nymphe. Xanthij, a people in Asia whose city being besieged of the
captain of Cirus, they brought into the castelles their wives, servants, and
goods, and putting thereunto fire, bourned all together, and afterward
issuinge out of the city, faught until that they were all slain. Xanthicus,
among the Jews was the month of Aprylle. Xanthus, a, um, yelowe. Xanthus, a
river of Troy, callid also Scama^der, also a city in Licia, also He^tors
horse. Xantippe, the wife of Socrates the philosopher.
X ANTE E.
XEnia, prese^tis sent by one to an other. Xeniolum, a small present.
Xenodochium, an hospytall. Xenocrates, a philosopher discipleto Plato.
Xenophon, a philosopher, which as well in marcial acts, as in eloquence
excellyd. Xerampellinae uestes, Probus.
garments of a color, which I suppose is called Murrey. Sum do suppose it
to be black garments. Calepinus
Xeria, dry playsters. Xerophagia, eating of dry meats. Xerophthalmia,
when the eyes be soore without droppynge or swellynge. Xerxes, a king of
Persia.
X ANTE Y.
XYlinae uestes, garments of cotton. Xyloaloes, a sweet and precious wod
callid Lignu^ aloes, our women having beads made thereof called it Acellula.
Xylobalsamus, the wodde whereof baulme natural comes. Xylophagus, a worm
breding in old wode, which is white and great belyed, and has a black heed.
Xilon, cotton. Xiphiae, certain blasynge sterres, which have beams like to a
sword. Xisticus, he that exercyseth him self in a place covered out of the
son or rain. Xyphius, a fyshe named a sword fyshe, which has in his nose
a bone, like to the sea berde of a sword, such one have I seen. Xystus, et
Xystum, a place, wherein men do exercise wrastlynge and other like pastyme in
winter. It may be taken for a galerye or place to walk in out of the rayn.
Z ANTE A.
ZACANTHEI, people in the mountains called Pyrenei, by the river of Hiberus.
Zacharias, the name of a prophet. Also the father of sayncte Johan Baptiste.
Zacynthii, people of the isle of Zacynthus. Zacynthos, an ylande in the sea
called Ionia, wherein is a city of the same name. Zagrus, a mountain, which
divides Media from Babilonia. Zancle, a city in Grecia, an other in Sicile.
Zaphyrus, a fyshe of the kind of gylt hedes but that he is somewhat blewe in
color. Zathene, a stone like to aumber, now black, now yelowe.
Z ANTE E.
ZEa, a kind of wheat. Zelo, are, and zelor, lari, for ae mulari. Zelor,
zelaris, ari, to be angrye, or to have zeal. Zelotes, for aemulator, he that
has envy at one, or assayeth to follow an another in living. Zelotypia,
ialowsye. Zelotypus, ialowse. Zelus, sometime envy, sometime love, some time
emulation. Zenobia, a queen of Siria, which in greek and latyne was very well
learned, and was also valyant in arms. Zephyrus, the weste wind. Zeros, a
kind of crystal, which has spots white and black. Zera, and zetecula,
a place made in a chaumber, wherein was a bed and three stoles, which with
courtaynes was so divided from the chaumber, that sometime it was part thereof,
sometime it was separate from it, and it had three wyndowes or lowpes, by the
which the son might enter into it. Zeugma, a figure, whereby many senses ^r
joined together with one verb, as, Neque is es Catilina, ut te, aut pudor a
turpitudine, aut metus a periculo, aut ratio a furore reuocarit, Ne thou art
such a man Catilyne, as either shamefastness can withdraw from
dishonestie, or fear from danger, or reason from vengeable anger. Zeusis, an
excellent paynter, which so painted a boy caryeng grapes, that birds came to
the table and pecked on the grapes, wenynge that they had been very grapes,
which Zeusis, beholdynge, was with him self angrye, and said, If I had made
the boy, as well as I have done the grapis, the birdis durst not have come so
nygh to the grapes. Zeus, a fysshe taken about Calys in Spain, which is
black, but he is very delicate.
Z ANTE I.
Zigena, a fysshe of the sea. Zigari, people, which we do call Egyptians,
that wander about in every royalme and be horrible thieves. Zigarum, the contray
from whens the said people do come. Zizania, cockle, which grows in corn.
Zinziber, gynger.
Z ANTE O.
ZOdiacus, a cerkle in heaven, wherein be the.xii. signs. Zographia, the
pycture of beasts. Zoilus, was a poet, which enuyed Homerus, and therefore
the enuiers of well learned men are called Zoili. Zoelicum, certain flax,
that comes out of Spain, whereof threde is made for nets to take birds.
Zomos, gruelle. Zona, a gyrdell. Zonatim, in compass about. Non. Mar.
Zopissa, pitche taken from ships, which being tempred with wax and salt,
is of more efficacy than other pytche. Zopyron, an herb, which some do
suppose to be Puly ol mountain. Zopyrus, was a man, which by phisnomye knew
every ma^s co^dicions. And wha^ in beholding Socrates he judged him to be
unthrifty, and therefore was scorned of many me^* Socrates answered, Zopyrus is
not deceived, for in deed I had been such one as he says, if I had not by
philosophy subduid nature. Also Zopirus was a noble Persian, servant to Darius,
which when the city of Babylon rebellid against king Darius, and that he had
madelong war, and could not subdue the^, unawares to any man, did cut of his
own nose, and wounded him self, and fled to Babylon, saying, the king had so
disfygured him, because that he persuaded him to have peace with the
Babylonians, which they heryng, made him their chief captain. Than by
little and little declaryng to them the strength of the king, and how they
might not endure long against him, at the last he caused them to submit
them selves to the king, and to receive him into the city. Wherefore Darius
was wont to say, that he had leauer have one Zopyrus, than twenty Babylons.
Zoroanda, a river, which the great water of Tigris makes on the one side of
the mountain Taurus. Zoroastes, the first fynder of Magike.
Z ANTE V.
Zura, bearies of white thorn. Zygia, a pype, wherein men did play at
weddynges. Zithus, drink made with barley sodden. It may be taken for ale or
biere.
Finis Dictionarii.
THE ADDICION OF SIR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT unto his Dictionarye.
A ANTE B.
Varre.
ABAGIO, gere, to fetch a compass in speaking, and not to consist or abide in
one oration or sentence. Abalienatio, alienation. Abalienator, he that does
aliene or put away a thing, or alters the possession thereof, an alienour.
Abanec, a gyrdel, which priests did wear, wrought with colors of scarlet and
purple, in such wise that there seemed to be in it flowers and precious stones
set in order. Abania, is interpreted the father, unto god acceptable, or
gratifienge unto god. Abarceo, cui, cere, to prohybyte or put of. Abauia, my
great grandames mother. Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate or make short. Abbatia,
the dignity of an abbotte. Sometime the monastery. Abdicatio, a renou^cing of
one whom I take for mine heir, Cic. in Pisonem. and ad At.
a puttyng out of favor. Abdidit se domum, he kept him at home. Abdere se ex
conspectu heri, to keep him away that his master see him not. Abdere se
literis, to live unknown in continual study. Abducere clauem, to take the
kaye out of the door. Abecedarius, he that sets any thing in order by
letter. Abedo, dear, to consume. Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdraw the
vengeance of god with prayers. Aberuncasso, sere, to turn up. Cicero.
Abhorreo ab urbe relinquenda, I have no mind to forsake the city. Abhorret
ab illo mea sententia, mine opynion is contrary to his. Abhorret a suspitione,
it is contrary to my supposalle. Abhorret a charitate uulgi, he tendreth not,
Cicero de Amic. Plautus in cistell.
or passes nothing on the poor people. Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is
turned into sadness. Abhortatio, a contrary advise. Abhortor, tari, to give
contrary advise. Abi in malam rem, go hens with a mischefe. Plautus in Mercator.
Abibitur, I or he will depart or go away. Abiectus, a vile person. Abiegnus,
na, number, of fur tree. Abigena bos, was among the diuinours, Varro.
callid Augures, the ox, which was to be sacrifised, about whom the other
beasts to be sacrifised, were set. Plautus in Asinar.
Abigere ex aedibus, to drive out of the doors Abijcio, cere, to pour out.
sommetyme to give away. Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation. Abijt hora, the
time passed. Abijt sol, the son is gone down. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus.
Abitus, tu, a departing. Abyla, a mountain in the se against Spain in
africa, callid one of the pillars of Hercules Ab incunablis, from his infancy.
Ab ineunti aetate, from his chyldehode. Abitio, a departure or going away, old
writers took it for death, as we may call it, the decesse of one. Abiudicare a
uita, Plautus in Asina.
to put to death. Abiudicabit nunquam ab suo triobolum, He will never be of
the mind to give three half pens of his own. Abiuratio, a forswearynge, an
abiuration. Ablectae aedes, nete fair and pleasant houses. Abludo, lusi,
ludere, to speak of a thing covertly, that other shall not epsy what the
matter does mean. Ablutio, a washing. Abluuium, a universal floudde,
wherewith a countray is drowned. Abneco, care, to strangle. Abneptis, a daughter
in the fourth descent. Abnormis, out of rule. Abolitus, ta, tum, rased out,
put out of remembrance. Festus.
Aboloes, old writers used for ab illis. Abominalis, le, abhomynable. Abortor,
and aborto, idem quod abortio. Abraham, the name of a patriarche, signifienge
father of many nations. Abradere de bonis, to polle or spoil a man of his
goods. Abripuit repent sese, he went away sodeinly Abrogare fidem, to bring
out of credence. Abrogatio, the dissoluynge or repellynge of a law. Abrupta
loca, rocks and hills here and there broken or dygged, so that one may vnethe
go or crepe up to them. Abruptum, that which has such a fall or s^epenesse
down, that no man may pass by it, ^
but only fall down. Ab^te ^^at, it stands upon the, or it lies in the.
Abs qui^^s homine, of every man what so ever he be. ^
Abscissus, a, um, broken, sharp. Abscissior iustu i^, sharp justice.
Absconsus, a, um, hid. Absolue^e vno uerbo, to tell at a word, to make an
end shortly. Liuius. 2.
Absoluere suspitione, to discharge or put of all suspicion. Plautus in capt.
in Amphitri.
Absoluere, to depeche of business. Absolute, perfytly. Absolutio, a
discharge, or depeche. Absolutus, ta, tum, discharged, depeched. Absonum fidei,
not credible. Absonus uoce, he yt has an untunable voice Abstergeo, si, gere,
to wype, to wipe away. Absterrere, to fear away, or drive away with fear.
Plautus in Mili. Plautus in Ruden.
Abstinenter, with abstinence. Abstinere inco^moditate, to behave him honestly.
Abstinere manum, to hold his hand. Abstineas me manum, take heed that thou
stryke me not. Sueton. in Clau. Pli. in epi.
Abstinuit diu publico, it was long or he came abroad. Abstinere uerbis, to
take heed, what he speaks. Abstinens alieni, he that medleth not with other
men's goods. Abstraxi me illinc, I gatte me thens. Abstractum, taken by
force. Abstrudere colaphos, to buffet or give blows. Abstrusus, a, um, hid
or shut up. Abest mihi animus, I have no courage. Absit uerbo inuidia, a
form of speking wha^ one would not be suspected of arroga^ce in some thing
that he will speak. Absente nobis, while I was away. Absento, tare, to keep
from a place, or cause to be absente. Plaut. in Mostel.
Absumpti sumus, we are undone. Absumedo, dinis, dispense, waste of money or
other like thing. Absumptio, a wasting, waste. Absurd, without purpose or
reason, to no purpose. Absynthium marinu^, wormefede. Absynthium santonicum,
may seem to be Lauander cotton. Abundanter, abundantely. Abunde est, it is
enough. Abundans, a rich manne. Abundare ingenio, to have a great wit.
Abuerto, tere, to turn from a place. Abusque mane ad uesperam, from the
morning to night. Ambustus, ta, tum, bourned up. Abusum, worn out. Abusus,
us, and abusio, abuse, ill use. Abutor, ti, to wear out. Terentius in Prolog^
Andri.
Abutitur operam, he lost his labor. Abydeus, a man borne in the i will of
Abydos.
A ANTE C.
ACananthide, the old name of the isle of Cypres. Acanthus, is an herb
commonly callid Brankursyn. Look before in Acanthis. Acapis, a river in Asia.
Acarpos, vnfruytefull. Acasta, a nymphe. Acar, and Acarus, a little worm that
breeds in wax. Acatia, a thorn growing in Egypt, whereof comes a gum.
which is medycynable for many diseases. Acatium, a boat. Accede adiutare, come
help me. Plautus in Truculen.
Accedit huc, more over than that. Accedere obui^am, to mete with one. Accedere
periculum, Plautus in Epidic.
to take on him the daungiere. Accedere alicui, to grant to an other, to be of
an other man's opinion. Accelerare gradum, to go apace. Acceleratio, haaste or
speed. Accento, tare, to sing often. Accessio, an augmentacyon, increase. Also
a coming. Accessio morbi, the beginning of a syckenesse. Accersio, sire, to
send or call for one. Accersitus, ta, tum, called for. Accersi iube filiam,
command thy daughter to be sent for, or called for. Liuius.
Accido cidere, to extenuate or make feeble, to destroy. Accisus, a, um, made
feeble, decayed. Accidit, there happened, it is chanced. Acecinere, to sing to
an instrument, or to sing a part, as a treble to a tenoure, or a descant to a
plain song. Accipenser, a fyshe having the skales turned forewarde, contrary
to other fysshes. which in the old time was of most estimation at the tables of
kings and princis. Plautus in casina. Ci. Tyro.
Accipere auribus, to here. Accipere causam, to hold excused. Accipere clade^.
to have great loss in bataile. Accipere cord, to perceive well. Pol haud
satis meo cord accepi querelas tuas, in good faith I do not well perceive the
cause of thy grief. Accipere conditionem, to take the offer. Cicero de Amic.
Accipere dolore^, to take thought, to be heavy Accipere nomen, to take
accounte. Accipere potesiatem, to have leave. Accipere uulnus, to be wounded.
Acceptus, received, entertained. Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable.
Accepti and expensi ratio, account of receites and expenses. Accipiter
humipera, a sparhawke. Accipiter hierax, an hawke callid a sakre. Accipiter
pecuniarum, a poller of people. Accipitiarius, a faulconer. Accliuitas, a
raysynge up of a hylle. Accommodatus, ta, tum, applied to a thing besemyng,
couenable. Accommodus, da, du^, apt, mete, convenient. Accreduo, duis, duere,
idem quod accredo. Accubatio, a sitting at the table. Accubitores, they that
sytte at the table. Accumbere alicui, to sit by one at the table. Plautus in
Trucu.
Accurare, to do a thing dylygently. Accurare prandium, to make ready the
diner. Accurata malitia, malice prepensed. Accuratum habere, to prepense.
Accusatio, an accusement. Accusatorius liber, a bylle of complaynt. Accusare,
to blame. Accusabilis, le, worthy to be blamed. Accusator, an accuser, a
rebuker. Accusatrix, a woman rebuker. Acedaria, salettes or meat lightly
p^pared. Acri ingenio, quycke wytted. Acer equus, a swyfte horse. Acerrimi
inimici, mortal ennemies. Acer morbus, a grievous syckenes. Acres oculi, clear
eyes. Acerrima uxor, a very shrewde wife. Acere, a city by Naples. Aceratum,
mortar, or claye myxte with hey or straw, wherewith walls are daubyd. Acerbe,
bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehemently. Acero, rare, to myxte with chafe.
Acernus, na, number, of the tree called Acer. Acerra, a ship, wherein
frankyncense is put. some do name it an altar, which was set before a deed
corpse, whereon incense was burned. Some call it a cup, wherein they did
sacrifyce wine. Acerosus panis, brown bredde not ranged. Acesinus, a great
river in Persia, which runs into the river of Indus, wherein do grow canes
of such greatness, that they do make between every knotte or joint thereof,
botes to row in. Acesis, an herb, which is yelow in color. Acestis, a great
river in India. Acerabulum, a measure contayninge in it of water measure, two
ounces. Acetositas, a^grenesse or sowrenes. Acetofus, a, um, eygre, sour.
Acetum in pectore. Nunc experiar, sit ne acetum tibi cor acre in pectore, How
will I prove, if thou haste any thing that does prycke the in the stomach.
Aceum, a city in Colchis, on the bank of the river called Phasis. Achantia, a
fyshe, which some men do suppose to be thornebacke. Achar, a city in Siria,
now called Nisibis. Acha^eon, the main sail of a ship. Achelous, a river
in Grecia, so named of a king of that name. Acheloeus, of that river.
sommetyme it is put for aqueus. Achemenia, a countray in Persia. Acherontinus,
and Acherontius, of the river of Acheron. Acherusia, a fenne in the realm of
Naples. Achilleias, a kind of barley, peradventure that which is called bear
corn. Achilleon, some do suppose to be mylfoyle. Achras, a wild pear.
Achylus, without lyppes. Aciale, hard iron. Acidalia, a name of Venus, of a
fou^tayn in a city of Boeotia, called orchomenae. Acidylus, a knotte in the
gyrdell of Venus. Aciem trahere, to set in edge. Acies animi, the capacity
of a man's wit. Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels. Aciritani, were a people in
Spain. Acis, a river in Sycil, which comes from the mountain of Aethna.
Acitia, an Island called also Melos in the sea by Candye. Acilon, the bearye of
holy. Aclassis, a garment unsown from the shulders Acon, aconis, a fyshe,
which after the description of Paulus Ioutus, I suppose to be that, which at
London is callid a shad. Acopus, an herb called also Anagyris, full of
branches, and has flowers like to colewortes, and has an ylle sauoure, the
sede thereof is in long coddes, hard and like in facion to kydneys. Acorus, an
herb with long leaves, like the blade of a sword. I suppose it be that,
which is called Gladwen or Gladen. Acratismus, and acratisma, a breakefast.
Acris, a river of Italye. Acrodria, be all fruits, which have an hard rynde or
shale, as pomegranades, nuttes, chestyns, pistaces, and other like. Acre,
swyft, sour, cruel, valiant, vehement, dyligent, circumspecte. Acritas,
sowrenesse, cruelty, dilygence. Acriter, swiftly, cruelly, vehemently,
diligently Acrisius, king of Argiues, the father of ^anaes, on whom Jupiter
begat Perseus. Acroama, a subtyle sentence, which requires an exquysite study
to perceive. Acroamata, were certain lectures of Aristotle, which he radde to
his scholars, wherein was the most subtylle and counnynge part of philosophy.
Acroecraunia, mountains of wonderfulle heyght, between Armenia and Hiberia.
Acrocomus, one having long hear. Acrocorinthus, an high mountain in Morea,
between the two sees Aegeu^ and Ioniu^. Acropolis, a castle set on a hylle.
Act, an elder tree. Action, the bearye of an elder. Acteus, a, um, of Athenes.
Actia, orum, plays made ones in five years. Actitatus, ta, tum, determined by
judgment. Actitatio, a debatynge of a case in law, or pleedynge. Actius, a
noble poet that wrate tragedies. Actiuus, actyue. Actualis scientia, a science
that declarethe things by their operation, of the which are three parts,
moral, dispensatiue, and civil. Acta aetas, age when youth is paste. Acta
agere, to do that which is all redye done, to lose labor. Actus, put in
fear. Actus, a braid in tillage, it is also a cartway. Actuosus, always in
business. Actuosus ignis, fire which always burns. Seneca.
Aculeatus, ta, tum, any thing that prycketh. Acupedius, he that has a quycke
and apt foot to run with. Paul. Iouius
Acus, a fish, which is long and somewhat grene, and has a beke, as it were
the byll of a crane, I suppose it is that, which some call an hornekeke.
Acustici, they which do here all, and speak nothing them selfs. Acute,
quyckely, subtly. Acuti oculi, clear eyes. Acuti cibi, sharp meats. Acutum
ingenium, a subtle or quycke wit. Acylon, an holy beary. Acyphantes, a city
in Thessaly, which is also called Pindus.
A ANTE D.
ADAD, in the Syrian tongue, is the son, also it signifies only. Ad me,
with me. Commodum ad te dederam literas, de pluribus rebus, Cice. Atti. lib. 9.
cum ad me been mane, Dionysius fuit. I had scarsly sent my letters unto the,
when Dionyse was with me erly in the morning. Ad breuissimu^ tempus, for a
very short time. Pli. in pan.
Ad id tempus, at that time. Ad sapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In
regard of his wysedom he was but a fool. Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa est, ut
emerem sibi, Plautus in Mercator.
mandauit mihi, He commanded me to bie for him one, which had such an another
face as she has. Ad cyathum stare, to awayte on the cup. Sueton. in Caesare
Ci de ora^tore. 2.
Ad manum seruus, he that is clerk to one, or writes for him. Ad pedes, a
lakay. Ad manus venire, to come to handestrokes, to cope together. Ad meridiem,
until noone. Ad multam noctem, late in the night. Terentius Cice. Atti.
Ad tempus, in season. sometime according to the time also for a time. Ad
dextram, on the right hand. Ad hoc exemplum, nunquam a maui, Plautus in
mercator.
I never louyd of that facyon, or in that manner. Ad hunc modum, this way or in
this manner. Ad extremum, finally, in conclusyon. Plin. Plautus in Au^ul.
Cicero. Plinius. Cicero de Amic. Plinius. Plautus in Ruden. Plautus. Terentius
in Phor^.
Ad postremum, idem. Ad summum, at the most. Ad uerbum, word by word. Ad
vnum, not one left. Ad vnum idem sentiunt, they be all of oone opinion. Ad
assem, to the vttermoste penye. Ad annos sedecim, syxtene years herafter. Ad
rauim poscere, to ask until one be hoorse Ad restim res red^t, It is come to
the point that be will hang him self. it is a sentence signifienge
desperation. Ad rem suam sapere, Plautus in Trucu.
to be wise for his own profytte. Cicero.
Adaequo, are, to make or be equal. Adaggero, rere, to gather and lay
together. Adam, the first manne, which sygnifyeth read. Adamanteus, and
Adamantinus, of a diamand, or as hard as a diamande. Adamaster, a gyaunt,
which was of an incredible greattenesse. Adamiani, were certain heretykes,
which went naked about all their business, saying that they did follow the
nakydnes of Adam being in Paradise, who believed that there should have been no
marriage, if no man had sinned. Adaperio, rire, to open a thing. Adapertilis,
le, for apertum, open. Adarca, a salt foam, which comes of the ryndes of
caanes or reeds grownyge in fennes. Adasia, an old ewe, which has late eaned
or had a lamb. Adasso, old writers used for Adigo, to compelle. Non. Mar.
Adaucto, tare, to augment or increace. Adaugeo, gere, idem. Adauctus, ta, tum,
augmented. Adaxi^t, for adegerint, let them compelle, or constrayne. Adcensi,
soldiers put in the place of them which are deed. Addico, cere, to set to
sale. Addicere animu^, to give or apply his mind. Terent. in Eunucho.
Addictus, bounden to one. Addebat hoc, he said moreover. Addere animum, to
give courage. Addere gradum, to make him go faster. Vergilius.
Additus, for an ennemie. Nec Teucris addita Juno, usquam aberit, Neither Juno
ennemy to the Troyans shall lack or be away. Addo, dare, to give to one.
Addormisco, scere, to sleep. Addubito, tare, to doubt. Adducere habenas, to
hold strait the bridel. Adductus, ta, tum, brought, led, moved. Adduplico,
care, to double any thing. Adelphi, brethren, it is also the name of a
comedy in Terence. Adeo res redijt, the matter is comme to that point.
Adeousque, until that. Adest ei animus, he has a good courage* Adest, he is
at hand. Adesse, to aid or succor one. Terent. in Andria.
Adesdum, come hither. Adeor, the passyue of adeo. Ader, a place by Bethlem,
where angels did sing at the birth of Christ, and Jacob kept there his
sheep. Non. Mar.
Adesus, a, um, consumed. Ad exitam aetatem, for ad ultimam aetatem, Festus.
at the vttermoste age. Adfabrum, well wrought. Adhaeresco, scere, idem quod
adhaereo. Adhaesus, a, um, cleaued to. Adhibere animu^, to take heed what is
spoken Adhibere aures, to harken, to give an ear. Adhibere in consilium
aliquem, to ask counsel of oone. Adhibere modum, to use moderacyon or
temperaunce. Adhibere parsimoniam, to spare. Adhibere sermonem, to deuyse or
talk together. Adhibere testes, to bring forth wytnes. Adhibere uim, to do a
thing by vyolence, to enforce. Adhinnio, Cic. in Pisonem.
to neye as a horse does after a mare. Cicero by a metaphore makes it to
sygnyfie to rejoice. Adhuc locorum, for adhuc. Plautus in capt.
Adiabene, a countray beyond Armenia. Adiantum, an herb growinge about
springes of water, having small leaves like to Coriander. sum do now take
it for Maydenheare. Adiaphoron, indifferente. Adij te heri de filia, I came
yesterday to talk with the for thy daughter. Adijcere album calculum, Plin.
epist.
to approve a thing Adijcere animum, to set his mind or love on oone. Adijcere
oculum haereditati. Ci. in Ver.
Plane uidebant adiectum esse oculum haereditati, They saw plainly, that the
other went about to get the inheritance. Adimere animam, to kylle. Adimere
ius, to prohybyte. Pli. de uiris illustr.
Adimere uestem, to pulle of his garmente. Adimere suum alteri, to take an
other man's goods from him. Adinuenio, to inuente a thing. Adinuentum, an
invention. Adipisci senectutem, to come to age. Cicero de senectu. Plautus in
Epidic.
Adipisci, to overtake one. Adiposus, rich. Adipson, a sweet root called
lykorys. Adipsos, a certain date tree growing in Egypt, the fruit whereof
has no stone. Plinius callyth it Myrobalanum. Adire ad pactionem, to come to a
point. Adire discrimen, to put him in danger. Adire haereditate^, to take on
me, the, or him, the inherytaunce. Adire periculum, to take a daungerouse
thing on him. Aditiculus, a little entry. Adiungere, to win or obtain.
Terent. in Andria.
Errat long mea quidem sententia, qui imperium credat grauius esse aut
stabilius, ui quod fit, quam id quod amicitia adiungitur, He is foul deceived
in mine opynion, that thinks, that rule to be more ferme and stable, which
is gotten by vyolence, than that which is obtained by friendship. Plautus in M^n.
Adiurgium, debate. Adiuratio, a con^uringe. Adiurati, confederate or alied
together by oath. Adiutor, an helper, Adiutrix. Adiunamen, help. Adlino, nere,
to enoynt, or rub a thing with any thing liquide. Administer, a stuarde of
householde. Administro, rare, to do service, to exployte, to fournyshe
Administratio, exploytynge or doing of a thing, service. Admirabilis,
wonderful. Admirabundes, he that does wonder or maruayle at a thing.
Admisceo, scui, cere, to myngle or mixte one thing with another. Admistio,
onis, a menglynge or mixture. Admiste, an aduerbe signifyenge, one menglyd with
another. Admistura, idem quod admistio. ^
Admittere uitam, to retain life, to live. Admittere, to do. Quid tandem
admisi in te? what have I offended the? Admittere noxiam, to pardon an offense.
Admittere diem, to open the wyndowe, that the light may come in. ^
Admittere equum, to lyte up to horseback, or as we say, to take his horse.
Admittere, to put the male best to the female for genera^ion. Admittere
sumptum, to do great cost. Admodum. ye. Ad^^to, tare, to swym to a place.
Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thing. Festus.
Adnexio, a knyttynge or fastening to a thing. Adnicto, nixi, nict ere, to wynke
on one. Adnitor, niteris, niti, to lean to a thing, to bear or sustain it.
Adnotatio, a titillinge, or short notinge of that, which we do read or here.
Adnumero, rare, to add to. Adolabilis, without grief or sorrow. Adolescens,
it is, a young man, which is yet growing. Adolescentulus, a ladde. Adonat, the
name of god among the Iues, which signyfyeth, The Lord of all creatures.
Adoperio, rire, to kouer or hyde. Adoptatitius, he whom a man ordayneth to
be his heir, and takes unto him in the stead of his son. Adoptio, where a man makes one his heir, and takes him for his son, being of his own
kynne or a stranger. Ador, and Adoreum, a kind of wheat, called also far,
which by the description seems to be the wheat, which we call ducke byll.
Adorno, nare, to apparayle, to prepare, to praise. Adquiro, quisiui, quirere,
to geate, to conquer. Adquo, for quousque, until. Adramelech, an ydolle of
Syria, whom also the Samaritanes honored. Adrastia, a contraye not far from
Troy, also the name of a city there. It was also called a goddess, which
took from manne both memory and wit. Adrastus, a king of Argyues in Greece.
who had two dawghters, of the which the one was married to Tideus, the other
to Polym^es, read the historye of the syege of Thebes. Adrepo, psi, pere, to
reach at a thing, to take it with vyolence. Adscisco, scere, to join or take
to, as when one joins another with him in auctority, or takes one to aid
him in his office. Adscriptitii, were men of war, which were taken into an
army to supplye the places of them that were slain, or other wise lacked.
Ascripti, were they that were appointed to inhabyte towns or cities, made by
the Romans, called Coloniae. Adscriptiui, idem quod Adscriptitii. Adsitis domi
facite, Se that ye be both at home. Aduallas, a mountain, from the which
the great river called the Rene, runs Northward. Adubanus, the famous river
called also Danubius and Hister. Aduelitatio, a mutual reprochinge, or
contention in words. Aduentus, tus, a coming. Aduerbialiter, like an
aduerbe. Aduersaria, a reknynge book of expensis. written first before the book
of account be made. Aduersa aerumna, aduersyty, damage. Terentius in Phorm.
Aduersa valetudo, syckenesse, Aduersatus, ta, tum, against or contrary. Pli de
uiris illust^.
Aduersis vulneribus, with wounds in the forepart. Aduerso flumine, against
the streme. Aduersus, sa, sum, that whereof only the fore part is seen, as
Auersus, whereof only only the hynderpart is seen. Aduorso animo, against my
will, thy will, or his will: against his heart. Aduersum, against. Quis est hic,
qui aduersum mihi fit? Who is he that comes against me, or marchyth toward
me? Aduersum, for erga. Aduertere, to perceive. Aduertere animum, to take heed,
or harken. Pli. in pan.
Aduertere oculos, to perceive, to see, to behold. Aduesperascit, the
evening, or euentyde is commen, or it waxyth late, or it is night. Aduigilo,
uigilare, to watch, to take good heed. Adulteror, rari, idem quod Adultero.
Adumbratus, a, um, feigned, countrefayted, portured. Adumbratio, portrayture.
Adulator, toris, a flaterar. Adulatrix, a woman that flatreth. Aduocito, ^are,
to call for one often. Aduocatus, he that defends an other man's cause.
Aduocatio, pleadynge. Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe round together. Aduorsor, for
Aduersor. Aduorsem, old wrytars used for Aduersarium. Aduro, ussi, urere, to
roast, to burn. Adustio, rostinge, or burning. Adustus, ta, tum, rostyd, or
burned. Adyticulum, a dyminutif of Adytum.
A, ANTE E.
AEantion, a town in the promontory or hill of Troy, called Sigeum. Aeas,
aeantos, a river of a contraye called Epyrus, which runs out of Macedonia,
and falls into the Se called Ionium. Aeacus, was the son of Jupiter and
Europa, whom Paynymes did suppose to be of such justice, that he was
appointed by Pluto, called godde of hell, to be one of the iuges there, with
Minoes and Radamanthus, to discuss the transgressyons of men being deed,
and to assign to them punysshement according to their merits. Aedificatio,
building. Aedificator, a buyldar. Aeditio, a publication of a thing. Aeger,
aegra, um, sick, sorrowful. Aegerrime, very grievously. Aedes, a chamber.
Aedilitius, a, um, pertayninge to Aediles. Aeditimus, idem qui Aedituus. Aedon,
a Nightingale. Aegae, a city in Cilicia, also an I Will in the Se called Aegeum.
Aegaeon, a giant called also Briareus, also it is one of the names of Neptunus.
Aegaea, a city in Macedonia, another in Mauritania. Aegeria, a Nymphe or
goddess, with who^ Numa Pompilius the second king of Romans, feigned to have
familiar company and communicacion concerning religion and worshyppynge of
gods, to the intent that he might thereby withdraw the people from the
appetyte of wars, wherewith they were inflamed. Aegaeum mare. Aegeus, the
father of Theseus. Aegealus, was a countraye called also Achaia, in Greece*
Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum. Aegylops, wild otes. Aegina, a city
ioynynge to Peloponeso or Morea, against the countraye of Athenes, also an I Will
from Pireum.xii. miles. Aeginenses, the people of Aegina the city. Aeginitae,
people of the I Will of Aegina. Aegineticus, ca, cum, of Aegina. Aegimuros, an I Will
called also Capraria, beyond Corse. Aegiochus, a name of Jupiter. Aegis,
gidis, an haubergeon, which only the goddis were painted with. Aegium, a
town in Peloponeso, now called Morea, where they feigned that Jupiter was
norysshed with a got. Aegle, a Nymphe. Aegloga, a communication of shepeherdes
together. Aegocephalus, a bird, Aristot. de animali. 2.
which is without a spleen. Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus. Aegonomus, a
got herd, or kepar of gotes. Aegos, a river in Thracia. Aegre, with much
pain, or difficulty. Aegrefero, tuli, far, to be sorry. Aegresco, sci, scere,
to be sick. Aegrum, idem quod aegritudo, sorrow, displeasure. Aegrius, more
sorowfully, more displeasauntly. Aegrio, I am sick. Aegritudo, dinis, grief of
mind, or sorrow. Aegrotare, to fail, or be feeble of courage. Aegrotus, feeble
of courage. Aegula, a kind of brymstone, wherewith in some places they do
perfume wulle to make it white. Aegylops, a fistula in the corner of the eye by
the nose of a man, which rounneth mattier. Aegyptini, people of Ethiope,
marchynge on Egypt. Aegyptius, and Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypt. Aegyptus, the
country called Egypt. Aegystus, he that slew Agamemnon. Aelius, the propre
name of a Romayne. Festus.
Aelutus, a catte. Aemi^^um, swollen. Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne.
Aemilia, a countray in Italy, callid also Flaminia, and Romandiola. Aemulatio*
envy, or imitation. Aemonia, a countray called also Thessalia. Aen^^s, a noble
man of Troy, which with Anthenor betrayed the city of Troy. Aenoba^bus, the
name of a Romain, so called because he had a berde as red as brass. Aeolium
ma^e, the sea ioynynge to Asia. Aeo^^s, called the king of wyndes. Aequ^li^^s,
equality. Aequ^tio, the equal division of a thing, or where one thing is made
equal to an other. Aequ^dium, idem quod equinoctium. Aequ^anium, seu
acquilaneum, the half deal of the hele. ^
Aequimentu^, hyre of a horse, or other be. A^^^^po^ien^a, equality in
estymation or (...). A^^^ipondium, of equal or like weight. (...), tastely.
Aeq^^^talentia, equal value. Aeq^^^ocatio, making diverse significati^ns to
one word. (...), dyuersely sygnyfyenge in oone word or term. Aeq^^^^us, ^a,
um, of the sea. (...), a, um, of the air. Ae^ati^s, he that was put from his
fredom of a cytesin, and paid tribute as a stranger. Cicero. Plautus.
Era, rae, dernel, which grows in corn. Aeratus, indetted. Aerarii
Tribuni, were treasourers, which paid to the soldiers their wages. Aerarii
praefectus, high Treasourer. Aere meo. Multi^n anni sunt, cum ille in aere meo
est, It is long time passed, that I accounted him in the nu^bre of my friends,
or for one of mine. Aerificium, the craft to make any thing of brass or
copper. Aero, rare, to dress with copper or brass. Aeromantia, diuynation or
conjecture of things to come by the air. Aerosus, a, um, that wherein brass
or copper is, or whereof it is made. Aerumnalis, le, where in is greatte pain
or labor. Aerumnatus, brought to myserye. Plautus.
Aerumnosus, a, um, miserable, full of pain or travail. Aerumnulae, little
crooked s^aues, wherewith men do carye fardelles and trusses on their backs.
Aes circumforaneum, money laid in bank. Aesculapius, the son of Apollo,
callid god of medycine. Aesopus, an ancient writer of fables. also the name of
a famous player in tragedies. Aestimare litem, to tax the damages and costs,
that a man has sustained by wrong. Aestus, doutfulnes, or flittyng of the
mind. Pli* in epi.
Aeta, an hylle in Thessalye. Aetabula, chyldehode. Aetalia, an I Will in the sea
by Geane. Aetatem meam me viduam esse mauelim, Plautus.
qua^ i^^aec flagitia tua pati, quae tu facis, I had leauer be a wydowe all
my life, than to endure this trouble that I have with the. Aetatem uelim
seruire, Plautus.
Litanum modo ut co^ueniam, I would do service all the days of my life, on the
condition that I might mete with Litanus. Aetas acta est mihi, my time is
passed. Cicero.
Aetas bona, the flower of youth. Aetate adulta, of full age. Aetate affecta,
of old age. Aetate exacta, very aged, in extreme age. Aetate confectus, idem.
Aetate integra, in the flower of youth. Aetate prouecta, aged, or of great age.
Aetatem, an aduerbe, signifies long time. lam dudu^ aetatem lites sunt inter
eos, There has be^ variance between them long time. Aeterne, euerlastyngely,
Aeterno, nare, to make perpetual. Aethereus, a, um, of the firmament.
Anaxagoras puts it for the element of fire. Aethiopia, a great country in
Affrike, containing many regyons, called Ethiope: wherein be found people,
beasts, and serpents of meruaylous form. It has on the west, the
mountains callid Athlantes, on the east it extends to the marches of Egypt:
on the south it has the sea occean: on the north part, it is enclosed with
the river called Nilus. Aethiopicus, ca, cum, of Ethiope. Aethiopissa, a woman
of Ethiope. Aethiops, aethiopis, a man of Ethiope. Aethon, one of the horses of
Phoebus. Aethrusci, the old Inhabytauntes of the countray in Italy, callid now
Tuscana. Aetiologia, a rehersynge of the cause. Aetites, a precious stone,
which has the color of an egles tail that is white. Aetius, the name of a
famous writer in phisik. Aetolia, a countrays in Greece. Aeuitas, eternitye.
A, ANTE F.
AFfecta, almost fynysshed, or nyghe at a point. Sue^on. in Vesp. Plautus
Affecta fides, credence almost lost. Affectus uirgis, beaten with rods.
Affectus morbo, vexed with sycknesse. Cice.
Affectum bellum, wars nyghe at a point. Affecta aestas, Somer well nyghe
passed. Cice.
Affectio, affection, sometime trouble of mind. Varro.
Affector, taris, idem quod Affecto. Afferre auxilium, to help, to aid. Varr.
de re ^ust.
Afferre dentes, to byte. Afferre manus, to set violent hands on one. Afferre
uim alicui, to make assault on one. Afferre molestiam, to do displeasure to
one. Afferre morbum, to make sick. Catullus.
Afferre pedem, to come. Abite, vnde malum, pedem attulistis, Goo hense, from
whense with a myschief ye came. Affero ad te salutem, I come to salute you.
Afficere cura, to bring in care. Afficere lucro, to make one to win or
gain. Afficere bonis nunciis, to bring good tidings. Plaut.
Vti bonis uos, uestrosque omnes nuntiis me afficere nultis, As ye will that I
bring to you and yours good tydinges. Affecit praeda atque agro populares
suos, Plaut.
He made his countray men rich both of lands and goods. Cicero.
Afficere stipendio, to pay to him his wages. Affici, to be moved with
affection. Affinis negociis publicis, he that medleth with the affairs of a
communalty. Affinitas, tatis, affinity, aliance. Affinis rei capitalis, gylty
of a great offense, which deserves death. Affinis sceleris, gylty of the
trespace. Affirmative, with an affirmaunce. Afflatus, tus, a blast. Plautus.
Affleo, affleui, flere, to weep in the remembrance of a thing. Salust.
Afflictus, stryken down to the ground. Affligere, to throw or beat down
to the ground. Plaut.
Affligam te ad ^erram scelus, si me uno digito attigeris, I will beat the
down to the ground wretch, if thou touchest me but with one fyngar.
Affluenter, abundantly. Affluentia, abundance. Affluens, it is, abundant.
Afformido, dare, to have great fear. Affricus, ca, cum, of Affrike.
A ANTE G.
AGar, the maiden of Sara, on whom Abraham begat Ismael. Agaricum, a thing
like to a white mussheron growyng on the stem of a tree, and is called Agarike,
which is medicinable in pourginge of fleame. Agaso, sonis, a horse kepar, a
muletour. Agatho, the name of one of the sons of Priamus, also a boy, whom
Plato louyd. Agathyrsi, people by Scithia, which be rich of gold, and yet be
neither couaytouse nor enuyouse, and their hears are blue. Agathocles, was a
king of Sicile. Age dicat, let him speak on, let him speak hardyly. Age, age
ut lubet, well go to, do what ye will. Age, and agite, go forth, forth on.
Agea, a way in a ship. Agelastus, he that never lawghyd. Agenor, the father
of Europa, whom Jupiter rauysshed, and of Cadmus, who builded the city of
Thebes. Agere, to here, to perceive. Plautus.
Vos agite spectatores, ye that behold, here, or take heed. Hoccine agis, an
non? Perceyuest thou this matter or no? also to conclude. Terentsus*
Herus me relictis rebus, iussit Pamphilum hodie obseruare, ut quid ageret de
nuptiis scirem, My master has commanded me, that layenge all things apart, I
should awayte upon Pamphilus, to thintente I might know, what he would
conclude, touching the marriage. Agere, to go. Quo hinc te agis? Terentius
Whyther go thou from hense? Sometime it signifies to come. Vnde agis te
nunc Dorpale? from whense come thou now Dorpalus. Agere. Pectus mihi agit
nunc cubiro: Plautus.
She hitteth me on the heart with her elbowe. Agere ad praescriptum, to do that,
that he was appointed. Agere aetatem, to live. Agere ambages. Plautus.
Quid opus me multas agere ambages? what needs me to make many words? or to
speak by circumlocution? Agere animam, to dye. Agere annum octingentesimu^, to
live eight hundred years. Agere apologum, to tell him a fable. Plautus.
Agere amicum, to do like a friend, Pli. in pan*
or play the part of a friend. Agere cum aliquo, to treat with one, or to
speak. Cum mecum saepe ageres, ut de amicitia scriberem: Where often times thou
dyddest entreat me, that I should write of frendshyppe. Illo praesente, mecum
agito, Plautus.
si quid uoles: If thou will any thing with me, speak it in the presence of
that manne. Agere iniuriarum, to sue one for trespase or wrongs done. Agere
summo iure, to proceed with rigor. Agere sou iure, to execute his auctority
Agere lege, to sue, to proceed by the way of Justice. Plautus.
Agere di^is malis, to curse. Agere mensuras fideliter, to measure things
justly. Cicero.
Agere ^^gas, to mock, to tryfle. Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration.
Agere uineas, to lay ordinance to a thing. Actum de me est, I am undone.
Agesilaus, a king of Lacedemony, which was little of stature, and haltyd on the
one foot, but in virtue, wisdom, and prowess he exelled all princes of his
time, whose life is written by Plutarche and Xenophon. Plautus.
Aggerre, to bring to one. Namque ecastor, amor and melle and selle est
foecundissimus, gu^^^ it dulce, amarum usque ad sacietatem agge^t, for in good
faith, love has abundance both of honey and galle, in taste it is pleasant,
but it brings with it bytternesse, so much that it becomes lothesome.
Aggrauatio, a grief, a bourdon. Aggrauesco, scere, to wax more greuouse.
Aggredi, to assail. P^s.
Aggretus, idem quod Aggressus. Ag^^iter, nymbly, quyuerly. Aginor, nari, to
marchandyse vile things, or of small value. Cicero.
Agis rem actam, thou lesest thy labor. Agit rem suam, he goes about his
own business. Plautus.
Agit hic perpetuum diem sol, The sone shyneth here all the day long.
Terentius Plautus.
Agitare, to entreat well, to compel to go. lam calcari quadrupedem agitabo
aduersum cliuum: Now will I with a spur make my horse run up the hill.
Plautus.
Agitare co^uiuium, to banquet and make good chiere. Age ergo, hoc agitemus
conuiuium, uino et sermon suaui, Therefore go to, let us banquet, drink talk
and make good chiere. Plautus.
Agitare custodiam, to take good head in keeping of one. Plautus.
Agitare diem, to pass forth the day. Agitare imperium, to govern. In pace
vero, beneficiis magis quam metu imperium agitabant: In the time of peace, they
governed, more by gentyllnesse, than by fear. Agitare iustitiam, to exercise
justice. Pli in ep. Salust.
Agitare letitiam, to make joy. Agitare mente, to conceive in the mind, to
think. Agitare cum animo, to reuolue in the mind. Salust. Salust.
Agitare praesidium, to be in garyson. Agitare uigilias, to keep watch.
Agitare uitam, to live. Agitatio, a meuynge or styrringe. alsoo exercise.
Agitator, a dryuer of a cart, or of beastis. Agitedum, ite mecum, than forth,
and come ye on with me. Agitur mecum been, I am in good condition. Val. Man de
Mi^^ia
Agere been, sometime is of a like signyfication. Agitur de capite, de fama,
etc. when the life or renomme is in danger to be lost. Agitur res capitis,
Terent.
the question or matter in debate, concernyth life. Aglaia, one of them which
are called Charites, gracis. Agnascentia membra, Plinius.
members which are superfluouse, as where one has three legs, or six
fingars on one hand, and other like. Agnitio, knowledge. Agon, agonis, a
contention in form of battle, or a wrastlyng, also the place where it was
exercysed. Agonalia, certain festival days kept among the Romans.
Agonensis porta, a gate of Rome called also Colina. Agones, were sometime
called hills. Agonia, sacrifice done on hills. Agonius, was named a god,
which had preemynence over things to be done. Agraria lex, a law made for
the ce^mon disposition of lands, as be our statutes of enclosures and
decayenge of husbandry. but among the Romans they were such laws as did
appoynte, how much land a Senator should have, and not excede, and how
much should be dyuided among the people. Aggrigentinus, tina, number, of the
town of Agrigentum, which is in Sicile. Agricolatio, tyllage or husbandry.
Agricultura, husbandry. Agricultor, an husbandeman. Agrippina, the name of the
mother of Nero the Emperor. Also the dawghter of Octauyan. Agrippina, Colonia,
the city of Coleyne. Agylla, a city in Thuscana.
A ANTE H.
Ah, a voice of lamentyng or sorowyng.
A ANTE I.
Ajax, the name of.ii. noble me^ of Greece Terentius
Ain, for aisne, is it as thou say* Ain uero, idem. Non, Mar.
Aiutamini, for adi^uate. Aizon, an herb called Syngrene, it grows on a
tyled house.
A ANTE L.
ALabandae, a city in Greece, in the country of Ionia. Alabandicus, ca, cum,
of that city. Alabarches, he that has the rule over s^l^^ and among the
Egyptians it was an honorable name. Alabaster, and alabastrum, a kind of
marble called alabaster. Alacriter, promptly, courageously, gladly. Alacre,
idem. Alania, a region of Seithia in Europa, which stretches unto the greatte
terms of Meotis. Alani, people called also Massage^ae. Alaricus, a king of
Goths, which dystroyed Rome. Alarij equites, horsemen, which are in the
wings of a battle. Alauorsi, people in the vttermoste part of the North.
Alba, the name of two cities in Italy. Albana, a cite in Arabia. also a region
in the east, wherein is also a city called Albania* Albanus, a river not far
from the city of Rome. also the name of two cities, one in Macedonia, the
other in Armenia. Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. albani paeres, the
Senators of Alba. Albegmina, part of the inward of bestes, which was offered
to Dis, callid god of hell. Albeuses, people of Alba. Albesto, scere, to be
white. Albicaleull, white stones, with the which the people of Creta did note
or mark the days, wherein they had good fortune like as they marked ill days
with black stoones, called nigri calculi. Albia, a river, which passes
through the ^a^ime of Boemia. Albiecra, is kind of olyue tree.
Alb^^era^^fleus, broad fygges, with a small stalk. Albidus, da, dum, somewhat
white Albing^, ^rowne in Laguria. Albi^us, the name of an emporour. Albion, the
ancient name of England: (...) sons of Neptianus. Albi^^, (...), which
comes to the city of (...). Alboga^erus, a hatte, which the greatte priestis
of Jupiter, called Flamines Dialis, did wear. Albot, albugo, and albumen,
the white of an egg. albugo, is alsoo a white spotte in a man's eye. Albo^^a,
shieldes or targates. Albula, the old name of the river of Tiber. also a water
in the field called Tiburtinus, which was medicinable for fore eien. Album
plumbum, tynne. Albunia, a wodde and fountain by the river called Aniene, in
Italy. Albu^^us, a hill in Lucania, Ale^a, a lion. Alce, a wild beast in the
woddes of Germany, in facion and skyn like to a got, but greter, which have no
iointes in their legs, and therefore they do never ly, but only do lean to
trees, when they do rest the^, which the hunters knowing, do saw the trees
that they lean to, half a sonder, whereby they fall down, and be taken.
Alces, a beast in France like a mule, but he has his over lyppe so long, that
wha^ he sedeth, he goth backewarde, or else he can not bi^e of the grass and
herbs, which he should eat. The horsekynde of them have horns on their over
brows. Alceste^seu Alcestis, the wife of Admetus the king of the people
callid Pherei, who being sick, and having answer of the goddis, that he should
escape death, if any of his kynne or frondes would die for him willingly, when
all men and women refused it, only Alceste his wife consented thereto, and
willyngly dyed. Alcaeus, a famous poet. Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the
beast, which is callid Linx, which is begotten between a lion and a lybarde.
Alcibrades, a noble captain of the Athenienses, which in nobility, beauty,
prowess, (...), and eloquence, passed al other in his time, not withstanding
his yyces were accounted equal unto his virtues. Alcides, idem quod Hercules.
Alcinous, Homerus Odyss.
the name of a king of a people callid Phaeaces, excellent in Justice, which had
a fair and (...) palyce, with or charde a which ^are most plentuousely fruits
^wyse in the (...). A^cman, a famous poet. (...), the mother of Hercules.
(...), a cunning grauou^^ (...), a good archer of Creta, which beholdynge a
dragon ready (...) are his son of did (...) so craftily, (...) as the dragon
(...) of the child, the arowe passed unto his heart, and hurt not his son, so
that the dragon immediately died. Alcyonae, the name of.ii. ladies, whereof the
one was wife to Ceisis, who seeing the deed body of her husband cast on land,
threw her self into the sea, whom the poets fained to be turnid into a bird of
that name: the other was daughter of Euene, callid also Marpesia Aleatoriu^, a
dice playing, or a dycyng house. Suetonuis calls it aleatorium forum. Alebria,
things which do nourishe well. Alec, is a sauce made of the livers of fishes,
also a fyshe, called a hearing. Alecto, one of the furies of Hell. Alectoria, a
stone found in a cocks gysar or mawe, of the greatenes of a bean, of the
color of crystal. Alemani, people of Germany, callid Germai^s Aleo, aleonis,
a dysar, or dyseplayer. Aletudo, fattenesse of the body. Alexander, the name of
a man, specially of a king of Macedony, which conquered all the cast part of the
world, and was in prowess and wysedom incomparable: but being drowned in
ouermoche felicity, he fell into exceeding pride and cruelty, and was at the
last poisoned, and died in Babylon, exceeding little the age of thirty years.
Alexandria, the name of a great city in Egypt* also of dyuere other cities.
Alexandrinus, na, number, of Alexandria. Algenses, fyshes called also purpurae.
Algidense, a kind of radysshe, long and clear through. Algidus, a
mountain.xii. miles from Rome. Algida sylua, a wod at the foot of that
mountain. Algo, idem quod algeo. Alguasen, an herb like to a lyly. Plautus.
Algus, uel algu, cold. Alia, a river.xi. miles from Rome. Alias res agis,
thou think on other matters. Vnde anulu^ istu^ nactus? di^ mihi, ille alias
res agere se simulare, Tell me where gattest thou this ryng? he made semblance
as if he thought on an other matter. Alicarij, they that do sell alicam.
Alicariae, common harlottes. Alicastrum, a diminutiue of alica. Alienatio, an
alienation or alteration. Alienator, he that alters a thing. Terentius
Alienior* aetate, of no^age, not of co^pete^s age. Alienus animus, Iam primum
illum alieno animo a nobis esse, res, ipsa indicat: The thing* self declares,
that even now he has no favor toward us, that he is not my friend. Alieno
more mihi uiuendum est, I must live after an other man's facion. Salust.
Aliena consilii, unmeet for the counsel. Alienum suis rationibus,
unprofitable for his purpose. Alienatus, a, u^, put away altered, estranged.
Alieu^s agimus, we become strange unto the^ Alimentarius, a, um, pertaining to
living or sustinance. Alimonia, idem quod alimentum. Alimodi, idem quod
aliusmodi, of an another facion or manner. Aliouersum, toward an other place.
Aliptes, he that annoynteth a man. Aliquis, aliquae, aliquod, some. Alirei,
Plautus uses for aliae rei. Alisma, an herb called also barba syluana, water
plantayne. Aliter ac, aliter atque, aliter qu^, otherwise tha^. Alites, birds.
Aliubi, for alicubi, somewhere. Aliuta, old writers used for aliter.
Aliusmodi, i^ an other man^, of an other facio^ Alligare alique^ furto, to
apech one of felony Alligare se furti, to charge him self of felony Alligatos,
he that byndeth. Alligatura, a bond. Allobrox, allobrogis, a man or woman of
the countray in France, called Dolpheny. Allocutio, a speaking to one.
Allocutum ire, to commune with one. Alloquium, communication, speech. Aludor,
idem quod alludo. Alluuium, idem quod alluuies. Alluuio, idem. Almities,
quietenes, secretenes. Almopia, part of Macedonia. Aloe, aloes, is used
commonly for a juice of an herb congeled like a gu^me, whereof be two sorts,
one is named Succotrina, which is like a liver, read, bright, and bronkle: the
other is called Caballina, and is sandy and gross* The first cleanses and
confirms the stomach of a man, and therefore is mixed with purgative medicines,
because they shall not anoy or hurt the stomach, the last is occupied about
horse and other beastis. Aloe lignum, or lignu^ aloes, is a sweet and precious
wod, which being received in medicine, comfort the stomach, and all the
inferior partis of a man, and makes sweet breath. Alogia, unreasonable or
beastly feding, and ingurgitation of meat and drink. Alopecus, he that has a
pylde heed, that is to say, the hears falling with scurse. Alosa, a fyshe
called also Laccia, and Clupea, is that, which by the description of Paulus
Iouius seems to be a cheuyn. Alphabetarii, they which do learn first the
order of letters. Alphabetum, the order of letters, as a. b. c. Alpheus, a
river in Archadia, also the name of a man. Alphos, a morphy or staining of
the shinne^ Alpinus, a, u^, of the mountain^ of Alpe^. Alpus, pale, careful,
or studious. Alsine mayor, an herb called wodbynde. Alsine minor, an herb
called the second mouse ear. Alsiosus, a, um, cold of nature* also which
are soon hurt or anoyed with cold. Altanus, a wynd, which is on the deep
sees. Alte, on high. Altellus, a surname of Romulus the founder of Rome. Alter
and vicesimus, one and twenty. Alter quisquam, any other. Alteras, old
waiters used for alias. Altercatio, a contention in words, where one man
purposes, an another replyeth. Altercum, sieve altercagenum, an herb called
also faba porcina. Alterplex, plicis, old writers used for duplex double.
Alter^a, ide^ quod alterutra. Altior, altius, higher. Altissimus, ma, mum,
highest. Altimetor, an Instrument wherewith high things are met. Altinu^, an
old city by the riuage of Venice. Altinates, people of Altinum. Plautus.
Altitudo, height, or depenes. Altrouersum, on the other part, or on the other
side. Altum otium, long rest, great leisure. Aluini, they which have
frettyng in their bealyes with contynuall flux. Alumnatus, nouryshed. Alyba, a
countraye not far from Mis^a, where as Homerus does write, were mines of
silver. Alysius, the name of Bacchus. Alysina, an herb called water plantayne.
A, ANTE M.
AMalthea, a woman, which with her sister called Meissa, nouryshed Jupiter
with the milk of a gore. Also the name of a prophetess. Amantior, more
loving. Amantissimus, most loving. Amantissime, most louyngely. Solinus.
Amantlies, people in Affrike, which have such plenty of precious stones,
that they build therewith houses. Amanus, a mountain called also Taurus.
Amaracinum, an oil made of maioram. Josephus.
Amaramis, the father of Moses. Amarantus, an herb, which grows a foot in
height, and has leaves like basile, and has a flower facionid like an ere of
wheat, ^f crimson color, which never dies: in french it is callid
Pass^uelute* some there be, which do suppose it to be callid in englysh
Baldar. Amarico, are, to make bitter, to make angry Amaror, idem quod
amaritudo. Amarus, ra, rum, bitter, very angry. Amariscus, an herb called de
Mathis, or Dog senell. Amarillis, the name of a shepeherde in the bucolic is
of Vergile. Amasenus, a river in Italy. Amasias, a king of Jews: which
signyfieth as much as populum tollens. Amasis, was a noble king of Egypt,
which made a law, that every year, ech^ man should make a rekeninge to the
heed offycer of his realm, of his life, and show whereby he lived, or by what
occupation he was sustained, and he that did not make such account, should be
put to death. Amasso, idem quod amauero. Amatio, a loving. Amastrum, uel
Amastris, the principal city of Paphlagonia. Amatli, the son of Chanaan.
Josephus.
Amathus, thu^tis, a cite in Ciprus, dedicate to Venus. Amathuntius, a, um, of
the said city. Amathusa, the isle of Ciprus. Amautosis, the dymnesse of the
eyes. Amazones, women of Scithia, which wa^ne a great part of Asia: who slew
all the men children, and kept the women children, of whom they burned the
right pappe, because it should not let them to throw their Iauelyns, or to
shote. Amazonicus, ca, cu^, pertaining to the Amazones. Amazonius, a, u^, ide^
quoth Amazonicus. Amazonicus, nici, a countraye called afterward Cesaria.
Ambarualis hostia, was a sacrifice made for the fields, with a sow great with
farowe. Ambedo, ere, to eat or gnaw about a thing Ambegni, were an ox and a
ram, where on every side of them lambis were brought to be sacrificed.
Ambesus, a, u^, eaten round. Ambest* ^dem quod circum est. Ambiani, seu
Ambianenses, people in France about Languedoke. Ambidentes, sheep of two tethe,
of sum called hogs, of some theaues. Ambiguitas, doubtfulnesse. Ambitus,
ta, tum, enuyronned or compassed. Ambitus, tus, enclosure, alsoo ambycion or
desire of promotion. Ambra, a very sweet thing, which is found on the sea, as
musherons are on the earth* whereof is made very precious and cordial medicines.
Ambracia, a cite in the cou^tray callid Epirus in Greece. Ambracienses, people of
Ambracia Ambrices, tyles, which be laid overthwart between other tyles.
Ambrones, people in France. Ambrosia, ^n herb, which some men do suppose to
be Tansey. Ambubeia, the commune cykorye with the long leaf, and the blewe
flower, which will be closed at the goinge down of the son, and opened at
the rysynge. Ambubeiae, dronken drabbes, which wander about the streets.
Ambulatiuncula, a little walk. Ambustus, ta, tum, bourned. Amecus, and ameca,
old writers used for amicus, and amica. Amen, a word of Hebrew, which after
the interpretation of Aquila, signifies fideliter, faythefully, after the.lxx.
interpretours, it signifies fiat, be it. Amentia, folly. Amento, tare, to bind
a thonge about any thing. Amentior, tius, madder. Amentissimus, a, um,
maddest. Ameria, an old city in Italy. America, a country late found in the
east by Amercum Vesputium. Amerinum, a city in Italy. Amethystus, a precious
stone of vyolet color, an ametyst. Amethystinus, a, um, of an ametyst. Amia, a
fyshe like to a Tuny, but he has no scales, but a plain skin, which
shyneth like to silver mixte with blue, and his tail is in facyon like a new
moon. Amica, a woman that is loved. alsoo a concubyne. Amicibor, for amiciam,
I will clothe or put on a garment. Amicior, ciri, to be cladde. Amicissime,
most frendely. Amice, frendely. Amiciter, idem. Amicissimus, a, um, most
frendely. Amicius, more frendely. Amictorium, a lynnen rail that womenne do
wear. Amicula, a diminutiue of amica. Amiculum, a short cloak. Amiculatus, he
that wears a short cloak. Plautus.
Amicabilis, le, frendely. Amineae vites, vynes growing in a country by
Salerne. Amyson, a famous city in the royalme of Pontus. Amissio, the loss of
a thing. Amissus, a, um, lost. Amiternum, a town in Campania, where Salust
was borne. Plautus.
Amites, perches, whereon hawks be set. Amittere iusiu^andum, to break an
oath, to lose credence. Quod si non dederit, atque hic dies praeterierit, ego
argentum, ille iusiurandum amiserit, If he do not pay it, and this day do
pass, I shall lose my money, but he shall lose his credence. Amittere
libidinem. Iam non possum, Plautus.
amis^ omnem libidinem, I may do no more, I am paste all pleasure. Ammon, a
surname of Iupyter, worshypped in Egypt. Amnestia, forgetfulness of things
passed. Ammoniacum, a certain gum. Amnicus, ca, cum, of the broke. Amo, are,
to love. Amaene, merrily, pleasantly. Amomum, a spyce growing in India, like to
a wild vine, and is in color somewhat yelowe or brown, and very soote in
savor. Amorthei, people beyond Jerusalem, and had their name of Amorrheus the
son of Canaan. Amores, wanton passetymes, or affections of lecherye. Amosio,
for annuo. Festus.
Amouere seg^itiem, to cast away sloth. Amouere crapulam, Plautus.
to parbreake when one is drunk. Ampendices, old writers vsid for appe^dices.
Ampelos agria, a wild vine. Amphibea, beasts or byrdis, which do live as well
on the water, as on the land. Amphilogia, a form in speaking, where a
sentence may be taken two sundry or contrary ways. Ampelusia, an isle called
now Tinge. Amphibolum, a doubtefull sentence. Amphibrachus, a foot in meter,
being of three syllables, the first and last short, the mydell syllable
long, as Cupido. Amphilochus, a philosopher. Amphesibene, a serpent, having
two heddes, whereof the one is before, the other behind, where his tail should
be. Amphimacrus, a foot in meter, having the first syllable and the last
long, the myddell syllable short. Amphimalla, garme^tis rough on both sides
Amphitapetes, garments of Cotton on both sides hearye. Amphimerimon, a fever
co^idyane, which comes of fleume. Amphion, a man, which with natural
eloquence, brought rude and wild people to a c^uile form of living: and as
some do suppose, sound first harmony. Amphipolis, a city nigh to Macedonia.
Amphiroe, a nymph or maide^ of the ryuers. Amphitana, a precious stone, the
brimme or edge whereof shines like to gold. Amphitheatru^, a round place made
with seats or scaffoldis, where men beh^ld plays. Amphitreatrales ludi, playce
exercysed in those places. Amphitrite, the wife of Reptunus. it is also taken
for the sea. Amphitrio, trionis, the husband of Alcmena, mother of Hercules.
Amphitrionides, he that comith of the ligne of Amphitrio. Amphictyones, the
generalle or commune counsel of all Grecia. Ampiruo, are, is proprely where
in dau^cing like mening or cou^tena^ce that one makes, he unto whom it is
made, shall do the semblable, it was first vsid of the pristes callid Saly.
Amplant, old writers vsid for amplificant, they enlarge. Ample, amply,
largely. Non. Mar.
Amplexa, for amplexare, embrace or take to you. Amplexati, for amplecti.
Amplexus, imbracynges. Ampliatio, a deferring of judgment. Amplificatio, an
augmentation. Amplifico, care, to augment. Amplior, larger, greatter.
Amplissimus, a, um, greattest, largest. Amplissimus ordo, was used for the
Senate of Rome. Amplissimus magistratus, the highest office. Ampliter, largely,
abundantly, magnifikely. Plautus.
Ampliter occupatus, let with much business. Ampliter testis, witness of all the
hole matter Amplius, more over, more largely. Caesar.
Amplius horas quatuor fortissime pugnauerunt, They fought mightily more than
four hours. Coeperunt amplius tria millia hominum, Liuius.
They took prisoners three thousand men and above. Cicero.
Ampliare, to defer or delay a thing in judgment, to reprie. Amplius
pronuntiare, idem. Ampron, a cord or chain fastened to the yokes, whereby
beasts do draw a wayne. Ampullarius, a bottell maker. Amuleus, the great uncle
of Romulus and Remus Amussitatus, tata, tum, made by line, well proporcyoned.
Amyclae, a city in Lacedemonia, where Castor and Pollux were borne. also an
other city in Italy. Amyclaeus, a, um, of that city. Amylum, is wheat laid
in water.iii. days, and every day the water changed five times, and being
soft, to pour out the water softly, that none other thing do pass, than to
pour in a little and rub the corn, and to skymme away the husks and the
branne, and strayn the residue, and being somewhat dried in a clothe, than to
lay it on new tyles, and set it in the son, and dry it. Anagallis, an
herb, which has a square stalk, and leaves like to peritory of the wall, but
much less, the male has red flowers, the female blewe. some do suppose it to
be our pympernell, some take it to be chykweede.
A ANTE N.
ANabasius, he that rides by post horsis. Hieronymus contra Rufinum.
Anabathrum, Iuuenalis.
a pulpyt or other like place, which stands on high, whereunto a man must go
up by a ladder or grie^es. Anabula, a beast in Aethiope, Plinius.
having a heed like a camel, a neck like a horse, legs like an ox, and is
of color a bright read, full of white spots. Anacephaleosis, a short
recapytulation or repetition of things before rehearsed. Anacharsis, a
philosopher of a meruaylous wysedom, all be it that he was borne in the
barbarous country of Scithia, whom Pliny supposes to have first fou^den the
potters whele: And being in the time that Solon made laws to the Athenienses,
He said, that laws were like to copwebbes, which tied fast little flies, and
the great flies brake them, and went clean through them. In like wise the poor
and mean men are fast wou^den in the penalties and dangers of laws, but
lords and men in great authority daily break laws, and are not corrected.
Anachorita, an hermit: the interpretation thereof is, he that lives a part,
and out of company. Anaclinterium, a mattresse. Anadiplosis, is a doubling
of a word, Spartianus in Ceiouio.
as the last word of the first verse, is the first word of the second verse:
as, Certent and signis ululae, sit Tytirus Orpheus, Orpheus in syluis inter
delphinas Arion. Anaglypha, and anaglypta, vessel or plate of gold or silver
chaced, as cuppis or bolles beaten with the hammer, and not ingraued.
Anaglyptes, he that works such vessel. Anagliptice, ye craft to chase or
i^boce plate. Anagnostes, he that redeth to other men, as bible clerks, or any
other clerk, which redeth while an other writes. Anagoge, the high and
subtylle understanding of scripture. Analecta, fragme^tis of meat, which fall
under the table, and be afterward swept away. Analesia, is a sickness of the
heed, which takes away sensiblenes from the hole partis of the heed, and
comes of the weakness of the stomak, or of to much meat, or of to much
lechery, or drinking much cold water, or to much study, drink, or of
indigestion. Analogia, conuenie^cy or proporcion, whose propretie is to
co^ferre that which is doutfull, with that which is like to it, which is more
certain, to make it more plain. Analogos, proporcionable. Anapestus, a foot
in meter of.iii. sillables, having.ii. the first fete short, the last long.
Anapis, a river in Sicyle, ten furlonge from the city of Syracusis.
Anarchos, without a prince, or without a beginning. Anastrophe, a tournynge
out of a commune order, as, Italia^ contra, for contra Italiam. Anaticula, a
little ducke. Anato^ius, a keeper of duckes. Anautos, a river in Thessalia.
Anaxagoras, a famous philosopher, noble of blood, but more noble in virtue and
wisdom, which abandoning all his possessyon, gave him all holly to the
study of natural philosophy: and when one said unto him, Haste thou no care
for thy countreye, he answered, Yes verily. I have exceeding care for my
country, poyntynge up to heaven with his finger. Also when he had been long
out of his countray, and was eftsoon returned, and beheld his possessions
distroyed and wasted, he said, I had not be^ safe, except these things had be
lost. Anaxarchus, a philosopher, which falling in the indignation of a
tyrant, called Nicoc^e^n, king of Cipres, was by him apprehended, and put into
a great mortar of stone, where he was beaten or pound with iron pestyls:
which tourment he took so patiently, that he doubled these words, worthy of
remembrance, Beat on, beat on Anaxarchus wynd bag, for Anaxarchus thou
bear not. By the which words he accounted his body but a bag full of wind.
Anaximander, a philosopher, which first sound the description of the compass
of the sea and land, and made first the sphere. Ancesa, graven vessel. Anceps,
cipitis, doutfull. sometime it signifies double. also cuttyng on both sides.
Anchises, the father of Aeneas. Anchoratius, a, um, pertaining to an anchor.
Ancillula, a little or poor wenche servant. Anclabra, vessels which priests
used. Anclare, seu antla^e, to empty a vessel. Ancona, a City in Italye,
upon the sea of Venyce. Anculi, and Anculae, goddis and goddessis of serving
womenne. Ancus, he that has a crooked elbow. it was also the name of a king of
Romans. Anchusa, an herb, of whose rote comes a red iuyse, wherewith
sanguyne color is dyed. Ancyra, the name of two cities, the one in Phrigia,
the other in Galatia. Andabatae, certain men that faughte with swords
wynkynge. Andegauia, a countray in France, called Angiewe. Andrachne, an herb
called purcelan. Andrago, a woman having a man's heart. Andricus, an hylle in
Cilicia. Androdamas, a stone, which is like to silver Androgeus, the son of
Minoos, king of Crete, which by envy was slain of the Atheniensis. For the
which many years after the sons of Athenienses were sent to Crete, to be
delivered to the monster called Minotaurus, which was afterward distroyd by
Thefeus. It was also the name of a noble Briton, when Julius Caesar came hither
into this realm of Britayne. Androgynae, people in Asia, being of both kinds
in one person, man and woman. Androgynos, a man having both members of a man,
and also of a woman. Andromache, the wife of the valiant Hector. Andromede, the
wife of Perses, whom he saved from a monster of the sea. Andron, a chaumber,
whereinto men only do come, and not women. Also a space between two houses,
wherinto the rayn falls. Andronitis, idem. Andronae, festis, whereunto only
me^ do com. Andros, an i will between Greece and Asia, directly against the city
of Ephesum. Andruare, old writers used for Recurre, to run again. Anellus,
a little ring. Anemonae, wild popie, with red flowers. Anethum, an herb
called dyll. Anger, a certain serpent, after whose stingynge happens
intolerable peynes. Angerona, was callid the goddess of pleasure, called also
Volupia. Angilae, people in Affrike, of whom the women, the first night that
they be wedded, do accompany with all men, which come to the wedding, but ever
after they be chaste. Anglia, England. Angaria, a constrained service.
Angariae, arum, some do expound it for a post or a currour. Anguimanus, an
Elyphant. Anguinus, na, number, of a serpent, or winding and crepynge like a
serpent. Angustitas, a strayte or strayte place. Anhelator, he that fetches
his wind often, or blows much, poursike. Ania, a Romayne woman, which
being fair and young, after that her husband was deed, was counseled to take
an other, but she would not consent thereto, For if said she, I shall hap to have
as good as I have had, I will not be in fear to lose him: If I shall have an
ill husband, what shall I need, after a good man, to suffer a shrewe?
Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll. Anicula, a little old woman. Animam
adimere, uel extinguere, to kill. Animam debe^, he owes more than he is
worth, he owes so much, that he has not his life but in lone. Anima,
sometime signifies brethe. Dic amabo, an foetet anima uxori tue? Tell me of
good feloship, does thy wives dreth stink? Plautus.
Animam comprime, hold thy brethe. Anima, sometime signifies wind, sum
time water. Si situlam lamiam caepero, ^^mquam aedepol tu mihi diuino quid
credas post hunc diem, ni ego illi puteo, si occepso, animam omnem
intertraxero, If I take the buckerte, never believe me for a prophet after this
day, if I draw not clean out, if I ones begin, all the water of the well.
Animitus, from the very soul or life. Animo male est, it greueth him at the
very heart. Animum eijcere, to put away affection or fantasye. Anio
praesenti, with a bold spirit or courage Animo obsequi, to take pleasure, to
follow appetyte or will. Animo morem gerere, idem. Animum explere, to
acco^plishe will or desire Animum adiungere, to apply or set mind to a thing.
Animum aduertere, to take heed. Animum appellere, to dispose or apply him to do
a thing. Animum adiscere ad uirginem, to set his love on the maiden. Animum
recipere, to take heart or courage. Animus tibi pendet, thou stand in doubt
what thou may do. Animo bono esse, to be of good chere. Animus impotens, an
impatient courage. Animo iniquo pati, to suffer impatiently. Animos lactare, to
draw men's hearts with fair promyses, to make fools feign, to bring men in
fools paradyse. Anime mi, my dear heart. Animule, idem. Plautus.
Animi causa, for pleasure. Cur eam emit? T. Animi causa, Wherefore did he bye
her? T. For his pleasure. Animatus, ta, tum, having a fantasye or favor to a
thing, or to be disposed. Ita animatus fui, Plautus.
itaque nunc sum, ut ea te patera donem, I had such a fantasy, and yet have,
that I would give the cup to you. Amabo s^ quid animatus est facere, fac iam
vt sciam, If he be disposed to do any thing, let me know it. Animaduerto,
uertere, to take heed, to perceive. Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dormientem,
Plautus.
circumplicatum serpentis amplexu, The nouryce awaked, and perceived the child
being on sleep, wrapped all about in the wyndynge of the serpent. Terent.
Da^e operam and cu^ silentio animaduertite, Take you head, and with silence
perceive what I will say to you. It is also to punysshe or correct, Cicero.
Ea sunt animaduerte^da peccata maxim, quae difficillime praecauentur, Those
offenses ought to be most sharply corrected, which most hardlye are
eschewed. Caesar*
Hac re animaduersa, Caesar iubet signa conuerti, After that that matter was
punyshed, Caesar commanded to advance the standerdes. Animaduersio,
punyshement, correction. Animaduersi, they which are punysshed or corrected.
Animaduersor, he that punysheth. Anio, anienis, a river in Italye in the field
called Tibu^tinum. Anisum, an herb called Anyse, whereof comes anyse seed.
Annarius, a, um, aged. Anicularis, re, idem. Annibal, the most valyant
captain of the Carthagine^sis, a man most expert in marcial prowess, who
at.xxv. years of age subdued Spain, percyd the mountains, called Alps, where
before never was passage, dystroyed all Italy, and slew the more part of the
nobylitie of Rome, and kept wars with the Romans.xxx. years. Anniuersalis,
the compass of the year. Anniuersarius, a, um, that every year returns at
one time. Annonarius, and annotinus, a, um, pertaining to vyttayle. Anodina,
things, which do put away pain or grefe. Anomalum, unequal, diverse,
rough. Anonymum, without a name. Anonium, an herb called dead nettylle or
archaungelle. Anophytus, sprongen or grown upon a thing. Ansatus, ta, tum,
having a handell. Ansanctus, on every part holy. Ansula, the diminutiue of
ansa. Antae, Iambes. also posts of a door. Antaeus, was a giant in Libia,
which was xl. cubits long, as it appeared by his sepulcher found by
Sertorius in a cite called Tigena. Antandros, a city in Phrigia. Antarcticus,
the fyfthe cerkle in heaven, called the southepole. Antariu^ bellu^, bataile
before a cite or town. Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey or other servant that gothe
before his master. Antefixa, things cast in mouldes, and set over doors.
Antelapides, stones set at both the sides of a door for strength.
Antelucani ue^ti, wyndes that do blow from the water, or from some creek.
Anteluco, an aduerbe, before day. Anteluculo, an hour before son. Antenor, a
prince of the Troianes, which betrayed the city of Troy: he first inhabited
the countray of Venice. Ante oculos, before his eyes: but it signifies further
of than Coram oculis. Antermini, the inhabitants of the marchis or frontiers
of a contray. Anterote, love mutually set between two persons. Antesum,
antefui, antcesse, to excel an other in any thing. Anteuibanus, a, um, nyghe
to the city: as Anteurbanum praedium, a manor nygh to the city.
Antexpectatus, ta, tum, come before that he was looked for. Anthedon, a kind of
medlars, which has leaves like an almonde tree, the fruit less then the
common medlar, but much plesaunter, and will be lengar kept. Anthemis, an
herb called chamomyll. Anthrax, cis, a stone called a carbuncle, which
shyneth in the night: it is also an aposleme or swelling callid a carbu^cle or
botch. Anthracides, a stone, in the which there seems to be sparks as it were
of fire. Anthracinus, na, um, black as a cole. Anthraceus, a colyar.
Anthracia, a burning cole. Anthropophagi, people in Asia, which eat men.
Anthropomorphitae, were heretics, which of a folyshe symplicitie affirmed,
that god had members like a man. Antibacchius, a foot in meter, having the
first syllable and the last short, and the myddell syllable long.
Anticthones, people dwelling in the uttermost part of the world, directly
against us. Anticyra, an I Will in Asia, where the herb called Elleborus grows,
which purges melancoly, and there it may be taken with out any danger: whereof
grew this proverb spoken to men in their melancholy, Nauiga ad anticyras: Go
sail to Anticyra. Antidora, gift for gift, one for a another. Antigerio, old
writars used for very shortly, forthwith, or the thing were done.
Antimerabole, a figure in speech, where words are repeted to a contrary
sentence: as, Non vt edam uiuo, sed vt viuam edo. I live not to eat, but I
eat to live. Antiochia, a great city in Siria, another at the riuage of
Persia. Antiochus, the name of diverse kings of Siria. Antiperistasis is that
thing, whereby where heat comes cold is expelled, where cold is, heat is
expelled: by this, well water in the winter time is warm, for as much as the
high parts of the air being cold, the heat withdraws him to the lowest
parts. like wise in the body of man the spirit is kept in more feruente by
the outward cold, by the joint conscent and tolleratio^ of al parts of the
body. Antipater, was a philosopher, borne in the city of Tirus, of the sect of
Stoici, which from the time of his birth, until his death, had always a
fever, and not withstandyng he lived until he was old. Antipathia, a natural
dyfference or repugnancy of things. Antipelargesis, one good torn for
another. Antiphrasis, a word or sentence having a contrary meaning: as,
Parcae, the mynisters of death be so called, because they spare no man.
Antipodes, people which do inhabit the part of the world, in respect of the
roundnes thereof, underneath us, that it seems that their feet be against our
feet. Antiqui homines, men of the old facion. Antiquus hospes, mine host of
long time. Antiqua ratio, the manner of time passed. Vergilius.
Antiqua terra, a noble countray. Terra antiqua, potens armis, et vberae
glebae, A noble countray puissaunt in wars, and of a fertile soil.
Antiquatio, an abolicion of a law. Antiquum obtinere, to keep the old facion.
Antistitor, he that stands before them that do work and controlleth them.
Antithesis, a figure, where one letter is set for a another: as olli, for illi.
Antitheton, a figure, whereby one contrary is joined with a another. Frigida
pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis. Quidius i^ Metamor.
Mollia cu^ duris, sine po^dere habentia po^dus. Cold things contended with
them that were hot, moist things with dry, Hard things with soft, light
things with heavy kept not one note. Antium, a city in the part of Italy
called Latium. Antlia, Martialis.
a pumpe or like thing to draw up water. Antaeci, people which dwell in the
contrary Zone or gyrdell, to Anticthones. Antrum, a den under the earth.
Anubis, was a god of the Egiptians, which they honored for Mercurius. Anxur, a
city, called also Tarr^sins. Anygrus, a river in Thessalia.
A, ANTE O.
AOnia, the countray called Thracia. Aonius, a, um, of that countr^y. Aornos, a
place, whereunto no bird may come.
A, ANTE P.
Plautus.
APage, fie, fie. Apage, haud nos deceat fugitiuos imitari: Fie, fie, it will not
beseme us to play the michers. Apage te, get the hens. Apage a me, have away
from me. Apalaestris, he that can neither wrastell nor do any other maistrie.
Apamia, the name of oone city in the less Asia, an another in Parthia.
Aparine, an herb that growethe in corn feldes, which is rough. and cleaneth
to the garments of them, which pass by it, and has a white flower, the stead
like to a nauyll: I suppose that it be goose grass or clyuers. Apathes, were
philosophers, which of a froward and stubborn nature, held opinion that a
wise man had none affections or passions. Apedes, a by^de, whose fete be so
little, that they seem to have none. I suppose they be martlettes. Apelles, the
most excellen^e paynter that ever was. Apello, lere, pulsum, to amoue or put
of from ^ thing. Appenni^us, the part of the mountains of Alps, which
begin at Grane. Aperte, openly, plainly, evidently, without dissimulation or
color. Apertus, ta, tum, open, plain, evident, discovered, without color or
cloak. Apesus, suntis, a mountain in Grece^ Apexabo, bone, a pudding callid a
bludding Aphaeresis, a figure, whereby a letter or syllable is taken from a
word: as Pone met^, for depone metum, mi, for mihi, tun, for tu ne. Aphilos,
he that has no friend. Aphr^ct^, a little bark or baygantine. Aphrodisia,
days dedicate to Venus, or veneriall pastymes. Aphronitrum, the some of
saltepeter, callid of the Arabiens, Maurach. Apiculus, the diminutiue of Apox.
Apinus, a tree, whereof comes pitche. Apina, a tryfle. Apirla, (...) enasse.
Apis, called also Serapis, (...), whom the Egypri^s honored Sspan^ chief god.
Apla^es, the part of heaven, which never moves. Apluda, wh^^ien ^^oone.
Aplusite, et aplustris, erum, the taklynge of a ship. Apoculypsis, slos, a
revelation. Apocleti, counsaylors of the privy counsel. Apocope, a figure, by
the which a letter or fillable i^ taken away, is peculi, for peculij. Apocopi,
men being golded. Apocroti, ^^on that be hard and miserable in living.
Apocryphus, a um, hid, not known. Apocryphi libri, books, the authors whereof
be ^^^nowen. Apocyno^, a little bone in the left side of a frogge, wherewith it
is supposed, things may be done, which were not expedient to be openly
known. Apodixia, an euydence, demonstration. Apodyterium, the place by a
bayne, where (...) which will be bayned, do put of t^^yr clothes. Apogaei,
wyndes that do arise out of the ground. Apogeum, an habytation under the
ground. Apolactizo, are, to strike with the heles also to despise or set at
naught. Apollinaris, an herb called a henbane. Apollinares ludi, plays made
in the honor of Apollo. Apollo, linis, whom the gentyles honored for god,
referrynge to him the inuencion of musyke, of poetry, and of phisike: It is
sometime taken for the son. Apollonia, the name of a cite in Epiro, now
callid Malonis, an other in Creta, an other in ^^ri^, also an i will by Thracia.
Apolloniarae, people of Apollonia. Apo^^^^, a broke of hot water by Padus.
Apoplesticus, he that is taken with the palsy. Apostope^^s, where s^^^what is
left our, specially in speaking, and left to the conie^^u^^ of them that be
herers. Apostasia, rebellyon or forsakyng of a man's profyssion or allegiance.
Aposta^a, a rebelle or rennagate. Apost^ophe, a conuertion in speaking from one
to an another. Apotelesma, a prouos^^^tion* or declaration of the signyfications
of sterres at a man's nativity, or the beginning of any thing, what thereof
shall happen. Apo^^^psi^, a dedycation or consecration, proprely of men into
gods. Apo^^^^^, a decoction of diverse herbs and spyces. Apparere quaestioni,
to serve process as sergeantes and baylyffes done. Apparo, are, to apparayle
or trymme, to be ready to do a thing, to prepare or ordeine. Apellare Caesare^,
to apele to the Emperor. Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix. Appia uia, the
name of a high way at Rome Appiana poma, a kind of appulles as great as
quinces, and having as great a savor as they. Applicat primum ad Chrisidis
patrem se: He first made repair to Christ's father. Apronia, an herb called
also Vitis nigra, a black vine, which runs up, and wyndeth about trees and
stalks of herbs, and has a leaf like an yuy, but greatter, and bears
beryes in clusters, which at the beginning are green, and black when they
be ripe, also the rote is black without, and within is yelowe like box.
Approbo, aui, are, to approve or allow. Appropinquo, are, to approach, to
draw nyghe to. Appropinquatio, an approchynge or drawinge nyghe to. Appropero,
aui, are, to make have to come. Aprurius, et Aprugnus, a, um, of a bore.
Aprunum, uei Aprugnum callum, the brawne of a bore. Apsis, the fely of a carte
wheel. Apsorus, an I Will in the Venecian See. Aptera, a city in the countray of
Licia, and a town in Crete. Apud eum est primus, he is his pryncypall mynyon.
Terentius
Apud me priores parts habet, he may do most with me. Terentius
Facio te apud illum deum, I will make him to take the for a god. Per eam te
obsecramus ambae, si ius, si fas est, uti aduersa eius per te tecta, Terentius
tacitaque apud omnes sint, we both desire you on her be half, if it may be
by any means possible, that by your polycy her mysfortune may be keuered, and
from al men kept secret. Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lie to one. Apud nos
imperium tuum est, we remember your commandment. Salust.
Apud animum meum statuo, I determyne in my mind. Apud forum, In the market,
apud aedes, In the house. apud horcum, in hell. Cic. in off.
Apud quem, in whose presence. Apud maiores nostros, In the time of our
forefathers. Terent.
Apud se non est, he is out of his wit, or he is not in his right mind. Vix
sum apud me, ita animus co^motus est metu, spe, gaudio. mirando hoc tanto, tam
repentino bono: I am well nyghe out of my wit, my mind is so vexed with
fear, hope and joy, with this good chance, which is so wonderful, so
great, and so sodaynely happened. Apud te sis, think what thou haste to do,
remember thy self. Apud ignem, by the fire. apud aquam, Salust.
apud quem, by whom, apud eum, by him. Apud te exemplum experiendi ^abes,
Plautus.
noneges foria: ye have the experience at home, ye need not to seek for it
abroad. Apulia, a countraye in Italy, marchynge on the sea called Hadriaticum.
Apus, odis, a bird like a swallowe, but he has larger wings, and is most
commonly about the sea cost a where always he either flies or houereth in the
air, and bredeth in a rock. Apyrena, sweet pomegranates. Apyrotus, a stone
that no fire may damage, or deface.
A ANTE Q.
AQuaelicium, rain water used in medicine. Aquaintercus, cutis, water which
runs between the skin and the flesh, the dropesy. Aquarioli, boys
which do attend upon common harlottes. Aquarius, one of the.xii. signs.
Aquarius, a, um, partaynynge to water, as aquarius sulcus, a forow, by the
which water is drayned. Aquifolia, a wild medlar, Vide The^ ophrastu^.
or a tree like a wild medlar. Aquilegium, a gourde of water, which comes of
rain. Aquileia, a city in Italye, in the countreye whereof the people are
called Carni. Aquula, a little water.
A ANTE R.
ARabarches, a lord of Arabi^. Arabia, a great country ioynyng to Judea and
Siria, Araby. Araba, a^abi^, a man or woman of Araby. Arachue, the name of a
woman, which first invented spynnyng of lynnen, and making of nets. it is
also taken for lynnen yarne, or the woufe. Arachneus, a little beast, which
gothe a soft pace. Arachnion, fine threde. Arachosia, a country in Asia.
Araciae ficus, fygges broad and white, which do grow on a little stalk.
Aracynthus, a mountain in Greece, in the countray called Aetolia. Araneolus, a
young or little spyder. Araris, (...) arar, a river in France, which runs
out of the countray of Languedocke by Barbone and Burgoyn, into the river of
Rone. Ararus, a river of Scithis, why he r^^^^oth through the realms of
Armeny. Arath, a countraye in A^^eny wonderful fertyle. Aratro, a^^, ari, to
ploughe eftsoon land that is sown, to make the ground fat. Araxis, a
river in Armeny, where it is supposed, that the arch of Noyabode, when the
stodde ceased. Arbea, a city in Judea, where Adam and other three patriarchs
were buried. Arboses, old writers used for Arbos, Arcadia, a countray in
Greece, in the part called Peloponesus, now Morea. Arcadicus, ca, cum, of
Arcadia. Arcas, ca^is, one of the sons of Jupiter. it is also a man or woman
of Arcadia. Arcatus, ta, tum, bent like a bow. Arce^^laus, a philosopher,
which affirmid by Sophemes, that he nor none other knew any thing. Arcessere,
to purchase or get a thing. Archarius, a treasorer, or coferer. Archidamus,
a noble man of Sparta, who being demanded how much money would serve to the
war of Peloponesus, answered, saying, that war sought for no certaynty.
Archigenes, the name of a famous physician. it is also he that would be taken
for the wisest of his kynne. Archigr^mateus, a chancellor or chyefe
secretary. Archimedes, was a geometricion of Siracasts, in S^eile, which
invented a sphere of glass, in the which all the mo^sons of heaven were
plainly perceived. he made also a done of wood, which contained such an
equal poyse, that it would hang in the air. Archyias, a noble philosopher of
the city of Tarentum in Italy, which was of the sect of Pythagoras, and was a
great friend unto (...). Archox, was the chief dignity in Athenes. Archin^^aus,
the master or chyefe of the players. Architectoniae, (...) idem quod
archirectura. Archon^^^, certain hare^^kes, which affirmed that the universal
state of things was not made by god, that by princi^, and they al ^o denied
the resurrection of the body. Arcirna, a little unto, a whalebarowe.
Arconitum, wishynge called Arcenyke. Arctophylax, a certain figure of sterres,
following Charles wayne. Arctos, a figure of sterres called Charles wayne. also
Vrsa mayor. Arctous, and arcticus, ca, cum, of the north. Arcturus, a sterre
which is at the tail of that, which is called arctos, or vrsa mayor. Arcuor,
ari, to be made bent like a bow, Liuius. Plinius. Ouidius in Metamor. 12.
or to be vaulted. Arcatus, ta, tum, idem. Ardeates, people of the city of
Ardea. Ardeola, an hernesewe. Ardere cupiditare, to couete ardently. Ardere
itacundia, to be diflamid with anger. Ardere maximo flagi^tio, to have done, or
to be in^^med of a myscheuous deed. Plautus.
Ardere, to shine. Tyrioque ardebat murice laena, His mantell did shine of
fine purple of Tire. Ardens, burning, ardent, fervent in doing. Ardum, old
writters vsid for arduum. Arelate, a city in France, callid Orleance.
Arenarius, a, u^, pertaining to a fighting place. Areopagitae, were Judges,
which sat in a place by Athenes, and judged causes of murder, and weighty
things concerning the common weal. Areopagus, Marces town, where the said
judges did sytte in judgment. Areopolis, a cite in Araby, callid also Moab
Areopolitae, the inhabita^tes of Areopolis. Arete, in latin virtus, in
english virtue. It was also the name of the wife of Alcinous king of Phoeacis,
of whom Homere writes in Odyssea. Arethyssa and Aretliusa, a river in the
great Armenye. Arethusa, the companion of Diana. it is also the name of a
fountain in Sicile, and of diverse other. Arerium, a city in Tuscan^.
Aretinus, a, um, of that city. Arferis, wine or water offered to the infernal
gods, or rather deuyls. Argentarius co^me^^us, prouisyon of money. Argentari^
cura, care for money^. Plautus.
Arge^tariae illecebre, things getting money Argentaria mopia, lack of money.
Argentaria, a bank of exchange. Argentum uiuum, quycke silver. Argesses, the
western wind. Argeus, a, um, of the city of Argos. Arg^^ plurali, a city in
Laconia. Argiletum, the sepulcher of Argus. it is also a place to here posters
clay is dygged. it was also a street in Rome, where the book sellers ^^^^lled.
Arg^^^^, book sellers dwelling in the said street called argilerum. Argimyssy,
three little isles in Asia, S. ra. li. 13.
by the isles of Mitelenae, and Lesbus. Argis, at the city of Argos. Argo, the
ship wherein Jason and his company sailed in to Colchos, to win the f^y^e
of gold. Argolicus, ca, cum, of Argos. Argonautae, were the noble men, which
accompanied Jason unto Colchos. Argos, singulari: Argi plurali, a city not far
from Athenes, a another in Achara. it is also a countray, part of Greece.
Plautus.
Arguere, alique^ pecuniae interuersae, to accuse one for stealing of money.
Arguta diuisio, a subtle division. Argutu^ caput, a sharp or pikyd hedde like
a sugar lofe. Argyranche, the silver sykenesse. Argyraspidae, men bearyng
shildes of silver Argytitis, the spume or foam of silver. A^^adne, a lady, the
wife of Theseus, whom he forsook, notwithstanding that she had sauyd his
life. Aricia, a city in Italy. Aricinum noemus, a wood by the said city where
Numa king of Romans feigned to speak with Aegeria the fayry. Plautus.
Aricinus lacus, a brook by Aricia. Aridus homo, a dry fellow, of whom no
thing may be gotten: some do call him, a pelt, Plautus.
or a pynchebeke. Arimaspi, people in the north part of Europa which have but
one eye, and that is in their sorched, which do fight contynually with
^^^phons. Ariminu^, a city in Italy. Arimphaei, people in the north part of
Asia, which all though that they have only woods for their dwelling, and
only beryes for their sustynance, yet keep they justice and peace among them
selves, and be temperate of manners. Herodotus. Ge^^us. Plinius.
Arinca, a corn called Rye. Arion, a famous harper, whom the maryners would
have thrown into the sea, for to have his money: but he desyryng them to let
him play a song on his harp or he dyed, afterward lepte into the water, but
a dolphyn receyuyng him on his back, and brought him to land a live.
Aristathea, the malowe with the greatlese. Aristarchus, a famous gra^marien,
which corrected the books of Homere, tryeng out what verses were his, and
what verses were counterfayt. Therefore they use to call him Aristarchus, that
is a sharp co^rectour of other men's works. Aristides, a noble man of
Athenes, who for his plain and just. dealing, as well in deeds as in words,
had the surname given him, Ryghtuous, or Just: He that reads this man's
life, in the lives of Plutarche, shall think him before all other to be
followed by a cou^saylour or governor under a prince. Aristippus, a
philosopher, which first did put the principal good thing in the pleasant
mocions of the mind: the pryncipall ill thing, in gryefe. Aristocratia, the
form of governance of a weal public, where they do rule, which are of
most virtue. Aristolochia, an herb, whereof be two kyndestone is called long,
the other round. The round has leaves in facion like yuy, but somewhat rounder,
wherein is a sharp and soft odoure, the flower white like a little bonet upon a red knoppe, the roots are round and many. The long Aristolochia, has
longer leaves, small branches, and a purple flower, which stynketh: and when it
spryngeth, it is of the facyon of a pear, the rote thereof is long, and of the
greatness of a man's fyngar: both of them do bear beryes like to capers,
within of box color, which are bitter and stynkynge. Aristomenes, a man of
Messene, which was called Iustissimus, most just. This man, when he was
dead, was founden to have his heart all heary. Aristophanes, a famous poet,
which wrate Comedies, wherein he tau^ted them, whom he did not favor: all be
it he was very eloquent, and much mirth is in his works Aristophoru^, a
disshe, wherein meat is borne to dinner. Aristoteles, a philosopher, of whom
Quintylyane writes in this wise: whatte say you by Aristotle, whom I wot
not, whither I may judge more excellent in knowledge of things, or in
abundaunce of writing, or in swetnesse of eloquence, or in sharpness of
wit, or else in diuersyte of works. Notwithstanding he was little of
personage, crook backed, ill shapen, and stuttynge. Ariuido, drythe, or
dryenesse. Arma coquinaria, vtensyles of the kechyn* Arm^n^^, a royalme in
Asia, lyeng between the two great mountains, Taurus and Caucasus, and
stretches from Cappadocia to the sea called Caspium. Armeniacum pomum, a pome
citron, or a Eitton, which is like an orange, but that he is somewhat in
length. Arme^^a^iu^, the keeper of an a^^^ry: sometime Esqui^^ de Esquyry.
Armille, an instrument of falshode or craft. Armilustrum, was a festiual day,
in the which the Romans did sacr^^es armed, and trompettes did blow bluddy
soundes. also the place wherein such sacrifyce was made. Palladus. Columel.
Armocea, a wild radyshe. Armoradum, the tendrels or young stalks of wild
radyshe. Josephus.
Armon, a river that comes from the hills of Arabye, and dyuydeth Moabiride
from Amoni^ide. Arnoglossa, an herb callid broad Plantain or waybred. Aroma,
atis, pleasant savor, also spyce. Aromatites, a precious stone, which has
the savor of Mirre. Aromatorius, and aromatopola, he that sells things
having sweet savor. Aros, an herb, called wake Robyn. It is called of some
Serpentaria minor, because it has leaue^ like to Dragons, but brother, and
having black spots, it grows much about hedges. Arpinum, an ancient
town in Italye, famous and noble by the birth of Plautus, Tulli, and Marius.
Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum. Arquires, old writers used for an arche^.
Arquus, arqui, the raynbowe. Arrideo, ere, to smyle on one. also to like or
seem pleasant. Plaut
Aedes mihi arridebant, The house lyked me well. Terentius.
Arrige aures, lay to thyn ears, or give an care to that which is spoken.
Salust.
Arrexit animos, it advanced their courage. Arrecta^ii parietes, walls made
with timber and parget, to divide chambers. Arripere se for as, to get him
out of the ^^otes. Plautus.
Arripere sermon^, to take him at his word. Arripere maledictum, to take heed
of an ill report. Cicero.
Quare cum ista sis auth^ri^^^^non debes Marce arripere male dictum (...), aut
ex scurrarum aliquo, conuitio, Wherefore in as much as ye are in this
authority, or of this estimation, ye ought not Maro, to take heed of an ill
word spoken a ^^^de, or of the rebuke of a raylynge (...)* The. est. de claris
gra^.
Arripere conditionem, to take the offer. Arrugia, a Conen, Ars parasitica, the
feate of flatterye. Ar^^^es, was the several name of the kings of Parthia.
Aristotel.
(...), beast, which is both male and female as some do say that a (...) is
one year male, (...) other year female. Arraba, a measure of the Egyptian^
contaynynge (...) and.xii. Romayn mesures, called Sextarii. Artaxa^^, a city
in (...). Artaxerxes, the name of diverse kings of Persia, of the which one of
them called Artaxerxes with the long hand, vse^ to say, that it was much
more kingly to give, than to take. Artemisia, was the name of a noble princess
which was the wife to Mans^lus, king of Caria, who was of a notable
chastity, and in love toward her husband so excelled, that when he was dead,
she caused his heart to be dried in a vesselle of gold into pou^er, and by
little and little drank it up saying, That their two hearts should never
depart a sonder, and that she thought, that there might be made no worthy
sepulcher for it, but her own body. Natwithsta^dynge she made for his body
such a sepulcher, that for the excellents wark^manshyp that was in it, also
the beauty, and costlynesse, it was taken for one of the meruayles of the
world, and for the notable saame thereof, all sumptuous and great sepulchers
were afterward callydde Mausole^. She found also an herb called Artemisia,
M^gwort, or Motherwort in english, of great virtue in women's diseases.
Artemisius, the month of May among the Macedonians. also a hill in Arcadia.
Artemon, monis, a trouble, whereby ropes do run. It may also be taken for any
instrument, which has troukles. Artitu^, well instructed in sciences.
Art^^^rica pas^io, called also Morbus articularis, the joint syckenesse, is
thus divided into Coxendix, called Sciatich, which is in the ^uckle bone,
Podagra, the gout of the legs and fete, and Chiragra, Galenus. Plautus.
the gout of the fyngers. Ar^^ue^^is, ^dem. Articularius, he that has the
gout. Articulate, articulately, as when one does express every syllable.
Arth^^^^^^, ^am do suppose it to be that herb and flower, which is called
Prym^^ose. Artocrea, may be called a pastye or pie, with flesh or fyshe
bakes. Artolag^^^^^, ^y^e cake bread. Plautus.
Artop^a, a bakynge pan, wherein they brake tarte^^ or other, things, made
of fine paste. Some take (...) vesselle to (...). Artoptestie, tartes or cake
shaken in a pan (...), browed bread, or breadde (...) wheat. Arto^^^^^^,
people, which did^^ offer unto god (...) and these. Aruales fratres, were
supposed to be the foster brethren of Romulus, to whom he gave the dignity of
priesthode, to make sacrifice for growing and increace of corn, and
preservation of the corn feldes. Aruisium, an hill on the sea cost of the i will
called Chium, where grows the wynes called Aruisia vina. Arunca, a town in
Italy. Aruncus, the bearde of a got.
A ANTE S.
ASarum, an herb, whose leaves are like unto yuie, but they be less and
rou^der, and has a good savor, the flower is purple, like to the flower of
henbane, but it sauoreth swetely, and grows between the leaves by the root,
the stalk is edged, and somewhat roughe, the roots ar small, crooked, and like
to grass, full of knottes: it is commonly callid Asarabaccha, some call it
wild Spikenarde. Asarotum, pauynge tile with pictures enelyd, which may not be
swept with a besom, but the dust and other thing must be swept with a wynge and
gathered up. Ascalon, a city in Palestina. Ascaloniae, a kind of onyons called
scalions. Ascanius, the son of Eneas. Asci^ae, Arabians. Asclep^ades, the
name of a famous physician. Alsoo of a philosopher, which being blind, was
demanded in skorne, what his blyndnes did profit him, and he answered, that he
had the more company by one boy that did lead him. Ascopera, a bag of
lether. Ascra, a city in Boeotia, where Hesiodus the poet was borne.
Ascriptus, ta, tum, inrollyd. Ascripti milites, sowldiours, whose names are
regystred or entered with other. Ascriptiuus, idem quod ascriptius, he that is
regystred with other. Asellus, a little or young ass. also the name of a see
fyshe, called an haddocke. Asianus, a, um, of Asia. Asiaticus, a surname given
to oone of the Scipyons, because that he subdewed the less Asia. Asilus, a
great fly, which byteth beasts, and is called a horse fly. Asion, an owl,
which has feathers on every side of her heed like unto ears. Asiortum, a
kind of spyders, with white strakes, of whom if that one be stunge, his knees
shall bow and wax faint. Asomatos, vnpalpable, or that ca^ not be felt
Asopus, a river in Achaia. Asotia, ryotte. Asotus, ryottous. Aspalathus, a
thorn growing in the east parts of the world, the rynde whereof is somewhat
read, and within, the wodde is of a sad purple, and smellith very sweet, and
therefore is used in parfumes. Asparagus, an herb called of common apotycaries
Sparagus, in english Sperage. Aspello, aspuli, aspellere, Plautus*
to drive away from one. Asperum uinum, a roughe wine. Asper numus, money new
coined. Aspersus infamia, stained with dishonor. Cicero*
Aspergere comitatem seueritate, to myxt famyliaritie and gravity together.
Asphaltum, a water in Syria, wherein nothing that has life may be drowned. It
is called Mare mortuu^, the deed see. It is supposed, that in that place stood
the cities of Sodoma. It is also a certain lyme myxte with brymstone, which
being ones hette, may never be extinete. Asphodelus, an herb called daffadyll.
Aspidisca, a little tergate or shield. Aspilates, a stone like to silver.
Assae, dry stones. Assatura, roasted meat. Assectator, a companyon. Assentio,
to perceive. Plaut.
Sed assentio aperiti fores, quae absorbent quicquid uenit infra pessulos, But
I perceive the doors are opened, which deuouren all that commethe within the
boltes. Assentatio, flatterye. Assentatiuncula, a flattering tale. Assequor,
assequi, to render as much to one as he has deserved. Cicero
Nullam partem uidear tuorum meritorum assecutus, It may not be found in me,
that I have rendered to you any thing after your merytes, or have done so
much for you, as ye have deserved. Assequi nomen, to get renoume. Plinius.
Asser, asseris, a pole. Asserculi, and assiculi, little bourdes or lathes.
Asserere aliquem manu, to set one at liberty or to manumyse a bondsman.
Asserere in seruitu^em, Plautus.
to bring in bondage or seruytude. Asserere ab iniuria, to defend from wrong
or danger. Asserere se studijs, to leave al other besynes, to apply study.
Assertor, totis, he that sets one at liberty, or defends him from
bondage. Assidela, a bishops seat or chair, wherein he sytteth when he
ministers. Assidere literis, to be always in study of letters. Assiduus
scriptor, an author approved, whose sentence* is holden for certain and true.
Assiduitas, continuance in a thing. Cicero.
Assidue, and assidu^, aduerbes, which do signify continually. Assigna^a
fame, to apply him self to get renoume. Assimilo, are, to do a thing like to
an another man, to (...) or follow one. Assimilis, le, like or semblable.
Assimiliter, al semblably. Plautus.
Assimulo, are, to feign to do a thing, and not to do it. Assipondium, a
pound weight. Assisia, one of ye names of Pallas or Minerua Assoleo, lere, to
be wont or accustomed. Assono, are, to sown or make a sown. Assauoce cantare,
to sing without an Instrument. Varro. Cato.
Assuefactio, a bryngyng of one in custom. Assuesco, scere, to use of a
custom. Assumptio, a taking. Assure, a city in Judea, builded by king
Solomon. Assus, a, um, tosted or roasted. Assyria, a region in Asia, called now
Syria, in english Surrye, having on the east Indie, on the west the river of
Tigris, on the south Medi or Mede, on the north the mount of Caucasus. Asta,
depart not, stand still. Astachus, a kind of crabbes of the sea. Astare, to
stand by, or to be present. Astare in genua, to knele. Astare aduocatus, to
assyst or speak for one. Plautus.
Astaroth, an old city sometime belonging to Og, king of Basan, in the which
dwelled gyantes, and afterward it came to the lotte of the tribe of Manasses,
and is in the countray of Bethania. There be two castelles of that name nine
miles a sonder, between the city of Adara and Abella. Asterte, a goddess of
the Sirians, to whom Solomon to please his concubyne, raised an Altar.
Asterias, a kind of herons, I suppose that it is an Egrette. Asthma, matis, a
sycknesse, where one may not fetch his wind but with much difficulty, with
weasynge of the breast: which happens by straytenesse of the pypes stopped
with toughe fleume, or of sum impostume grown in the pypes. Astomi, people
of Indie, having no mo^thes, which lyuen by air and smelle of sweet things.
Astrea, sygnyfieth Justice. Astringere fidem, to promise. Astringere se furti,
to yield or make him self gyltie of felony. Astroites, a stone like to a
^^shes eye. Astrologus, an astrologie^, he that studieth the speculation of
astronomy. Astronomus, an astronomer. Plinius.
Astruer^ digni^ati alterius, to augment an other man's dignity or honor.
Astruitur his, is put for more over, Plinius in Epistolis.
or furthermore. Astur, any thing of Asturia, a cite in Spain. Astur equus, a
spanysshe horse, called a genette. Astur co^es, idem. Astura, a town and river
in Italy. Asturia^, a city in Spain. Asuestinum, lynnen threede, which may
not be burned. Asymbolus, he that comes to a bankette, without appoyntement,
an vnboden geste.
A ANTE T.
AT* yet, or at the least way* Cicero pro Flacco.
Si non propiquitatis, at aetatis suae, si no^ hominis, at humanitatis rationem
haberet, All though he had not consideration of kindred, yet should he have had
regard to his age, and though he caryd not for the person, yet should he have
had respect unto good humanity. Arabulus, a fervent wind, which when it
blows in the realm of Naples, pestylence immediately insueth. Atalanta, a
maiden, which was daughter to the king of Argiues, which keeping perpetual
virginity, haunted forestes and woods, and did slay wild beasts, and was
the first that wounded the greatte bore of Calidonia. Attalus, a king in the
less Asia, of marvelous richesse, of whom all magnifyke and stately things,
are called Attalica. Attamen, but yet. Atechna, things vnkunningly handled.
Ategia, a bouthe, or place made up with trees and boughs. Ater panis, broune
breadde. Atharus, a bird with four legs, having the longest behind.
Athanatos, immortal. Athenae, narum, the city of Athenes. Athenaeum, a place
at Rome, where all scyences were radde. Athenodorus, a philosopher, which
left with Octauian the Emperor this lesson, wha^ he took his leave of him:
Roble prince, wha^ thou art attached with wrath, neither say nor do any thing,
until thou have by thy self perused the.xxiiii. greek letters, and remembered
the order of places where they stand, to thi^^ent that the passion of ire, by
withdrawyng the mind to an another thing, might languishe and vanishe away.
Atheromata, little pousshes in the neck, and under the arms. Atheos, he that
does not believe that god is. Athesis, a river in Italy that passes by the
cities of Verona and Tridentum called Trente. Athos, a hylle in Macedonia, of a
wonderfulle heyght. Athrax, a city in Thessalia. Athracia ars, art magike.
Atlanticae insulae, the yles called now fortunatae, where fruit and herbs
do grow without labor. Atlantides, the daughters of Atlas, alsoo certain
sterres. Atlas, Atlantis, the name of a king, which first taught the course
of sterres, and therefore it was feigned of him, that he sustained heaven on his
sholders. It is also the name of a hylle in Barbaria, high and small, that it
perceth the clouds. Atlantes, Moors dwelling about that hyl. Atocion, a
medicyne, which makes a woman to be barrayne. Atocius, a certain spyder which
is heary. Plautus in (...)*
Atque, than. Illi sunt alio ingenio atque tu, They be of an another manner of
wit than thou art. Non Appollinis magis verum, atque hoc responsum est,
Appolloes answer was never truer than this is. Plautus in (...).
Atque adeo, and that more is. Esurio hercle, atque adeo nunc haud parum sirio,
I am hungrye, and that more is, I am a thyrste not a lyttelle. Atque eccum, but
lo where he is. Atractilis, an herb, having a long stem and rough, with
long leaves growyng by the top, the residue without leaves, the top full of
pricks, and a yelowe flower, women were wont to make spyndelles of the
stalks thereof. Atricapilla, a bird, with black feathers on the crown of his
heed. Atrifer, a rushe that bears a black sede. Atriolum, a little ynner
court. Atriplex, an herb called orache or arage. Atritas, blackenesse.
Atrophia, an affecte or discra^ye, wherein the body can not be nouryshed with
any thing but consumes with leanness. Atrophus, he that has that affecte.
Atropos, one of the fatal ladies, which is feigned to break the threde of
life: it is sometime put for necessitte of death. Atta, is he that gothe so on
the soles of his fete, that he swepeth the ground, rather than walks.
Attagen, and attagena, a byrd, which is found in Ionia, and is very delycate,
and has feathers of sundry colors, and being at large, is always singing o^
chatteringe, when he is taken, he makes no noise, nor seems to have any
voic^. They are deceived that take him for a woodcocke. Attalica toga, a gown
of tynsette. Attelanae fabulae, were comedies or enterludes, which only were
^iestes and merry scoffs, or bourdynges. Attelae, a city nygh to Naples.
Attentu^, he that hereth diligently, attentive. Attentus ad rem, careful to
get goods. Attero, triui, terere, to rub against a thing. Atterere famam,
Salust.
Post ubi ^orum famam atque pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia imperabat, After
that he had made them consume their good name and honesty, he set them in
hand with other greatter attemptatis. Attica, a countray in Greece, wherein
stood the famous city of Athenes, the nourice of all scyences. Attice, an
aduerbe, sygnifyenge in the eloquence of speech of Athenes. Atticismus, the
form of that speech. Atticisso, sere, to speak like an Atheniense. Attigo,
idem quod attingo. Attilus, a fysshe, which is in the river of Po, very great,
and with long rest waxes meruaylous fat, which Franciscus Philelphus
supposed to be a sturion, but that is denied by Iouius, which affirms that he
is greatter than a sturion, and unlike to him in form, taste, and price.
Attingit me sanguine, he is nigh of my blod. Plinius.
Attingere senectam, to come to great age. Attingere parts naturae, Vergili.
in Geor.
to com to the knowledge of natural causes. Attingere studia, to savor of
letters. Attingitur, it is night. Attondeo, attondere, to clyppe or sheare a
thing nygh. Attondere arbores, to shrede trees. Plautus.
Attondere auro, to rydde one of his money, to take all away from him.
Attributus, ta, tum, attributed. Attributa pecunia, money delivered to be
given to an another manne.
A ANTE V.
AVarus, coueytous of money. Aucupare sermonem alicuius, to harken or take heed
what one says. Audin tu? Herest thou not? Audire been, to have a good name.
Audire male, to have an ill name. Audiens dicto, ready to do that he is
commanded, at commandment, obedyent* Audienciam facere, to command or make
silence, as they do wihche are cryers in places of justice. Auello, auulsi,
auellere, to pluck away by vyolence. Auellere se a meretrice, to withdraw
him, or go away by force from an harlotts. Auenaria, a kind of grassehoppes,
which appers not until the corn be ripe. Auentinus, an hylle at Rome. Auerni,
people in France, callid Auergnes. Auernus, a look in Campani^, which was
dedicate unto Pluto king of Hell, where ^^on supposed, that there was an entry
or passage to hell. Auersus, a, um, strange, unacquainted. Vergilius.
Auertere ab aliquo loco, to let or prohybyte one to enter. Aueruncus, god
which puts away all euylle. Aufero, abstuli, auferre, to take away.
Terentius
Aufer te hinc, get the hense. Aufer te domum, get the home. Plautus.
Auferas iurgium, leave thy chiding. Auferre litem, to get by action or
process of the law. Maiore mulcta mulcta^, quam li^em auferunt, Plautus in
Ruden.
He makes them to spend more than they may win by their suite. Aufer nugas,
leave these trifelynges, leave your mockes. Auferre petitionem, to have the
thing that he asks. Plautus in Cur.
Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs te id quod peto, Even as ye will, so that I
may have the thing that I ask or demand. Auferre pignora, to take a
dystresse or gage. Plautus in Asina.
Auferre tacita, to make oone to confess a thing secret. Suspendas potius
me, quam tacita haec auferas, Thou may rather hang me, thanne make me
confess that secret. Terentius in Andria.
Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without punyshement. Ergo pretium ob stultitiam
fero, sed inultu^ nunquam auferet, I am well rewarded for my folyshenes, but
yet he shall not go quyte away without punyshement. Cic. Tusc. quest. 3. Ennius.
Auferri sibi, to be vexed in mind, or from him self. Augifico, for augeo.
Augere auxilia, to make a new host, after a discomfyte. Auguratus, the
dygnitie of them, which were Augures, of whom was a college in Rome: as
there be now of priests in Cathedral churches. Augurium, dyuination or
telling before of things, which shall happen, specially by the flight, or
voices of birds. Cicero ^ L. Murena
Auguror, ari, idem quod Augure. Auguror opinio^e, I suppose in mine opinyon
Augusta Caesaria, a city in Spain, upon the river of Iberus. Augusta
emerita, a city in Portugal. Augusta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beautyfulle
city in Germanye, now callydde Awsbourghe. Augustalis, ale, the Emperors
Palayce or Pauyllyon. Augustus, a place consecrate, full of majesty and
honor, it is also a name of addicion given to emperors. Auiatius, and
auiaria, he and she that has the charge of the keeping of pultrie or
wildfoule. It may also be used for a pultar, which sells pultrie. Auiarium,
the place where pultrie is kept. also busshes set for birds to haunte and
sytte in. Auide, affectuously, couetously, ardantly. with great desire. Auidis
moribus, of an exceeding couaytous appetite. Auiditas, desire of a thing,
couetyse, ardant affection. Auidus cibi, hungrye. Terent.
Auilla, a lamb lately yeaned. Auius, uia, uium, Plaut. Vergil. Salust.
whereby there is no passage or way. Auius, he that gothe out of the way. Aula,
of old writers was vsid for olla, a pot. Aulula, a little pot, whereof comes
Aulularia, a comedye of Plautus, wherein is declared the covetous mind of one,
which hid his money in a pot, thynkyng that no man knew hit but him
self, and yet was he deceived of it. Aulicotia, boiled meat. Aulicus, a
courtyar. Aulicus, ca, cum, of the court, Sueton, in Nerone.
as aulicus apparatus, courtely apparayle, but most proprely the apparayle of
pryncis. Aulis, lidis, a lyttelle countraye or shyre in Boeotia in Greece. It
was also a great city and haven, where the princis of Greece assemblyd, and
conspired together the destruction of Troy. Aulon, the name of a Mountain and
city in Calabria, where growethe excellent good wynes. Alsoo of two other
cities, the oone in Macedonia, the other in Cilicia. Aul^, shaulmes or waytes.
Auleticus, he that plays best on a sha^me or wait. Auocare animum, to
withdraw the mind from a thing. Auocamentum, passetyme, recreation, that
withdraws the mind from heaviness or melancholy. Aurata, a fyshe of the sea,
which I suppose to be a gylte heed, for he has in his foreheed a thing
congelate, which in the water shyneth like gold, and also has a set of t^the
like check t^the, wherewith he has been hard of fyshers in the night to
crushe cockyls, and such other little shell fyshes, whereon he fedeth.
Terentius in Andria.
Aures arrigere, to lift up the ears, to here attentyuely. Cicero in Salust
Cicero pro G^^la^co. Plautus in Tr^nu^mo. Plautus in Mi^^. T^^b^nius Cicer^.
Cic. V^lu^.
Aures calent illius criminibus, mine cares glowe or burn to here of his
mischeuous acts. Aures hebetes haber, he is dulle in berynge, or he lysteth
not to here. Auribus accipere, to have herd. Auribus cap^re spolia, to harken
and bear away our sacrefies, or secret counsel. Auribus dare, to flatter,
to speak that which shall content a man's ear. Auribus aequissimis alicuius
uti, to be favorably hard of one. Apulcius.
Auribus prouehi, to be carried by the ears, it is proprely used, where we will
declare, that being in journey with one, we delight so much in his
communication, that we feel no labor or pain by going or riding. So may we
say, auribus prouehimur, in hering of him our pains are relieved, or in heryng
him talk, our journey seems short, or is abbreuiate. Auricularius, a, um,
pertaining to the ears. Auricularis confessio, confession made secretly, as
priestis do here it. Auricularis* re, idem. Aurigo, a sickness callid the yelow
iaundise. Aurilegus, he that has stolen gold. Auripigmentum. Aurum
coronatium, was gold gathered of the people, to make crowns, to send to
Emperors, after their vyctories. Plaut. in Mercator.
Auscultabitur, he will do as ye bid him. Auscultare alicui, to obey one, or
be at his commandment. Auscultare inter sese, to whyster oone in an nothers
^are. Ausim, sis, sit, is put for audeam, as, at. Ausitis, the contray callid
also Hus, where Job dwelled. Ausonium, Italy. Ausones, were the ancient kings
of Italy. Ausum, and ausus, a presumptuous enterprise. Plautus in Peria.
Auspicium liquidu^, a manifest sign or token. Auspicia optima, tokens of good
luck. Plautus in Aui.
Auspicio malo, with ylle luck, or in an ylle time. Nae ego edepol ueni huc
auspicio malo: I camme hither in an ylle time, or, An unhappy or unlucky
fortune brought me byther. Auspico, are, to seek for a thing by diuinatio^.
Auspicatus, ta, tum, honorably enterprised. Quintilia.
Auspicato, happyly. Austrum, the spoke of a whele. Aut certe, or at the least.
Quo enim vno uincebamur a victa Graetia, id aut illi ereptum est, Ci. in Bru.
aut certe nobis communicatum, That oone thing, wherein we gave place to Greece,
which is vanquyshed by us, either it is taken clean away from them, or at the
lest we be therein equal unto them. Autenticus, ca, cum, of authority.
Autocthones, people which began in the countray that they do inhabyte,
which name was given to them of Athenes. Autodidactus, he that lernith without
a master by his own study. Automata. things without life, which seem to move
by them selfs: as it may appear in old horologes, and images, which by vices
do move. Autopyros, bread of clean wheat without other mixture, saving a
little leven. Author, T^. Liuius, Paulus inreco^sultus. Ci. in Ver. Plautus in
Cur. Terentius in Prolog. Andri. Plautus in poenu.
the first Inuenter or maker of a thing also a reporter of news. also he that
has the custody of one within age. also he that does sell or deliver a thing
on warrantise. also he whom a man follows in doing any thing. Authoritas,
authority, credence, puissance, opinion, judgment, the inioying of possession.
Authoritatem defungi, to deny to have done any thing, or to have been the
cause that it was done. Authoritatem defugere, Terentius Eunucho.
to refuse to do that which he is commanded. Authoritatem interponere, to
command a thing to be done. Authoramentum, wages, or hyre. Authoro, rare, to
bind one by covenant to do service. Authoratus, ta, tum, bounden by
covenant.
A ANTE X.
AXis, an extree of a cart, sometime the hole carte, Sometime it is shyngle,
Iuuenal^^.
wherewith howses are covered in the stead of tyle. Axilla, the armehole.
Axamenta, verses made by the priests of Mars, called Salii, in quycke
tauntynge of all men. Axare, old writers used for nominare, to name or ask.
Axioma, a sentence spoken and proved: as If Plato walks, Plato moves, if it
be day, the son is above the earth. It is put by Tulli for that, which
sophisters do call a proposition, which is a sentence true or falls.
A ANTE Z.
AZymus panis, unleavened breadde. Azanlum, was a well, the water whereof being
drunk, caused men to hate the savor and taste of wine. Azotu^, a city in
Siria.
B ANTE A.
BAAL in the tongue of Siria, signifies lord, and is attrybute to Jupiter.
Babe, an interiection of wondering. Babylon, a great city in Caldey, and
signyfyeth confusion or translation. where was a tower edyfied by Hembroth,
which was in height five miles, and a hundred three score and ten paces,
afterward being enlarged by Semiramis, the wife of Ninus king of Assiria, it
was so great, that it contained in compass three score miles, and the walls
were in the height three hundred fete, and in thyckenes or bredthe three score
and fyftene fete, and had a hundred gates of brass, and there ran through
the middell thereof the noble and most famous river Euphrates, which is oone
of the ryuers, whereof the hedde or spring is in Paradyse. Babylonia, the
countray where the city of Babylon stood. Babylonicus, ca, cum, and
Babylonius, a, um, of Babylon. Babylonica, are clothes wouen with sundry
colors. Baccalia, a kind of bay trees or laurel, but it has larger leaves,
and great plentye of beryes. It is also called Augusta. Baccar, car^s, and
Baccharis, is an herb having a lefe in facyon and greatness between violet
leaves and the herb, which is called Moleyn or longwort, the stalk square,
and somewhat rough, which is in hayght a foot and a half, having a flower like
purple, myxte with white, the root black, but that sauouryth like unto
Cinamome, some do call it Asdrabacca, some our ladies gloves. Bacchari, to do a
thing like a mad man or vexed with spirits. Bacchatim, like a mad man.
Baccaricum, a sweet ointment, made of the root of Asdrabaccha. Bacchius, a,
um, of Bacchus. Baccisera, a tree bearing bearies. Baccula, a little bearye.
Bacillum, a little staff. Bactra, trotum, a contray in Scithis, beyond
Assiria, it is also the name of a city in that countraye. Bactriani, people of
that countray. Bactrianum, a cou^tray wherein were a thousands cities. Badizare,
to goo. Plautus in Asina.
Bagous, in the Persian tongue signyfieth a geldyng, or a man gelded. Bagrada,
a river in Affrike by the city called Vtica, where Att^hus Regulus, and the
host of the Romans, slew a serpent, which was in length one hundred and.xx.
fete. Bahal, the ydoll of Cyre. Balanites, a stone, which is a light grene,
and has a vayn in the myddell like a flame of fire. Balanitis, a kind of
round Chestens or cheste nuttes. Balaustium, the flowers of wild pome
granades. Baleares, two Isles by Spain, whereof the one is now called Maiorca,
the other Minorca. Ballistarium, the place where a great brake ^or slynge is
laid. Balneatorius, a, um, of a bathe. Balneb^um, a little bayne or bathe.
Balito, tare, to blete often. Balsamum, baulme. Bambia, a kind of olyue tree.
Banausus, an artificer that works at ye fire. Banchus, called an haddok.
Baphia, a dyehouse. Baptae, men which had their visages painted. Baptes, a
stoone green, of the color of a frogge. Baptismus, and Baptismum, and
Baptisma, matis, Baptym. Barbala, a little berde. Barba iouis, an herb called
Sing^eene, and grows on tyles. Barba senis, is an herb, which grows among
stones, the leaves whereof be like to long hears. It is also called Barba
petrae, it has a yelowe flower, and the root thereof is bitter. Barbatulus,
he that has a young berde. Barbus, and barbo, a fyshe called a barbyll. Barce,
a city in Libia, also an other city called Ptolomais. Bardesanes, was an
excellent astronomer. Bardiacus, a certain garment. Baris, barides, vel
baridis, a boat in Egypt, wherein they carried ded bodies to burieng. Bariona,
i would, quod filius columbae, the Culuers son. It was the surname of saint
Peter the apostell. Barnacida, a garment that childern did wear. Martialis.
Barrus, a toothe. Quid tibi vis mulier, nigris dignissima barris? What would
thou have woman, that art worthy black tethe? Basan, a countray beyond the
river of Iordane in Judea, which was diuyded to two of the Trybes: which may
be interpreted most fertile and fat. Martialis.
Bascanda, a certain vessel, which came out of England, when it was called
Britayn. Basilca, a city in Germanye. Basilia, an I Will in the north occean
see. Plaut. in capt. Plautus in ^rinu^mo. Plautus in Persa. Plautus in Carcu.
Basilicae edictiones, the kings ordinance or commandments. Basilica
facinora, acts or gestes of kings. Basilica nux, a wall nutte. Basilice
agere, to do a thing royally. Basilicus, a certain chance at dyce.
Basilides, a certain heretic, which affirmed to be.CCClxv. heuens.
Basilidiani, the folowers of Basilides. Bassaris, tidis, a priest of Bacchus.
Bat, is a word that is spoken to one, when we will have him speak no more, as
peace or huysht. Batauia, a countraye in Germanye, called Hollande. Batauus, an
Hollander, or man of Hollande. Batiochus, a little pot, out of the which
wine is poured at the tablel Batrachion, an herb, which I do suppose is that
which is commonly called goldknap, or crowefoote. It is also called of
Democritus Chrisanthemon, for it has a flower as yelowe as gold, and the
leaf is somewhat like unto parcily, but that it is much greatter. Battologia,
idem quod multiloquium, much talk or speech, clatterynge. Josephus.
Batus, is a measure for lycour among the Hebrews, which contained.lxii.
measures of Athenes, called Sextarios, every Sextarius contaynynge.xviii.
ounces, which amounts to four score and.xiii.li. of english galons.
B ANTE D, and E.
BDelium, is a tree growyng in Arabia and Scithia. also a gum coming of the
same tree, like to wax, but clear as gum, within unctuous or fat, very
sweet of savor, when it is rubbed or burned, and bitter in taste. Bebry^ia, a
cou^tray callid the great Phrigia. Bebrytius, a, um, and bebrix, bebricis, of
the countray of great Phrigia. Bebritium, seu Bebriacum, a town in Italye
between Cremona and Verona. Beelphegor, a gapynge ydoll. Beelsephon, lord of
the north, an ydol set up in the places of espiall. Beelsebub, an ydoll called
god of flies. Beemoth, the devil, and signifies a beast. Belbus, a beast
called also Hiena. Belgae, people of Gallia, between the rivers of Ryne, Marne,
and Seyn, and stretchith to the northwest see, in the which are now contained
the countrays of Brabant, Fla^ders, Holland, Ghelder, part of Friseland,
Gulyke, Hennow, Pycardy, part of Champayne, the great forest of ^^dan, the
cities of Acon, Colayn, Triere, Rhein^s. Belial, the devil, which is
interpreted Apostata, without yoke. Bellatula, little sweet heart. Plautus.
Plautus in Ruden.
Belliatus, ta, tum, beautified. Belle, well. Belle se habet, he does or
fares well. Bellerophontes, seu Bellerophon, Note here the malice of hariots.
was the son of Glaucus king of Ephyra, who being a man of much beauty
and prowes was arda^tly beloved of Stenobea, the wife of Pretus king of Ephyra,
next after Glaucus, and when she desired him to commit adultery with her, he
fearing the vengeance of Jupiter god of hospitality, and remembrynge the
frendshyp showed to him by her husband, refused her, and did put her away from
him, which she disdayning, and being in a wood rage, accused him to her
husband, that he had rauyshed her, but he like a sober man would not than slay
him in his own house, but delyueringe to him letters to his wives father, sent
him in to Licia, where he than reigned, who perceiving thereby the mind of
Pretus, encouraged Bellerophon, to distroy the two mo^sters callid Solymos and
Chymera, and sent him thereto that he might be s^ayn under the color of a
valiant enterprise, but he acheuyng it nobly, returned with honor. Bellica,
was a pyllour in the temple of Bellona, called goddess of battle, where they
used, when wars were proclaimed, to cast a Iauelyn. Bellicrepa, a certain
form of daunsynge in harneyse. Bellator equus, a horse of war. Bellatrix,
tricis, a woman valyant in wars. Belligero, rare, to make war. Bellona,
called goddess of battle. Bellis, seu bellium, the white daysye, called of
some the Margarite, in the north it is called a Banwort. It is also a fyshe
with a long beak like a crane, which is called of some a kekehorne.
Bellouaci, people of Beauuosyne in France Cice. Atri.
Bellum merum loquitur, he speaks oonely of war. Belon, the name of a city
and river in Spain. Beluosus, a, um, full of monsters of the sea. Bel^^^tus,
^a, tum, painted or ^erued with great beasts. Belluara ^apetia, Tap^strye
wroughte with great beasts. Belus, the first king of Assiria, father of
Ninus, and is signifies the son, it is also a river in Syria, which has
sand of the nature of glass, which it casts up, also it torneth all
other metal that comes into it, into glass. Bembina, a town by the forest
called Nemaeus. Bembinatus, of that town or wood. Benacus, a great lake in
Lumbardy. Been accipere aliquem, to entreat one well, or entertayne him. Been
acceptus, well entertained. Plautus.
Been agitur, the thing is well done. Been ambulato, god he with the. Been
audire, to be well spoken of. Been conuenire inter cos, they agreed well to
gether. Plinius.
Been cogitare de aliquo, to have a good opinion of one. Plautus in Pseud.
Plautus in Trinum. Plau^
Been curare aetatem, to live pleasantly. Been hercle denuncias, thou tellyst
me good tidings. Benedico, dixi, dicere, to praise, to say well. Benedice, an
aduerbe, signifieng in praising or saying well. Cum illiciebas me ad te blande
et benedice: when thou dyddiste train me unto the with pleasant words and
praisynge of me. Benefacio, cere, to do well. Benefactum, it is well done.
Benefacta, Benefytes, pleasures. Beneficiu^, a benefit, a pleasure, or good
torn Beneficentia, is not only lyberalitie in gyuing of money, or
possessions, or other like things, but also in helping a man with counsel,
solicitation, or other labor. Plautus in Rude. Plautus in Epidic.
Been far gratiam, to do pleasure to one. Been habere, to behave me or him
well. Been hoc habet, this matter comes well to pass. Been longus sermo, a
very long tale. Been magnus, very great. Been mane, very tymely. Been mereri,
to do pleasure to one. Been multi, very many. Been nummatum marsupium, a purse
well stored with money. Been nummatus homo, a well monyed man. Been successit,
it came well to pass. Been ^ale, farewell, a dowe. Been ualere, to be in good
health. Been uerta^t di^, god turn it to good: I pray god bring it well to
pass. Been uiuere, to make good chere. Beneuolens, beneuolent, he that loves
well an another. Benigna terra, a ground that is fertile. Benign, an aduerbe,
which signifies curteysly, graciously, bounteously. Benignitas, curteysie,
lyberalitie, gentylnes. Berecyntus, a mountain and city in Phrigia, where
Cybele, callid the mother of the goddis was chiefly honored. Berecyntia,
callid the mother of goddis. Bersab^, a city in Judea, called also Puteus
iuramenti, the pytte of the oath, where Abraham dwellid, which is the consynes
of the land of behest. Berillus, a stone which is very clear, and somewhat
inclynynge to a grene color. it is not that, which we commonly do call
Berall, in drinking cups, but it is rather that, which we do call
crystal, which being wrought into squares, has in them a glymse of a
light grene. Beta, an herb called Beetes. Bethania, a town two miles from
Jerusalem, on the side of the mount Oliuete. Bethel, a city in Samaria,
where the people dwelled which were called Iebus^i. Bethleem, the city of
Dauyd the prophet, where he was borne and dyed, where alsoo our savior Christ
Jesus was borne: there also dyed Rachel the wife of Jacob the patriarche. it was
assigned to the tribe of Judah, and was distant from Jerusalem.vi. miles, and
was first called Euphrata, and signifies in the hebrewe tongue, the house of
breadde. Bethsaida, or Bethesda, was a great ponde in Jerusalem, wherein the
pristis washed the sheep, which should be sacrifised, and may be interpreted
the house of cattle. It was also the name of a town, where Peter and Phylyp
the apostels were borne. Bethsamis, a city in Galilee, where Christ did many
miracles. Bethsamitae, people of Bethsamis. Bethsura, and Bethsurae, a strong
fortress of the Jews. Baeticatus, he that wears a black or broune garment.
Baeticus, ^a, cum, black or brown. Baetica, a prouynce or countray in Spain,
called now Granado, Baetis, a river in Spain by Granado. Betonica, an herb
called Betayne. Betonica altilis sieve coronaria, I suppose hit to be Gyllofers.
Betphage, a town in Judea, and may be interpreted the house of a mouth, or a
iawe. Betula, a tree, called birche.
B ANTE I.
BIaeon, wheat which is hard to be beaten out of the husks. Bias antis, was
one of the.vii. wise men of Greece, and was governor of the city called
Priene, and was very rigorouse in iutice against ill men, and defended his
contray long against outward hostility: at the last the town being taken,
and the people fleinge away, and carienge with them such treasure as they
had, he went quietly out of the town, leuyng all his substance behind him:
and when he was demanded, why that he only carried nothing with him, he
answered: I carry al with me that is mine own, meaning thereby, that his
wisdom and virtue were his propre goods, al other things were the goods of
fortune, and by her appointed to them that might catch them, but wisdom and
virtue were constante, and might by no man be taken from him. Bibisia,
bybbynge. Biblio, blere, to make a sown as a pot does, when drink is drawn
into it. Bibliographus, a writer of books. Ci in Ve^. act. 3.
Bibitur. Mature ueniunt, discumbitur, fit sermo inter eos, et inuitatio vt
graeco more biberotur, They come at the time appointed, and there was among
them talking and quaftynge, that every man might drink after the Greeks
facion.
B ANTE. L.
Plautus in Trinu^mo.
BLandi loquentulus, a pleasant speaker. Blande, graciousely, amorousely,
flateryngely. Blanditer, idem. Blandicia, flatery, pleasant motion, intysement
by words. Blapsigonia, loss of generation, proprelye in bees. Blatio, tiui,
tire, to speak or talk like a fool, or without any purpose or reason, to babble.
Blatero, ronis, a babbler, he that talks to no purpose. Blattaria, an herb
called Moleyn. Blatteus, a, um, purple. Blitteus, ea, eum, unsavory.
B ANTE O.
BOa, is also a sickness, wherein the body is full of read blysters. Boalia,
plays made for the health of oxen and kyne. Boaria, an herb called a clote or
burre. Boca, uel Bocas, a fyshe, which has his back as it were painted with
sondrye colors, Iouius says and affirms, that he is taken in all costs in
great sculles, not withstanding I do not yet find his name in english.
Boebis, a lake in Thessaly. Bogud, a town in Affrike, alsoo the name of a
king. Bolus, a throw or cast at dyse. also a braught with a net in waters. it
is also a morsel. Bombax, an aduerbe spoken of him, Plautus in pseudolo.
that sets naught by that which is spoken, as one would say, when he is
rebuked of a fault, And what than? or tushe, I care not for that. Bomolochus, a
common scoffar, or he that susteyneth all vyllanie for to get money. It was
also taken for a boy, that stood at the aulters end, to stele away the
candels. Bona caduca, the goods of them that be damned, goods escheted. Bona
dea, was she that some called fatua, or fauna, of whom Varro writes, that in
her life never man did see her but her husband, nor herd her named. Bonae
aedes, a substanciall house. Bona dicere, to report well. Bona fide dicere, to
say truly and plainly. Bona pars, the more part. Bona uerba quaeso, say well
I pray you. Terentius in Andria.
Boni frugi, honest, of good conditions. Bonaria, the calmenes of the sea.
Boreae, Jasper stones. Borsyrites, a kind of olyue, having many boughs,
white and spotted with sa^guine. Bosra, a city of Idumea. Botytillus, a
little cluster of grapes.
B, ANTE R.
BRachicatalecton, where oone syllable lacks at the end of a verse.
Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verse lacking one syllable or mo. Breuiculus, a
little short man. Breuiter, shortly. Breuis, idem. Bryon thalassion, or
Marinum, a thing growing on the rocks, whereon the salt water beats,
somewhat like to moss, and is called of the northern men flank. Bryonia, a
^^lde vine, having read bearies, and the leaves more rough tha^ of a vine.
Britanica, an herb like greatte sorelle, but blacker, thycker, and therewith
mosye, the root black and litell, and in tasting straineth the tongue.
Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus. Bronchosela, a waxinge kernel. Bronteus,
the surname of Jupiter. Brupeo, ere, old writers used for stupeo, stupere, to
be abashed.
B ANTE V.
BVa, the word of young children when they ask for drink, with us they use to
say Bumme. Bubula, Befe. Bubonocele, where the bowell is braste by the share
of a man toward his privy me^bres. Bucea, a thynne husk in a bean within the
hulle. Bucerum paecus, an herd of rother beasts Bucolicu^ carmen, a poem
made of herdme^. Bulbine, nes, scalions. Bullula, a little water bell or
bobill. Buphonum, an herb, whereof if catell eat, they do dye of a grief in
their throat. Buphihalmon, an herb, called also Cotula fetida, and is like to
camomyll, but it growith more upright, maywede. Bupre^tis, a fly like to a
black bytel, but he has longer legs, which if a beast does eat, he
swells, and therewith dies. Burbarus, a fyshe, which by the description of
Paulus Iouius, seems to be a Carp. Burrum, a deep read color. Busicon, a
great fig. Bustuarij, sword players, which went before the ded corpsts when
they were borne to be burned. Buteo, onis, a bus^arde. Buttubata, a trifle of
no value. Buxeus, a, um, of box.
C, ANTE A.
C BY HIM SELF, sygnyfyeth Caius, the propre name of a man, and therefore is
joined with an other name, as C. lul. Caesar, Caius Julius Caesar. Ci.
signifies Claudius. Cabala, a tradicion of the Jews, left among them by
Moses without writing, but from the father to his son, and so continually in
their generation, wherein is included the understanding as well of the
secrets of nature, as the mysticalle sense, included in the words of holy
scripture. Cabus, a ^^^dre of the hebrews, containing two sextatios and a
half.vi. ounces, and.iii. drammes of Athenes measure, which amounts to four
pound, three ounces, and three drammes. Cacaturio, to desire to go to the stole.
Cachexia, a spyce of a consumption, which proceeds of an ill disposition of
the body, and the body and vysage is therewith very lean, and ill colored.
Cacia, viciositie, or that which we commonly do call, a fault in a thing.
Cacoblepa, a little beast in Egypt in the banks of the river of Nilus,
which has such venenosytie in his eien, that who that beholds them, dies
incontinent. Cacoetlie, a vice or sore engendered in oone from his infancy,
hard to be recovered or caryd. Cacologia, ylle speech. Cacologus, an ill
speaker. Cacophaton, is an ill form of speaking, or where the words do not
sown well and conveniently. Cacoxelus, an ill follower or imitatour. Cacus, a
gyaunte, whom Hercules slew in Italye. Cadiscus, a vesselle, wherinto are
gathered scedules, bills, or lottes, where things at done by a consent of
many counsaylours, or of the people. Cadmites, a stone, which has little
blue sparks about it. Cadmus, the name of a king of Phenicia, which builded
Thebes: by whom some men do suppose, that diverse of the Greek letters were
found. Cadit mimus, the courage faylethe, or is ^^^ted. Cadere, to be slain.
Caducias, the rod, Plautus in Amphit.
which Mercurius did always bear in token of peace. Cadoc^ator, ambassador or
heraulte at arms, sent to demand peace. Caduca, things that will shortly
peryshe or decay, old writers used them for significations of that which
should happen. Ci. in phil.
Caduca haereditas, an inheritance which is fallen in excheate, for (...) of
heirs. Caducus labor, labor lost. Plinius.
Caducae literae, letters which will be shortly put out. Caduci tituli, honors
and dignities, Pli. in pan.
which endure but a little while. Caduri, they which are decessed. Vergili. 7.
Caducor, ceris, duci, to be over thrown. Cadul^, the dryppyng of fle^she
roasted. Cadu^, a vessel con^^ynge the same measure that Amphora does. Cara,
an I Will in the sea called Aegeum. It is also called Co^, where fyshe worms were
first found. the country of Hippocrates, the prince of Phisitione. Caeus uel
Cous, a, um, of that I Will called Caea or Coa. Lueretius. 2 Plautus in pseudolo.
Caecigeni, they which are borne blind. Caeca die, Eme die caeca hercle
oliuum, id uendito oculata die: bye oil olive good chepe and sell it again
dear. orels, bye oil for days, and sell it again for ready money. Caecus
morbus, a sickness that is hid, or may not be discerned. Caeci haemorroides,
emoraudes or piles, which are within the foundement, and do not appear. Caeca
uestigia, where one may not se his way that he rydeth or goes. Caecum uallum,
a trenche, which in time of war is pyght privily with sharp stakes, which
are hid with brakes or bushes. Caecum intestinum, is a bowel, which comes
from the right side, at the point of the houkle bone, and goes to the left
side in length, and is also called Monoculus. Caecitas, blyndnesse, not only
of the bodyly eyes, but also of the mind. Caedes, murdre. Cic ad Q. (...)
Vergil*
Caedere calcibus, to kycke. Caeditur testibus, he is convict by witness.
Caedere, to sacrifice. Caedunt binas de more bidientes: According to the
custom they sacrificed two hoggrelles. Caelatus, ta, tum, gra^^^. Caelesus,
te, et hoc caeleste, of heaven or heavenly. Caelibaris hasta, was the staff of a
Iauelyn, which had been in the body of one of them, which were called
gladiatores, and was slain: with the which staff the head of a maiden new
married was hemp and stricken, sygnifiyng, that likewise as the staff was
stycked fast in the body of him that was slain, so should she stycke fast,
and be joined with him that married her. Caelostomia, a vice in speech, where
one speaks inwardely, and makes rather a sound than a pronunciatio^ of his
words Plinius.
Caelum, the palate, or roufe of the mouth. Caelipoteus, all mighty god.
Caeneus, the surname of Jupiter. Caepi, I began. Caeremoniae, ceremonies.
Caeraete, a city in Thuscan^. Caeris, a sore like a^ honey comb. Caeroferarii,
they which do bear candels in the church before the cross in procession, or
do any like service in the church Caeroferarium, a candell stycke, whervppon
tapers are set. Caeroma, (...) Caeromatum, an ointment, wherewith wrastelers
were anointed, to make them the more deliver and strong. Caesim, edgelynge,
or with the edge. Caesitium, a clean napkyn or handkerchiefe. Caesura, a cut,
a garse, an incisyon, also intaylyng or caruynge in stone or timber.
Caesuratim, brefely, succinctly. Caetera doctus, learned in other things. Cice.
de natura deo^^
Calamitae, little grene frogs. Calasastri, boys which do sing with a
shyll voice. Calatores, servants which are always called for. Calcaria
fornix, a lyme kylle. Calcata, a house which is pargetted. Calcearium, a
strowe. Calceatus, tus, idem. Calceatus, ta, tum, shodde. Calceare, to show an
horse or mule. Chalcos, seu aereola, the.xxxvi. Sueton. in Resp.
part of a Dram. Calculum album adijcere, to approve or allow a thing.
Calculum ponere, to yield account. Plinius in panegyr.
Calculosus, a, um, grauelly, or stony. Caldariae, hot bathes. Caldarium, a
cauldron wherein water is her. Calendae, the first day of every month. Cales, a
town in France. Calim old writers used for Clam, privily. Callaria, a cole
whitynge, mean between a haddocke and a whytinge. Callipolis, a city in
Thracia. Calleo, iui, lere, to perceive, to know by long experience.
Calliblephara, medicines to make here is to grow in the chekes or brows.
Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eyes, specially when the eye lyddes do
cleave together. Calliscere, to wax hard, proprelye in the skin and flesh.
Calliirichum, an herb called maiden hear. Callum obd^^^ere, to harden, to
make to endure labors or peynes. Calones, shoes of wodde. Also scullyons and
boys, which do follow an hooste to carry baggage, wodde, coled, or other like
things. Calophanta, a mocker. Calurisicus, ta, cum, that which heateth or
makes a thing hot. Calotecheus, a good workman. Calp^^, a tun. Caltha,
an h^r^ callid marigold^^ or tuddis Calthala, a garment of the color of
M^rygoldes. Calu^^ia, the hole heed of a (...) or beast. It was also a common
place of (...) some men do suppose, that it was the place where Adam the first
man was buried. Caluaster, a man somewhat balde. Caluor, ueris, ui, to be
dysappoynted. Calx, calcis, masculyne gender, the hele. Calx, the feminyne
gender, lyme made of stones burned. it is taken sometime for the end of a
thing. Calydon, a city in Greece. Camarina, a stynking herb, the air whereof
provoke one to vomyte. Cammarus, a fish callid a creuyse, specially of the
fresh water, a creuyse deaudoulx. Camerinam mouere, is a proverb spoken to
one, signifieng that he hurts him self, which proceeded of a fenne so callid
which being dried up, there happened a great pestilence, wherefore the people
adjoining, asked of Apollo, if they should make it dry for ever, who answered,
Ne moueas camerina^, as he should say, stir no myschyefe to thy self.
Camuri boues, oxen or kyne, with crooked horns. Canaan, the son of Came, the
son of Noe, of whom comes Cananeus. Canalitium aurum, gold dygged in
pyttes. Josephus in antiqui.
Canan, the countray called Arabye. Cananaea, a part of Siria, now callid
Judea. Cananitis regio, idem. Canaria, an isle in the sea called Atlanticu^,
nygh to the fortunate yles. Canarius, a, um, pertaining to dogs. Canatim, an
Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge like a dog. Cancellarius, in the old time was taken for
a scrybe or notarye, now it is callydde a chancellor. Cancellatim, lattyse
wise. Cicero de lege agraria.
Cancelli, little crabbes of the sea. Canere sibi, to speak for his own
profit. Canere sibi and musis, to sing or write for his own pleasure, and
for them that do favor him, nothing caring for any other. Canta, old
writers used for cantata. Cantito, tare, to sing often. Plautus in Trinu^mo.
Cantare, to monysshe or exhort. Haec dies noctesque tibi canto ut caueas,
This I exhort the day and night, that thou may beware. Cantatio, a
singing. Cantator, a synger. Capere rationem, to find the mean. Rationem
coepi ut and amanti obsequerer, and patrem non offenderem, I found the mean to
please my lover, and not withstandyng I dyspleased not my father. also to know
the cause why. Terent. in Heautont.
Scio tibi esse hoc grauius multo, ac durius cui fit: uerum ego haud minus
aegre patior id qui nescio, nec rationem capio, nisi quod tibi been ex animo
uolo, I know well that to you, whom the thing touches, hit is much more
displeasant and grievous: but yet it greuith me no less, I can not tell why, but
only because I love you. Capere rationem oculis, to judge by syghte. Hi loci
sunt atque ^ae regiones, Plautus in Pseud.
quae mihi ab hero sunt meo demonstratae, ut ego oculis rationem capio, These
are the places and streets, that my master showed me, as far as mine eyes can
judge, or as far as I can perceive. Capere uoluptatem, to delight. Capere
uersoriam, to change a purpose, to turn saylle, to do contrary to that he
intended. Capere usuram corporis vxoris alterius, Plautus in Amphitri.
To commytte aduoultrie with an another man's wife. Capidulum, a hoode.
Capillatia uela, be clothes of hear. Capito, tonis, a see fyshe, greatter
commonly than a Myllet is, which as I suppose, we do call a base Capitulo,
lare, to divide by chapiters. Capnion, an herb called Fumitorie. Plinius li.
26.
it is also called Capnos. Capo, a fyshe called a Gurnarde. Caprilis, le, of a
got. Caprillus, la, lum, idem. Caprotina, a surname of Juno. Capsis, for cape
si vis, take it and thou wylt. Captare impudicitiae, to lie in awayt to take
one in the act of lechery. Captare ^oenam, to get a supper of fre cost.
Martialis.
Captare sermonem, to harken priuyly what men talk. Captatio, a purchase.
Carba, a wind that blowethe from the Southe. Carbunculatio, is a faut in
vynes, when the clusters of grapes are not sufficiently covered with leaves, by
the which occasyon, they be wythered and dried. Carbunculus, is also a kind
of earth, the which with the hear of the son, waxes so hot, that it
burns the rotes of herbs and trees. Carchedonius, a kind of Carbuncle
stones, which in the house seem of purple color, abroad in the air they are
fyrie, against the son they send out sparkles, and if wax be touched with
them, it melts. Carcinus, a crabbe. Carabus, a fysshe called a lopster, like
to a Creuyse, but that he is greater, and is red when he is alive. Chalchis, a
fysshe of the sea, of the kind of Turbutte. Charax, a Fysshe, callydde alsoo
Dentix, with teethe standinge out of his lips, and is a broad fyshe, and
somewhat read, with a chaungeable color. Cardomine, an herb called water
cressis. Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherein bread is laid, In the North
countraye hit is called an arc. Carduus, a thystell. Caricus, ca, cum, of the
country of Caria. Carides, a fysshe callydde Pranes, like to shrympes. Cariem
trahere, to wax rotten, or to be putrified or vinnewed. Cariophillon, a spice
called cloves. Carnus, na, number, fat. Caros, excess of meat or drink. also
an herb and sede called carways. Carpere iter, to take his journey.
Carpocrates, an heretyke, which denied that god made the world. Carpophyllon,
a tree, which has leaves like to laurel. Carthallum, a baskette. Caryopos, the
juice of a nutte. Carynus, na, number, of a nutte: as oleum carynum, the oil of
nuttes. Carystae, and Carystos, an I Will in the sea called Euboicum, wherein is
plenty of marbyll of diverse colors. Carystaeus, a, um, of that isle.
Casabundus, da, dum, falling often. Caseale, a stable. Casner, in the Oske
tunge is an old man. Cas^^o, tare, to fall often. Cassinum, an old market
place. Cassiterus, tynne. Cassiterides, certain yles, wherein tynne is dygged.
Cassutha, a wede that windeth about hemp or lynne, called Doddar. Catabasis,
the son set. Catachresis, a figure, whereby the propretie of a word is
abused: as, Facies simillima lauro, where facies oonely belongs to a man, and
not to a tree, although it does signifye there a similitude or figure.
Cathysta, a garment close all about. Catacrysis, a condemnation. Catagrapha,
images lokyng diverse ways, and in diverse fourmes. Catalepsis, occupation or
deprehencion. Catalexis, a fynyshynge of a thing. Catalyma, refection, also an
ynne. Catamidio, are, to set one up with a paper on his heed to be mocked or
rebuked for some offense, as they use to do with men perjured, or with forgers
of evidences. Catapultarium pilum, a bolte. Cata^yposis, a figure, where one
thing is described by an another. Cato, wise. Also the name of a noble Senator
of Rome. Catoblepas, a beast full of poison, called a Basylyske. Catillo, are,
to eat like a glutton. Catorthoma, the right exercise of virtue. Catulinus,
na, number, of a catte. Caudecae, little coffers of wyckers, or a iu^ket, wherein
eles are taken in ryuers. Plautus in Rude.
Caudeus, a, um, of the stem of a tree. Caudex, is a dulle brayned fellow, a
dulle hedde. Caudicalis, ale, pertaining to the stem of a tree. Caudicariae
naues, ships made of thick plankes. Cauere alicui, to give counsaylle to
oone in mattiers of law, or concerning contractes. Cauere, with accusative
case, sygnifyeth to bid to beware. Cauere sibi ab aliquo, to take a quytaunce
or other discharge for the payment of money or delyueraunce of any thing. At
uero, Ci. in Bru.
inquam, tibi ego Brute non solua^, nisi prius a te cauero, amplius eo nomine
neminem, cuius petitio sit, petiturum, Truly (said I) Brutus I will not pay
the, except I have first a quyttance of the, that thou shalt not eftesones
demand it of him, of whom thou moughtest ask it. Cauere capite, to be
bound body for body. Plinius li. 34. plautus in Bacch.
Cauere, to provide. Quid isti caueam? B. Vt reuehat domum, Whatte shall I
provide for him? B. one to bring him home. Caueri, to be taken head of.
Caueares hostiae, and cauae, were parts of the beasts next to the tail, to
be sacryfysed for the bishops. Cauillatio, a cauillation, a subtyl forged
tale Cauillor, lari, to speak in mockage. Caulias, the juice of colewortes
myxt with bran, and being tossed togider, was brought into the form of a
paste. Causam accipere, to take the matter in hand. also to take an excuse.
Causam capere, to take an occasion. Causam dicere, to answer unto that,
which is laid to his charge. Caussam dicere, to say contrary, to deny.
Plautus in capt.
Hoc si secus reperies, nullam causam dico, quin mihi and parentum, et
libertatis apud te deliquio siet, If thou do find hit other wise, I will
not say contrary, but that it is at thy pleasure, that I shall lose both my
parents and liberty. Caussam dicere ex uinculis, to answer in ward, or
being a prisoner. Terent. in Heauto.
Causa mea, for my sake. Syro Ignoscas uolo, quae mea causa fecit, I will that
ye forgive Syrus all that he has done, for my sake. Liuius.
Caussas nectere, to feign matters. Caussam orare, to plead. Caussam quaerere,
to seek an occasyon. Cice. Atti.
Caussam sustinere, to bear the blame.
C ANTE E.
Sueton. de claris gra^.
CEdere creditoribus, is proprely where one not being able to pay his dettes,
leaves all his goods or lands to his credytours. Plautus in pseudolo.
Plautus in capt. Colu. 12.
Cedere ex transuerso, to go sydelynge like a Crabbe. Cedere ad factum, to come
to effect. Cedere pro, to be in the stead: of an another thing. Nam pro
pulmentario cedit sicuti ficus, For it is in steed of the meat, like as
fygges be. Pli. epi. 50.
Cedentes capilli, hears ha^gyng down right Cedrelate, tes, a great Cedre
tree. Cedrium, certain kind of pytche found in Siris. Cedrinus, na, number, of
a cedre tree. Cic. de Se.
Cedunt dies, the days pass away. Celatus, ta, tum, hid. Celebratus,
brata, bratum, much spoken of, or haunted. Celebris locus, a place much
haunted and known. Accius. Sisenna.
Celeranter, for celeriter, hastily or quyckly. Celeratim. idem. Celeres, old
writers used for Equites, horsemenne. Plautus in Merca.
Celeris copia. Date di quaeso co^ueniundi mihi eius celerem copiam, God grant
that I may very shortly mete with him. Varro.
Censere, to be angrye. Ne uobis censeam, si ad me referretis, Lest I would be
angrye, if ye told me. Plautus in Stico.
Censere, to speak or tell. G. Quid grauare? censeas. Tell me, what is that,
that greuethe the? Plinius. 8.
Censeri, to be had in estymation, or to be set by, also to be meruayled at.
Censio, onis, a price, advise, or opinion. Censoria nota, the rebuke or check
of the master of manners, Censoria animaduersio, was a punyshement of them,
which were of ill manners. Censorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, which had
ouersyghte of the manners of the people, which were called Censores.
Centaurium, an herb, whereof there be two kinds: The great, which apotycaries
do call Reuponticum: And the less, which is called Centorye. Alsoo fell
terrae, and Febrifugia. Centenariae coenae, were suppers on the which by a
law callid Licinia, was bestowid but one hundred of the brasyn coin called
Asses. Centesimae ursurae, were gains of the hundred penny value of every
thing, for every month lone. Centesimus, ma, mum, the hundred, as Centesima
pars, the hundred part. Centralis, le, that which is set in the very mids
of a thing. Centurupe, a feld in Sicile, whereof is Centurupinum crocum.
Cephalocrustes, a worm, which is in the leaves of a peache tree. Cepa, pae,
and cepe indeclinabile, an oynion. Cepas edere, to eat onions, was a proverb
spoken of them, which do seem to weep, or do weep often. Cephenes,
unprofitable bees, which make no honye, but only with the multitude of them,
do keep warm the young bees. Cera, wexe, also wexed tables. Ceramion, the same
mesure that amphora is Cerea pruna, wheat plummes. Cereus, a, um, soft, also
fat. Horatius. Actius.
Cerinum, a garment of the color of wax. Cerium, a soore like an honey comb.
Ceritus, mad. Cerinthe, an herb having the taste of wax and honey together.
Cerinthus, the meat of bees, which is found in honey combs, separate from
the honye, which is in taste bitter and is also moist. Cernere, to deuyse
together, Plautus in Trinu^mo.
or talk oone with an another. Verecundari neminem apud mensam decet, nam ibi
de diuinis atque humanis cernitur, No manne ought to be abashed at the
table, for there men do devise or talk of matters concerning as well god as
manne. Cernere, to syfte or range flower of corn. Plinius. 1^.
Cerno animo, I do foresee or consider before. Cernulus, he that is busye to
find fault in an another man. Hier. con. Ruffinum.
Cernus, nus, nui, a certain show. Ceroma, oil myxt with wex. Cic. in ca.
also the place where wrastlers were anointed. Certatio, debate, strife,
study, prouocacion. Certo, tare, to strive or contend. Certi, certain other.
Cicero. Salust.
Certi homines, sure men and faithful. Certae opes, riches that is permanent.
Certum habere, to know surely. Ceua, a lyttelle cow that gyuethe much Milk.
Ci. ad Art.
Certo, without doubt. Ceruclius, a cabyn in the hygheste part of a ship.
Cessare, to be ydelle. Cestus, a gyrdell, wherewith the housbande did gyrde
his wife, which was set with little studdes. Ceu, as it were.
C ANTE H.
CHaere, for salve. Chalasis, the knotte wherewith women's garments were knytte
about they necks. Chalastricum nitrum, saltepeter, which is very pure, and
like to salt. Chalcantum, a kind of ynke like to brass. Plinius ^ 4.
Chameleuce, ces, an herb growing by rivers, having leaves like a poplar,
but much greatter. Chamemirsyne, is a busshe or tree, which has sharp
pryckes in the leaves, and read bearies cloustred, I suppose it to be that,
which is called holy or holme. Chamitterae, and chamitteridae, little images,
made following a greatter image. Chaniscus, the hyndermost part of a ship, by
the which the anchor hangs. Chanotia, a tarte or marchepayne, or other like
delycate thing. Chaonides, wolfes that do slay hearts. Charchesia, a cup
long and small in the myddell, and full of handels. Charisma, matis, a grace
or special benefit. Charistium, a grene marble. Charmesinum, a kind of
sylke, which deliteth the beholders. I think it be crimsin. Charopus, amyable,
pleasant, or having a good grace. Chartula, a little leaf of paper.
Chelonalopices, I suppose to be the birds which we do call Barnakles.
Chenotrophia, a house or place where waterfoule are kept. Cheospes, a king of
Egypt, which made the great steple at Memphis, whereon were so many men
workynge, that the same king spent only in parcely, oynyons, and garlike, a
thousand and three score talentes, which if it were the great talent, it
amounted of our money, to CCl. thousand five hundred and fyfty pounds.
Leuit 11.
Chirogylius, an hedgehogge. Chironomus, a daunser of a moriske. Choa, a
certain measure. also vessel, wherein was put lycour, which was offered to idols
Choenix, a mesure containing.xxvii. ounces, which is one Sextarius of Athenes,
and a half Chomer, idem quod Chorus. Chorocitharista, he that leadethe a
dance, and plays him self on an instrument. Chors, it is, a place enclosed,
wherein cattelle is kept, a barton called in some place. Chortales aues,
pultrie fedynge abroad in a barton or court of husbandry. Chorus, sieve chomer,
a measure of the Hebrews, which contains ten times as much as Batus, or
Ephi, and amounts to as much as one and fourtye measures of Athenes, called
Medimni, which in all makes two thousand, nine hundred.xii. pound of
measure, every pound being xii. ounces. Chorus, a measure of grayn, salt, and
other like things, which conteyneth as much as ten of the measures called
Medimni Attici, where in every Medimnus be.lxxii. Sextarii Attici, Read in
Sextarius. so that hit contains of our galons Chreston, an herb called also
cykorie. Chrysoberillus, a crystal stone, wherein the color of gold shyneth.
Chrysoprassus, a stone grene as a leke, having speckes of gold. Chus, seu
choa, a measure contaynyng nine pounds of measure, which is Chytracus, a
tryuet or cradel, whereon pottes are set to boil meat.
C ANTE I.
CIbum subducere, to take meat away from one. Cibum facere, to make redye
meat. plautus in Truculen.
Mane aliquid fiet cibi, There shall be some meat made ready betyme. Cibi
repositi, meat set up to be kept. Quintilla. Ci. tus. q. 1 Varro.
Cibarius panis, ra^ged bred or crybbil bread. Cibarium uinum, small wine.
Cibatus, tus, tui, vyttayles. Cicatrico, care, to strike one so that a mark
always remains. Cicatrizo, idem, also to heal a wound, so that only a
seame or scarre may appear. Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to follow Cicero in
eloquence. Cicerbita, an herb called Southistell. Cichorea, and cichoreu^, an
herb called cikory Cicum, a thynne skin, which is within a Pomegranate.
Cicur, every beast or bird, which ones being wild, is made tame. Cicuro,
rare, to make tame. Ciere, to trouble or make him angry. Plautus.
Quid negotii est, Pistoclerum Lydus quod herum tam ciet? What is the mattier
that Lydus thus troubles or angreth his master? Festus.
Ciere, is sometime to name. Cinabulum, a cradelle. Cinara, an herb, which
some men do suppose to be an artochoke. Cinifactum, brought into ashes, as
things which are bourned. Circania, a bird, which in his flight fetches a
compass. Cirsion, an herb, which we do call buglosse. Circulo, are, to
compass about, or to make a cerkle or compass about a thing.
Circumcidaneus, a, um, cut round about. Circu^cisitum mustum, wine, which
after that the grapes are pressed, is taken out of the same grapes, being cut
and new pressed. Sueton. de claris rhetoribus. Ser. Sul. ad Cicerone^.
Circumcise agere, to make an oration by pecis, without coming to the purpose.
Circumcirca, all about. Circumcurso, are, to run hither and thither. Circundo,
dare, to enuyronne or compass about. Paulus de re iudicata Vlp. de iudiclis.
Circunduco, duxi, ducere, to lead one about. it is also to abolysshe or put
aside an act. Quod si is qui edictum peremptorium impetrauit, absit die
cognitionis, tunc circu^ducendum erit edictum peremptorium, And if that he that
has optayned the paremptorie decree, be absent the day when the matter should
be determined, than the peremptory decree is to be dyssolued or abolyshed.
Plautus in Pseud. Plautus ibidem. Plautus in Capt.
Circu^ducere, is sommetyme to deceive by cautelles. Circumducere aliquem
argento, to get ones money by falsehode. Circumductus, ta, tum, led about.
Circumductio, deceyte. Circumferre se, to go bragging about the streets.
Vergilius.
Circumflecto, tere, to turn hither and thither. Circumfundo, dear, to cast
water or other lycour about. Vergili.
Circumfusus, a, um, gathered about, as people when they desire to se a thing.
sometime wrapped about like an adder or serpent. Plin. de uitis illustr.
Circumlino, to annoynte about. Circummissus, a, um, sent about.
Circummunio, ire, to enuyron strongely, to fortify with walls or men. Cicero
Circumpedes, lackayes awaytynge at their masters styrop. also footmen of
princis. plautus.
Circumspecto, are, to behold about. Circumspectatrix, a woman that beholds
about, or watches. Circumsto, stare, to stand about. Plautus.
Circumtego, texi, tegere, to cover al about. Circumuerto, tere, to turn
about. Cirri, be things like hears about oysters. Cirratus, he that has his
hears brayded. Cis paucos dies, within few days. Plautus.
Cis vndique, in all places about. Cisium, aut cissium, a cart with two
wheles. Cispello, puli, pellere, Plautus in Amphit.
to keep out oone that he come not into the house. Citta, a pie. Ciuiliter,
like a citesyn. Also courteysly, or with good manner.
C ANTE L.
CLauola, seu clabula, a bough or stock, Varro.
wherinto a graffe is set. Cla^ me, clo^ te, I or thou not knowing. Clam
alter alterum, the oone knowyth not of the other. Clam omnes, no man knowing
or witting. Plautus in Pseud.
Clara pugna, a battle worthy memory. Claritudo, ide^ quoth claritas, also
brute, renome. Classici, they which in a town were most rich and
substanciall. Classici authors, writers of most estimation. Vergilius.
Classiarius, a man of war on the sea. Claudere, to turn about. Claudite
nymphae Dicteae, nymphae nemorum, iam. claudite saltus, Turn about ye
goddesses of Dictea, ladies of the forestes turn your daunse about.
Clementia aestaris, the te^peratnes of somer. Plautus in Stich.
Clementer uolo, I am well content. Clementer tractare, to entreat gentylly or
swetely. Cliduchus, he that bears a mace. Clingo, gere, old writers used for
cingere to gyrde. Cliuia, al thi^gis hard to be brought to pass. Festus
Cloacare, to defyle or pollute.
C ANTE O.
COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the principal sum. Coaduno, nare, to
assemble. Coccinatus, he that wereth a scarlet gown. Coctona, quynces.
Codicarij naues, ships or barges made of thycke plankes. Codicilli, epistels,
Suetonius
sometime it is taken for letter patentes of a prince. Coeli, the part of
Siria, that ioineth to Arabie. Coenatus, he that has souped. Coenatiuncula, a
little drinkyng house. Coenare alienu^, to sup at an other ma^s cost. Plautus
in persa.
Coenabis hodie magnum malum, thou shalt have thy supper soon in shrewde
rest. Coire in foedera, to make alyance. Coire societatem, to be famyliar.
Plautus, Cato.
Coepio, piui, pere, to begin. Coeptus, ta, tum, begun. Coepta, torum,
things or matters begun. Coepto, tare, to begin. Coepulonus, a banketter
or reuellar. Coercere ignes, to stynte the fire, which burns a house or
other like thing. Plautus in Mili. Plautus.
Cogitat curas, he thinks on his matters. Cogitate, aduysedly, Cogitatum,
idem. Cogere oues, to put up the sheep into a stable or fold. Cogere in
ordinem, to set in order. Cohaereo, cohaesi, haerete, to be joined, or to
cleave to a thing, also to come to pass. Nuptiae non cohaerent, The marriage
come not to pass. also to agree together. Cohaeres, he that is ioyntelye heir
with an another. Cohibere, to retain or keep to him self. Cic. de Se.
Cohibere intra limen, keep you within the doors. Plautus in Milite. Plautus
in Mer^ator. Ter. in He.
Cohibere filium, to keep under his son. Cohibere se, to moderate him self.
Cohibitus, ta, tum, let, refrayned. Cohors, is also a company of servants
about a noble man. Colina, for culina, a kytchen. Collabefactari testula, to
be banyshed out of the city by lottes of shelles, as it was vsid in Athenes.
Se after Ostracismus. Collacteus, he that sucketh of the same breast and at the
same time. Collatitius, a, um, that which is gathered and brought to gyther.
Collaudo, are, to praise with other. Collegium, a company of them, which have
equal authority. also a company of men which be of one mystery or craft.
Collibet, and collubet, collibuit, collibitum est, collibere, Plautus in Amph.
to like, to please. Vtcunque animo collibitum est meo, Even as it pleases me,
or lyketh me. Colligere uestem, to tucke up his garment. Colloco, care, to
set in a place. Plaut. in A^lul. Plautus in Amph.
Collocare se in arborem, to klim up on a tree Colocare aliquem in soporem, to
stryke one in such wise that he is amassed, and lies as he were on sleep, or
to speak hit more shortly, to lay one aslepe with a stroke. Plautus in Merca.
Colloces te in otium, draw the to ease. Collocatus, ta, tum, put or set in
some place. Collocupleto, tare, to enryche. Colloqui aliquem, to speak to one.
Colloqui alicui, to deuyse or talk with one. Colloquor, queris, qui, to talk
with one, or to talk together. Colluuiaris porcus, an Hog that walloweth in
the mire, and there has meat given him. Colludo, dear, to play with one, or
together. Collusor, oris, a playfelowe. Plautus in Capt.
Collus, idem quod collum. Collybus, money received by exchange, or in bank,
as men do which goo into strange countrays, delyuering money of this
realm, to receive as much of an other coin, where he comes. Collybistes,
and collybiste, he that delivers money by exchange, a banker. Collyra, a
lofe of breadde, or a bunne. Colere se, to apparayle him self. Colere
officium, to do his duty or endeavor. Plautus.
Colere pietatem, to have his parents in reverence. Colere vitam, to live.
Plautus in Ruden.
Coloratus, ta, tum, colored. Columbulus, a pygeon. Columnae Herculis, are two
mountains in the sea, where men do enter out of the myddell see into the
occean, the one is in Europa by Spain, the other in Africa. Colunus, na, number,
of hasyll. Colutea, the tree called Seen, whereof the leaves and coddes are
ministered in medicines, to pourge melancoly. Comedim, old writers used for
comedam. Come, for comedit, he eats. Comessabundus, Q. Curtius.
ouercharged with meat and drink. Comessans, idem quod comessor. Comesse for
comedere, to eat. Commessatio, ryottous bankettynge. Comessator, a ryottour.
Commemini, I remembered. Commeminere, to remember. Plautus in milite.
Commentariensis, was called a gayler. Commereri culpam, to do an offense. Pla.
in aul.
Commigro, grare, to go from one place to dwell in an another. Comminuo, to
cut in small pieces. Commisceo, scui, scere, to myxe together. Commiseresco,
scere, to have compassion. Terentius in Hecyra.
Commissio, a conferring together by exercise, as two learned men's wits
together, or other like thing. Commissa, confyscations. Commissus, a, um,
committed to the keeping of oone. Commissum bellum, open war. Commodare
loquelam, to speak. Ti. Liuius. Plautus in Ruden. Plautus in Mostel.
Commodare operam, to help. Commodare capillum, to kembe his heed, or deck
his busshe. Commodatarius, he that has borrowed any thing. Commode, well, or
to the purpose. Commode uerba facere, to speak things to the purpose. Commode
cadere, to happen or succeed well or to the purpose. Commoditas hominis,
Terent. in Adelphis.
the facility or curteysie of one, the which agrees to any request. Terent.
in Eunucho. Plautus in Asin. Plautus in Mostel.
Commodum id non est, it may not be easily done. Commoda statura homo, a man
of good stature, nor to great nor to little. Commoda et faceta mulier, a
pleasant and merry woman. Commodus capillus, a bushe well decked or kempte.
Idem in Pseud.
Commodus homo, a tractable or reasonable man. Commodu^ obsonare, to use
moderate fare. Commodum discesseras heri, cum Trebatius uenit: Ye were scantely
departed from me yesterday, when Trebatius came to me. Plautus in Pseud.
Terentius in Andria.
Commonere aliquem officium suum, to advertise one what he ought to do.
Commonere aliquem, to remember one of a thing. Commonstro, to show a thing
that is hyd. Commorior, riri, to dye with one. Plautus in Amphit.
Commoror, rari, to abide with one: also to dwell in a place for a time: also
to tarry one that is goinge. Male facis, properantem qui me co^morate, sol abit:
Thou do naught to tarry me, sens I go in have, and the son is now set.
Plautus in Amphitri.
Commorari, to cause one to tarry. Ante auspitium commoratum est? an tempestas
continet, qui non abisti ad legiones ita vt dudum dixeras? Did the token showed
by the birds, cause the to tarry? or else the wether keep the back, that thou
wentest not unto the army as thou saydest a while a go that thou woldeste?
Commossem, for commouissem. Donatus.
Commotus, ta, tu^, meued, troubled, afraid, angrye: also quick. Communes
dies, were unlucky days to go about any thing, such as we do call dysmoll
days or cross days. Communiter, in commune. Commutabilis, le, that which
may be changed easyly. Commutatus, ta, tum, changed. Commutatio, an exchange,
one thing for a another. Compareo, rui, rere, to apiere, to be seen. Plautus in
Amphit. Plautus in Trinu^mo. Cicero.
Comparebunt quae imperas, You shall see all things done, that ye do
command. Comparet ratio argenti, it does appear how the money is spent.
Comparare se, to dyspose himself to any thing. Plautus in Bacch.
Comparare, to find the mean or deuyse. Nunc hoc tibi curandu^ est Chrysale.
C. Quid uis curem? M. Vt ad senem etiam alteram facias viam, compara,
fabricare, finge quod luber, Now Chrysalus thou must take good head. C. what
wylt thou that I should do? M. Deuyse yet to goo an another way to warke,
ymagyne, contryue even as thou thynkest best. Compacto rem agere, to conspire
a matter, plautus in capt.
or to do a thing by one accord. Comparare, to get or purchase. Comparare
conuiuium, to prepare a banquet. Comparare malum, Plautus
to purchase an ill turn or a myschiefe. Comparatus, ta, tum, ordained or
received in an usage. Quam inique comparatum est, Terentius in phorm.
hi qui minus habent, ut semper aliquid adda^t ditioribus? What an ill use is
this, that they, which have but a little, Ci. de ami.
shall give more to them that be rich? Quando quidem ita ratio comparata est
vitae naturaeque nostrae, vt alia ^^tas oriatur ex alia, Sens the form of our
life is so ordained by nature, that of oone age comes an another. Compedio,
diui, dire, to give or fettar one. Varro.
Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to shine veraye bryghte. Compellucidus, da, dum,
very bright. Compendifaceo, facere, to make brief or be short in speaking.
Comperendinatus, ta, tum, adiorned. Comperendinati rei, they whose judgment is
deferred until an another time. Compesce in illum unjust dicere, Plautus in
Bacch.
leave to say ylle of him. Competitor, he that sueth for that which an other
man sueth for. Co^pingere in oculos, to thrust it in his eyes. plautus in Men.
Compita, are places where many ways do mete, or where two streets do cross.
Complaceo, cui, cere, to please or like well. plautus in amph. Cato. plautus.
Terentius
Complacitum est, it lyketh or contenteth. Complano, are, to make plain.
Complures, complura, and compluria, many. Complusculi, scula, idem. Compluuius
lacus, a dyche, whereinto water falls out of diverse gutters. Componere lites,
to agree men together, which are at variance. Compos culpae, he that has
don an offense. plautus in Truculen.
Compos patriae, he that is come home into his countraye. Compos praeda, he
that has gotten the pray that he looked for. Compotio, tiui, tire, plautus in
Rude.
to get one the thing that he desired. Compoto, taui, tare, to drink with
an another man. Compotrix, she that drinks with an other. Compotatio, a
bankette. Comprecor, cari, to desire or pray. Compraehendo, hendere, Cicero
to take hold on a thing, to comprehend or contain. Also to favor and
defend. Comprimere anima^, to hold in a man's breath. Comprimere manus, to hold
his hands that he stryke not. Plautus in Ca^ina plautus in Truculen. Plautus
in Ruden.
Comprimere se, to cease or refrain to do a thing. Comprime, let be, pease.
Comprimere alique^, to beat or torment one Comptum, a certain offering of
lycour, which was made with meal. Co^caleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made
warm Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be stered or provoked.
Concameratio, a warke made like to a vault with arches. Concalleo, lui, lere,
to be made hard as a man's hands with much workynge, or his feet with
much going. Concastigo, gare, to chastise with a another. Plautus
Concede hinc, go hense a little. Concedere fato, to dye. Concelebro, brare,
to celebrate with other. plautus in ca^^^a.
Concelebrare platea^ hymenaeo, to make joy abroad with synginge and daunsyng
in the honor of marriage. Concento, tare, to agree in one tune. ^^^tus.
Conceptiuae feriae, holy days kept at a time certain yearly. Col^^el.
Conceptus, ta, tum, conceived, purposed. sometime gathered: as, Ne cum a
uertice ^o^^ens imbribus conceptus affluxerit, fundamenta conuellat: Lest when
the streme gathered by the showers of rain, shall run unto it, it shall pull
up the foundation of that which is builded. Conchyta, he that seeks for the
shell fysshes, out of the which comes purple: we may take him for a fysher
of oysters and muskelles. Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiouselye and aptly
gathered to gether. Ci. in Ver. act. 4.
Conciliare pecunia^, to gather money of the people. Concinnitudo, an
aptness, a conueniency. Plautus in capt.
Concinnare, to make. Vt illi mastigiae cerebru^ excutiam, qui me insanum
verbis concinnat suis, I will surely brain this knave, that with his words
makes me out of my wit. Plautus in Trinum.
Concinnare lutum, to make mortar. Concinnare se leuem suis, to put his friends
to no cost. Nunqua^ erit alienis grauis, qui suis se concinnat leuem: He shall
never be greuouse to other, which will not be burdenous unto his friends.
plautus in Men.
Concinnare struices patinarias, to make sundry bankettynge disshes. Ibidem.
Plaut. in Sticho. Plautus in Amph.
Concinnare vestem, to amend a garment. Concinnare viam, to make rome that a
man may pass. Concinnare vxorem lachrymantem, to make his wife to weep.
Lachrymantem ex abitu concinnas tu tuam vxorem, By your departing hense, ye
make your wife to weep. Concinnatus, concinnata, tum, apparailled, trymmed.
Concinne, proprely, honestly, trymly. Concire, to move or stere. Disperij,
scelestus, Terent. in Heautont.
quantus turbas, conciui insciens: I am undone wretch that I am, what a
business have I made unawares? Concire lites, to move debate. Concionem habere,
to make an oration or sermon to the people. Concipere oculis, to see or
behold. Plautus in paenulo.
Concipere foedus, to make a leage. Concipere metum, to be aferde. Concipere
scelus, to imagine to do an ill deed Conclamo, mare, to cry to one. Plautus in
Milite.
Vbi abijt co^clamo, heus quid agis tu in tegulis? When he was gone, I cried
unto him, How ferra, what do thou among the tyles? Also to make a cry or
proclamation. Plautus in Menech.
Vis conclamari auctionem fore quidem? Wylt thou have it proclaimed that there
shall be port sale. Conclamata vasa, proclamation made to trusse, to gather
bag and baggage, as is used in the raysynge of a syege, or remouynge of a
camp in battle. Conclamito, tare, to make many cries. Festus.
Conclauia, many chaumbers or places under oone kaye. Conclauium, idem quod
conclaue. Concoquere odia, to suffer dyspleasures or malice. Concredo, didi,
dear, to deliver or commit a thing upon trust. Concorditer, by assent, or
agreement. Concresco, creui, crescere, to grow together. Concretus, creta, tum,
joined or congelyd to gyther, as a thing that is lyquide, to be made hard.
Concubinatus, hooredome, fornication. Conculco, care, to tread under the
foot. Concuro, rare, to care for a thing. Concurro, rere, to rounne with an
another, Plautus in Bacch.
sometime to accord. Concursus, sus, a runnynge of people together to one
place. Condecoro, rare, to honor a thing in making it more commendable.
Condignus, na, number, worthy, and according as it is esteemed. Condign, worthyly,
honestly. Condisco, scere, to learn. Condiscipulus, a scholefelowe. Conditura,
saulse or pyckelle made with spyces. Condolet caput, my heed aketh. Plautus.
Condono, are, to give, to forgive a det or duty, to pardone. Condormio, ire,
to sleep with other. Condormisco, scere, to sleep a little, to nap. Plautus in
Asin.
Conduci non possum, I can not be made to believe: no man can make me believe.
Conductus, ta, tum, to be set to hyre. Conductor, he that hyreth a thing.
Co^dus, a steward of household, or he that keeps the store of household.
Conduplico, care, to pay the double of a thing. Conduplicatio, doubling.
plautus in Rude.
Confer, to deuyse, to talk together. Confer amorem, to love. Co^ferre
animu^ alio, to set his mind else where Confer capita, to assemble for
counsel, to lay their heads to gether. Plautus.
Confer gradum, come forth. Confer in pauca, to conclude shortly. Confer
manus, to assail each other. Pli. in pan.
Confer tempus in aleam, to spend the time in playenge at the dyce. Terent.
in Eunucho. Plautus in Bacch.
Confer uerba ad rem, to do as he says. Confer se in pedes, to run away,
to take his legs. Confert, it is profitable. Caes* in co^.
Confertus, ta, tum, full. alsoo in a flock, or multitude, in a bushment. Vt
nunquam conferti, sed rari, magnis que interuallis praeliatentur, That they
might fight, not a multitude together, but a few at oones, and a great
distaunce on sonder. Ti. Liuius.
Turba conferta iter clausit, The people gathered in a bushment, Caesar.
stopped the way. Qua part hostium acies confertissima uisa est, erupit, He
brake out on that side, where the host of the enmyes seemed to be most thycke
of people. Confertim, in a bushement. Plautus in Mercator. plautus in persa.
Conficere pensum, to spynne out her threde, it is translatid into this
sentence, To have done or brought to an end that thing, which he was
commanded or appointed. plautus in Men.
Conficere prandium, to have dyned. Pallium ad phrigionem fere confecto
prandio, when dinner was done, or when he had dyned, he carried her mantell to
the brouderar. Terentius in Andria. Ci pro L. Flacco.
Conficere solicitudines alicui, to bring one into heaviness, or to make him
sorrowful. Conficientissimus literarum, he that puts all thing in writynge.
Confidentia, trust, hope, certain assurance, also mad hardynesse.
Confidentiloquus, he that speaks boldly, without fear. Plautus.
Configo, fixi, figere, to stycke or thruste in to a thing. Confingo, finxi,
fingere, to feign a thing to be true. Confingere dolum, to find a mean to
deceive one. Confirmo, are, to confyrme, or assure a thing to be as it is
spoken. Confirmare se, Ci. Tyro.
to make him self strong after his sickness. Confirmare animum, to take
courage. Confirmitas, assuridnesse. Co^flagro, are, to be on a fire, to be
inflamid Conflictatio, Donatus.
is where as one thing beats against a another. Confluuium et confluxus, a
metynge to gether of many streams. Confluus, a, u^, that which flows
togeder. Confoedusti, old writers called them which were joined in leage,
confederates. Confodio, dear, to dygge. Confore, to be brought to pass.
Terentius. in And.
Conformo, are, to bring to a facyon or figure, to make apt or like to a
thing. Confringo, fregi, fringere, to break or bruise. Confringere tesseram,
to be out of favor, Plautus in Cistell.
or no more welcome to one. Confringere rem, to spend away all his
substance. Confragosus, a, um, roughe, Ibidem.
as a ground which is not plain, also hard to be understand, rude in
language. Confugere ad aliquid, to resort for succor or excuse. Confundere,
to trouble all, Liuius. 6.
also to myxe out of order. Confutatio, a disprouynge of that which is spoken.
Congelatur, it is frosen or congelyd. Congemino, nare, to double. Congeminatio,
a doubling. Congermino, are, to grow jointly together. Congerro, ronis, a merry
companion, Plautus in Mostel.
he that keeps company only in pastyme and merry deuysynge. Congestitius, a,
um, cast up in a heap. Conglacio, aui, are, to be frosen. Conglobatim, in a
round form like to a bottom of threde. Conglutino, nare, to join together,
as it were glewyd. Congraecor, cari, to eat and drink excedyngly, after the
commune word, to make good chere. Congressus, us, is also company with other.
Congruens, according, like. Conijcere in saginam, to put to fattynge, to go
where he may fill his bealy. Coniugata, be those words, which being of one
kind, be diriued one of an other, as of Iustitia, iustus, and iustum, whereof
an argument may be made in this wise, If Justice is to be chiefly honored and
loved of men, a just man is to be had in estimation and reverence among men.
Coniugatio, a ioynynge to gether. Coniunctura, idem. Coniunctus, ta, tum,
joined. Coniunctim, to gether. Connato, tare, to swymme to gether. Connecto,
nexui, nectere, to bind together. Conniuentia, a sufferaunce of a thing, or a
fayninge not to se or espy. Connatio, a swymmynge to gether. Conquassatio, a
bruysnge together. Conqueror, queri, to complain, Conquiesco, eui, escere, to
cesse, to leave of. Conquiro, quisiui, quirere, to seek all about. Conquisitor,
a sercher, also an officer, which is sent to attache a man for a great offense.
Fes^us.
Comegione, old writers used for e regione, on the other side, or against a
thing. Conscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut with other. Conscindere sibilis, to
whystell oone out of a place. Ci. ^d A^.
Conscindere, is also to scorn or rebuke one pryuylye. Conscio, sciui, scire,
to know with other. Conscium sacere aliquem, to make one privy to a matter. ^
Conciscere, to draw to. Diligens pastor sta^^ulu^ cotidie conuerrit, nec
patitur stercus humorem consciscere, A dilygent shepherde every day sweepeth
his stable, and lets not the dunge draw moisture unto it. Cons^^ibello,
are, to write together. Consc^ibere, is also to inrolle or register. ^
Consecro, are, to put in remembrance by writing. Consecrare memoria^
nominis, to put his name in perpetual remembrance. Consensus, consent.
Consepio, piui, ire, to enclose with an hedge. Cicer. off.
Conseruo, are, to keep, to preserve, to gather goods. Conseruus, and
conserua, a fellow or companyon in service. Consignifico, care, to show by
tokens. Cicero.
Consigno, nare, to seal and close up, as letters. also to sygnifie or
declare, proprelye by letters. Cic. Acad.
Consignatus, ta, tum, sygnified, testified. Consilium est ita facere, I have
purposed so to do. Consimilis, le, in all things like. Consolatio, comfort in
adversity, Consolabilis, he that may be comforted. Consomnio, are, to dream.
Cic. off. 3.
Consortio, cionis, felowshyppe. Co^spergo, spersi, spergere, to scatter or
sperkyll about abundantly. Conspectus, tus, a beholding or sight. Conspirare,
to wind round like an adder. Conspondio, di, dear, to promise mutually.
Consponsi, they which have mutually promised one to the other. Consponsor,
soris, he that binds him self by promise, to him that has made like
promise. Conspuo, ere, to spette on one. Consputo, to spette often on one.
Constabilio, liui, lire, to make sure. Constituere, to be advised or determined
to do a thing. Constituere in diem tertium, to determyne to do a thing three
days next following. Constituere disceptatione^, to make his plee formal, or
to foresee that which shall come in contencion. Constituere iudiciu^, Cicero in
parti. ora.
after our manner of speaking is to demourre in law, or dwell in law, to
remytte a thing to the better oppinyon of the judges. Constituere maiestatem,
Salust.
to confyrme or advance the reverence dew to the supreme authority.
Constituere quaestionem, to decree, that upon strayt examination, execution be
done. Constituere statum causae, is when the judge does determyne, where hit
be a matter in law, or a matter in deed, which is in controuersye. Constituere
uadimonium, to put in pledges. Constet modus, let there be a measure. pli. in
epi.
Constat ratio, there is a reasonable cause. Constat hoc mihi tecum, we be both
agreed. Constrepo, pui, ere, to make a noise togider. Constringo, strinxi,
gere, to bind fast, to wringe hard. Consuetudo, conversation. Consuetus, ta,
tum, accustomed. Consumo, sumpsi, sumere, Terenti^^ in And.
sometime signifies to fynyshe or make up, or to bring to a point. also to
spend, as Consumere die^ in apparando, to spend all the day in preparynge.
Consumere fidem, to lose credence. Salust. Terentius in Heau. Salustius in
^ugurt.
Consumere operam, to employ labor. Consumere orationem, to tell a long tale
without a conclusyon. Consurgo, surrexi, gere, to arise to gyther with other.
Contabesco, scere, to waste away, or relent, Plautus in Mercator.
like salt put in water. Contechnor, nari, Plautus in pseudolo. Terentius in
H^cyra.
to inuente sum thing to deceive. Contego, texi, ^egere, to hyde a fault
that it be not espied. Contemptim, dysdaynefully. Contemptus, ta, tu^,
contemned, not esteemed. Contero, triui, terere, to wear out with occupienge,
also to make war. Plautus in Cistell. Plautus in Bacch. Te. in Hec.
Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier: Thou make me weary woman with thy
talking Conterere aetatem, to spend his life. Conterere die^, to spend the
day unprofitably Conterere operam, to lose labor. Conterere questum, to
spend all that he has gotten or won. Contestatus, ta, tum, proved by
witness. Contexo, ere, to join to gether. Contexere dolos, to find crafty
means. Co^ticesco, cere, to keep silence with other. Continere se domi, to
abide at home. Plautus in Amph.
Continebat me tempestas, The foul weder let me. Continenti biduo, two
days continual. Contignus, a, um, that which touches or is next to a
thing. Contollam gradum, I will go nerre. Plautus in Aulul. Vergil. Geor. Ver.
aen. 2.
Contorqueo, torsi, torquere, to pluck up and draw with him. Contorquere
telum, to shoot an arrowe or darte, and therewith to hit or perce a thing
Contortuplico, are, to wrappe or wind a thing, that with great pain it may
be vnwounde. Plaut. in persa.
Contortuplicata nomina, names so dyffuse, that they may uneath be pronounced.
Contra, on the other part. Ci. tusc. q. Ouidius in Metamor. Pli. in epi.
Cicer. off. Ti. Liuius. Cic. Tusc. question.
Contrahere animum, to take thought. Contrahere tempus, to abrege the time.
Contrahere valitudinem, to get sickness. Contrahere, to make covenant.
Contrahere bona, to geate goods. Contractio animi, stonyinge of the mind.
Contractus, ta, tum, gotten. Contractus, tus, contracte, bargayne. Co^trasto,
stare, to be against one, to repugne. Contrunco, care, to mynishe. Plautus in
Sticho Cicero in clodium. Plautus in Stich.
Contueor, eri, to defend, to see. Contumaciter, dissobediently. Contundere
facta alicuius, to put a another man's acts out of estimation or
remembrance. Contuor, eri, to see. Plautus in Asin. Ci. ad At.
Conturbo, are, to trouble. also to spend in wast. conturbare fortunas, to
spend al his goods in waste. Conuador, dari, to compel oone to find
suertyes. Plin. 11.
Conueho, uexi, uehere, to carry or bring from many places unto one place. Cice.
Atti.
Conuector, toris, a maryner that conueyeth over many. Plautus in Amphitri.
plautus in Curcu. plautus in Amphit.
Conuello, uulsi, uellere, to shake, or pull out of his place: also to take
from one by robery Conuenit, I am content. also it is conuenyent or meet.
Conueniens, convenient. Conuentus, ta, tum, accorded. Salustius in iugurt.
Cice. pro Sexto. Plautus in Ruden. Cato.
Conuenta pax, peace, accorded. Conuenticulum, a little assembly. Conuerro,
rere, to swepe to gether into one place* also to rub. Converse, klenly.
Conuexus, a, um, imbosed round and holowe within. Conuexitas, the imbosynge or
roundnesse of the backeside of that which is holowe. Conuiciu^ dicere, to
speak to a man's rebuke. Conuicium facere, to do a thing to a man's rebuke.
Conuiuam abducere, to bring one to a dinner or banker. Conuiuiones, companyons
at drinking or bankettynge. Conuoco, care, to call to gether, or to assemble
many to gether. Conuolo, la^e, to fly to gether. Conuoluolus, an herb called
withwynde. Copen, old writers used for Copiosum, plenteouse. Cophinus, a
basket. Copio, are, to gather much to gether. Copiola, some plenty. Copia, is
also aid. Copiam dare, to give power, or license, Terent. in Heautont.
also to give occasion. Copia est. Nam apud patrem tua amica tecum sine metu ut
sit, copia est, Ibidem.
For thou may now bring to pass, that thy wench may be with thy father
without any dread. Copia est, I may or might. Terentius in p^o^m.
Ego in eum incidi infelix lo cum, ut neque eius sit an ittendi, nec retin endi
copia: I am vnhapily come to that point, that I may neither leave her, nor
keep her. Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great difficulty or peyn might I
come unto him. Copia cuntandi non est tibi, Plautus in Epidic. Plautus in Capt.
plautus in Epidico. Plautus i^ Milite. pli. in epi.
Thou haste no leisure to tarry. Copia est tibi magis, thou may more easily.
Copia nulla est tibi in illo, He can nothing help the. Copiam efficere
alicui, to find the means that one may come in. Copiam facere argenti, to
lend one money. Copiam facere, to communicate any thing with an another. Copi,
for copioso. Copiose, abundantly. Coquito, tare, to boil often. Corbito, tare,
to cast into a baskette. Cordapsus, Plautus in Casina.
a syckenes that is now called Illiacus, which is a pain in the guts.
Cordate, wisely. Cordilla, plautus in paenulo.
the young fry of the fysshe called Tunye. Victruuius
Corgo, old writers used for Profecto. Coria, coriorum, are in building
certain setting or layeng of things in one order, or in height, or in
thyckenes. Coriandrum, an herb and seed callydde Colyander. Coriatium, of
lether. Corinthiacus, ca, cum, that which is of the city of Corinthus.
Corporatura, corpulencie, quantity of the body. Corpore uiciati, they which
do lack some membre at their nativity. Corrector, an amender of fautes. Te in
Hec. Plautus in (...).
Corripere sese ad alique^, to go to one hastily Corripere se repent, to go
his way sodeinly Corriuales, they which do love to gyther one womanne.
Corroboro, are, to make strong or bygge, to harden. Sali^^ius (...).
Corruda, an herb called wild Sperage. Corrumpere rem familiarem, to waste
his substance. ^
Corrumpere igui, to burn up. Corrumpere oportunitates, to lose opportunity or
occasyon. Corruptor, a distroyer, a waster, a corrupter of things. Corruo,
rui, ruere, to fall down together. Cors, cortis, idem quod chors, a court,
which serves for pultrie, to feed at large. Corus, a southwest wind.
Corymbifer, an yuy tree. Cosmitto, for committo. Cotyle, a measure contaynynge
nine ounces, as well at Rome, as in Greece. Cotyla hyppoiatrica, that is to
say, which was used in medicines for horses and cattle contained.xii. ounces.
Cotyla georgica, that is to say, which was used in things concerning
styllage, conteynyd.xiii. ounces and a half. sometime it is usurped for
Sextarius.
C ANTE R.
CRacentes, for graciles. Crambe, a kind of colewortes. Cramben repetitiam, is
called of Iuuenalie a Declamation to be often herd, with much tediousnes to
the herers. Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte when one is drunk. Crapulam
edormiscere, to sleep out drunkenness until he be fresh again. Crasis, a
greek word, sygnyfieth complexion, temperature, or myxture of natural
humors. Crassamen, thyckenesse. Crasse compedes, weyghty gyues. Plautus in
pseudolo.
Crasso, are, to make fat. Crater, is also the basin of a water cundite,
wherinto the water runs out of pypes or cocks. Creator, the first maker of
a thing. Creber, bra, brum, is also standing, or being thycke together, as
trees. Crebritas, and crebritudo, oftennesse, or thiknes in being or growyng
together. Credere verba alicui, to tell to oone his counsaylle. Creditur tibi,
I trust the. Plautus in Sticho plautus in Curcu. Plautus. Columel. 6. cap. 25.
Creditur male, it is ylle lent. Creduis, uel creduas, for credas.
Cremasteres, the synewes, whereby the stones of a man or beast do hang.
Cremo, are, to bourne. Crepa, of old writers is used for Capra, a Goote.
Crepare, to be broken, also to speak or prech. Vergili. Horatius.
Crepidatus, he that wears slyppers. Crepidula, a little slyppar. Crepitare
dentibus, to crashe with the teth. Plautus in Ruden. plautus in Amphit.
Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth. Crepuit foris, the door craked.
Crispus, he that has a curlyd hear. Crista, a kreste, or any thing growyng
on the head of a foul or beast, as a cocks comb, or the feathers on the
head of a bird, called a coppe. Crociatus, ta, tum, colored like saffron.
Crocito, tare, to croke like a raven or crow. Crocitus, the noise that raven or
crow makes, called crokynge. Crocitatio, idem. Crocomagma, matis, the duste
or refuse of Saffron. Cronia, the feasts of Saturn. Cruciabilitas, and
cruciatus, turment, affliction. Cruci dare aliquem, to hang one. Plautus in
Milite.
Crucifigo, fixi, gere, to crucyfie. Crucio, are, to tourment. Cruda poma,
fruits that are not ripe. Crusculum, a little or small leg. Crustum, is
also a morcel of bread or meat. Vergili.
Crux, sygnifieth all manner of tourment.
C ANTE V.
CVcurbitula, a little gourde or cup, wherewith blood is drawn out of a
man, when he is scarified. Cucuma, a vessel of brass or tynne, facioned like
a Cucumer, wherewith bathes were filled and emptied. Cudetur in me faba, all the
blaame shall be laid to me. Cuiusmodi, what, what facion, what manner. Plautus
in Menech. Oicer. procluen. Cicer. pro Roscio.
Cuiusmodi homines erunt? What manner of men shall they be? Cuiusmodicunque
matter sir? What so ever a mother she be? Cuiusquemodi. Vereor enim cuiusque
modi es Rosci, ne ita hunc uidear voluisse setuare, ut tibi omnino non
pepercerim, I fear me that in what so ever state thou art in Ros. lest it
shall be thought, that I would so excuse or defend him, forasmoche as I have
not all spared the. Salusti. in catelin.
Cuiuscunque modi genus hominum, of all manner of sorts of men. Culcitrula, a
little fether bed. Festus.
Culcitula, a little staff. Culeus, among the Romans was the greattest
measure, and receives twenty of the measures called Amphora, which amounts
to two thousand, eight hundred, four pound of measure, every pound being
twelve ounces. It was also a sack of lether, wherinto they, which had
slain their fathers or mothers were sown, and with them were also put alive,
a Cock, a Serpent, and an Ape, and thrown al together in to the river of
Tyber. And this was the punishment of paricides or murderers of their parents.
Plautus in Capt.
Culpa carere, not to offend. Culpam commereri, to commit an offense. Culpam
in alterum confer, to lay the blame to an another. Culpito, tare, to blame
often. Culpo, pare, to blame. Cululus, a little chalyce or cup of earth,
which the bishops used in sacrifice. plautus in paenulo.
Cum, all be it. Nam cum sedulo munditer nos habemus, uix aegre amarorculos
inuenimus, All though we do appoint us never so kleanly, yet uneath find we any
lovers. Cum dicto, forthewith, as soon as it was spoken. Terentius in Hecyra.
Cum maxume, to much. Cumulatus, ta, tum, augmented. Cumulate, abundantly.
Vergilius.
Cunabula, is also taken for the beginning of things. Cunctanter, slowely,
soft and fair. Cunctatio, and contatio, taryenge. Cunctus, ta, tum, all
togther. Cunilago, a kind of sauerye. Cupiens, he that desires a thing.
Cupiens tui est, he loves the hartyly. Cupienter, with great desire. Cupitus,
ta, tum, desired. Cupressus, a Cypress tree. Cupressinus, na, number, of cypres
tree. Curiata comitia, were assemblyes of people in places of judgment, for
matters in varyaunce. Curio, is also a curate, Liuius.
or he that has the spiritual charge in a paryshe. Curionatus, the office of
a curate. Curionium, the money that is given to a curate for doing his office.
Curmundulla, pears very delycate, having so thynne parings, that men did
eat them vnparyd. Curare, to care for a thing, to take heed, Terent. in
Andria.
or be dilygent about a thing. Cura ut valeas, Look to thy health. Curasti
probe, Thou haste done every thing well. Curare aedes, to take heed to the
house, Plautus. Terent. in Heauto.
that nothing be lost. Curare aliena, to meddell with other men's business.
Curare amicos, Plautus in Sticho Plautus in Trinu^mo.
to entertayne friends or acquayntaunce. Curare fidem, to keep promise. Curare
munus suum, to do his office. Curabo illi pecuniam, I will provide that he
shall have money. Curabitur, it shall be provided. Curatus, ta, tum, done with
dilygence. Curatus, in good point or state. Curatio, charge. Curatio mea est,
Plautus in poenu.
It is mine office or charge. Currens, he that runs. Currentem incitare, to
exhort or set forward him that of his own courage is well disposed to a
thing. Cursim, with all speed, very spedyly. Cursura, a course. Cuticula, a
thynne skin. Cutiones, they which in selling make many prices or they come
to a point. Festus.
Cuturnium, a vessel, out of the which wine was poured in sacrifices.
C, ANTE Y.
CYanus, a blewe flower growing among corn, called a bluebottell. Cyathisso,
are, to syppe or to quafte, all out, or halues. Cyathus, the.xii. part of the
mesure called Sextarius, which was supposed to be as much as commonly a
temperate man did drink at one draught. Read more after in Sextario. Cyborium,
a kind of appuls of Alexandria. Cydarum, a boat. Cynodontae, are dogs tethe,
which do grow in the latter age. Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale. Cypsili,
birds called swalowes. Cyrnij, people of the I Will of Cors. Cysthus, a kind of
yuye. Cytinus, the flower of a garden pomegranate.
D ANTE A.
DAGNADES, were little birds, which in Egypt men used to make fast to
garlandis when they went to drinking. Damascoena, prunes. Vlpian. L. aqu^^^a.
Cic. Epist. libr. 17. ad Volu^n^um Cic in L. pi^onem.
Damnas dare, to pay damages. Damnum facere, to suffer damage, to have loss.
Damnatus, condemned. Damnatior, more worthy death. Danista, an vserer.
Danisticus, ca, cum, pertaining to vsery. Plautus in Trucu.
Dapsilis lectus, an excellent good bed. Daphnoides, an herb callid Lorell
or Laury, which cuseth a vehemente purgation. Dapsilia dicta, words frankely
spoken. Dascia, thyckenes of brethe. Daucus, yelowe carette, whereof the roots
sodden in brothe are pleasant and holsom.
D ANTE E.
Plautus (...)
DE nocte abijt, he went away at night. De nocte uigila^e, to wake i^ the night
De die, to day. Ergo ne una orationis pars de die dabitur mihi, Than shall not I
be suffered to speak one little word to day. ^
De die uiuere, every day, or from day to day, to live. Plautus in per^a.
Plautus in Bacch. Plautus in Monech. Cicero. Cicero. Terentius in Hecyra.
Plautus in Mostel. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Capt. Terent. in Heauto.
Plautus in Trucu. plautus in Epidico.
De meo, of my good, de tuo, of thy good. De mea sententia, by my counsel. De
illis verbis cave tibi, beware how thou spekest such words. De imperio
decertatur, they fight for the empire, or chief rule. De manu in manum, from
hand to hand. De filia te adij, I comme to speak with you for your daughter.
De meo exemplo aedificet, let him build according to my platte. De ista^ te
amo, I love the for her sake. De compacto, by agreement. De industria, of
purpose. De integro, eftesoones from the beginning. De improuiso, at adventure,
unsought for, or unlooked for. De more, as it has been accustomed. De nihilo
nihil est irasci, It is folly to be angry for nothing. De praefacili exores,
Thou shalt lyghtely opteyne. plautus.
De proximo senex, the old man that dwells hereby. De repent, suddenly. De
subito, idem. Deam bulatio, a walking forth, or abroad, out of the house.
Debilito, tare, to make feeble or weak. Deblatero, terare, to speak
foolysshely, Fe^^^^. Non. Mar.
to babble rebukeully. Decaluo, to make very balde. Decaphorus, a lytter borne
by ten men. Ci. ad At. Plinius.
Decedere, to give place to an other. Decedere itinere, to turn out of the
way for some purpose. Plautus Ci. in Ver.
Decedere uia, to go out of the way. Decedere de suo more, Ti. Liuius.
to change his custom. Decedere instituto suo, Ci. in Ver. Liuius.
to do otherwise than he was wont. Decedere officio, to do against his duty
to do no more his duty. Terent. in Adelph. Cic. A^t. 1.
Decede^ nihil de summa, there shall be nothing minyshed. Decedere, to dye.
Decedi, to have place or way given. Cicero de senectute.
Haec enim ipsa sunt honorabilia, quae uidentur leuia atque communia, salutari,
appeti, decedi, assurgi, deduci, reduci, For those things ar honorable,
which seem to be of small effect and commune, to be awayted on, to be sued
unto, to have the way given, to be risen unto, to be brought to the court. and
brought again home. December, the number of ten. Decemuiri, where ten men be
in one authority. Such were at Rome soon after that they ceased to have
kings, and they had authority to gather laws, and also to make laws: At the
last they conspired to have a perpetual authority, and fynallye were
therefore deposed for ever. Decemuiratus, the dignity or office of Decemuiri.
Colu. li. 4.
Decenus, na, number, a dosen. Decies, ten times. Decennalis, le, of ten
years. Decennium, the space of ten years. Decenter, comelye, seemly, Terent.
in Necyra.
or as hit is conuenyent. Decermina, things pulled away, in making things
clean. Decernere, to purpose. Plautus in Mostel.
Decernere quaestionem, to ordeyne that an examination be made. Decernere, to
fight in battle. Decet me haec vestis, this garmente becomes me well. Pli.
in epi. 105. Terent. in Heautont. Plautus i^ Bacch.
Decidit ab archetypo, he did not follow his first example. Decidere de spe,
he lost all his hope. Decidit fructus, he lost all the profit that should
come of it. Deciduus, a, um, that which falls, as Decidu^ folia, leaves that
do fall. Decies sestertium, was used of the Romans for a thousand Sestertia,
which amounts of our money to six thousand, five hundred, four score and
seven pound, and ten shyllynges. Plinius. Varro.
Decliuis, ue, that which is ready to fall. Decliuis aetate, fallen in age.
Decollare, to fail. Decolorus, a, u^, lackyng color, or ill colorid
Decoloratus, ta, tum, idem. Decoxit domino suo foetura, the increase of
cattayle came to little advantage unto his master. Decore, honestly.
Decortico, care, to bark a tree. Decotes, thredebare garments, or garments
worn to the vttermoste. Decumbo, bear, to lie down. Daecures, old writers
used for decuriones. Decuriatio, making of knights or captains Ti. Liuius. de
bell. macedonico lib. 10.
Decu^rere, to just. Decussis, ten hole parts, also pieces equally cut, more
over the divisions of timber sawen in equal parts. Decussatim, in even
porcions cut. Dedecet, it is not honest or convenient. Dedecoro, rare, to
dishonest. Dedecus, dedecoris, dyshonestie. Dedignatio, dysdayne. Deditus, ta,
tum, given, rendered. Dedita opera, for a purpose, by his own consent.
Deducere riuos, to turn the river. Deducere vocem, to speak small.
Deducere, to abate of a sum. Defaecatus, ta, tum, fined or clean from the
lies or dregs, as wine, which is not troubled. Defatigo, gare, to make oone
weerye, or to fatygate. Defatigatio, weerynesse. Defer aliquem furti, to
appeache oone of felonye. Cicero de lege agratia. Priscianus.
Deferunt de me apud uos, They report of me falsely unto you. Defetiscor, sci,
I am weery. Defes^us sum, idem. Defectus, a, u^, that which lacks any thing.
Defectio, rebellion, departing from one captayn to go to an other. also lack
or defaut. Plautus in persa. Pli. in pan, Cicer. off.
Defigere aliquem colaphis, to give oone a cuffe on the ear, or to beat one
with the hands. Definite, shortly, or at few wordis. Definitum est, It is
concluded. Deflectere ex itinere, to turn out of the way. Deflexit de via
consuetudo, The custom is changed or turned. Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or
lament, to be sorry. Plautus in Epidic.
Defloccatus, worn for age. some time passed the flower of youth. Defore, to
lack in time to come. Defunctus iam sum, Terent. in Eunucho.
I have now done my duty. Defuncta morbis corpora, Liuius.
bodies recovered from syckenes or diseases. Defunctus fato, escaped his
destenye. Ibidem.
Defungi in hac re, to be out of this busynes, Terent. in phorm.
to be discharged of this matter. Defungi regis imperio, to do the kings
commandment. Defunctus, ta, tum, deed. Defunctorie, remyssely, lyghtely,
Vlpian.
without study, or dyligence. Degero, degessi, degerere, to carry away.
Plautus in Aulular.
Degerere laborem alicui, to ease one of his labor. Degru^mor, ari, to lay a
thing by line. Dehortor, tari, to discourage, to exhort to the contrary.
Deijcere de gradu, to bring out of a constant or temperate mind, also it
signifies, to deprive of dignity. Cic. de off. Ci. ad At. lib. 16. Cicer. pro
cecina. Ci. de ^^n.
Deijcere, to disease or put out a man of his possession. Deiectus, and
deiectio, a casting out of possession, or a disse^son. Deiungo, xi, gere, to
vnioyne. Deiuro, to swear depely. Delabor, lapsus sum, labi, to fall down of
a high place. Also to be consumid and come to naught. Delacero, rare, to tear
in pieces. Delachrimo, idem quod delachrimor. Delauo, uare, to wash myghtily.
Delectamentum, pastyme, solace. Delibatio, tastynge, or the taking of assay.
It is also sacrifyce of meat or drink. Delibatorium, a place apt for such
sacrifice. Delibare, is also to hurt. Deliburus periuriis, Columell. Cellius.
Saluit.
stained or defiled with perjury. Delicate, wantonly. Delicia, the timber,
Festus.
which makes the end of a house above, called a Gable. Deliciares regulae,
the isles at the gables end Delici porci, young suckynge pigs. Varro. 2.
Delingo, linxi, lingere, to lycke of. Delirans, dotynge. Deliratio, dotage,
folly. Cicero
Deliramentum, idem. Delius, a, um, of the I Will called Delus. Delius natator,
was one perfytte in swimming, which became a proverb, that wha^ a thing was
spoken or written, hard to be understand, and required a cunning expositour,
than would they say, Delio natatore eget, It requires a cunning or subtle
expositour. Deludificor, cari, to begyle. Delutamentum, clayenge. Terentius in
phorm. Plautus in Menech.
Demensum, a certain portion of meat and drink allowed by the month to the
servants. It is also a measure contaynynge four Romayne busshelles. Demeter,
the name of Ceres. Demigro, grate, to goo from one house, to dwell in an
another. Vergilius. Georg. 2.
Deminuo, nuere, to mynyshe, or make less. Demi^^ere, to dygge. Demissi
homines, men fallen from richesse to poverty. Cice. pro Murena.
Demere soleas alicui, to pull of ones shoes. Demere vngues, to pare ones
nails. Plautus in Auius.
Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, which was supposed to be of such excellencye,
that he had authority over all ill spirits, which made men aferde. Demoli^^
culpam, to dyscharge him of the fault or blame. Plautus in Bacch.
Demolio, idem quod demolior. Demoueo, uere, to remove! Demuto, tare, to change
his manner or facion Denarius, in weight is the seventh part of an ounce: To^
(...)
In coin her was as much in poyse and valuation, as our old sterlynge grote,
of the which there went seven to the ounce. Denascor, denasci, to cease to
be, to dye. Denominatio, the namynge of a thing. Dens, is also every thing,
wherewith an other thing may be holden fast. Dentatus, he that has great
tethe, strong to the, or many tethe. Dentifrangibilum, a thing wherewith tethe
are broken. Denumero, rare, to pay money. Denunciatio, menassynge. Caesar.
Cicer pro Placco.
Denunciatio testimonij, an iniu^ction to apere Deoro, rare, among our lawyers,
is to perpleade, or to conclude in pleadynge. Deorsum uersum, down right.
Terent. in Adelphis.
Depaciscor, sci, to make covenant, to agree upon certain couenantes.
Depaupero, rare, to impouerysshe, or make poor. Depectus, kempte. Dependere
opera^, to take pein about a thing Depingo, xi, gere, to paynt a thing to the
quycke, also to report. Deprecatio, when we confess that we have offended.
Deprecator, he that sueth or intreatethe for another man, that he should not be
punished. Depressus, a, um, low. plautus in paenulo. Terentius
Depropero, rare, to make much haste. Depugnatus, ta, tum, well fought.
Deputare rations, to reken, or make account Derado, si, dear, to shave of, or
bark of. Deriduculum, a skorne or mock. Deripere aliquem capillo, Plautus in
Menech.
to pull one down by the hear of the heed. Derogito, to make instant desire,
Plautus in Asina.
to pray hartylye. Des, a poyse of eight ounces. Descendere in sese, to humble
him self. Persius
Descensus, sus, a going down. Descensio, idem. Deseco, care, to cut.
Desedeo, dear, to sytte down. Desertor, he that leaves his country, and
gothe to his enemies. Deseruire studijs, to apply lernyng or study. Plinius in
Epistolis. Plautus. Terentius
Desideo, sedi, desidere, to sytte stylle, to abide in a place. Desido, sedi,
sidere, idem. Designare, to chief a thing, and appoynte it for some purpose.
Desistere litibus, to leave suite. Terent. in phormi.
Despectio, a lokynge downewarde. Despicor, cari, to despise or disprayse.
Despicatus, tus, disprayse. plautus in Milite.
Despoliare digitos, to pulle the rings of from ones fyngers. Despondere
prouinciam, Cicero de prouinc. coniu.
to give charge or rule of a country. Desponso, are, to affiance a woman.
Destinare, is also to send. Iuuenalis.
De subito, sodaynely. Desudasco, scere, to labor until he sweat.
Desuefactus, out of custom, or use. Desydero, rare, to desire. Desyderati, men
deed, proprely in battle. Desyderium, desire, also special love. Cicero
Desyderatio, idem. Detrecto, tare, to refuse to do a thing, or not to do it.
Detrudere, to set forth one by force. Detrudere regno, to put oone out of
his royaulme. Deturbare aliquem aedibus, to thruste oone out of the house.
Deuerbium, the last end of a word. Deuersus, turned downewarde. Deuoro,
rare, to devour. Deuorare dicta, Plautus in Asina.
to take good heed unto words. Deuorare libros, to read books with ardent
desire. Deuorare molestiam paucorum dieru^, Ci. in phili.
to endure pain or displeasure for a little while. Deuorare nomen alicuius,
Plautus in Trin^mo. Ci. in Bru.
to forgete a man's name. Deuorare orationem, to here a taale without taking
any head of it. Deunx, deuncis, xi. times the measure callid Cyathus, which
was as much as a temperate man used to drink at.xi. draughtes. Dextans.x.
times the mesure callid Ciathus Dextera uel dextra, the right hand. sometime
on the right side. Dextram dexirae co^mittete, to promise faith and truth in
hand. Laur. Val.
Dextimus, old writers used for dexter. Dextero, rare, to lead in the right
hand.
D ANTE I.
DIabath^^, shows that the greeks vsid Diaulus, a measure of ground
contaynyng two furlong, every furlong being of.Cxxv. fete. Diacodion, a syrope
made of the heedes of popye and water. Dibaplia, purple twyse dyed. Terentius
in phorm. Plautus in Auiui. Terentius in phormi. Ci. in Ver.
Dicam impingere, to bring an action against one, or to lay against ones
charge. Dicam scribere alicui, to enter an action against one. Dichas, a
measure of two palms, or.viii. fyngers. Dicare operam suam, to offer his
service. Dicere nummos, to promise money. Salusti. in histo.
Dicere ex animo, to speak as a man thinks Dicere ex tempore, to make an
oration without study. also to speak unadvisedly. Dicere, is also to call a
thing by a name. Plautus in curgul. Ibidem.
Dicassis, for dicas. Dice, for dic. Dictamen, a thing written by an other man's
instruction. Dictare rationem, to yield account. Plautus in Amph.
Dictatum, a mynute given by one so an another, to write a letter by. Dictito,
to tell a thing often. Didragma, a coin, which was of the value of.viii. of
the money called Sesterciil, which of our money is two old sterlynge
grotes. Didymus, is in latyne Geminus, in english, one man double as much as
an other. Diffarreatio, a certain sacrifyce, which was between a man and his
wife. Differitas, old writers used for Differentia, dyfference. Differ,
sitim, to endure thyrste. pli. in epi.
Differ vadimonium, to give to one a longer day of apparaunce. Differ famam
alicui, to sprede ones name abroode. Differri, to be so vexed in mind, that a
man wotteth not what to do. Plautus in Cistell.
Difficultas, difficulty. Difficulter, with great pain or labor. Difficul,
for difficile. Difflo, are, to blow down. Plautus in Mill. Iou^^s.
Digestio, dygestion, dystribution. Digiti, ar muskyls, or a like kind of shel
fish Digitum tollere, to favor a matter. Digitus, is also a mesure, being of
the breadth of four corns of wheat laid together. Digitulus, a lyttoll
finger. Digladiatio, a fight, a strife, a debate. Dignatio, great estimation,
sometime favor, or familyaritie with noble men. Digressus, a departing.
Diligenter, dilygently, aduysedly. Dilucide, euydently. Dimissoriae literae,
letters myssiue. Dimixos, a lamp with two lyghtes. Dinumero, rare, to pay
money. Diobolaris, a common and vile harlot. Diomedes, a noble captain of the
Greeks at the syege of Troy. Dipsaeus, a wild tasyll. Dirimere litem, to make
an end of a matter in varyaunce or suite. Cicero
Ditimere actionem, to delaye^ matter. Dirimere societarem, to break
fellowship. Diripere oppidum, to sack a town. Plinius.
Dituo, rui, ruere, to break down to the ground Dirutus, ta, tum, broken down
to the ground dystroyed. Discalceo, ceare, to pull of ones shoes. Discalceatus,
vnshodde. Discedere in diuersa, to be of sundry opinions Discernere armis, to
fight in battle. Discupio, to desire very much. Discursus, runnynge hither
and thither. plautus in paenulo.
Discutere, to dissolve humors gathered into an impostume. Discussoria
medicame^ta, medicines which do dissolve or break things congelid or tough.
Disiunctio, a separation. Disiunctus, ta, tum, separate. Dispar, unlike,
unmeet. Disparo, rare, to sever. Disparatum, is that which is separate from any
thing by layenge to his contrary. Dispartior, tiri, to diuyde, or be dyuided.
Dispeream, I pray god that I dye: it is a word used in the steed of an oath,
in the affirmance or denyenge of a matter. Disperij, I am undone. Displiceo,
cere, to displease. plautus in cistell.
Displicina, she that has displeased. Dispolio, idem quod despolio.
Dispoliabulum, a despoyle, plautus in Bacch.
a place where all myschiefe or robbery is done. Dispudet, I am ashamed, or he
is asshamed of that, which is done. Dissoluere, to pay that which is owed.
Terent. in phorm. Plautus in Mercator.
Dissoluere aliquem, to despatche one from a long taryenge. Dissuadere, to
turn one from doing of a thing Dissuo, ere, to undo a thing. Dist^det, I am
weary of a thing. Distinctio, distinction, separation. Distinct, distinctly in
order, as it may well be understand and perceived. Terent. in Eunucho.
Distorqueo, si, quere, to sort awrie. Ah illud uide, os ut sibi cariufex
distorsit, O, look how the hangeman sets his mouth away. Plin. de uiris
illustr. Plautus in Trucu.
Distractus, ta, tum, pullyd on sunder. Distractio, a pulling away or a
sunder. Districte, straytely. Distrunco, care, to cut in two pieces. Plautus
in ^acch.
Diuidia, busynes, trouble, variance.
D, ANTE O.
Plautus in capt Ide^ in Aul. In amphit.
DAre in ruborem, to make ashamed. Dare insidias, to deceive one. Dare
iusiurandum, to take an oath. Do lego, I give by testament or last will. Dare
malum alicui, to do one a shrewd turn Dare manus, to yield him self
vanquished. Dare mancipio, to deliver on warrantise. Suo periculo is emat, qui
eam mercabitur, mancipio neque promitret, Plautus in p^^^a.
neque quisquam dabit, He that will have her, let him bye her at his own
peril: for no man shall promise or deliver her on warrantise. Dare mutnum, to
lend. Dare vitio, to disprayse. Plautus (...) in (...) in (...).
Danunt idem quod dant, they give. Datu meo, of my gift. Datarius, a, um, that
which is to give. Datatim ludere, to toss from one to an another, as men
play at tenys. Doctor, he that teaches other. Doccus, a timber piece.
Dodrans, is also.ix. of the measures, called Cyath^, also.ix. inches in length
or breadth. Dogmaristes, he that folowethe an another man's doctrine. Dolenter,
sorowfully. Dolium, a vessel for wine, some call it a tu^ne, and conteyneth.xxx.
of the old measures called Amphoras. Doloro, aui, are, to cause one to have
sorrow or pain. Domi, at home. Domo, from home. Domum, to the house, or home,
sometime at home. Cicero de diuinatio^e Tibullus.
Domuitio, a departing home. Do mitus, ta, tum, made tame, subdewed, or
vanquysshed. Domator, idem quod domitor. Dominus, is also an owner. Domina, the
lady or maistresse. Dominatus, tus, domynation, or authorytie over other,
maystershyp. Domus, is sometime a temple or church. also a familye or kynrede,
alsoo a man's country, also a neste of birds. Donaticae coronae, garlandes
that in the old time were worn in plays. Dormire in vttamuis aurem, Terent.
in Heauto.
is a proverb which sygnifyeth to be without any manner of care. It may be
englished, To sleep soundly on both sides. Dormisco, scere, to begin to
sleep. Plautus in curcu. in Trinum.
Dormitator, a sleaper. Dormitorium, that which pertayne the to sleep.
Dorophorus, he that caryeth a present. Vergilius. Seruius.
Dorsum in mari, a heap of sand gathered in the sea, which watermen do call a
shelpe. Dorsus, idem. Dotes animi, the gifts of grace. Dotes corporis, the
gifts of nature. Doxa, in greek, sygnifyeth opinion, sommetyme glory.
D ANTE R.
Dram, the coin, which is in value v.d.ob. half farthyng. somewhat less,
after fyfty of them to five crowns of the son. Dracaena, the female dragon.
Draguntea, an herb callid dragons. Dragma auri, a coin which in value was as
much as one ounce and a half of silver.
D ANTE V.
DVbenus, old writers used for dominus. Dubitatim, doubtfully. Vergilius.
Ducere animo, to think. Ducere bellum, to make war. Ducere spiritum, to
draw breath, to line. Ci. ad qui.
Ducere vultum, to lowre. Ducere, is also to suppose. Ci. de ami.
Hanc esse in te sapientiam existimant, ut omnia tua in te posita esse ducas,
Men think that wysedom to be in you, that ye think all that which is your
own, to be in your self and not in Fortune. Ducere honori, to repute it
honorable. Salustius in iugurt. Ibidem.
Ducere minoris, to set less by it. Ducere officij, he supposid it to be his
duty. Ducere probro, to dysprayse. Ducere mortuum, to be deed. Meos ne ego
ante oculos illam patiar, alios. amplexarier? mortuum hercle me duco satius,
Shall I suffer him to embrace her before mine eyes? by god I had rather be read.
Ductare, to take to wise, also to esteem. Plautus in Asin. Plaut. in pers^.
Terent. in Adelphis.
Ductare restim, to lead the dance. Ducatus, the governance or condute of me^
Ductus, ta, tum, led. Ductus, tus, tui, a coundyte, whereby water does
rounne. Ductor, toris, a guide. Du^llator, a warryour. Plautus in Capt.
Duellica ars, the feate or science of arms. Duicensus, he that is set with
an other to pay money for a tax of subsidy. Duidens, a sheep of two tethe.
Dulceo, cere, to be sweet. Dulcidulus, a, um, a little sweet. Dulcesco, scere,
to be made sweet. Plautus in Mercator.
Dum, as long as. Vsque ne valuisti? C. perpetuo recte dum puidem illic fui:
Dyddeste thou well all that while? C. ye always well, as long as I was there.
Dumosus, a* um, full of brembles. Duodeuiginti, eyghtene. Duodecim, twelve.
Duodecimus, a, um, the twelf. Duonum, old writers used for bonum. Dupliciter,
two ways. Duricoria, things which have hard skins Duricors, dis, hard
hearted. Duratus, ta, tum, hardened. Duro ingenio, dull wytted. Dure, cruelly.
Duriter, with much pain. Duricles, rudeness, rygour.
D, ANTE Y.
Dynastea, a rule or governance.
EFOR THE MORE part signifies of. Ere nata, considering the matter. Ere nata
mellus fieri haud potuit, quam factum est: Co^sideringe the matter, or as the
matter chanced, it could not have been better done than it was. Eregione, on
the other part, on the other side against.
E ANTE B.
EBeati, they which from great prosperity are fallen into mysery. Ebeo, are,
to bring out of prosperity. Ebibo, bibere, to drink all out. Eboracum, a
city in England, called York. Eblandior, iri, to get a thing by flatery:
also to like. Ci. ad At. Id^^ planc. Columell.
Eblanditus, ta, tum, gotten by flatery. Ebriolus, la, lum, a lyttel drunk, or
a little person drunk. Laberius. pla. in aul.
Ebriulo, are, to make drunk. Ebriatus, drunk. Ebullo, are, to boble out, or
braste out. Ebulus, an herb called walworte, which is like to young elder
tree.
E ANTE C.
ECastor, an oath of the paynymes. Plautus in mercator.
Ecce me, lo here I am. Eccere, some used it for an oath, as it were, by Ceres:
some only for Ecce, lo now, or se now. Eccillum, for ecce illum, see him.
Plautus. Terentius
Eccistam, for ecce istam, se her. Echnephias, a storm, where a cloud is
broken and falls. Echi, lyttel narowe valeys or days between two hills.
Columel.
Econtra, contrary wise. Ci. in phil.
Ecorapeli, they which abhor the common facion or old vsages. Ectypum, that
which is made according to a pattern.
E, ANTE D.
EDem, signifies pleasure, dilectation. Ede^tatus, he that has his teth taken
out. Edicto, tare, Plautus in Epidic.
to declare or pronounce often times. Edictio, idem quod edictum. Edor, ederis,
edi, to be eaten. Edo, edis, edidi, edere, to execute or do a thing, or to
cause a thing to be done. Edere annos, to tell what age a man is o^. Edere
cedes, to make great slaughter. Edere clamorem, to cry out. Edere exemplum, to
show an exaumple. Edere foetus, to bring forth fruit. Edere iudicium, to
reherce the judgment. Cicero
Edere librum, to publyshe a book. Edere ludos, and spectacula, to cause plays
and pageantes to be showed to the people Edere nomen, to tell his name to be
written or regestrid. Edere oracula, to give answers, as the devil did in the
ydolles of paynymes. Edere praelium, and bellum, to make war. Edere rationem,
to yield account. Edere risus, to lawghe. Edere scelus, to commyt a
myscheuouse act. Edere scriptum, to show by writing. Edere spiritum, to dye.
Edere stragem, to make a great slawghter of men. Edititius iudex, Cicer. pr^
planco.
a judge whom the one part has chosen. Edoceo, cui, cere, to instruct or
inform one of a thing. Edo^misco, scere, to sleep soundely. Edormiscere
crapulam, to sleep until he be sober again. Educere, sometime sygnifyeth
educate. Plautus. Te. in Ad.
Eduro, rare, to make very hard.
E ANTE F.
EFfascino, nare, to bewytche any thing, as wytches do, which disfygure
children, and distroye grain and other things with sorcery. Effata, were
certain prayers, which the diuinours used to make at the end of their
divination or telling the success of thingis Effectum dare, to bring to
pass. Terent. in Adelphis. Cicer. her tensio.
Efferre sese, to praise him self. Effere manum, to lift up his hand. Effere
aliquem laudibus, to extolle oone with praises. Efferre, to deuulgate, or to
tell abroad. Efferre, to advance or promote. Effero, rare, to make wood as a
beast. Efferueo, ere, to boil much. Efferuesco, scere, to begin to boil or
sethe. Cicero de oratore. Plautus in Casina.
Efferuescentia uerba, hot angry words. Effexis, for effeceris. Efficere
argentum alicui, to get money for a man by some mean or deuyse. Efficientia,
idem quod effectus. Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones image in payntynge or
keruynge. Effilo, lare, to sow. Effilatum, that which is sowed or stitched on
a garment, as a guard or purfle. Plautus in (...). Plaut. in (...). Plautus in
(...) Ci. de (...). Terent. in Eunucho. Cice. ^^^e.
Effio, fieri, to be done. Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment. Efflare,
animam, to dye. Efflauit animam spes, I have no manner of hope or trust.
Effiuet, it shall out, I will not keep it, all men shall know it. Effluxit,
it is quyte gone. Effoetus, ta, tum, hatched, as a bird that is come out of
the egg. Effoetum corpus, a weak body. Effreno, nare, to vnbrydell. Effringo,
effregi, gere, to break to pieces. Effractus fame, made feeble for lack of
meat Effugit memoria, to be forgotten. Plautus in Bacch. Terent. in Andria.
Pli. in epi. and in pane.
Effugere nuptias, not to be married. Effuse, effusius, effusissime, abundantly,
more vehemently, excedyngly.
E ANTE G.
EGens est consilij, he lacks counsel Egeria, was an ydol, to whom women
with child did offer, supposyng that thereby they should travail easily. Egerit
aquam fons, the fountain pousheth out water. Egestio, onis, distribution
abroad, it is also the putting forth of ordure or dunge. Ego, I. Egomet, I my
self. Terent. in Eunucho.
Ego ne, who I.
E ANTE H, and I.
EHem, is a word spoken, when a man is moved with some thing, which is newly
happened. Eheu, alas. Eho (...), how serra, when one calls a man to him,
forgetting his name. Eiectus, ta, tum, cast out. Eiecto, tare, to throw
out. Eiulatio, a brayenge out with lamentation. Eiurare, to renounce,
Eiuratio, renouncing.
E ANTE L.
ELangueo, ere, to be sick. Elanguesco, scere, to wax feeble. Elauare se
bonis, Plautus in Asina.
to be clean washed from all his goods, to spend all, and leave nothing.
Elapsus, a, um, escaped. Elapsa est spes, hope is lost. Elleborus albus, an
herb callid Lyngwort, the root whereof is called nesyng powder. Elleborus
niger, an herb callid bears foot Elix, licis, a furrow made for water to
pass. Colu. li. 2.
Ellobia, things which were hanged at the cares of women. Ellum, for ecce
illum, see where he is. Donatus.
Elops, a fyshe called also Accipenser. Eluceo, cere, to shine. Vergilius.

E ANTE M.
EMaciatus, ta, tum, made lean. Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened. Emancipati, are
also they, which are out of their fathers rule, or they, Festus. Cic. in
catelina^.
which are made subjects to an another. Embata, a ship called a barque.
Embolium, the argument or first entree into a play or interlude. Embolismus,
the adding of a day in the year Emeritum stipendium, the last wages that a man
takes in wars. Emeriti senes, old men excused from labor by age. Emico,
care, to skyne forth. Emicare, to dance or leap. Emigro, grate, to goo from
oone place, Plautus in Aulular. Vergilius.
to dwell in an another. Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with us. Emoueo, uere,
to put away. Empyrium coelum, the heaven, which is next above all the seven
spheeres, and signifies the fyry heaven. Emu^io, tire, to humme or make any
other sown like a man that is dumme.
E ANTE N.
ENarro, rare, to tell a thing at length. Enato, tare, to swymme out.
Encaustes, he that fourmeth or facyoneth a thing with fire. Encaustice, making
of images with the fire. Enimuero, forsothe. Enixa, a woman late delivered of
child. Sueton. in othone.
Enotesco, scere, to come to knowledge. Enterocela, a disease when the bowelles
be fallen into a man's codde. Enucleate, clearly.
E, ANTE O.
Sueton. de claris gra^.
EO setius, never the less. Eo loci, in that state. Eo inficias, I deny. Eo
obniam, I goo to mete with one.
E, ANTE P.
EPacta, things added to. Ephesus, a city in Greece. Ephialtes, is that
disease, which is called the mare in slepynge. Ephimeron, the great wild
Lylly. Ephod, a stole, which a priest wears about his neck, when he is at
mass. Epicoenum, of both kinds. Epicia, called aequum and bonum, equytie,
which is justice without rigor of the law. Epimytheon, the declaration of a
fable. Epiphora, a syckenes of the eyes, callid the droppynge of the eyes.
Epiroticus, ca, cum, of the countray called Epirus. Eporhedicae, good breakers
of horses. Epulae, larum, a banquet made to many persons Epha, seu Ephi, a
mesure of the Hebrews or Jews, containing.lxxii. times the measure called
Sextarius Atticus. Read more after in Sextarius.
E, ANTE Q.
EQuiceruus, a beast in the oryente, having horns, and a long mane to the
shulders, and a bearde under his chyn, and fete round like a horse, and is as
great as an heart. Equisetum, an herb called horsetayle.
E ANTE R.
ERadico, care, to pluck up by the rotis. Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle
oone hard by the ears. Plautus in Epidico.
Erasus, a, um, rased or scraped out. Erogatio, distribution of things to
other men, a lyberall gyuynge. Erogito, tare, to desire heartily. Eros, love.
Erotema, it is, a demand. Erotematicus, he that often demands. Errare de
verbis alicuius, to mysvnderstande the words that one speaks. Erratio, a
goinge out of the way. Terent. in Adelph.
Erratum, an error. Erumpo, rupi, erumpere, to braste out, some time to leap
forth. Erumpet in neruum istae^ fortitudo, Terent. in phorm. Donatus. Erasmus
in Adag.
is a proverb, which is dyuersely expound, for it may signify, This courage
of thine may bring the to a halter, or to ^y^te by the heles. or it may
sygnify, This great strength or courage of thine will come unto nothing. which
proverb is taken of archers, which oftentimes when they put forth most
strength: they break the string of their bow, and the arowe falls down at
their fete, whereby the shot is lost, and comes to nothing. Eruptio, is
when an host issues hastily out of a camp or fortress, and falls on their
ennemies. Eruum, the grene peason. Eryngion, an herb like a thystel, the rote
whereof being condite or conserved in honey with cynamome and cloves,
comfort nature, and styrreth courage, and is of some men called Yringus.
E ANTE S.
ESalon, is a bird, which breaks crows eggs, and her birds be distroyd by
the wolf, and likewise she kylleth the wolfes whelpis, if she may com by them
Esau, the son of Isaac, and brother of Jacob. Essedarius, a charyot man.
Estrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer. Esurio, onis, an hungrye fellow. Plautus
in persa. Varro.
Esurigo, ginis, hunger.
E, ANTE T.
ETenim, for, also, semblably, surely. Etiamnae, is it so? is that enough?
Plaut. in Asin. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Amphi^. Cicero de amicitia.
Etiamnum, until than, until that time. Etiamnunc, until now. Etiamsi,
although. Etsi, idem.
E ANTE V.
EVangelia, liorum, pluraliter, were sacrifices and solemn prayers made after
good tidings. Euanno, are, Ci. de fini. Cic. ibide^.
to van corn or other like thing Euceria, opportunity. Eudoxia, good renoume
or good fame. Euenit ex sententia, it camme to pass as I, thou, or he would
have it. Euenit praeter sententiam, aut praeter spem, It happened otherwise,
than I, thou, or he thought, or trusted. Euerriculum, a fyshynge net callid a
drag. Euersus, a, um, destroyed. Euersio, destruction. Plautus in Menech.
Euhoe, a noise, which they do make that are in great heaviness and waylyng.
Euidenter, clearly. Euitesco, scere, to become grene. Euolo, lare, to flee
away. also to escape, It sign^fieth sometime to take away by stelth. Plautus in
Cuteli. Terent. in Eunucho.
Euoluo, uere, to turn hither and thither. Euoluere se turba, to wind him
self out of trouble. Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to cast out. Euomere itam,
to wreake anger. Euomere uirus, to spytte out his poison. Eupatorium, an herb
called agrimonye. Euphrasia, an herb called eybright. Eutrapelia, gentylnesse,
good manners. Eutrapelus, gentle and pleasant. Euxinus Pontus, a part of the sea, which divides Europa from Asia.
E ANTE X.
^
EXaduersum, even against it, on the other side. Ex aequo and bono facere, to
do justly or indifferently. Ex animo, of good will, of a good courage Cic.
(...).
Ex dignitate nostra, according to our ^state or dygnitie. Exacuo, cuere, to
make very sharp, to stere. Exaequo, quare, to make egall. Ti. Liuius. Plautus
in Trucu.
Exaeuio, uire, to wax gentle or mylde, Exagogae, they which carry any
thing out of the house. Exagoga, rent, revenues. Plin.
Exalburno, nare, to take out the farte juice that is in some wodde.
Exaluminati, orient perles. Examen, is also examination or trial. Examina
insantium, a company or sort of chylderne. Plautus in Truculen. Cic. Tusc.
Cicero de amicitia.
Examo, mare, to love well. Exanclo, is also to vanquyshe. Exardeo, si, dear,
to be vehemently inflamid. Exardesco, scere, to wax hot, or to be vehement.
Plautus in Mili. Plautus in Capt.
Exarco, rere, to be dry. Exaugeo, gere, to increase much. Exauspicaui ex
vinculis, I have had ill luck sens I came out of prison. Excalceo, ceaui, are,
to pull of hosen or shoes Excalfacio, cere, to make very hot. Terent. in
Andria.
Excessit ex ephebis, he passed boys age. Excedere puetis, idem. Cice. pro
Archia. Plinius in Epistolis.
Excedere officium, to do more than duty. Excellens, excellent, surmountynge.
Excelsitas animi, the valyantnes or heighte of courage. Excidere formula, to
lose his action. Sueton. in Claud.
Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the number of citelyns. Excidit animo, it
is out of my mind. Excido, cidi, cidere, to distroy. also to cut out of a
quarrye of stone. Excipere, to take unawares or suddenly. Excipere furem, to
receive a felone, Plinius in Aulul.
as an accessarye. Excogito, tare, to find or invent by thinking. Excogitatio,
invention. Excoquo, quere, to boil a thing until it be dry. Excrucio, are,
to tourment. plautus in cistell.
Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented. Excubo, bare, to keep watch.
Exculco, care, to tread out, or wring out. Exculpo, psi, pere, to grave or
intayle images, also to get any thing by bering of one. Exculpere oculum, to
thruste out ones cie. Terentius in phormi. Varro. Plautus in Pseud. Plautus in
Casina Plautus in Mostel.
Excurio, are, to put out of company. Excuro, rare, to dress a thing
curiously. Excuratus uictus, meat curiously dressed. Excuratus homo, a
galyarde fellow. Excurro, rere, to run out of a place. Excursus, sus, where
one passes his bounds Excursor, a currour. Excusabilis, le, that which may
be excused. Excusatius, more excused. Plinius.
Excutere alique^, to rob one, to shake oone out of his clothes. Excutiunt
cerebrum tua dicta, thy words do trouble my brain. Excutere iugum, to shake
of the yoke. Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the tears come out of ones
eyes. Excutere uomitum, to make one to spue. Excussi grandluae, beaten with
hayle stones. pli. in epi. Ci. in phil.
Excutere, is also to chese. Inuentutem ex tota Asia excussimus, ^e have chosen
out all the young men that are in Asia. Exector, idem quod execto. Exegeticon,
idem quod expositiuu^, uel enarratiuum, by the which oone expounds or
declares a thing. Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale. Exequi mortem, to dye.
Plautus in pseudolo. plautus in Trinum. plautus in Milite.
Exequi sermonem, to speak. Exercere aetatem, to live. Exercere Bacchanal, to
be drunk. Exercitatus, exercysed. Exerere uincula, to stryke of his gyues, or
to take out of prison. Exfodio, dear, to dygge out. Exgurgito, tare, to take or
cast out of the channel or stream. Exhaeredatus, disinherited. Exhaeresimus
dies, the day which makes the leap year. Exhaurire labores, to spend
labor. Exhebenum, a stone wherewith gold smyths. do polyshe gold Exhibere
rations, to make account* Exhibere spectaculum, to make commune plays or
triumph. Exhillaro, rare, to comfort or rejoice. Plautus. Pli. in epi. plautus
in Mercator. plin. de viris illust. Ci. in Ver. Cic. in oratore.
Exigere aetatem, to live. Exigere tempus, to pass forth the time. Exigi
matrimonio, to be deuorced. Exigere supplicium ab aliquo, to punish one.
Exigere nomina, to compel men to pay their dettes. Exacta aetate, at the
last end of age. Exacto mense, the month passed. Exiguus, a, um, little.
Exilica causa, a matter against them, which were in exile. Exigue, an Aduerbe,
which signifies very little. Columel.
Exilis, le, sclender, small. Eximie, excellently. Eximius, a, um, excellent.
Ci. in Ver. Cicero de oratore.
Eximere ex reis, to acquit one of an offense Eximere ex aerarils, where one
has his Qui etus est in the escheker, or other like place, to discharge one
upon his account. Tit. Li. 8.
Eximere noxae, to release one of a trespass committed. Eximere actione^, to
bar one of his action. V^p^a. titulo Ex quibus causia. Plautus in milite.
Exinde, idem quod exin, afterward, from thenseforthe. Exloquor, qui, to
speak as it is, to speak all. Exobsecro, crare, to make great desire.
Exoculatus, whose eyes be put out. Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eyes. Plautus
in Ruden.
Exoculasso, sere, idem. Exodia, were also wanton toys myxte with verses in a
comedy or interlude. Exonero, rare, to discharge or vnburdeyn. Exopto, tare, to
desire fervently, or wysshe. Plautus in Epidico. Ci. in ph^. Plautus in ^acch.
Exotheo, bui, bear, to suck up. Exorbo, bare, to make oone that he can not
see. Exorare ueniam, to ask pardon. Exorabilis, he that is easy to be
entreated in a matter. pli. in epi. Plautus in cafin. Donatius. Terent. in
Adelphis.
Expalleo, lui, lere, to be pale. Expallio, aui, are, to rob one of his
garme^tis. Expectatus, ta, tum, desired. Expectati parents, were ill parents,
and worthy to be hated, as who says, their death were daily to be desired.
Donatus.
Expeciario, desire of things certain and looked for. Expedire se cur^, to
discharge him of care. Terentius in phorm.
Expedire rations, to dispatche matters. Expedi, tell on quyckely. Terentius
in Eunuch. ^de^ in pho. pli. in epi. Plautus in Truculen.
Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly. Expeditum erat, it was expedient.
Expedibo, for expediam. Expeditus, dispatched. Expendere scelus, to be punyshed
justly for his offense. Expendere, Vergillus. aeneld. 2.
is also to examyn and to consider Expensum, uel expensam, has also an other
propre signification. Caelius Ci.
Mentio facta est de legione ea, qua^ expansam tulit C. Caesari Pom peius.
Mention was made of the legyon, which Pompeye reckened to be at the charge
of Caesar. Creditores suae negligentiae expensum far debent, Secuola. quae in
fraude^. L. pupilius. Cicero
The creditours ought to bear the loss, which is happened by their negligence.
Experge te, awake. Expergere facias, idem. Expergitus, wakened by an another.
Festus. Plautus in Amphitri. plautus in paenulo.
Expetunt multa iniqua, many unhappy things chances. Expetit tuam aetatem
illud facere, thine age requires to do it. Expetere, is also to pourchace.
Plautus in Ruden.
Mirum quin tuum ius meo periculo expetam, It is marvel but that I shall
pourchase thy right with my great danger. It is also to redou^de or turn.
Nam deum non par uidetur facere, Plautus in Amphit.
delictum suu^, suamque culpam expetere in mortalem ut sinat* It is not
sitting for god to do, that his offense and fault, should redounde to a
mortal person. Expetendus, da, dum, worthy to be desired. Plaut. in persa.
Plautus in Trinsimo. Asconius. Ci. in Ver. Cicero in pisonem.
Expetesso, sere, to demand. Expetisso, sere, to desire vehemently.
Expilator, a robber, which leaves nothing behind him. Expiare scelera. Tua
scelera dis immortales in nostros milites expiauerunt, God has punysshed our
men of arms for thine offenses. Expiamentum, satisfaction. Explanto tare, to
pull up that which is set. Columell. Sueton. in Tito. Te. in Hec.
Explendesco, scere, to appear clearly. Exple animum curis, put all care out
of thy mind. Explicare, Plautus in Epidic. Cicero in pisonem. pli. in epi.
Cic. de senectute. Idem de amicitia. Plinius in Epistolis.
is also to tell or show a thing plainly. Explica aestum meum, put me out
of this fantasy or doubt. Exploratu^ est mihi, I know surely, I am sure
Exploratum habeo, idem. Exporto, tare, to bear or carry out. Express dicere,
to speak properly and to the point. Exprobratio, a reproach. Terent. in
Andri. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in milite.
Exprompta memoria, a ready wit. Expuere miseriam ex animo, to put myserye
clean out from the mind, to forget misery. Expurgo, are, to make all clean.
Expurgare se, to declare him self innocent of that which is laid unto him.
Expurgationem habere, idem. Columell. planc. Cic. Plautus in curcu.
Expurare, is also to cut clean away: also to coniecte. Exputresco, scere, to
rotte. Exquisitus, ta, tum, exquysyte, much serched for. Exquisito opus est,
it must be looked for. Exquisite et exquisitim, exquisitely, with much study
and diligence. Plautus in Bacch. pli. in pan. Plautus in Bacch.
Extendere, is also to continue, to prolonge. Extentare uires, to thrust out
strength in doing a thing. Extergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype clean. Extergo,
idem. Exterus, tera, terum, that which is not of this country or place.
Extimeo, mere, to have great fear. Extirpo pare, to pluck up by the roots.
Extollere, is also to lift up. ^
Extollere liberos, to bring up children: also to prolonge: also to magnify.
Extortus, constrained by tourmentes. (...) Cl^^^. (...) T^. Li^ius. Plautus
^ur^co^, ad ex ^iben. plautus in paenulo.
Extra precium, above any price. Extra, except. Extra iocum, in erneste.
Extraneus haeres, he that is not the very heir Extraho, traxi, trahere, to
draw out. Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day to day. Extrahere
certamen, to defer battle. Extrahere iudicium, to defer judgment.
Exuer^ae, the swepynges of a house. Exuerto, tere, to preuente. Ex uinculis
causam dicere, to plede in ward. Exungo, xi, gere, to anoynte. Plautus
Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nails. Exuere, is also to depryue. Vergilius.
Exue mentem, put away that mind. Exurgo, gere, to arise up.
F ANTE A.
FACETE, meryly. plautus in Milite. Plautus in capt.
Facere aucupiu^ auribus, to harken as a spy. Facere carnificina^, to execute
the office of an hangeman, in hanging, behedynge, or quarterynge of men. Cic.
Cato.
Facere castra, to set a camp. Facere certiorem, to ascertayne, or advertise
one by letters or messager. Facere compendiu^, to make short, to abrege.
Plautus.
Facere compot^, to give to one, that thing, which he desires. Facere
coniecturam, to coniecte or deem. Facere contumeliam, to do displeasure.
Plautus in Asina. Terent. in phorm.
Facere copiam argenti, to lend money. Facere copiam alicuius, to let him take
his pleasure of one. Facere delitias, to speak for pleasure, Plautus in
paenulo. Cicero in philip.
or in mockage. Fac esse, admyt that it be so, or put the case it be so.
Facere fidem, to make one to believe. Facere frugem, to drynge gaynes. Plautus
in paenulo. Cicer. pro cluen. Plautus in curcul. Terentius in Eunuch. Plautus
in Amphitri.
Facere funus, to minister funeralles. Facere gradum, to walk or go a iournay.
Facere gratiam; to give thank. Facere gratum, to do pleasure to one. or to win a man's favor. Facere grauidam, to geate with child. Facere iacturam, to
have a great loss. Facere inditium, to tell or to give warning of a thing
that he knows. Facere ingenium suum, Plautus in Mercator.
to do according to his wit or nature. Facere insidias, plautus in paenulo.
Terentius in phorm.
to lie in a wait to do harm to oone. Facere ludos, to mock or skorne.
Facere magni, to esteem much. Facere nequiter, to do shrewdely. Facere ocium,
to give to one leisure. Plaut. in Mili.
Facere palam, to tell a thing abroad. Facere periculum, to prove, to assaye.
Facere pluris, to set more by. Facere propitium, to make him thine or his good
lord or master. Facere quaestum, to gain. Facere reducem, to bring one
again. Plautus in capt. Terent. in Adelphis.
Facere re^, to get profit or gain by a thing. Facere reum, to accuse or sue
one in a criminal cause. Facere risum, to laughe. Facere scelus, to do a
myscheuous deed. Quintilia.
Facere sementem, to sow grain. Cicero de oratore. plin. de viris illustr.
Plautus in Amphit. Non. Mar. Plautus in Bacch. Terent. in And. Plautus in
Epidico. Ci. in Top plautus in Trucu.
Facere stipe^dia, to be in wages in the wars Facere superbum, to sle one.
Facere technam, to play a craftye pageant. Facere transacta omnia, to bring
all things to a point. Facere turbas, to make business. Facere uadimonium,
to lay in gage or suerte. Facere uerba aut uerbum, to speak. Facere uindemia^,
to gather grapes to make wine. Facere uitium, to fall in decay. Facere
uolupratem, to satisfye mine thyn or his pleasure or appetite. also to delight
with pleasure. Fagineus, et Faginus, a, um, of beche. Vergili. 9.
Falurica, were waypons, which were thrown out of toures. Falce, falsely.
Plautus in Bacch.
Falcimonia, deceyptes. Falsus, a, um, false. Famam dissipare, to sow a brute
or noise in the people. Famigero, to dinulgate or publishe a thing. Varro.
Farrago, ginis, diverse grain and pulse corn myngled for prouander, called in
Cambryge shyre, bolymonge. it is sometime used for a myxture of any other
thing. Iuuenalis.
Fatuus, a, um, unsavory, without any manner of taste. Fauoniana, pears which
are read.
F, ANTE E.
FElicones, men which are necessary for no thing. plautus in capt.
Feriae esuriales, fasting days. Ferinus, ferina, ferinu^, pertaynyng to
wild beasts. Far conditionem, to proffer, to put to the choice, to offer a
condition. Plautus in market.
Far gradum, to go forth. Far grauiter, to take a thing greuousely. Fer
manum, give me thy hand. Plautus in Truculen. Terent. in Heauto.
Fer me, supporte me, help me. Far moleste, to take a thing displesantly.
Far osculum, to kiss. Far sententiam, to show his opinion. Far
suppetias, to succor. Festra, a little wycket.
F, ANTE I.
FIctus, ta, tum, made to the similitude of a thing. Ci. in phil. Cicero de
ienectute. Terent. in And. Te. in Hec.
Fidem deserere, to break promise. Finge animo, suppose or put the case. Fit,
it happens. Firmare fidem, to perform promise. also to accord to a thing.
Firm, steadfastly. Firmiter, idem.
F ANTE L.
FLagrare inopia, to be in great poverty. Flamatick, a tree burned with
lightning Flam^arius, a dyer of yelowes. Flameum, a veyle or typpette of
yelowe, which women did wear, when they were new married. Flammigena,
commen of fire. Festus.
Flegmen, is where with much going the bloudde issues out of the toes.
Flexipes, pedis, he that has crooked fete. Flustrum, the fulle tide in the sea, or other water, which ebbeth and flowyth.
F ANTE O.
FOenusculum, a bottell of hey. Forago, a skayne of yerne. Forma stata, a mean
beaultie or stature. Fors, Fortune. Fors fuat, god send the good fortune,
Terent. in Hecyra. Donatus,
god speed the well. Fors fortuna, good chaunc^. Forsitan, and forsan,
peradventure. Fors, is sometime used for Forsitan, peradventure. Forte fortuna,
by good adventure. Fortesco, scere, to wax or be strong. Neu^us.
Fortit^r, puyssantly, valyantly. Fortunae, goods, good fortune, aduancemente.
Forensia, Judges robes, Sueton. in Augusto.
or the habytes the which are worn in the places of Judgment. Fouere in
pectore, to think pryuyly. Plautus in Bacch.

F ANTE R.
FRacecre, to be resolved, putryfyed, or rotten. Fraces, lies of oil. Fraenos
inijcere alicui, to let oone of his pleasure, to brydell him that would not
be ruled. Fractae res, things spent or lost. Fracti bello, werye of wars.
Fractus, ta, tum, broken. Fragilis, le, frail, broukle. Fragilitas, frayiltie
or brouklenes. Fratricida, he that has slain his brother. Fratrueles,
brothers chylderne, cousyne germaynes. Frequentissimae aedes, a house much
hanted with people. Frequens adest, he comes often. Frontem explicare, to
look meryly. Terentius Plinius.
Frontem exporgere, idem. Frontem contrahere, to look sowerly. Front
exporrecta, with a merye countenance. Frugaliter, temperately, soberly,
Plautus in Epidico. Cato. Terent. in Heautont. Plautus in Bacch. Plautus in Amph
without excess or ryotte. Fruiscor, sci, for fruor. Frui ingenio suo, to do
as he will. Frustra es, Thou art deceived or abused. Frustra habere aliquem,
to abuse or deceive oone. Columel.
Frustrari expensas, to loose his costs and charges. Frustratio, abusing or
deceyuynge of one
F, ANTE V.
FVat, for fit. Plautus in Amphitri. Cicero.
Fugere, is also to exchue. Fugit te ratio, thou vnderstandeste not the matter.
Fugit me, I have forgoten it. Fugiens uinum, wine that has lost his verdure.
Fugientes litere, blind letters. Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitive, not abiding.
Fugitiuarius, a, um, that gladly and quickly runs away. Plautus in
Trinu^mo. Plautus in Trinum.
Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherewith a thing is sustained.
Fulguritassunt, stryken with lyghtnynge. Fulguritum, stricken or blasted with
lightening. plautus. Martialis.
Fullonica, fullars craft. Fumos ue^dere, is the practice of them, which
being nygh about a prince, or in his favor, ^
do bear men in hand, that they speak for them to the prince, where they
speak never a word: and cause men thereby to live in fools paradyse. ^
Funditus me perdidisti, thou have utterly undone me. Funditus perii, I am
utterly undone. Fundere exercitum, to dyscomfite an army. Fundus, is sometime
taken for a foundation. also for the chief author of a thing. Fungi officio
suo, to do his devour. Funginus, a, um, of a mousheron. Plautus in Asina.
Funus facere, to cause one to dye. Futio, it is, tere, to pour out, or run
out. Futis, a vessel, wherewith water was poured in to a lauer, to bring water
in to a parlour or soupynge chamber.
G, ANTE A.
GABA, a town in Galile Gabalum, a town in France, nyghe to Narbona, where
there was made very good chese. Gabaon, a City in the holy land nyghe to
Rama, where Solomon doing sacrifice, spoke with god. Gabaonitae, men of that
town. Gabba, a city in Siria. Gabriel, signifies the puissaunce or might of
god. Galatia, a country in the less Asia. Galgulus, a bird, whom if one do
behold that has the yelowe iaundise, furthwith the man becomes hole, and
the bird has the syckenesse. Galilea, is a countray, Plinius
which marches on Siria, Arabia, and Egypt. Gallaria, a lampurne. Pau. Iouius
Gallus, a, um, of France. Gangaridae, people between Assiria and Inde.
Columell.
Gangilium, a sickness in the head of a beast, wherewith the head becomes full
of water. Ganzae, geese. Garu^na, a river in France, called Gyrond.
Gastrimergia, gloteny.
G, ANTE E.
GEbuseus, the son of Canaan, of whom the old inhabitauntes of Jerusalem were
called Gebusei. Gedeon, the name of a judge in Israel. Gedrosia, a countray in
Asia. Gemellariae, an instrumente, by the which oil runs out of the
press. Gemmosus, sa, um, that which is all of preciouse stones. Gemit cymba,
Vergilius.
the boat cracketh being ouercharged. Generositas, an aptnes to ingendre,
Colum. 3.
to bring forth, sometime it signifies nobility. Genezareth, a great mere or
ponde in the land of promission, and it is alsoo called Mare Tiberiadis.
Genocha, a beast less than a fox, in color a dark yelowe, full of black
spots: I suppose it to be a black Ienet, the furre whereof is in England
esteemed above all other furs. Genselia, which is compacte of many families
or kynredes. Geodesia, is a science of things concerning sensible greatness
and figure. Gergonia, a town in Guyen, standing on an high hill. Gerere
bellum, to make war. Pli. in p^^.
Gerere honores, to be in honor or autorite. Gerere morem, to obey. Terent.
in Adelph. Cicero de amicitia. Plautus in paenulo. Plautus in Amphit.
Gerere negotium, to do his business. Gerere praeturam, to be in the
authirotye of a judge. Gerere pudorem, to be shamefaste. Gerere rempublicam, to
mynistre the publyke weal. Gerontocomion, an hospital, wherein old men are
kept, an almesehouse. Gesta, things which have benne done, acts. Gethae,
people, which some suppose to be those, which are in Norway and Gothia* some
say that they be more in the northeste in Scithia parteynynge to Europa.
G, ANTE I.
GIbbosus, idem quod Gibber. Githago, cokyll growing among corn which is
ripe, Giruli, fysshes which I suppose to be menowes.
G ANTE L.
GLomus, mi, et glomus glomeris, a botome of threde. Glucidatum, sweet and
delectable.
G ANTE N.
GNafalium, an herb, which is also called Chamezelon, whose leaves are so
white and soft, that it seems to be floxe Gnafos, a ^^fyll, which towkars do
use in rowing of clothes. Liuius.
Gnarauit, et Gnarauisse, for Narrauit et Narrauisse. Gnariter, for gnare,
wyttsly. Gnauus, quick, active, apt to every thing. Gnauiter, dyligently,
lustily, valiantly. Gnitur, et G^^urs, old writers used for Gignitur, et Nixus,
Gnoro, for Noro. Gnosco, for Nosco. Gnossos, a city in Greta or Candy.
Gnosius, a, um, of that city.
G ANTE O.
GOmo^, is a measure of the hebrews, and in the (...) part of Ephi, wherefore it
conteyneth.vii times the measure called ^e^tarium in ounces, an half ounce.ii.
scruples, on half (...), half one silique, and the tenthe part of Siliqua
Gobio, idem quod Gobius a goge^^. Gorgonius, a, um, parteyning to Gorg^nes
Gorthia, a countray beyond Norway, whereof the people (...), which destroyed
the (...) of Rome, with the more part of Europe.
G ANTE R.
GRadus, a griece whereby a man goes upward. Also a degree. Liuius.
Grad^ (...) to cause (...) step back. Ci. Tus. 2. Ci. de off. 1
Grad^ (...) of estimation or authority. Gr^d^ (...), to (...) p^^te from a
constaunte purpose. Gradus, honor. Ci. in philipp. 1.
Graec^^^lix, red wyllowe. Graecisco, are, to follow the greeks. Graecia, the
countray called greece. Graecus, a greek. Grandiusculus, a, um, a little
greatter. Gratiam habere, to thank. Gratiam i^ire, to get thank. Gramma, idem
quod scriptulum, uel scrupulu^, a scruple, the.xxiiii. part of an ounce.
Gratiam refer, to require one with a good turn o^ an ill. Gratia tui, for
thy sake. Gratus, a thankful man. Grati^^do, (...), kyndenesse. Gra^^,
kyndely. Grauastellus, an ancient father. Plautus. Vergilius.
Grauis nuntius, heavy tidings. Grauep^ ^^^m, an high price. Grave din^^u^, a,
um, heavy or unlusty, disposed to do no thing. Grauicors, cordis, he that has
a great heart. Grauiloquus, he that speaks gravely and seriousely. Gremi^^, is
the space between the two thighs, specially of a woman. Granta, herb
roberte.
G, ANTE V.
GVesselli, beasts like to myse, which have their dunge as sweet as musk
Guberno, nare, to gouorne. Gubernaror, a master of a ship. Plinius in
Epistolis. Ci. in phil.
also a governor of a countray. Gubernacula nauis, the Instruments, whereby
the ship is ruled.
H, ANTE A.
HAb^^ eum arcte, Plautus in Mercator.
he keeps him short or from liberty. Habere ^ontionem, to preach, to declare
a thing to the people. Habere ratione^ (...), to (...) the earth. Habitus, ta,
tum, (...). Habi^ (...) father of many (...) Hadria, being the masculyne
gendre, is taken for (...), or the fe^ther* being the (...) gen^re, it is a
town (...). Hadria^^^, a no^ ^^per^ure, which in all (...) ex^^l^utly l^^^ed.
Hadriaticum mare, the sea, which is between the north part of Italy and
Illiria, or A^^^ony. Terent. in Eunucho. Ide^ in Ad.
Hac, hense. sometime by this place. Hac non successit, it come not well to
pass this way. Haebudes, are Isles beyond Scotla^nde two days saylynge,
whereof be five. Herba, an herb. Herbaceus, a, um, that is of herbs.
Herbarius, he that knows herbs, and their virtues. Herbarius, a, um, of
herbs. Herbesco, scere, to be an herb. Herbidus, et Herbosus, a, um, having
many herbs. Hagiographa, holy scripture. Hagiographus, a writer of holy
scripture. Hallux, the greatte toe, which lies over the next toe. Halyetus,
a foulcon. Hanus barbarus, a little pot with a great belly, wherein wine and
water were wont to be brought to the table. Terent. in Eunucho. Vergili.
Vergilius. C^cer pro M Cal^o.
Haud innito, wyllyngly. Haud nihil, some thing. Hausit coelum, he saw heaven.
Hausit corda pauor, fear made their courages feign. Au^ustinus.
Haurire dolore^, to endure heuines or sorrow Hauritorium, any thing whereby
water is drawn out of a well.
H ANTE E.
HEana, a foundation. Hebetesco seu hebetasco, scere, belongs proprely to the
eyes, to be dulle in sight. Hebraei, Jews. Hecatontarchus, the Capytayne of a
hundred men. Hecta, vel heta, a try^^e. Hemina, is a measure, which is half
asmoche as Sextarius, that is to say, conteyneth x. ounces, and is also called
Dextane, in the pound of measure. Hedui, people in France, now callydde
Burgonyons. Vid. Caesa.
Helciarius, he that draws a ^o^^ against the stream. Helicon, a mountain
in Boeotia. Heliopolis, a city in Egypt. Helleborum edere, is a proverb
spoken to men, which are very melancholye, or be wild brayned. Heluella,
small herbs or wortes. Helxine, an herb called pelitory. Hemionitis, sieve
hemonion, an herb which we commonly call hearts tung^. Hemicadia, vessels
called a tierce, half a hoggesheed. Heo, an interiection, How. Heptaphillon,
an herb called tormentill. Hercle, a word used to ornate a sentence by
affyrmation. Here, for heri, yesterday. Herinatius, an hedgehogge. Hermathena,
was two images to gether of Mercury and Mynerua. Heroes, herois, an half god,
or he which for the love of virtue susteyneth great labors and peril. Hera,
the lady, the maystree, the dame. Herilis, le, perteinyng to the lord or
master. Hexaplum, vel hexapla, an example. Hexasticum, six verses together.
Hexapeda, a measure called a fathom.
H, ANTE I.
HIbisous, wild melowes. Terent. in And.
Hic, Tu si hic sis, aliter sentias, if thou were I, or as I am, thou woldeste
think other wise. Hieratica, fine paper. Hin, a measure of the Hebrews, which
conteyneth.xii. times the measure called Sextarius, read more in Sextarius.
Hinnus, hinna, and hinnulus, hinnula, a mule engendered between an ass and a
mare. Terent. in Adelph. Ide^ in Eun.
Hinc, an aduerbe sygnyfienge from thense. Hinc illinc venit, He comes I
know not from whens. Hinc loci mei, from my countray, or town that I came
fro. Ide^ in and.
Hinc, for that cause. Hinc illae lachrimae, For that cause were the tears, or
that was the matter wherefore he wept. Hiant flores, the flowers do spread.
Vergili. 6.
Hiare, to wonder or marvel. Hippagogius, an instrumente, wherewith stones
are polyshed. Hipparchus, captain of the horsemen. Hippei, cometes or blasyng
sterres, having manes like horses. Hippiades, images of women on horsback, as
the women of Amazon were always painted. Hippia^, was a philosopher in Grecia,
which (...) him self to know al sciences and arts: for in eloquence he was
excellent, meru^ylouse in poetry, also in musyke, and made the instruments,
whereon he played, and all the (...) that he did wear, and the ring (...)
^yn^^r, which was wonderfully well gra^en, and wrought his gyrdell with nedell
w^^ke incomparably, and a philosophy (...) with a^ (...) Hippobotos, a feder of
horses. Hippolap^^^^^, an herb, which some do suppose to be patience.
Hypericon, an herb callid saint John's (...). Hydropiper, seems to be the
herb which the potecaries do commonly call Eupatory. Histria,
H ANTE O.
HOdiernus, na, um, of this day. Homonymon, where many things have one name,
but diverse in effect: As a man, which is alive, or painted, divided by this
addicion, a very man, a painted man. Cicero.
Honorifice^tissime, in a very honorable form or manner, very honorably.
Honorem prefari, is where one shall speak of any thing, that is not honest,
than to say, Saving your reverence. Hora, is sometime taken for a day: also for
time Hordeaceus, a, um, of barley. Plinius.
Hordearij, they which do live with eating barley. Horiola, a little fyshers
bote. Horno, an aduerbe sygnifienge this year. Horrent agri, the fyldes are
unpleasant and unfruitful. Horti pensiles, gardeynes made on the tops of
houses, or upon pylars. Hortenfis, se, perteynynge to a gardeyne, or of a
gardayne. Hospitium, a house always ready to receive friends. Sometime a
lodging* also an hospytall. sometime frendeshyppe showed in hospitalitye.
H, ANTE Y.
HYades, the seven sterres. Hydragogus, he that brings water to a place by
furrows or trenches. Hydrargyru^, a certain thing, wherewith silver is gilt
in the stead of quick silver. Hypenium ouum, an egg which has neither white
nor yelke. Hypotheca, a pledge. also a doctrine. Hypothesis, an argument,
matter, or cause, whereupon one should argue, dispute, or speak. Hycca, a great
fysshe, which Hermolaus Barbarus takes for a Sturgeon.
I, ANTE A.
IA, was the younger son of Atlas, and sounethe as much as a royse. Pli. in
epi. Cicero de ^micitia.
Iacet grauiter, he lyethe sick. Iacens animus, a desperate mind. Quintil. 9.
Cicer. pro Roscio, Cicero.
Iacet oration, the oration is without any grace or spirit. Iacent preti^, they
are of a low price. Iacent, they are without virtue, courage, or estimation.
Iacere, to extend out or be of length. Iacio, ieci, iacere, to cast or
throw. Iacere fundamentu^, to set or lay a foundation. Jacob, a patriarch,
son of Isaac. Iam, is also incontinent or forthwith. Iam ne imus? shall we
not go now? Terent. in Eunucho.
Iatros, a physician.
I, ANTE B.
Ibidem, there, or in the same place.
I, ANTE D.
ID curat scilicet, he cares much therefore, Ter. in An.
which is spoken as who says, he cares nothing for it. Id locorum, for Id.
plau. in ca. and in paenu. Ci. de orator. and pro Milone.
Id temporis, at that time, or such a time. Id temporis est: The time is
such. Idaspes, a river runnynge by Parthia and Inde: and at the last falls
into the great river called Indus: in this river is found much gold and
precious stones. Idem, also signifies like or sembable. Plautus in Epidico.
Ter. in an.
Idipsum, the same thing, or one thing. Idomeneus, the son of Deucalio^ and
king of Crete.
I, ANTE E.
Iessen, a town, where Joseph met his father Jacob, and brought him into
Egypt.
I, ANTE G.
IGnarius lapis, a fire stone, or flynte, out of the which fire is beaten.
Affranius.
Ignauia, is also lack of courage. Ignauit, he made him a fool. Ignauiter,
with a falls heart, or cowardly.
I, ANTE L.
ILlabor, beris, labi, Vergili.
to throw him self into a thing. Medieque minans illabitur urbi: And
thretnynge them, he threw him self into the city. Illaboratus, ta, tum,
that which is made or done without labor. Illac, on that side. Illiusmodi, of
that sort. Illepidus, without dilectation or grace. Illiberalis, ungentle,
without kyndenesse or courtesy. Illibera^e facinus, an vncurteyse pageaunt.
Te. in Ad.
Illinc, from that place. Illiteratus, unlearned. Illo, to the place. plautus in
capt.
Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go about a great thing without reverence, or
dishonestely to treat a thing of great estymation. Gellius. Macrobi,
Illotis pedibus, fere idem, also without shame Illuc, in that place or there.
Illutibilis, that which can not be washed away.
I, ANTE M.
IMaginosus, sa, um, full of images. Immemor, forgetful, he that does not
remember. Immemorabilis, le, unworthy remembrance, Plautus in Capt. Suetonius
Plautus in A^^na.
Immensus, a, um, of such greatenesse, that it can not be measured. Immerens,
he that has not deserved. Immerito meo, without my deserte. Immerito, an
aduerbe, without deserving. Immergo, mersi, gere, to drown, or to plo^ge a
thing in the water. Cicer. pro (...) in (...).
Immersit se in alicuius consuetudinem, He brought him self into deep
acquaintance with one. Immersit se in ganeum, he is gotten into a tavern: or he
has thraste him self in to a tavern or ale house. Immigro, to go to dwell in
a place. ^
Immigraui in ingenium meu^, I came to mine own rule, or to be ruled by min
own wit. Imm^^ere, signifies also, to be nygh. Mors propter incertos casus
quotidie imminet, Death, by uncertain chances, is every day nyghe. (...)
Ver. Act. 4*
Imminent in fortunas nostras, they be at hand and ready to rob us of our
goods. Imminet exitio alterius, he is ready to sle one. Imminens, that which
is at hand. Imminens ingenium, a runnynge wit. Imminuere caput alteri, to
break ones head. Plautus in Mo^^el.
Imminuere pudicitiam virginis, to defloure a maiden. Imminuere maiestatem, to
commyt treason. Immisceo, scui, scere, to mengle to gether. Immisericot diter,
without pity. Terent. in Adelphis. Plinius
Immitis, te, cruel, without pity. Immitia poma, apples which are not yet
ripe. Immobilis, le, immovable. Plautus in poenu.
Immodestus, ta, tum, without temperaunce. Immodeste, out of measure: also to
much. Immodicus, ca, cum, great or much. Martialis.
Immodici, many. Immodice, to much. Immola, a city in Italy, which was
sometime called Forum Cornelii. Immortalitas, a perpetual life. Immortalis,
le, vnmortall, that lives ever. Immoror, rari, to abide or continue in a
thing. Immustulus, a little bird, I suppose it be a wrenne. Immuto, tare,
Plautus is Epidico. Ibidem.
to change one thing for a another. Immutabilis, le, unchangeable. Impanero,
crare, to invade, or go into a place Impar, not equal, not sufficient.
Imparens, disobedient. Imparatus, unready, vnpuruayed. Festus. Plautus in
Amphitri.
Impatibilis, le, that which can not suffer or sustain. Impauidus, he that
fears not. Impendent mala, myschiefe is nyghe. Cic. plane.
Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded. Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule
desires or appetytes. Impertio, tiui, tire, et Impertior, tiris, perti, to
partycipate with one, to give part of that which he has. Impertire salute,
to salute. Impertitur, part is given. Terent. in Eunucho. Festus.
Impesco, scere, to put a beast in to a good pasture to feed. Impigre,
diligently, without slouthe. Impio, are to defile, to stayne him self with a
dishonest or foul deed, specially against god or his parents. Implere,
sometime signifies to accomplish or put in execution. Sueton. plinius.
Columell. Non. Mar. plautus in Epidic.
Impluo, ere, to rain in. Implutus, wet in the rain. Impluiatus, ta, tum,
colored as it were wet in the rain. Imponere legem, to set a law on a
thing, Imponere alicui, to deceive one. Importuosus, a, um, without port or
haven. Improbus aliae, rei, good for non other thing. plautus in Milite.
Ibidem. Most.
Improba merx, ill marchaundise. Improbi posts, rotten posts, or decayed, or
feeble. Improbe, an aduerbe signifyenge si, nowghtyly, unhappily. Improlis, vel
Improlus, he which is not yet a cytezen. Improuidus, he that prouydethe not
for the time coming. Improuidus, da, dum, that which comes sodaynely and
unlooked for. Improuisus, a, um, idem. Improuise, unthought on, or unlooked for.
Imprudens harum rerum, not knowing of those matters. Imprudentia, lack of
foresyght, that it was not thought on. Imprudenter, unwisely, unadvisedly.
Imputare, Vlp. Caius
is also to reken one thing with a another, or to account one sum with a
another.
I, ANTE N.
Ci. in Ver. Cicero de amicitia. Terent. in Andri. Plautus in persa. Quintilia,
Plautus in A sin.
IN annum, for a year. In bonis, among good men. In coenam, for supper. In
conspectum aspice, look before the. In diem uiuere, to live without carynge for
to morrow. In numerato habere, ready, or at hand. In partem, for thy part. Age
sis, tu in partem nunc iam hunc delude, atque amplexare hanc: Goo to now for
thy part, deceive him hardely, and take her unto the. Cicero.
In pedem, for every foot. Is se ternis nummis in pedem tecum transegisse
dicebat: He said, that he bargayned with the for three pence a foot, or for
every foot. Cicer. pro lege Ma.
In potestatem esse, under the rule, or at the pleasure of one. In praesentia,
at this present time. In primis, above all other things. In procliui, that
may be lyghtely or easyly done. In promptu est, it is easy to know, it is
apparaunte. Plautus in pseud. Festus.
Inanis accedit, he comes without bringing any thing with him. Inciens, a
woman nygh her time to travail of child. Inclareo, uel inclaresco, ere, to be
known of all men. Inconsulte, without counsel, or unadvisedly Incontinens,
he that is not chaste, or keeps him not to one woman. Incoquo, xi, coquere, to
seethe or boil in a thing. Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or raw. Festus.
Incoctae mulieres, women which do trymme their hears to much. Incoctile, a
brasyn or copper vessel, tynned within. In consilio ad^sse, to be of counsel
in a matter in law. Cic. act. 4. in Verrem
Me quoque Petilius, vt sibi consilio adessem, rogauit: Petilius alsoo desired
me, that I would be of counsel. Plautus in cistell.
Incordio, aui, are, to put into a man's heart, to persuade him. Incubo, bonis,
they that set al their study on treasure. Plautus in Aulular. Ibidem.
Incumbere, to be inclyned to some thing. Incumbere gladium, to thrust him
self on a sword. Indecens, unsitting, inconvenient. Indecoris, re, idem quod
Indecor. Indecore, an aduerbe, sygnifyeng unhonestly, vnconueniently. Indico,
dixi, dicere, to denounce properlye war. Indicere consilium, to call or
command a counsel. Indicere iustitium, to command a vacation or as we do
say, to keep no term. Indicere pecuniam populo, to set a tax or subsydie on
the people. Induere posts pice, plautus in mostel.
to lay on pytche on the posts. Induere personam alterius, to speak in the
name or stead of a another man. Quintilia.
Induere personam iudicis, to represente a judge. Industry, wyttyly. Inire
rationem, to find the mean. Inire, to leap, as a horse lepeth a mare.
Ineunte aetate, in youth. Ineunte uere, at the beginning of the spring of the
year. Inexhaustus, a, um, never ceasynge. Infer crimen alicui, to lay to
ones charge. Infer sermonem, to talk. Infectus, infected, stained, dyed.
Infectum reddere, to undo that which is done. Infecta pace, without any
peace made. Infector, a dyar of colors. Infit, he said, he began. Inflecto,
tere, to bow or plye. Influo, xi, ere, to run into a thing, as water or
other lycour does. Infuco, care, to color a thing, intending deceipte.
Infuscare uinum merum, Plautus in cistell.
to alaye wine with water. Ingeniculus, a figure among the sterres. called
now Hercules. Ingenua facta, noble acts. Ingens animus, a great courage.
Plautus in milite. Plautus in Asina.
Ingerere dicta in aliquem, to chyde with one, to say ill of one. Ingerere
malum, to do displeasure. Ingerere pugnos, to strike with the fyste. Ingratijs,
maulgre one. Plautus in Amphit. and in curcu. Terentius in Eunuch.
Ingratus, ta, tum, unthankful, dyspleasaunt, constrained, or against a
man's will also unkind, and not remembrynge frendshyppe, or benevolence.
Inguinium, a city in Liguria, aunciente and rich. Inhabilis, le, unapt.
Plinius in Epistolis, Plautus in Sticho Ci. in phil.
Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place. Inhibere imperium, to have charge or
rule. Inhibere supplicia alicui, to execute turmentes on one, or to put one to
death. Inhibere nauem, to cast ancre, or to stay a ship, which is under
sail, that she sail not a full course. Terent. in Eunucho.
Inhonestus, ta, tum, dishoneste. Inhoneste, dishonestly. Inhonoratus, ta, tum,
lacking honor. Inhospes, he that will lodge no man. Inhospita tecta, houses
where no man may lodge. Inhospitalis, le, unapt for lodging, Cicer. pro
Roscio.
Inh^mo, are, to put into the ground. Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehende
or attache one. Terentius in phormi.
Inijcere scrupulum alicui, to put one in a fantasye. Sucton.
Inijcere studium alicui, to cause one to study. Iniquo animo far, to be
myscontented or so rowfull. Inique, myscheuousely, or unjustly. Plautus in
Trucu^en. Cicero de senectute.
Iniuria tua, through thy defaulte. Iniussu imperatoris, without the emperors
commandment. Iniusta, ta, tum, unjust, also exceeding just measure.
Unjust, unjustly. Innascor, sci, to be engendered in one. Innatus, ta, tum,
engendered. Innocens, vnharmefull, innocent. Innocentia, integrity, true
intent. Pli in epi. (...).
Inossensus, unhurt. Inofficiosum testamentum, where the father by testament
gives away from his son his lands or goods without cause. ^
Inops ab amicis, dyspouruayed of friends. Inops amicorum, idem. Inopia,
poverty, lack of things necessary Inopi^atus, unthought on or unlooked for. ^
In quantum, in as much, or for as much. Inquam, I said. In^anitas,
madness. Insaciabilis, le, insatiable. Ins^endo, dear, to go up, or to clyme.
Terent. in H^^^to. Cicer pro P. Sylla. Tit. Li. 4.
Insciens, vnwyttinge. also not thinking on that he does. Inscientia,
ignorance. Instaurare bellum, to make war eftsoon. Insuitor, may also be
called a factour which byeth and ^elleth for a another man. Institoria actio,
an action brought by the master against his factour, or by the factour
against his master. plautus in Epidic. Terent. in phorm. Cicero in philip.
Instiruere astutiam, to find a craft to deceive oone. In integrum restiuiere,
to restore a thing to as good point as it was in. Integrum est, hit is at his
pleasure or in his power. Integre, truly, and diligently. Cicero de oratore.
In integro esse. Sed quoniam haec iam neque in integro esse possunt: But for
as much as there is no remedy, or that these things may not be helped, or
may not be in as good point as they were. Cic. de Senectute.
Intemperans, he that does every thing with out order or measure. Intendere
f^rmulam, to bring an action against one. Sueton^^s in Vitell. Sueton. in
Ty^^^ in Cic. ad Q. fratrem. Terent. in Eunucho.
Inter coenam, for In coena. Inter nos amamus, we love together oone an another.
Inter ^ias, by the way riding or goinge. Intercessor, he that lets a
matter, that it may not goo forward. Interpellatio, a let in a man^
business. Interpellator, he that lets oone that he may not speak or do a
thing. Intrarius amicus, a special friend. plautus.
Intybum, seu Intybus, is the generalle name to all kinds of Lichorye or
Succhorye. as commune Succhorie, Scariole, Endive, and Dendelyon.
I, ANTE S.
Ischiros, idem quod fortis, strong. Isatis, Ode, wherewith clothes are dyed
blewe.
I, ANTE T.
ITa me deus amer, So god love me, Plautus. Terentius
or help me. Ita ut fit, as it happens. Dum rus eo, Terent. in Eunucho.
coep^egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut fit, ubi quid in animo est molestiae,
aliam rem ex alia cogitare, When I went down into the countraye, by the
way riding, as it happens oftentimes, when any displeasure comes to my
mind, I bethought me of one thing and other. Ita ut erat, as it was in deed.
Ita ne? but is it so? or is it as thou sayste? Also it sygnyfieth a note of
dysdayne. Terent. in Andria.
Ita ne contennor abs re? Settyst thou so lyttelle by me? Itaque, wherefore
than. Itaque, and so. Item, even as, also, in like manner. Iter facere, to goo
a journey.
I, ANTE V.
IVcunde, merilye, gladdely, pleasauntly, dylertably. Iucunditas, dilectation,
pleasure. Iudi^io perfundere, Cicer. pro Sex. Rose.
to bring one to the point to be condemned. Iurare in uerba alterius, to do
fealty, or to be sworn a subject. Iurare in lege alterius, plin. de viris
illustr.
to swear to keep the laws or ordinances of an another. Ius bonum dicis, thy
request is reasonable. Plautus in Stico. Plautus in Epidico.
Ius dicis, thou speak reason. Iure, with good cause. Iure ue^iuiu^ia, by
right or wrong. Terent. in Andri. Plautus in Capti. Ter. in Ad.
Iusta seruitus, service without rygour. Iusti honores, honors due. Iuuat
mihi, It does me good, it is a pleasure to me.
L ANTE A.
LABIO, is a fyshe, which I suppose to be that that is called God, with the
great lyppes. it was alsoo the Surname of a Romayne. Labrum, a lyppe. also the
brymme of a river also a washing basyn. Laccia, a fyshe called a cheuyn.
Plautus in Sticho Plautus in Asin. Priscianus Festus.
Lacerare diem, to lose the day, to spend the time about naught. Lachrimula,
a little ^eare. Lacio, lacui, and lexi, lacere, to bring into a snare, or to
wind one in to deceive him. Lamia, is alsoo an herb called a blind or dead
nettyll. Lagopus, an herb, which I suppose to be Auyns. Latheris, an herb
called Spurge.
L. ANTE E.
LEchia, a fysshe, which some have taken to be Tunye, for the symylitude of
them. Legere, to ch^se. Lege agere, to sewe in the law, also to do execution.
Lent palustyis, duckes meat, which is in standing waters. Leo, a shelle
fyshe called a lopstar. Lepide, pleasantly, pratyly. Lepista, a little pot
or vyole. Lep^a, is the smalleste poyse that may be, whereof there are.lxxxiiii.
in one scruple, in a dram..CClii. Leucophlegmantia, a spyce of the dropsye,
where the face and members are white, and swollen great. Leuare aliquem onere,
to discharge oone of his burdeyne. Leuare laborem, to mynyshe his labor.
Leuare morbum, to put out of pain. Leuia nina, small wynes. Leuita, a deacon.
Leuiter, lightly.
L* ANTE I.
LIa, oone of the wives of Jacob the patriarche. Libella, the diminuti^^ of
Libra, it was also a small coin, and of them were two sorts, one was worth
the senthe part of Sestertius, the other the tenthe part of Denarius.
Libelhones, caryers of letters. Libere, frankly, liberally, without constraint
Libere uiuere, to live at pleasure. Liberalis forma, a good favor. Liberale
ingenium, a free courage. Libertus, a bondsman manumised. Libra, a pound
weight, whereof were diverse, one was the Romayne pound, which contained.xii.
ounces, or four score and xvi. drammes, an another was belonging to exchaungers
or bankers, and was but of viii. ounces, an other was callid Mina, whereof read
more in Mina. Lichen, an herb called Lyuerwort. Limaria, the fyshe callid
Tuny, when it does not excede one foot in length. Lingulaca, a fyshe called a
sole. Litem contestari, I suppose does sygnifie as much as that which our
lawyers do say, to enterpleade when oone, which is not party to the action,
comes in, or is called in to plead with the other, to the intent to save his
title or interest, which is supposed that he has with them.
L ANTE O.
LOcus obiurgandi, occasion to chyde. Terent. i^ And.
Loca^e filiam, to bestow his dowghter in marriage. Locusta, a fyshe callid a
creuyse. Locutor, he that speaks much. Log, is the same measure of the
Hebrews, Gellius.
that Sextarius atticus, is among the Greeks. Read more in Sextarius.
L ANTE V.
LVcigena, engendered of light. Lucto, idem quod luctor. Ludos reddere, and
ludos facere, Terentius Martialis. Cicer. pro domo sua.
to mock Ludia, a merry wene he full of sport. Lummibus obstruere, to stop up
the light, to let that the light may not come into a house. Lumina
prefer, to inspyre. Lumminosus, a, um* full of light. Cic. antequam iret in
exilium.
Lumbrici, little fyshes taken in small rivers which are like to lampurnes,
but they be much less, and somewhat yelowe, and are called in wylteshire
prides. Lupus, is a fyshe, which some men take for a pyke. Lupus sanctarius,
hoppes, wherewith biere is made.
L ANTE Y.
Lydius lapis, a proverb spoken of an exact judgment, or that which is
exactly tried. Lysimachia, a city in Ponto, which fell down with an
erthquake.
M, ANTE A.
MACER, seu Macir, a spyce called Maces.
M ANTE E.
Medica, an herb, which I suppose to be clouer grass with purple round
flowers. Melandria, the lean parts of the fish called Tuny. Melanurus, a
kind of perches, callydde Ruffes. Melita, an isle lyenge between Sycile and
Affryke, which is now callydde Malta, where at this time the company of the
knights hospytilers do inhabit, as they did at the Rhodes. Merula, a fyshe
called Merlyng or whiting. Minutum, idem quod l^pta. Mygala, a field mouse with
a long snoute, called a shrewe.
O ANTE C.
OCymum, an herb called Basyll. Ocuiata, a perch fyshe. Olus atrum, an herb
callid Alisa^der. Orchynus, a great Tuny fyshe. Orphus, a fyshe like to a
Burnarde. Orcha, a great fyshe of the sea, which deuoureth men and beasts
hole, of the which fysshe we do see great bones hanged up in the kings
houses. It is also a great pytcher, which serves for wine or oil.
P, ANTE A.
PAGRI, fyshes, which I suppose are dacis. Paliurus, some do suppose it to be a
fyrse, or a whyn. Partheniu^, is supposed of some well learned men to be tansye,
which opinion I think to be best.
P, ANTE E.
PEctines, shell fyshes called Scalopes. Pectunculi, cockylles. Perca, a fyshe
called a perch. Persicaria, an herb, which is supposed to be Arssmerte.
Pertica, a measure conteynyng.xvi. fete, and is called a perch or a pole, or a
rod, it is sometime but.x. fete, and in wodde land xviii. fete. Perasites, a
clote, the leaves whereof are laid on butter.
P ANTE H.
PHellandrion, an herb callid Filipe^dula Philago, Cudworte. Phisides, fysshes
like tenches, but that they are greener. Physiter, a great fyshe, which
spoutethe out of his mouth great goulfes of water. Phoenix, waybenet or bent.
Phocena, a fysshe called Porpuse, or like unto it.
P ANTE O.
POlygonon, knotte grass. Pompilus, a kind of great Tuny. Iousus.
Populus alba, an aspe tree. Porca, Columel.
in mesure was reckned half a roude land, or the.vii. part of an acre.
Pseudonardus, lauander. Psitta, a fysshe called turbutte. Pugillus, as much as
the holownes of the hand may conteyne. Pychis, a cubyte. Pygmei, people,
which are but a Cubyte in length.
R ANTE A.
RAIA, a fyshe called skeate. Ranunculus, an herb called crowfote or
goldeknappe. Rhombus, a Fysshe called a Turbutte. Ricinum, an herb callydde
Palma Christi.
R ANTE V.
RVbea mayor, an herb called madder. Rubea minor, an herb callid cliuers.
Rumex, dockes, sometime it is taken for Sorell. Ruscum, holme or hethbrushe.
S, ANTE A.
SABINA, an herb called Sauyne. Sampsuchus, an herb called Maioram gentle.
Satureia, an herb callydde Sauerye.
S ANTE C.
Scarus, is a fyshe, which I suppose is in Deuonshyre called a Bekar. Scilla,
some do call it a sturgion.
S, ANTE E.
SEDVM maius, houseleke or syngrene Sedum minus, an herb callid stonecroppe.
Selibra Romana, the Romayne half pound comprehended asmoch as our hole pound.
Saepia, a fyshe having but one bone, wherein goldesmythes do make mouldes, and
is called a cuttyll. Seris, an herb callid white endive and scariole Sextula
gemina, is the third part of an ounce, called also Duella. Siclus, among the
hebrews was half an ounce. Siliquastrum, an herb which some do suppose to
be cost mary. Smilax, lacis, french peasyn. Solanum, an herb, which some do
suppose to be nyghtshade or morell. Solanum soporiferum, an herb, which I
suppose to be Dwale. Solonos uesicaria, Alkakengi. Sonchus, an herb called
Southistell. Sportula, the stipende given to cayly awaiters, for them and their
company, among the noble Romans, amounted to.ii. poyse grotes, and a half
grote, or.x. pence of the old coynage. Stater argenteus, was a coin of half
an ounce weight, and was also callid Siclus and Terradragmon. Striatus, ta,
tum, imbowid or made with ridges and furrows, or like unto it. Symphitum, an
herb called Comfrye. Sysimbrium, horsemynte as I suppose. Sysymbrium
cardanine, water eresses.
TIthimallus, a kind of spurge. Some take it for wertwort. Tussilago, an herb
called coltisfote. Typhonicus uentus, a whyrle wind, which plucketh up trees
by the roots.
VEttonica, an herb called Bittayne. Vettonica coronaria, Byllofers. Vmbelicus
veneris, an herb callydde Penygrasse. Verbena, an herb called Veruen. Vitia,
a pulse called a vetche. Vlua, a flagge. Xestes, idem quod Sextarius.
Finis Dictionarij.
TO THE HONEST AND gentylle readers.
TO THE MORE plain declaration of these tables following, briefly compiled
out of the books of Georgius Agricola, and Robertus Senalis, which wrate last
and most exactly of poises and measures, It shall be expedient to the reder to
have in remembrance these things following.

FIRST when he redeth in any book of poyses, coins, and measures, to consider
whither they be of Rome, Greece, or of the Hebrews, and than to seek the
columns, over the which those countries ar written, and there shall he find
that which he seeks for.

Also to remember the valuation of all our coyns, as they be rated at this
present time, and account.xii. d. to a shylling.xi. grotes and ii. d. to an
ounce.xx. s. to a pound.xiii. s. iiii. d. to a mark.xii. ounces to a pound,
as well of measure as of poyse.

Moreover that every ounce or ynch measure quadrate as a dye, is diuyded into
the same minutes or porcio^s, that an ounce poise is, and.xii. ounces in
measure, concerning vessels, is not callydde there a foot, but a pound
measure.

Also that the vessels or receptories are first counted by measure, because
that therein it is more certain than poise, as a poise ofice of honye is not in
quantity like to a poyse ounce of wine or oil. wherefore Vncia red in old
authors without addicion of pondus, is to be taken for the measure ounce, as ye
shall find more abundantly in the books of the said Agricola and Senalis.

Item in the redyng the mesures of greek, if ye find them not here declared,
ye must always remember, that the english pynte is xxiiii. ounce measures, the
pynte of Rome called Sextarius, is.xx. ounce mesures, the greek pynte called
also Sextarius, and the hebrew pynte callid Log, is but.xviii. ounce mesures,
and according to that rate, ye must make calculation in conferring together
all other measures.

And this I trust shall at this time suffice, for the understanding of this
matter, whereby the reders, as well of old hystories, orations of Tulli, as
also ancient physicians, and the books of holy scripture called the Bible,
shall apprehende more understanding, with singular dilectatio^ and pleasure.
For the which I shall require them to give praises to god, of whom it has
chiefly proceeded, and thanks to our most excellent souerayn lord, by whose
most gracious comfort and aid, I have performed it, and to pray to god to
give me grace and time, to accomplish such warkes, as I have purposed for the
commodity honor and weal of this my natural country.

The computation of Georgius Agricola.
Romayne poyse.
SCriptulum, the.xxiiii. part of an ounce. Victoriatus, the.xiiii. part of an
ounce. Denarius, the seventh part of an ounce. Sextula, the syxte part of an
ounce. Sicilicus, the fourth part of an ounce. Duella, the third part of an
ounce. Semuncia, half an ounce. Vncia, an ounce, the.xii. part of a pound
troy. Sescuncia, an ounce and half. Sextans, two ounces, or the syxt part of
any thing, having poyse or measure. Quadrans, a quarterne of a pound, or three
ounces, or the.iii. part. Triens, four ounces, or the fourth part.
Quincunx, five ounces, or the fyfte part. Semissis, half a pound or half
any thing. Septunx, seven ounces or the seventh part. Bes, viii. ounces, or
the eight part. Dodrans, nine ounces, or the nynthe part. Dextans, ten
ounces, or the tenthe part. Deunx, xi. ounces, or the leuenth part. Libra,
Pondo, seu As, twelve ounces. As, is sommetyme taken for the hole of that
which is divided in parts.
Greek poyse.
GRanum, the.iiii. part of Siliqua, the.CCCCC.xvi. part of an ounce measure or
poyse. Siliqua, the third part of obolus, the.Cxliiii. part of an ounce poyse
and measure. Obolus, the half of Scriptulum, or Scrupulus, the.xxxii. part of
an ounce. Scriptulum, the third part of Dram, the.xxiiii. part of an ounce.
Dram, the.viii. part of an ounce, which practysers in phisyke have esteemed
to the weighte of.lx. barley corns taken out of the myddell of the ears,
the.viii. part of an ounce poyse and measure. Vncia, an ounce, the.xii. part
of a pound poyse and mesure. Mina Attica, twelve ounces and half. Mina medica,
xvi. ounces. Mina Alexandrina, xx. ounces. Talentu^ atticu^ minus,
conteyneth.lx. Minas atticas, which of our Troy weight amounts to.lxii.
pounds and half a pound. Talentum atticum maius, co^teyneth.lxxx. Minas,
which is of troy weyghte.lxxxiii.li. and four ounces.
Hebrew poyse.
SIclus, in poyse is half an ounce or four dra^mes. Mina hebraica, co^teineth
two poundis and a half, troy, or.lx. Siclos. Talentum hebraicum, contains. C.
Minas, that amou^teth to.CCL. pounds troy. Talentum Syrum, contains Minas
Atticas.xv. that is.xv. pounds.vii. ounces and a half.
The old English poyse standerde.
Four graynes of wheat poyseth the.viii. part of a penye, so.viii. graynes
ought to way a farthynge xxxii. graynes a penye. Penny and farthynge makes
the.xvi. part of an ounce. Four Royalles makes an ounce of gold. Xii.
ounces makes a pound of troy weight.
Romayne coin.
AS, before the time of Augustus the emperor, was rated to the tenth part of
Denarius, The co^putation of Robertus Senalis, bishop of Abrent
and afterward to the.xvi. part of Denarius. Sextans, the.vi. part of As.
Quadrans, the fourth part. Semissis, half As. Sestertius, the fourth part
of Denarius, contains.iiii. Asses. Victoriatus, the half of Denarius.
Denarius, whereof.vii. made one ounce, was by estimation of our money.vi. d.
ob. and the.vii. part of a halfpenye, after.xi. grotes and.ii. d. to an ounce.
Tressis.iii. Asses. Senarius.vi. Asses. Decussis.x. Asses. Solidus, was
dyuersly taken, sometime for a brasyn coin, containing.xii. small coins.
sometime for Dram, in silver, as primi Esdrae octano ca. and.2. eiusdem.7. et
Paralipo.xxix. Some were the value of Dram, as in the time of Alexander the
emperor. Also Solidus aureus, was in the time of the same emperor.ii.
drammes of gold. After in the time of Justinian.vi. of them made an ounce,
which was the just poyse and value of our royals. Centussis, x. denarij, of
our money.v. s. vi. d. ob. half farthyng, half half farthynge. Mill aeris,
a hundred Ce^tusses, which is of our money xxvii.li.xvi. s. vi. d. q^. XX.
Sestertij, ar.v. Denarij, of our money.ii. s. vii. d. ob. half farthinge, and
the.xxiiii. part of a farthynge. XL. Sestertij.v. s. iii. d. ferthi^g and
the.xii. part of a farthing. Lxxx. Sestertij, x. s. vi. d. ob. and the.vi.
part of a farthyng. Centum sestertij, xiii. s. ii. d. half farthyng, the.vi.
part of a farthyng, and the.xxiiii. part of a farthynge. CC. Sestertii.xxvi.
s. iiii. d. q^. the third part, and the.xii. part of a farthynge.
Greek coin.
CCCC. Sestertij, iii. s. viii. d. ob. a half farthing, a quarter and the.vi.
part of a farthing* DCCC. Sestertij, v. ^^v. s. v. d. a farthing, half
farthing, and the third part of a farthinge. M. Sestertij, (...). ix. d. ob. or
there (...). Sest^^tium, i^ even as much.
Greek coin.
AEteolum, seu Chalchus the.xxxvi. part of dram, by estimation the poyse
of.ii. barley corns. Semiobolus, the.xii. part of Dram. Obolus, the.vi.
part of dra^. Dram argenteum, a coin whereof.viii. made an ounce, which is
of our money after the rate of this present time v. pens halfpeny farthing, an
ounce conteininge.xi. grotes and.ii. pence. Didrachma.ii. drachmas, of our
money.xi. d. ob. Stater, seu, Tetra ^^achinu^.iiii. drachmae, of our
money.xxiii. d Dece^ draeli^^^ iiii. s. ix. d. ob. XX. drachmae. ix. s. ^^. d.
XXX. drach.xiiii. s. iiii. d. ob. XL. drach. (...) L. drach. xxiii. s. xi. d.
ob. LX. drach. xxviii. s. ix. d LXX. drach. xxxiii. s. vi. d. ob. LXXX.
drach.xxxviiii. s. iii^ d LXXXX. drach (...) d o^ Centum drach (...) Dram
(...) drach. argenti, (...) Mina, or Mna (...) Solo^^^, a h^ndred drachme, of
our money.xlvii. s. xl. d. Mina uaetus, xxxv. s. xi. d. q^. lxxv. drach. X.
Mine seu Mnae (...) s. ii. d. XX. (...) XXX. (...) xvii. s. vi. d XI minae, lxx
(...) L. Minae, (...) x. d. LX. Minae, (...) Lxx. Minae. (...) LXXX. Minae,
(...)
Hebrew coin.
LXXXX. Minae, CCxv. ^^. xv. s. vi. d. Centum Minae, CCxx^^^. (...) d. Talentum
atticum minus and (...), co^tayneth.lx. Minas, which is of our money
Cxliii.li.xv. s. Talent^^^ atticum maius, conteyneth.lxxx. M^ra^, of our
money.Clxxxxi li.xiii. s iiii. d V. Falen^a minora, DCCxviii.li.xv. s. X.
Talenta, MCCCCxxxvii.l^^x. s. XX. Talenta, MMDCCC.lxxv. li. XXX. Tale^ta,
MMMMCCC.xii l^.x. s. Xl. Tale^, MMMMMDCCl.li. L. Tale^, vii. M.Clxxxvii.li.x.
s. LX. Talen. viii. M.DCxxv.li. LXX. Talen. x. M.lxii.li.x. s. LXXX. Talen^^.
xi. M.D.^^. LXXXX. Talenta, xii. M.D.CCCCxxxvii.li.x. s. Centum Talenta. xiiii.
M ^i.CCClxxv.li. Mill Talenta, Clviii. thousand and fyfty pound. In the
accomptynge of Talen^^^ atticum maius, add to every Talentum minus, xlvii.
(...).
Hebrew coin.
SIctas argenicus, was in value (...) drachi^as, of our money.xxiii d. V*
Sicl^* ^x. s. vii. d. X (...) (...) XX. Sicli. xxxviii. (...) XXX. Sic. (...)
XL. Sicli. iii.^^.xvi. (...). L. Sicli. iiii.^^.xv. s. ^. d. LX. Sicli.
v.^^.xv. ^. LXX. Sicli. vi.^^.x^^^^. s. ii. d. LXXX. Sicli. (...) d Lxxxx.
Sicli, viii. (...) d. Genti^^ Sicli. (...) d. Mi^^^ Sicli, Cv. (...). Mna
Hebraica, (...) of our money (...) (...) (...) of our money. ^. lxxv.
Rom ^ Greek measure.
Talentum i^^lgare, contains half so much.CClxxxvii.li.x. s. V. Tale^ta
^ulgaria, MCCCC.xxxvii.li.x. s. X. Talen^, MMDCCClxxv.li. XX. Talenta, v.
M.DCCl.li. XL. Talen. xi. M.CCCCC.li. Lxxx. Talenta. xxiii. M.li. C^^luin
Tal^nt^. xxviii. M.DCCl.li.
Measure in length or breadthe. Romayne and Greek.
GRan^^^, is the fourth part of digitus a finger. Digitus, a finger bread is
the length of four grains iiii. digiri makes.iii. inches. Pollex, seu Vncia,
callydde an ynche is the just length of three ^arly grayne^ or four where
corns, and a quarter, taken out of the myddelle of the care of this one is
vncia linearis, or an ynche by line: ^n other quadrata, or square, that is to
say an ynch in length and hiede an another cubica, or in.iiii. quarters like a
dyse, every quarter being an ynch. Exodus 25.
Palmus minor, contains.iiii. fyngers or.iii. inches. Palmus mayor,
co^tayneth the h^ndbrede.iiii. fyngers, and the rhumbe in depenes. Palmus
duplex seu dichas, conteyneth.^iii. fyngers. Sp^^^^^^ne seu Dodrans, a span
which is the space between the thumb and the little finger stretched forth,
and contains.ix. inches, or.xii. fingers Per, (...), co^teineth.iiii.
palms.xii. inchis, or xv. fingers which measure is made with a span and the
length of half the myddell finger, or with the two (...) closed, and the two
(...) extended metyng together, but these measures are not to certain as the
ynche before rehearsed, by reason that all men's hands are not like great. and
therefore as I have proved, the foot which is made by the said ynche, to be
the foot which Budeus, supposes to be brought by the Romans into France, as
Glareanus says, but the Romayn foot, whereof Portius makith mention, is
shorter than that foot one inche, and the.vi. part of a finger. And the foot of
the squire used by our Carpentars is shorter than the Romayne foot of Budeus
one ynche, so that it conteyneth xv. fyngers, whereby apereth the diversity of
foot mesure, not withstanding the said first foot is the true foot, and thereby
all other mesures shall be compted most perfitely. Palmipes, contains a foot
and a palm, or.v. palms. Cubitus, conteyneth one foot and half. Gressus, a
step, contains two foot and a half. Passus, a pase, contein.v. foot.
Orgia, a fathom, it is proprely.vi. fete. Pertica, a perch, among the Romans
contains.x. fete. Pleth^um, conteyneth a hundred fete. Stadium, a furlonge,
conteyneth.Cxxv. pacis. Diaulus, conteinith.ii. furlo^g. Milliare, seu
Milliatium, a mile contains.viii. furlong, or a thousand pacis. Dolichos,
contains.xii. furlonges, or.MCCCCC. pacis. Parasanga, xxx. furlonges.
Schoenos. lx* furlonges. Statlimos, Statio, seu Mansio, one days journey
contains xxviii. miles. Porca, Cxx. fete in length, and xxx. in breadth.
Actus, Cxx. fete square. Iugerum Romanu^. in length CCxl. fete, in breadth Cxx.
fete
Hebrew measure^.
ZEreth, a palm^. Cubitus sanctuarij, contains.vi. palms.
Romayne measure.
Gomor, as much as a man may receive between his two arms. Calamus
sanctuarij, co^teinith x. fete and a half. Calamus vulgaris, contains ix.
fete, of our measure three yerdes. Choemis, co^teineth.iiii. miles Castra, seu
Stationes, contain every of them.ix. miles. Iuger, seu Iugerum, as much land
as a yoke of oxen could falowe in a day. December iug^ra, as much land as ten
yoke of oxen moughte falowe in a day.
Measure in vessel or things to receive. Romayne measure.
LIgula, sine Coclilear, the iiii. part of Cyathus, and receives.iii. drachmas
and one Scriptulu^, of the inch measure. Cyathus, whereof one makes ace^abulum,
and is of mesure one ynche and a half, a dram, and a scriple, and receives
of oil one ounce and half, of ^yne one ounce.v* drachmas and one scriple, of
honey two ounces di^. Acetabulu^, the half of Quartarius, is two inches and
half of mesure, receives of oil ii. ounces and.ii. drachmas, of wine.ii.
ounces and a half^, of honey.iii. ounces di^* and.ii. drachmas. Qua^tarins, the
half of H^mina, is.v. inches of measure receives of oil.iiii. ouncis and
di^, of wine five ounces, of honey.vii. ounces di^. Hamina, the half of
Sextarius is.^. inches of measure, and receives of oil.ix. ounces, of mine
ten ounces, of honey xv. ounces. Sextarius Romanus, is.xx. inches of measure
called Cubica, and receives, in noise of oil.x^iii. ounces, of mine xx.
ounces, of honey.xxx. ounces, and is the.vi. part of Congius, in our measure it
is less than a pynte by four inches of measure. Modius, is of grayn and salt,
and contains.xvi. Sextarios and of our measure a ^alon a pottell and a
quarte, saving iiii. ynche measures. Congius, has.vi. Sextarios, Cxx. inches,
in mesure callid Cubica, and receives of oil in poyse.ix. pounds of wine
x.li. of honey.xv. pounde^* of our measure it is.v. pintes, or a potttell and a
pynte. Vrna, co^teineth.iiii. Congios and receives of oil.xxxvi. pounds: of
wine.xl. pounds: of honey.lx. pounds. It is of our measure, in galons and a
pottell. Amphora, seu quadrantal, contains.xlviii. Sextarios, is a foot
square in measure, called cubica, or like a dyse, and co^teineth of oil.lxxii.
pound of wine.lxxx. pound, of honey.Cxx. pound weight. It is of our measure.v.
galons. Culeus, conteyneth.xx. Amphoras, It is of our measure a hundred galons,
a pype ^^uynge.xxvi. galons.
Greek measure.
COchle^rium Atticu^, seu medicum, is of ynche mesure a dram, half a
scriple.ii. graynes, and two five parts of a grain, and receives in poyse a
dram and.ii. scriples of oil, and of wine as much in poyse as in measure.
Chema, has.ii. Cochlearia, is in mesure.ii. dra^mes one scriple.iiii. graynes,
and.iiii. five parts of a grayn, and receives in poise double as much as
Cochl^^rium. Mystrum medicum, has.ii. Cochl^aria, and a half, one Chem^, and
a quarter, and (...) in measure.^^^. drammes, and receives in poyse of wi^^ or
pure water, as much as in measure. Cochlearium ueterinariu^, belongyng to
cattle, is in measure a quarter of an ynche, and receives in poise of wine a
dram.ii. scriples, one obolu^, one grain and a third part of a grayn, of
honye.ii. dra^mes.ii. scriples.vii. grains and very little more. Mystru^
ue^erinariu^, belonging to catel, is in mesure half an ynche, and receives in
poise of oil.iii. dra^mes and a scriple, of wine.iii. dra^mes.ii. scriples.ii.
graynes and.ii. third parts of a grain, of honye v. drammes, an half.iii.
grains and.v. sixte partis. Mystrum Georgicu^, or of husbandry is in measure
half an ynche and half a dram and receives in poyse of wine half an ounce
and half a scriple, of honey half an ounce and two drammes, a quarter of a dr^m
and half a scriple. ^oncha, is double as much ^s Mystrum. Gyathus medicus, is
double as much as Concha, in mesure an inche and a half, and receives in
poyse of wine, one ounce.iii. dra^mes, and.iiii. Siliquas, of honey.ii. ounces
and ii. scriples, of oil one ounce and.ii. drammes. Cyathus georgicus, or of
husbandry is in mesure.ii. inches and a quarter, and receives in poyse of
wine.ii. ounces and ii. scriples, of honey.iii. ounces one dram and.ii.
scriples, of oil one ounce and seven drammes. Cyathus Veterinarius, pertaining
to cattle, is in mesure.ii. inches, a receives inpoyse of wine one ounce, an
half, a dra^me.ii. scriples.ii. siliquas ii. grains.ii. third parts of a
grain, of oil one ounce, a half, one dram, and a scriple of honey.ii.
ounces, a half, a quarter, oone obolu^.iii. graynes and a third part.
Oxybaphum medicum, is in measure.ii. inches a quarter, receives in poyse of
wine.ii. ounci^ and.ii. scriples, of oil one (...) half.iii. drammes.
Oxyba^^^^ Georgicum, or of husbandrye, is in measure iii. inches a quarter, and
a dram receives in po^ ^f wine.iii. ounces and a dram, of oil ii. ounces, a
half, a quarter, a half, a dram, of honey.iiii. ounces a half, a quarter,
and half a dram. Oxybaphum ueterinariu^, pertaynyng to cattle, is in
measure.vi. inches, and receives in poyse of wine.v. ounces and a half, one
scriple.ii. siliquas: of oil.v. ounces, of honye viii. ounces, a quarter
and.ii. Scriples. Quartarius, is double Oxybaphum. Cotyle Medica, is dowble
Quarta^^us, and is in measure ix. inches, and receives in poyse of wine.viii.
ounces a quartern and.ii. Scriples, of oil.vii. ounces and a half, of our
measure it lacks.iii. inche mesures of half a pynt. Galenus says, that there
were diverse opinions of Cotyle, for sum affirmed it to conteyne.xii. ounce
mesures and some said.xvi. Cotyle georgica, is in mesure xiii. inches and a
half, and receives in poise of wine, a pound and half an ounce. of oil.xi.
ounces, of honye a pound a half, and.vi. drammes, of our measure a pynte and
one ounce mesure. Cotyle ueterinaria, pertaining to cattle is in measure.xii.
inches, and receives of wine xi. ounces.ii. scriples, one obolum and one
siliqua, of oil x. ounces, of honey one pound iiii. ounces a half one dram,
and one scriple. It is of our measure just half a pynte. Sextarius atticus,
is.xviii. mesure ounces, and conteyneth in poyse of oil.xv. ounces, of wine a
pound.iii. ounces v. ^^^^mes and a Scriple, of honey.ii. pound and one ounce.
It is of our measure a pynte saving a quarterne or six ounces. Chus artica,
or mediea, receives.vi. Sextarios articos, and is in measure ^^. pound in
poyse of oil.vii. pound and a half, of wine.viii. pound iii. ounces, a half
and.iii. drammes: of honey.xii. pound and a half. It is of our measure a
pottell and half a pynte. Chus Georgica, or of husbandry is in measure.xiii.
pound and di^, and receives in poise of oil.xi. pound.iii. ounces. of
wine.xii. pound and di^, of honey.xviii. pound and.ix. ounces, and is of our
mesure vi. pyntes, a half, and a quarter or.xviii. ounces. Chus veterinaria,
is in mesure xii. pound, and receives in poyse of wine.xi. pound one
ounce.ii. drammes and.ii. scriples, of oil.viii. pound, of honey.xvi. pound,
a half, one ounce a half, and a dram. It is of our measure a pottell and a
quarte. Metreres attica, contaynethe xii. Choas atticas, and is in measure.
Cviii. pound, in poyse of wine. C. pound, of oil lxxxx. pound, of honye.
Cl. pound. It is of our measure six galons a pottelle and a quarte. Metreres
georgica, is in measure like to attica. Choenix, conteyneth.iii. Cotylas, and
is in measure.xxvii. inches. It is in our measure a pynte and three inches.
Medimnus atticus, contains xlviii. Choenices. It is of our measure.vi. galons
a pottelle and a quarte. Medimnus georgicus, is ^ hundred.lxii. mesure. It is
of our measure.x. galons and oone pynte, or a bushel a pecke and one pynte.
Sextarius Medimni, the syxte part of Medimnus. Artaba, five Modios, of our
measure, a bushel, a pottell, a pynte, and.iiii. ynche measures.
Hebrew measures.
LOg, (...) the hebrew Sextarius, and is equal to Sextarius atticus, and
co^teynyth in measure.xviii. ynchis. Satum, contains.xxiiii. Logim, and is in
measure.xxxvi. pound, receives in poise of wine.xxxiii. pound* an^ our
ounces, of oil.xxx^* of honey.l. pound. It is of our mesure.ii. galons and a
quarte. Hin, is half Satum, is in mesure.xviii. (...), receives in poyse of
wine.xvi.li. di, and ii. ounces. of oil.xv.li. of honey.xxv.li. of our mesure a
galon and a pynte. Batus, conteyneth.iii. S^t^, which is of our measure.vi.
galons a pottell and a quart. Ephi, seu Epha, a measure of dry things, as
corn and salt, and is equal with Batus. Gomor, the tenth part of Ephi, and
lacks of our pynt.ii. ounces, and almost half one ounce. Chorus hebraica,
contains* (...) x. Ephim, which is of our (...) mesure.vii. bushel and a
half.
FINIS.
THIS AT THIS TIME shall be sufficient for the declaration of poisis and
mesures. And he that desires a more ample and exquisite trial of them, let
him diligently read the books of Georgius Agricola, and Robertus Senalis, who
writing last of all other in that kind of matter, have found diverse things,
which were not before of other remembered, as it daily happens in all kinds of
writing. I know well that Budeus, Alceatus, and Portius are men of excellent
learning, and their books to be made with an exact study and diligence: But
Agricola being a great physician, and therefore more accustomed to read the
warkes of Galenus, than the other, which in their profession be lawyers:
semblablye the warkes of other, which wrate of the diseases of cattle, and
remedies for them, more over attaynyng the books of Cleopatras, a noble and
great learned woman, which also (...) ^f measures, specially pertaininge to
^nd^^: no meruail though that he more perfitly has determined that thing,
which among the other was in contencion. Semblably Senalis an honorable
bishop, following Agricola, and approuyng his diligence by making true
conference between him and the other, and more over being well learned in the
hebrew tunge, and consequently in holy scripture, trieng out studiousely the
poyses and mesures to the hebrews pertaining: has happily brought unto light
that which the other has remembered, or else not understanding substancially
the hebrew tongue, they purposely omitted. For these causes I have preferred
the computation of these two before any other, exhorting not withstanding al
them that do understand latin, that they do not therefore neglect the others
books, but to embrace and read^ them studiously, as in whom they shall (...)
marvelous knowledge, which else perchaun^ they shall lack. And as concerning my
calculation, which I have done with much study and incredible labor for the
profit of other, if I have therein any thing failed, as I trust that I have not
(although the division in breking of numbers callid fractions, is a thing
subtle and marvelous hard to observe always truly) I heartily pray al gentle
reders, fyndyng it by an exquisite trial to correct it without indignation:
and likewise all the resydewe of the dictionarye preceding, and frendely
communicate with me their labors, for the which I will give unto them most
hearty thanks, not leaving unremembered, god gyuing to me life, their honest
labors, being benesyciall unto this their country.

Tho. Berthelet. regius impressor excudebat. ANNO. M.D.XXXVIII.


