INSTRVCTIONS For MVSTERS AND ARMS, AND the use thereof:

By order from the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1623.

Jnstructions for MVSTERS and ARMS, and the use thereof.
FIrst of all, it is to be understood that there are three sorts of distances,
to wit, Open Order, Order, and Close Order. Open Order or the first distance
is, when the Soldiers both in Rank and File stand six foot removed one from
another. Because the measure of these distances cannot be taken so justly by
the eye, we take the distance of six foot between file and file, by
commanding the Soldiers, as they stand, to stretch forth their arms, and
stand so removed one from another, that their hands may meet.

And for the Ranks, we make account we take the same distance of six foot,
when the butte end of the Pikes do almost reach their heels that march
before. We take the second order or distance of three foot between file and
file, by bidding the Soldiers set their arms a Kenbow, and put themselves so
close that their elbowes may meet. And we reckon we take the same distance
between the Ranks, when they come up almost to the swords point.




The second distance, or your Order is, when the Soldiers stand three foot
removed both in Rank and File, one from another; and this Order is to be
used, when they are embattayled, or march in the face of an enemy, or when they
come to stand, or when you will wheel. But when you march through any Country,
you must observe three foot only from File to File, and six from Rank to
Rank. The third distance, or your Close Order is commanded, by this word
Close, which is when there is one foot and a half from File to File, and three
from Rank to Rank, and this is for the Pikes only, and must never be used but
when you will stand firm to receive the charge of an enemy. The Musketeers
must never be closer then the second distance of three foot in square, because
they are to have a free use of their Arms.

In exercising your motions, you are always to observe your Open Order of six
foot in square, in which the company being first placed, you are to acquaint
them to these terms of directions.

Stand right in your Files.

Stand right in your Ranks.

Silence.

To the right hand.

As you were. It is to be noted when you are commanded to be as you were, you
are ever to return by the contrary hand, from whence you came. As for example,
If you did turn to the right hand, you are to return as you were to the left
hand, and so in the rest.


To the left hand.

As you were.

To the right hand about. When you will countermarch to the right hand, the
first Rank of Leaders only must advance one step forward with the right leg,
and then turn, and all the other Ranks must march first up to the place from
whence the first Rank did countermarch before they turn. So likewise if you
will countermarch to the left hand, the first Rank must step forward one
step with the left leg, and then ^urne, and all the other Ranks behind must
^ome up to that place before they, turn, as before. The same order ^s to be
observed when ^ou will countermarch ^our Files.


As you were.

To the left hand about.

As you were.

Ranks to the right hand double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left hand double.

As you were.

Files to the right hand double.

As you were.

Files to the left hand double.

As you were.

Middlemen to the right hand double your front.

As you were.

Middlemen to the left hand double your front.

As you were.

Ranks to the right or left hand
countermarch In countermarching, though both are here set down for
distinction sake, you are to name neither Ranks nor Files: But are only to say
to the right hand countermarch, or to the left hand countermarch.


To the right or left hand
at discretion.

Files to the right or left hand
countermarch.

To the right or left hand
As you were.

Before you wheel. When you exercise a company single, you double your Ranks
before you wheel, in regard the body is small. But in a division or greater
body, you close first both your files and your Ranks to your Order of 3. foot,
and omit the doubling, and so wheel.


Ranks to the right or left hand
double. When you will wheel to the right hand, double your Ranks to the left
hand, and when you wheel to the left hand, double your Ranks to the right
hand. For so the right and left hand Leaders will keep their places on that
corner toward which you wheel.


Files to the right or left hand, or to the middle
close to your Order to 3. foot between File and File.

Ranks close to your Order to three foot between Rank and Rank.

To the right hand wheel To the left hand wheel Or wheel about
which you list and each as often as you list. This manner of opening is used
only in a single company. For in greater bodies where the doubling is omitted,
you open first your Ranks, and then your files to your open Order of six
foot, to bring them back again as they were.


After you have wheeled.

Ranks backward open in double distance. By double distance is meant 12. foot.
For so the Ranks (which before did double) falling out again into their first
places, come just to the distance of their open Order of six foot, in which
they were before they doubled.


Files open to your Order, that is, to 3. foot.

Ranks as you were.

In opening Ranks or Files, you must make all the Files or Ranks, saving the
outermost on that hand from whence you mean to open (which must stand) to
move altogether, till the second Rank or File, from that which stands, have
gotten its distance, and subsequently the rest.

If you will have them close their Files to the right or left hand, the
outermost File on that hand you purpose to close, must be commanded to stand,
and all the rest to close to it.

Advance your pikes. In charging, half the Ranks only must charge their
Pikes, the other hindermost half of the Ranks do Port their Pikes, that is,
they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as may give them no
offense, either in charging or retyring. Besides this way, the Pikes are not so
subject to be broken by the shot of the Enemy, as when they are advanced.
Order your pikes. Shoulder your pikes Charge your pikes. Order your pikes.
Traile your pikes. Check your pikes.
These following motions are to be performed both standing and marching. Charge
your pikes. Shoulder your pikes. To the right hand charge. They must likewise
observe when they charge standing, to fall back with the right leg, and
marching, to step forwards with the left.
Shoulder your pikes. To the left hand charge. Shoulder your pikes. To the
Rear charge. Shoulder your pikes. Stand. Order your pikes.


For the Musket.

The Postures in his Excellencies Book are to be observed: But in Exercising,
you must only use these three terms of direction. Make ready. Present. Give
fire.


Your Musketeers must observe in all their motions to turn to the right hand,
and that they carry the mouth of their Pieces high, as well when they are
shouldred, as in priming, and also when they hold their pannes guarded, and
come up to give fire.

In advancing toward an Enemy, when they do not skirmish loose and
disbanded, they must give fire by Ranks after this manner. Two Ranks must
always make ready together, and advance ten paces forwards before the
bodies, at which distance a Sergeant (or when the body is great, some other
Officer) must stand, to whom the Musketeers are to come up before they present
and give fire. First, the first Rank, and whilst the first gives fire, the
second Rank keep their Muskets close to their Rests, and their pannes
guarded; and as soon as the first are fallen away, the second presently present
and give fire, and fall after them. Now as soon as the two first Ranks do
move from their places in the front, the two Ranks next it must vnshoulder
their Muskets and make ready, so as they may advance forwards ten paces, as
before; as soon as ever the two first Ranks are fallen away and are to do in
all points as the former. So all the other Ranks through the whole division
must do the same by twoes one after another.

A manner there is to give fire retiring from an Enemy, which is performed
after this sort.

As the Troop marches, the hindermost Rank of all keeping still with the
Troop makes ready, and being ready, the Soldiers in that Rank turn
altogether to the right hand, and give fire, marching presently away a good
round pace to the Front, and there place themselves in Rank together just
before the Front. As Soon as the first Rank turns to give fire, the Rank
next it makes ready and does as the former, and so the rest.

We give fire by the Flank thus; The outermost file next the Enemy must be
commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the body, till such time as
they be ready, and then they turn to the right or left hand, according to the
sight of their Enemy, either upon their right or left flank, and give fire
altogether: when they have discharged they stir not, but keep their ground,
and charge their Pieces again in the same place they stand. Now as soon as the
aforesaid file does turn to give fire, the outermost next it makes ready,
always keeping along with the Troop, till the bringer up be past a little
beyond the leader of that file that gave fire last, and then the whole file
must turn and give fire; and do in all points as the first did, and so all
the rest one after the other. A Sergeant, or (if the Troop be great) some
other better qualified Officer must stand at the head of the first file, and
as soon as the second file has given fire, and has charged, he is to lead
forward the first file up to the second file, and so to the rest one after
another, till he has gathered up again the whole wing, and then he is to
join them again in equal front with the Pikes.

Last of all the Troop or whole Wing of Musketeers makes ready altogether, and
the first Rank without advancing gives fire in the place it stands in, and
speedily as it may, yet orderly, falls away, all the Ranks doing the same
successively one after another.

The Arms of a Pikeman, are Gorget, Curats, Headpeece, Sword, Girdle and
Hangers.

The Arms of a Musketier, are a Musket, a Rest, Bandeliers, Headpeece, Sword,
Girdle and Hangers.

It is required, that the Muskets be all of a Bore, the Pikes of a length: But
to the end this course may not by a sudden alteration turn to a general
charge and burden upon the people, the Lords Lieutenants, and the Deputy
Lieutenants are rather to use the way of advice and encouragement, as a matter
which will be very acceptable to his Majesty, who will take notice of the
affection of such as shall most readily provide, Arms according to this order,
then to enforce a present general observation thereof. But in case where the
Arms shall be decayed, and must be renewed, this order is to be strictly
observed.

The Arms of Horsemen, Cuirassiers, are a Gorget, Curats, Cutases, Pouldrons,
Vambraces, a left hand Gauntlet, Taces, Cuisses, a Caske, a Sword, Girdle and
Hangers, a case of Pistols, Firelockes, Saddle, Bridle, Bitt, Petrell, Crooper,
with the leathers belonging to fasten his Pistols, and his necessary sack of
carriage, and a good horse to mount on.

The Arms of a Hargobuzier or Dragon, which has succeeded in the place of
light horsemen (and are indeed of singular use almost in all the actions of
war) the Arms are a good Hargobus or Dragon, fitted with an iron work, to
be carried in a Belt, a Belt with a Flaske, Priming-box, Key, and Bullet bag,
an open Headpeece with cheeks, a good Buffe coat with deep skirts, Sword,
Girdle and Hangers, a Saddle, Bridle, Bitt, Perrell, Crooper, with Strappes for
his sack of necessaries, and a horse of less force and less price then the
Cuirassier.

In the exercise of the foot troops, the companies are to be of hundreds
only, besides Officers, that they may be so much the nearer together to be
trained and exercised with less pains to the soldiers, and less loss of
time, when they shall be called together by their Captain.

The Company is to be divided into Files of ten in a File; ^eader. ^iddlema^
middlema^ ^ringer up
the File is to be distinguished into a Leader, a Bringer up, two Middlemen,
and three between the Leader and his Middleman, and three between the bringer
up and his Middleman. When the Companies come together, they are to be
exercised ten in depth (as the proportion best fitted to receive all charges,
and perform all executions) But in cases of necessity in service, and for
exercise, it will be requisite to reduce them into five in File, and then those
two Middlemen become bringers up, and then have a kind of charge over those
three between the Leader and the Bringer up, and will be of great use in
preparing and exercising of the soldiers in the practice of their Arms and
order. For it is not intended that the whole Companies should be drawn
together to be exercised: But that upon Sundays after Evening prayer, and upon
Holidayes (as it has been formerly used for Bow) the Leader, Bringer up, or
Middlemen should exercise together with his whole File, or such a part as dwells
most convenient for him. And further that once in a month, or six weeks, the
Captain, Lieutenant or Ancient may (with the knowledge of the Deputy
Lieutenant that dwells next him) upon a Holiday exercise a squadron of his
Company, or the whole, as shall seem good to the Deputy Lieutenant.

The like form for the Horse: o Leader. middlema^ middlema^ Bringer up
But it is to be observed that the Files of Horse are never to be above six,
but distinguished by the names of Leader, Bringer up, and two Middlemen, and to
be doubled to three deep, upon occasion. And to avoid the great abuse, that
is practiced by those that are enrolled to keep horses for the Kings service,
That the Leader, Bringer up, or Middlemen of the Files of Horse, do exercise
the Horse upon Holidayes and Sundays after Evening prayer: And that the
Captain by himself, his Lieutenant, or Cornett, may (with knowledge of the
next Deputy Lieutenant) upon a Holiday call together some Files or a squadron
of his Company, to practice them in the exercise of their Arms. The Officers
also both of Horse and Foot Bands, as well in the chief, as inferiors,
Sergeants, Corporals, and Lamprizados, are to have a more special care for the
ordinary exercising of the Soldiers of their Company, which dwell next unto
them, and properly for them.

A special care and order must be taken that all those that find a man to
serve on Horseback, whether they find the Horse or the Man, or both, must not
change the Horse or Man at their pleasure: for so it would be every day to
practice a new man or a new horse, and the exercise be made vain. But they
must take into consideration, that the man and horse designed to the service of
the King, has (by the intention of the Law) been dedicated so to the interest
of the King, as they must always be in readiness at the call of the Kings
Officers, and may not be changed without the knowledge and consent of the
Captain, or Deputy Lieutenant next adjoining, or by warrant of the Lord
Lieutenant. And this with this only limitation, that another sufficient man or
horse be supplied in the room of the man or horse made deficient, for a just
cause well approved of. And as the Soldier, or Horse may not be changed or
discharged, without the knowledge of the Captain, or Superior Officers. So is
it not lawful for the Captain to change or discharge any man or horse (once
enrolled) without the approbation of the Lo. Lieutenant, or his Deputy.

A principal care is to be taken for the provision of the Arms, that they may
be provided at such rates as they are truly worth, that the people be not
subject to the abuse of undertakers for these businesses: And also for the
furnishing of every Shire with a competent proportion of Match, Powder and
Bullets, to which purpose directions have been heretofore already given.
Nevertheless it is not held necessary, until the Soldiers be perfect in
their postures, and ready managing of the Pike when they are armed, and the
Musket together with the Rest, that there should be any expense of powder at
all: And then for some time to be exercised with some false fires, which is
only a little powder in the pan: Nor at any time to blow away their powder in
vain; but that powder which should be allowed by the Country for trayning, be
bestowed only at Marks: In which case, it is to be wished, that little small
prizes might be provided at the cost of the Country, to be shot for at the
marks, which would give an ambition to men to carry them away, and would save
the Country more in powder then their value: And a desire in men to render
themselves perfect, would make them to find themselves powder with that money,
which on those days, and in those times, would be worse spent in an Alehouse.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1623.

