An answer in action to a Portingale Pearl, called a Pearl for a Prince:
Given by a Lay man in a Legacy, which Legacy he desires to se executed
before his death. 1570.

Hierom. ad Paulam etc. Let men first read, least they seem not through
judgment, but through the presumpsion of hatred, to blame that which they know
not. Imprinted at London in Fleetstreete; by William How: for Dionis Emilie.

An answer in action to a Portingale Pearl, called a Pearl for a Prince.
IN PRIMIS, I bequeath to a Preacher, and Minister of the word of God, to
preach.xii. Sermons in the parish Church of S. Giles without Cryplegate in
London, six pounds in lawful Money of England. In which Sermons I requier,
the Lords prayer, the Creed or Articles of the Faith, and the x.
Commandments of almighty God to be entreated of: And ye first Sermon to begin
the first Sunday in April, next coming, and so every first Sunday in every
month for the year following.

Also I will that the Preacher.xiiv. days before his first Sermon, shall seek
out of the poor being godly, or that will promise hereafter to obey Almighty
God, twenty men of the age of.xviv. years and upward, and.xx. women of the age
of.xiiii. years and upward. And.x. children of the age of vi. years and upward
All the which persons shall be able to say the Lords Prayer, their belief, and
the.x. commandments of Almighty God in their mother tongue. And if any of
the said persons cannot say them, they shall promise to learn them within one
Month, and also to their power to obey and keep them. And the same persons
shall also promise to be at the Church, at eight of the clock in the morning,
at the beginning of every one of the.xii. Sermons, and at the end of every
Sermon they shall have.ii. d. a piece given unto them by the Preacher, that is
v. l'j. And so many of them, and so often as the Preacher shall think good,
they shall prepare themselves to Communicate and receive the holy Supper of the
Lord Jesus. And at the same time and times, the money and other things is
given them, they shall have this read unto them, to th'entent they may know to
direct themselves in that form that they loose not the benefit of that which
is after to be given. And at the second Sermon, the Preacher shall enquier of
those which can say the Commandments of Almighty God, whether they have in
their conversation labored to keep them. And if any be found wilfully to
break the same, the same person or persons shall be put out and others taken in
their place, and this to be done at every one of the.xii. Sermons. And at the
sixth Sermon, every one which can say the Lords Prayer, their Belief and
Commandments of Almighty God, and is not found wilfully to to break the
same, of the which I desire diligent inquiry to be made of their neighbors,
shall being men, have Shertes of two shillinges a piece. And the women Smockes
of two shillinges a piece. Sum.v. l'j.

Provided that if any cannot say them or wilfuly break them, the Sherts and
and Smockes shall be reserved in the Preachers hands until the twelfth and last
Sermon be finished.

Always provided, and to be understand, that it is not possible for an idle
person to keep them. For Idleness being one of the sins of Sodom, wherefore
those which can and may labor and will not, I do will utterly to be exempted
from this benefit. And at the last and twelfth Sermon, so many of those
appointed persons, aforesaid, as can say the Lords Prayer, the Belief
and.x. Commandments of Almighty God, and has not ben found wilfully to
break the same, shall have.vi. shillings and eight pence a piece in money. And
if at the twelfth and last Sermon, any of the said appointed persons be found
unmeet and unworthy to receive the same: to weete, that cannot say the Lords
Prayer, the Belief, and Commandments of almighty God, or wilfully has
broken the same. Then the same money, Shertes and smockes, I will to come to
those persons of the fifty, which have best observed the conditions before
remembered. Sum of this Legacy is.vj. pounds, v. pounds, and.v. pounds
and.xvi. pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence. Sum in all is, thirty two
pounds thirteen shillinges and.iiii. d.

And such a Church of so many Souls, thus to be built, I affirm to be better
accepted of Almighty God, and better for the Common wealth, and more agreeable
to those Churches, buylt by Saint Paul, at Rome, at Corinth etc. Then costly
buyldings be they never so sumptuously done amongst the Papists and Jews,
which prefer ye Stony Temple of God before the living Temple of god which be ye
bodies of men. And the same being vndecked both within and without, yet cease
not with great cost and charge with the Jews, daily to build their stony
Temples with Stone, Timber, Belles, Vestments, Music, with a huge number of
Torches and Candels, burnt in the day light, when the burning and light is
neither profitable to God nor man. Also settinge up dead Images, and puttinge
on them Gowns and coats, which neither do feel cold nor heat: Also
furnishing them with many costly Jewels: And the Temples of God, and living
Images of God, which are the bodies of men unfurnished of things to serve
necessity.

These be the signs and Images which D. Osorius of Portingale, in his book
entitled the Pearl for a Prince, the leaf.43. does affirm nothing to be
more better to quicken our memory, to think one God, and to remember his
benefits. But the holy Ghost in the fourth Chapter of Deuteronomie, affirmith,
them to mar and corrupt us. And the actions of the Papists in preferring the
dead and counterfeit Images to Candels and Coats, and to the higher place: And
the true and living Images of God which are the bodies of men being unfurnished
of things necessary and apopinted to the lower place, proves the holy Ghost to
speak trewly, And Osorius of portingale with all his learning and eloquence,
to affirm an untruth. Also their Stony Temple is furnished with a number of
Idle persons, which do pray after the manner of the heathen, which think to be
hard for their many words and much babeling, the which thing Christ our
Savior forbids in the.vj. Chapter of the Gospel of S. Matthew that
Christians should belike unto them, for that our heavenly Father knows what
things we have need of before we ask of him.

Which persons also prefer Sodometrye and Whordome before honorable Marriage.
For honorable Marriage is utterly expelled out of their Cloisters.

The holy Ghost by S. Paul says, It is better to marry then to burn: But
the actions of the Papists do show them to be of an other mind, for their
actions affirm it to be better to burn then to be married. And the actions of
ye Priests, Friars, Monks, and Nuns, etc. Do affirm not only burning in
lust, but also fornication better the^ marriage, for none may remain in their
cloisters that be married: But they may remain still in their cloisters that
have committed fornication, and think their vow not broken, having had the
popes absolution, we Si non cast tamen caute. Thus you do see, though Osorius
has holiness in his words, yet in this you may see filthiness and Hypocrisy
in the Papists actions, But be not deceived with their words but look to
their actions. Osorius says in his accusations.41. leaf. For we will rushe
into those houses in which holy virgins being enclosed day and night, do singe
Himmes to the glory of God and pray to Christ for the good estate of Kings
and Princes and for sauegard of the whole Communaltie. etc. The Proverb is:
Fair works make fools feign or glad. But be not deceived with words, but
consider and mark their actions, and you shall see ye King Henry of France,
upon whom the mighty God showed a wonderful Judgment, after he had threatened
yt his eyes should se all the professoures of Christ's Gospel, of his
nobilitye, burned, which denied Antichriste the Pope: but before he could se
it, his own eyes in Iusting when he thought himself most safe were first
thruste out. And the same King Henry of France bearing as much good will to
Abbeys and Cloisters as Osorius of Portingale: yet he found some so filthy and
insufferable, that for rauishing of women and after murdering of them, the
Cloister with the Freeres were both burned together. And if the eyes of men
were as clear to behold all things, as the eyes of the mighty god, many such
Cloisters, Nunneries and Sels, might be found among the Papists of like
goodness. wherefore be not deceived with Osorius words, but look to their
Actions.

S. Paul speaking by the holy Ghosie, forbad none, young nor old, to live in
single and chaste life, but praised and commended the same to all estates and
all ages, one and other, without exception: But he expressly commands that
the Church should receive no widow under three score years: But Osorius with
the Papists would be wiser then the holy ghost speaking in S. Paul: but
their actions on the contrary shall prove them fools. Again how much those
Cloisters and Sels are to be feared to live one with another as the Sodomites,
the easiness and idleness of their life, with the fat feedinge of many of
them, having monstrous fat bodies, yeldeth reason to make the matter
susspitious. But the confession of M. D. Harding in his Book against the
Bishop of Sarisbury, entitled A Confutacion etc of the book made by Ihon
Casa. for the which he was kept back from being Cardinal, as M. Harding
affirmemeth, in which book the said John Casa. with eloquent words, and with
a Rhetorical style commends the life of Sodomites: Also Andrias Alciatus and
Paulus Iouius, with other writers in a manner makes the matter very apparent,
what those those Cardinales, Bishops, Abbots, Freers, Monks, and the rest be,
and how hollie they live: Wherefore take heed for all is not Gold that Osorius
of Portingale with is Rhetorical style, makes to glister as appears by that
before noted.

Again the same persons prefer also the precepts and Commandments of men
before the precepts and Commandments of Almighty God. Even as the Jews did,
which took them selves to be the Church of God and were so taken in the time
of Esaias the Prophet. For in his.29. Chapter, after he had threatened that their
Altar should be brought into distress in the.13. and.14. verse he has these
words Therefore the Lord said because this people come nere unto me with their
mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from
me, and their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men: Therefore behold
I will do a meruaylous work in this people, even a meruaylous work and a
wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish: and the understanding
of their prudent men shall be hid.

The same church of God, so taken amongst the Jews in the time of christ our
Savior, fell away also by the same means, as appears in the.15. chapter of
S. Mathews Gospel. Even as the Papists also this day be fallen away, in vain
seruinge God, and teachinge for Doctrines, men's precepts. And as the Scribes
and Pharisees demanded of Christ our savior, Why do thy Disciples
transgress the traditions of the elders? Even in like manner do the Papists
with Osorius demand of the Protestants, Why do ye trangresse the traditions
of the elders? And even as Christ our savior answered the Scribes and
Pharasies, with this question, Why do ye break the commandments of God for
your traditions? Even in like manner do the Protestants answer the Papists,
with Osorius with the very same question, Why do ye break the commandments
of God for your own traditions, erecting Cloisters, Nunries Friars, and
Mounkes, with such a huge monstrous number of traditions, Ceremonies and other
men's inventions, and observations, that if they should be declared, a great
volume were not able to contain them. And the most mischief of all, to break
one of those, you make greater conscience then to break the commandments of
almighty God. And these be the churches, Nunries, and Cloisters, and Cells, for
the which Osorius of Portingale, has published many fair names, Elegantly and
Rhetorically, as one which by the art of words, can make a Fly, seem to be
greater then an Elephante, and copper to be better then Gold or God. And after
he has made great boast of them, he requires with all to know what is set up
in place of them: The stony Temple with the traditions of the high Priests*
Scribes and Pharasies, put down by Christ Jesus our savior at Jerusalem.
As if he might say now with ye Scribes and Pharisees, Christ Jesus has
broken down the goodly stone Temple at Jerusalem, and put away the traditions
of the church of God: what has he set up now in the place thereof. For it is
not reason says Osorius that he should bewail that is taken away, before he
se what is set up in the place of that is pulled down: Read the Gospel of
Christ Jesus ( Osorius) and with the same examine yt doctrine they preach,
and se how the same agrees with the doctrine of christ Jesus, and you may
see, if you call for grace, what is set up in place of yt is plucked down. But
Osorius answers, if their doctrine be according to the word of God: yet
their lives are not reformed to the word of God. But amongst ye Papists where
be Freers, Monks, Images, Nonnes, the Mass, the Stews, and those mad Bishops
as John Casa. and other mad Cardinals which practice the work of Sodom, there
the Priests and people be better reformed to the obedience of the word of
God. Very notably said Osorius. Let this be examind and being found true, it
is to be agreed, that you have praised yt, that was praise worthy, and
dispraysed that, that was disprayse worthy. But proceed you forward, shrink
not back when you com to trial, and let the lives of the Protestants be
examined and compared with the lives of the Papists, and also with the
Athiests This bargain thus agreed, mark well the sequel: Oye Idolatrous
Athiests, take part with the Idolatrous Papists that like as they put
confidence in clothing and lighting Images, Blocks, and stocks etc. so you
may put confidence in your wits strength, friends, riches, lands, etc. But O
ye true Christians, worship that invysible power by Jesus Christ according to
his word, whose invisible power is seen by the creation of the world being
considered in his works. Romans 1. ca.
In the word of God it is commanded, that no filthy communication proceed out
of our mouths, in this, make comparison, and ye shall find the Protestants
speak with new tongues, to weete, that which tends to Civility, humanity
and Christianity, and the Papests with the Athiests keep their old Bawdie
tongues still, and they take the same ceassing from bawdie talking, a mark to
know heritikes which will not receive the Popes ceremonies. Again, the word of
God comaundeth, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain etc.
Make comparison and se who takes the name of yt mighty God with most fear
and reverence, and ye shall find that amongst the Papists and Athiests, he
that will not swear and blaspheme the Glorious name of the mighty God, they
take it a sure mark to know those heretics which will not receive the Popes
ceremonies.

Again, the word of God says: There shall be no whoare of the daughters of
Israel, The folishnesse and filthiness of Papists who prefer before the holy
scriptures the mind of the holy ghost their counsel as as this Concill
Toletan where was thus de creed. One having no wife and that has a Concubine
may not be put from the Communion so that he be contented with one woman be she
wife or harlot.
nor whoare keeper of the sons of Israel, And in the new Testamente it is
written, that no fornicatoure shall enter into the Kingdom of God,

In this make comparison, and ye shall find the Stews plucked down amongst
the Protestants, and fornicators punished: and contrary among the papists and
Athiests the stews set up and the fornicators so far exempted from
punishment, that D. Hardyng is so unshamefast in his book against Bishop
Jewel, to call it a necessary evil. And in Queen Mary's time, a Freere at
Paul's Cross named Peto, was not ashamed to make a piece of his sermon, to set
up fornicatours the stews again, yea to speak against the Stews is a plain
mark to know the Heritikes (say the Papists) which will not receive the
Popes ceremonies. Again, The word of God commands, when you will be merry,
Sing psalms, in this make comparison, and you shall find the protestants
singe Psalms, and the Papists with the Athiests singe baudy songs with such
like abhominacion, and if one be taken amongst them syngyng of psalms, he is
taken for an heretyke, and emprysoned. And so this also, they take to be a
mark to know Heretykes, which will not receive the Popes Ceremonies. Again
where Christ our Savior commands in these words, When thou make a
feast, call the poor, the maimed, lame, blind etc. Consider whether amongst
the papists, etc. or protestants, this is best observed: The athiests ioygne
the^ selves commonly with the papists, against the Christians.
But although amongst the protestants, this be best observed, yet the
papystes with the Athiests take it, but a mark to know Heretics which will
not receive the Popes Ceremonies. Again, where the word of God asks, How
the love of god dwells among them that shut up their compassion from the
poor. And in another place, He that shuts us his ears at the cry of the
poor, shall cry himself and not be heard.

Now, compare the common wealth of the Protestants, and the common wealth of
the Papists together, and se where is best orders appointed for the poor. But
this also (say the Papists) is but a mark to know Heretics which will not
receive the Popes ceremonies. Again, the word of God in the.20. cha. of Esaias
the prophet, Threatens Plagues upon them that come near unto God with their
mouths, and honor him with their lips, when their hearts are far from
God: Now compare the Protestants with their Churches, and the Papists with
their Nunneries and Cloisters together. The Protestants pray in their mother
tongue, or in such a tongue as they understand, but the most part of the
Papists, pray in such a tongue as they understand not: Consider therefore upon
which of these two the plague is most like to fall, whether upon the
Protestants or Papists.

Yea further consider upon whom the plague is fallen. For the Papists affirm
that saying over the Lords prayer in Latin five times over, although the
unlearned understand not a word thereof, yet he pleases God. But the
professors of the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, affirm that saying over
the same Lords prayer once, or else many times over without understanding
profits not. yea to say it once either else many times over without obedience
profits not. The huge number of Papists say, Et demitte nobis debita nostra
sicut and nos etc. But because they understand it not, they therefore cannot
obey it: and therefore desire ye Plagues of God to fall upon their sins which
is come to pass, for you shall se amongst the Papists, ye which is against
nature. The father present the son to death, Behold how the Papists Images
do teach and instruct them.
and the son the father, as one Stowe presented his own Father in ye time of
Queen Mary to be burned. Also ye mother put the son to death, as Herene the
Empress who with the Images, called lay men's books was enstructed to put
down her own son Constantine the sixth being Emperor and thrust out his
eyes of the which he died: For that he cast down men made of wood, which she
esteemed more then her own son, yea her own flesh and blood, and the living
Image of God. She took up also the bones of her husband Constantine the fifth,
and burned them. And at the same time she thrust out her sons eyes, as
Etropias writes. The Sun did not give light in.17. days, so that Mariners
with their ships lost their ways in the Seas. The want of which light, the
people affirmed to come, because the'mperours eyes were put out. Also the
brother staying the brother, as Alphonsus Diazius a Spaniard, which came from
Rome into Germany to slay his own brother, and there slew him, not for that
he disobeyed the word of God, but for that he denied and disobeyed men's
Traditions, the Popes ceremonies.

And thus the papystes obtain their prayer even as the children of Israel
lusted in the wilderness obtained their prayer, both water out of the Rock,
Manna from Heaven, and Flesh and fethered fowls as the sand of the sea.

But ye meat was yet in their mouths when the wrath of God came upon the^.
The Deuels obtained their prayers to go into the Heard of Swine. The deuel
obtained his prayer to try Job. And thus the prayer of Papists speaking the
word of God, the same word does not return void, for their prayer is
turned into sin. But this (say the papists) is but the saying of
Heretics, which will not receive the Popes ceremonies and Traditions. Here
again in the same chapter and in the same place, Esaias the prophet threateneth
that because the Church of God amongst the Jews, taught the fear of God with
the precepts of men, Almighty God would take away the wisdom of their wise
men, and the understanding of their prudent men should be hid. Consider what a
number of ceremonies the church of Rome has put forth to teach the fear of
God, which Osorius mainteineth in the book called A Pearl for a Prince. and
se notwithstanding, the learning and eloquence of Osorius and the Papists,
whether this plague is not threatened to be fulfilled on the Papists, as it was
threatened to be fulfilled on the Jews. And se, and consider again, whether
the same was not fulfilled upon the church of God at Jerusalem, and whether
the same be not also fulfilling daily on the Papists, by the great fall the
Church of Rome has had in this last hundred years and more. Consider further
whether their wisdom be not taken from them that would give Gowns and Coats,
How the Papists be taught and instructed With their Images
and Candels to blocks and stocks, and the living Temples of God men's bodies
being unfurnished. And consider further, whether their wisdom be not taken
from them, that amongst them do light so many thousand of Torches, and Candels
in the broad day light, when neither God nor man has any need of them. And
consider again, what S. Paul writes in the first to the Romans of Osorius and
the papists, who have turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the Image of a corruptible man, making him like an old man, with
a graye bearde, and a body with three heads. The holy ghost speaking in S.
Paul, affyrmeth that they that did thus, wrought many things against nature,
and thinking themselves wise, became fools. Mark the truth of the word of
God, O ye papists with your friends the Athiests.
But Osorius with the Papists has done this above remembered, and the sequel
of this, has brought forth this in experience, that the Papists do many
things against nature, as before is noted, whereby they prove the Scriptures
true and the holy Ghost to speak truly, that thinkinge themselves wise and
learned, they are become fools.

And here somewhat more to speak of the authority of the Pope and his doctrine.

If the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, D. Osorius with D. Harding. etc
Durst suffer such a Church as this aforesaid in ye Legacy to be built
amongst them, the same would show which Church wear more able to abide the
light, or the touchestone, but they dare not do it for fear the princes and
people might manifestly see the confutacion of all their new Religion, and
young and new Ceremonies, which has no antiquity with or co^parable to the
word of God. Again they dare not suffer such a Church to be builte amongst
them, for fear the gain and Glory they received of the Princes and people,
by their new Religion, and new and young Ceremonies should be decreased or
deminished. So that I may cite truly to the Pope, Cardinals etc. this place of
Scripture written in the.12. Chapter of the Gospel of S. John. 43. vearse For
they love the praise of men more, then the praise of God. yea if the Pope,
Cardinals, Priests. etc. would suffer such Churches to be builte amongst
them, they would also cease to give pardon to those their papists, which
promise to the Protestants and break it. Which swear to the protestants,
and forswear themselves. Yea they would cease to give pardon to those
papists, which poison the protestants, murder the protestants etc. Yea they
would cease to give pardon to those subjects which Rebel against their most
gracious Sovereign Lady and Prince: the which Rebels or Subjects here in
England, before her Majesty drew any swerd against them, has first begun to
draw out their sword against her majesty. But these be the fruits of the
Popes new Religion and new Ceremonies, wherefore I may say unto the Pope,
Cardinals etc. out of the old religion the word of God, and the words be
written in the first Chapter of the Prophet Esaias. 21. vearse. How is the
faithful City become an harlot, it was full of Judgment and Justice lodged
therein, but now they are murderers. That the nature of papists is to murder,
before any seek to murder them: consider of this last rebellion of
Northumberland and Westmerlande, and that the nature of the Pope and
Cardinals, etc. is to honor, aid, help, and pardon such parsons. Consider
what they receive from ye Popes dear children to further this wicked Rebellion
against their most gracious Prince, who never took the blood of any one of
their fingers. This mark spectacle, or glass, being well marked, looked in,
and considered, may be sufficient matter to put away all the murdering doctrine
of papistry. That Rome was a faithful City, consider the words of S. Paul
written in the first Chapter to the Romans, the which Epistle S. Paul writ
to Rome, and that Rome has his departing from the same Doctrine, written by S.
Paul, according to the Prophesy of S. Paul, in his.2. Epistle to the
Thessalonians.2. Chapter, in which Chapter he writethe of these two things,
both the which is proved true that the day of Christ was not at hand, and
that there should come a departing first, and the day of Christ was not at hand
for it is.14. C. years and od since the writing thereof. Again, many
departinges has come since that time, but none co^parable to the Pope, within
the Temple of God, or within the Church of Christ, that is of them that
profess Jesus Christ. For the Pope has unity, antiquity, and
universality, before all antichrists, so that he is now superior to Mauhomet
amongst the Turks, in persecuting and murtheringe them yt have in their lives
and actions, the doctrine which S. paul in his Epistle writ to Rome, the
which old Religion Rome once received before this their departing S. The old
Romanists be the Protestants the new and young Romanests be the Pope and
Papists.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans wryt, To all you that be at Rome beloved
of God called Saynctes, etc. But now since the departing all those yt will now
write to the church of Rome, must write to the Pope. And thus according to the
prophecy of saint Paul to the Thessalonians.2. chapter a fore noted. This
man of sin is now start up and sits in the Temple of God, that is in the
stony Temple with his Image in men's consiences, with his ceremonies, and upon
the necks of Emperors with his feet, and upon their mouths with his shows,
and lift up above the Earth, rydinge and sittinge on the peoples shoulders:
Also, he is affirmed to be neither God nor man, but a middell creature between
both. Also that he can not err. Also affirming that he puts forth for
Religion to be as the light, and that Christ our Savior his Gospel and
doctrine in comparison of that he puts forth, is as the night or darkness.
Also that the Gospel of christ our savior, is like to the shell of a Nutte,
and the Pope his Gospel to be like the curnell of a Nut. And thus his coming
has been with all power according to the same prophecy in these words
following, Even him whose coming is by the workinge of Satan, with all power,
etc. Also the prophesy declares him to come with signs and lying wonders,
which also proves true in him and his Religion, by the Holy Maid of Kent, by
sweating Images, by laughyng Images, by wrye neckt Images, by speaking within
Images, Take this mark to know the Papists are confuted. for the learned
Protestants having answered their books suffer them generally to go abroad
amongste the people. but the learned Papists having answered their books dare
not so generally suffer them to go amongst the people for sore eyes cannot abid
the light, etc
as the rotten stock called the Holy Roode of Grace, in the which Image a man
was used to stand, and with in the Roode was a number of Wyers, to make the
Image turn his eyes, to nodde with his head, to hang the lip, to move and
shake his jaws, so as if the gift were small he would hang a frownyng lyppe,
but if the gift were great, then should the Jaws go meryly etc. by their holy
blood of Hales which was the blood of a Ducke, and by the priests and Friars
was preached to be the Blood of Jesus christ etc. Also by their breaden God,
and yet call it the Sacrament, as they call Baptysme a Sacrament.

Also they affirm in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, ye accidence of
bread to remain, and the substance of bread to begone, whereas in natural
philosophy every accydence has his being by his substance, and contrary
without substance, impossible to have any accydence by natural philosophy.
Again by the Scriptures, which truly teaches the power of God to be above
natural philosophy, there is no more me^sion made of taking away the substance,
then there is mension made of taking away the accydence, and there is no more
mension made of the abiding of the accidence then there is made mension of
abiding of the substance: and yet we see, and the papists confess, the
accidence of bread to remain, the which accidence the Pope teaches to
worship as Christ our Savior. But beside this accidence confessed by the
papists to remain. When the same accidence is put in the mouth, the same
tastes as ye substance of bread, and when the same is let down into the
stomach, the same norisheth as the substance of bread, so that we se all
things remain naturally to our eye, to our taste, and to the norishment of our
bodies, and so are forcesed to come to our faith, to receive Christ
spiritually, for his words are spirit and life, as he him self affirms. And
S. Paul agreing with the doctrine of christ our savior, calls it A
spiritual meat and a spiritual drink, all this not withstandinge, the pope
the man of sin teaches it to be Fleashe, blood, and bone, within, and the
accydence of bread without. Thus with these and many other liyng wonders, the
Pope according to the prophesy of S. Paul shows himself to become etc. Also
that the princes and people should receive these strong delusions and believe
lies the prophesy shows the cause in these words, Because they received not
the love of the truth, etc. That the word of God is called truth, so Daniell
the prophet calls it in the old Testament, the.10. chap. 21. verse, in these
words: But I will show thee that which is decreed in the Scriptures of truth,
etc. The Pope would sanctify the Princis and people with giving the^ his
seremonies. But Christ Jesus sanctifies the people with giving them the
rreuth that is his holy word.
And the words of Christ our Savior in the new Testament accords and
confirms the same in the.17. chapter of S. John.17. verse. Sanctify them
with thy truth: thy word is truth, etc. That the Pope took this
sanctification and truth from the princes and people, and gave them in place
thereof, Legenda aurea, etc In their mother tongue the same is manifest, that
the princes and people were content so to be deceived and so had no love to
the truth, and because they loved not the truth, therefore says the
prophecy, God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe lies,
etc. And what lies they have believed, look in Legenda Aurea, as they call it.
Also in the Festiual. Also in Sermones Dyscipuli Where every sir John or morrow
mass priest, took to himself this blasphemous, rebellious, and abominable
title and the same is in the.C.xi. Sermonde, Sacerdos est altior regibus,
felicior angelis, creator sui creatoris, That is, a priest is higher then
Kings, more happy then Angels, creator of his creator: had not they need to
have Torches and Candels to light them at noone days, that would believe this?
Yet this was some of their Catholic Doctrine which the princes and people
received according to ye prophecy. S. Paul in 1 Thessalonians. 1. ca. does not
commend the^ because they turned from Idols to Images, as the papists do: but
he does co^me^d the^, because they turned from Idols or Images to serve the
living and true god. Do you the like, o ye papists, that you may cease from the
unnatural murdering of your own children, friends, and neighbors etc. That the
protestants may say to you with S. Paul, and quomodo conuersi fueritis ad Deu^
a simulacris, vt seruiretis Deo viuenti, etc. and do not say hereafter, that it
is a mark to know Heretics by, who in their words with S. Paul, do say the
living god, least ye call S. Paul Heretic also.
Again princes would go to Jerusalem, etc. to visit the Image of Christ or of
his cross, and leave christ himself at home in his own land and country
unfurnished of things necessary, I mean poor men, women, and children, and
will you papists say they did not believe lies? Again the Pope the man of
sin, told the Princes when they held the stirop of the Popes horse, and held
his horse by the bridell, they gave unto God great honor. But the Pope the
man of sin, teceaued not the same respecting his own honor, for his own
person did not regard the same.

And will you Papists say they did not believe lies? Again, the Pope with his
shauelings, told Emperors and Princes that the professors of the Glorious
Gospel of Christ, called Protestants, that they were Rebels and Traitors,
and would pluck the Princes out of their seats. And the Pope the man of
sin, reaches the people to obey Gods Commaundeme^ts, before the Princes
commandments, which is right, for the same does the learned Protestants
teach also, and so ought to be: but mark this further which follows. The
Pope the man of sin, teaches the people to obey his commandments before
the commandment of their Prince* Yea, to take up the sword in his quarrel
against their own natural Prince. Yea to obey every hedge priest that comes
in the Popes name, before their own natural prince. The which Doctrine has
caused the subjects to poison their own natural prince: It is written in
the.18. of S Matthew. Necessary it is that offenses come. But it is also written
woe to D. Hardyng and to the Pope etc Through whom the offenses in Rebellion
and the offenses in the Stewse comes.
the which doctrine has caused the subjects to rebel against their own
natural Prince, as of late here in England: The which doctrine has caused,
the subjects to deny their obedience to their own natural Prince. The which
doctrine has caused the subjects, to pluck their own natural Prince out of
his seat, as King Pipin of France etc. The like whereof was never seen to be
don amongst the Christians called Protestants. For next unto the commandment
of God, they obey the commandment of their natural prince, and when the
commandment of their prince is against the commandment of God, the common
people or any other private person or persons, be taught to flee to suffer, and
not to rebel. But yet the Pope taught the Christians called Protestants to be
rebels. But O ye Papists, did not the princes and people believe lies? Much
more might be added but for tediousness, I pass them over and come to another
verse of the prophecy, which tells how he shall be reueyled as in these
words, S verse. And then shall the wicked man be reueyled. That he is reueyled
to our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty. That he was reueyled to King
Edward the sixth, her Majesty's brother. That he was reueyled to King Henry
the eight, her Majesty's father, and to diverse other mighty Princes of this
Realm of England, the same is manifest and apparent.

That he is reueyled to many mighty princes in Christendom, and to many
notable learned men in Christendom, and to numbers of all states in
christendom, the same is manifest by the hard shifte of disputinge he is
driven unto, which is to promise, to break promise To swearyng and to
forswearyng: To Poison, to Murder, to Insurrection, to Rebellion, settinge the
princes against their Subjects, and the subjects against their Prince, and all
to keep himself up that he may ride on four men's shoulders, as S. Paul and
S. Peter never did. And thus tearyng Christendom in pieces, making the same a
pray to the great Turk, rather then he would preach, labor, and suffer as
S. Peter and S. Paul aforetime has done, as is manifest by the Scriptures as
also by other Ecclesiastiall Histories. And it follows also in the same
prophecy in the same 8. verse in these words, Whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, Antichrist is promised to consume with the
spirit of god his mouth: but the pope does consume by the doctrine in the word
of God. Ergo the Pope is one Antechriste.
and shall abbolish with the brightness of his cominge, The spirit of his
mouth is the Scriptures his holy word, as witnesses Esaias the prophet in
his.11. Chapter 4. verse, where is these words: And he shall smite the earth
with the Rod of his mouth and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the
wicked. That this spirit of his mouth, this breath of his Lips the holy
Scriptures which slays the wicked, was kept from the princes and people,
that they might not have the same in their mother tongue, to studdy and
meditate upon the same to this year.1569. amongst the Papists is yet manifest.
That the Pope with his shauelynges feared the princes and people from the
reading and studyng of the holy Scriptures, which slays the wicked:
Preachinge unto them that it was to hard for them to understand, and would
not admonish them with S. Peter, to beware of the dark and hard places which
the wicked take to live in voluptousnesse and so pervert all the Scriptures to
their destruction and dampnation. And again, did not comfort the humble and
godly to the readyng of the Scriptures, as saynct Peter in his second Epistle
and first chap. 21. verse, where he preaches thus to his congregation. The
Pope cardinals, etc dare not put the Bible in the mother tongue and give it to
the princes and people and admonish them with S. Peter that they have a most
sure word of the prophets to the which they should do well, to take heed
although they may translate it and coat it for them selves, favorably: for
their doctrine can no more abide the Princes and people to know the word of
god, then sore eyes can abide the light of the Sun.
We have also a most sure word of the Prophets* to the which ye do well that
ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. And he tells
them how long they should studdie and read, in these words, Until the day
dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. The.119. psalm of David also
agrees with this doctrine, approuynge the same to be old and true doctrine.
But the Pope the man of sin utterly forbids them to have it in their
mother tongue, as yet amongst the papists is manifest to this day. Yea those
which have it in their mother tongue amongst them being known, be taken as
Heretics, and burned without any question being moved concerning the
godliness and rightousnesse of their life But by and by a plain argument
taken they be Heretics to say against the Pope and his ceremonies, even as
Hunne which was hanged in ye Lolards tower, in the year of our lord God.1514.
R. Fitziames, being then Bishop of London, who at the instigacion of his
Chancellor D. Horsey, who murdered the said R. Hunne, before his death caused
him to be brought from the Lolardes tower to his manner of Fulham, the.21 of
December in the year aforsaide, and this was one article the Bishop objected
against him.

Oye Papists look in the 12. c. of S. John, and you shall find that the Pope
shall not be judge but sermo que^ loquutus sum, ille iudicabit eu^ in extremo
die. whether it be Emperor, Bishop or pope, etc. And look in the sixth chap.
of the Revelation. And haste you to slaye up the number which shall be killed for
the testimony of the word of God. etc.
Item that the said R. Hunne has in his keeping English books prohibeted and
dampened by the law. As the Apocalips in English, Epistels and Gospels in
English etc. But blessed be God which has sent his word, the spirit of his
mouth, the breathe of his lips, which slays the wicked, unto many mighty
Princes and other noble personages, and of all states and kinds of people in
Christendom, both noble and unnoble, in their known mother tongue since the
which time, the Pope the man of sin, has had his consuminge and abolishyng
according to the prophecy, and so shall consume and abbolish with the
brightness of Christ our Savior his coming: And this consumyng and
abbolishing shall be generally in the consience of men. But not so generally in
ye manners of me^. And this one mark take for a conclusion, that where so ever
the word of God is in the mother tongue, and is studied, followed, and obeyed,
there the Pope with his ceremonies cannot stand: no more then darkness can
abide the light, or truth falsehood. The Lord Jesus open the eyes of the
Pope, Cardinals, etc. That both Protestants and Papists may agree to build
the living Temples of God men's bodies, with doctrine within them, and with
those necessaries according to the word of God, without and upon them, and
after this full furnished, to erecte and furnish the stony Temples with things
necessary. And this is reasonable according to the law of God, and the law of
nature. And otherwise, it is preposterous and out of order, and against the law
of God, and against the law of nature. Wherefore the Lord our God grant all
men to obey the same mighty God who created Nature, and has most wisdom to
give the most prudent rules and laws for the use of the same. Wherefore toward
the building of the living Temples of God, men's bodies, which the Papists
neglected, and built and furnished stony Temples before them, I have for my
part begone to erect and edefie this one little Church, and with prayer again I
beseech almighty God to grant that others of greater abilytie may build
greater Churches, to the conversion or confutacion of Osorius, and all other
papists and Heretics, and to the peace, benefit, and wealth of the whole
state and common wealth of Christendom, and to the furderaunce of the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus, Amen.

Acts. 7. Chap. verse. 47. and 48. But Solomon builte him an house, how be it,
The most high dwells not in Temples made with hands as says the Prophet
Esaias, the 66. chap. And the 17. chap. Act. 24. verse. God that made ye world
and al things that are therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and earth,
dwells not in Temples made with hands etc. And thus much for the stony
Temple. But for the Temple of men's bodies is thus written. 1. Corinthians. 3. chap.
16. and 17. verse. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the
spirit of God dwells in you, if any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall
God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy which are ye etc. And 16. chap. 19.
verse. Know ye not that your bodies is the Temple of the holy ghost which is
in you whom you have of God and you are not your own. And.2. Corinth. 6. chap.
16. verse. And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols, for ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said I will dwell among them and walk
there and I will be their God and they shall be my people. And Ephesians. 2. chap. 20.
21. 22. verse. And are built upon the foundacions of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, in whom all the building
coupled together grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, In whom ye also are
builte together to be the habitacion of God by the Spirit.

FINIS.

